Neutrophils, lymphocytes, and monocytes. What's optimal for health and longevity? So neutrophils, lymphocytes, and monocytes are components of white blood cells. So let's take a quick step back and look at the association between total what total numbers of white blood cells with life expectancy. So what we're looking at here is longitudinal data from the Baltimore Longitudinal Study on Aging with a relatively small sample size compared to what the rest of the studies data from the studies I'm gonna show you, in a slide or two, with about 2,800 subjects. But the strength of this study is that the, subjects data was followed for up to forty four years. So hence, the the longitudinal study. So for white blood cells, note that the reference range is 3,400 to, 10,800 white blood cells per microliter, but the reference range says nothing about what's optimal for health and longevity. So starting from blood test data, for subjects in their fifties, life expectancy was then plotted against the initial white blood cell count. So what we can see is that for subjects that had white blood cell total white blood cell levels of 3,500 to 6,000 cells per microliter, they that group had the longest life expectancy, about thirty seven years starting from the, again, the initial measurement in the in their fifties. So what about the high higher end of the reference range, 6,000 to 10,000 white blood cells per microliter? So this group lived, significantly shorter than the 3,500 to 6,000 group, about seven years shorter. So a thirty year life expectancies, again, starting from the initial, measurement in in for subjects in their fifties. So still, within the reference range, but again, towards the highest end of the range greater than 10,000 cells per microliter, we see a life expectancy of about twenty seven years. So when comparing the highest end of the reference range, greater than 10,000 white blood cells per microliter versus the 3,500 to 6,000 white blood cells per microliter, that's about a ten year difference in life expectancy. So what about less than 3,500, white blood cells per microliter? So this group would appear to have the shortest life expectancy compared to all the other groups, but there were only 49 subjects, in in that group that had less than 3,500. So the authors couldn't, properly statistically determine if that was, associated with a reduced, life expect expectancy compared to all the other groups. Alright. So, white blood cells are not all the same though. There are many different cell types. And these cell types include neutrophils, eosinophils, monocytes, basophils, and lymphocytes. Now because, neutrophils, lymphocytes, and monocytes, comprise 99% around 99% of the total blood cell, content, that I'm gonna go over that data today in terms of what's optimal, for health and longevity. So first starting for ref, neutrophils. So the reference range is very wide, 1,400 to 7,000 neutrophils per microliter. So again, within that range, what's optimal? So first in looking at the aging data, this is data for about 378,000 subjects or relatively large study. So the data for men is relative is shown in in in green and, this is relatively easy and straightforward. So, neutrophils increase pretty consistently during aging for men and this is from about 20 years old through 90 years old. As you can see, the green line consistently increases, throughout the lifespan for men. For women, the story is a little bit more complicated. We see that neutrophils increase from about 5,000, neutrophils per microliter in women up until, up to about 6,500, in their mid thirties. And then neutrophils decline, all the way until the mid fifties, and then they increase again, until 90. So what what could explain these this biphasic, plot for women? So one explanation may involve pregnancy. So, as we can see here, pregnant women, versus non pregnant women and the neutrophil levels. So what we can see is that pregnant women have higher average, neutrophil levels than non pregnant women. In this case, about 5,300 in the pregnant women versus, about forty one hundred in the non pregnant women and this is these two groups of data were significantly different. So, my explanation for the plot for women, how how neutrophils change during aging is that compared to 20 year olds, there's probably an increased proportion of pregnant women in this cohort so that their neutrophil levels up to about 35 are higher than the, proportion of women who are less pregnant at 20. And then the frequency of women who are pregnant from 35 to 55 decreases compared to the twenty to thirty five group, thereby explaining the decrease in neutrophils during that age. And then obviously post menopause, there isn't gonna be any pregnancy so then we see the rise in neutrophils in a similar pattern to men. Now based on the aging data, this was suggest that values of around in the four thousands, 4,000 to 5,000 would be indicative of youth for neutrophils for both men and women. But, lower may be better. And in support of that hypothesis, we're looking at all cause mortality data in a very large study, more than seven hundred and seven hundred and seventy five thousand subjects. And what we can see is compared to the 2,000 to 3,000 neutrophil group, which was used as the reference, subjects that had neutrophil counts that were less than 2,000 and greater than 3,000 had a significantly increased all cause mortality risk, when compared to two two thousand to 3,000. So based on this data, I'd argue that, 2,000 to 3,000 may be optimal in terms of, neutrophil levels, during aging and for their association, for their lowest risk of death for all causes. Alright. So what about lymphocytes? So the reference range is 700 to 3,100 and these these reference range values can vary from lab to lab. These are the lab values that are on my, on my blood test results that come from LabCorp. So for lymphocytes, that preference range is 700 to 3,100. Again, a pretty wide range that says nothing about what's optimal. It's just the population based average. So what does the data have to say for lymphocytes? So first, we're looking at lymphocyte levels on the y axis, again, plotted versus age. So age related changes for lymphocytes. And what we can see is that youth, subjects around 20 years old are characterized by higher lymphocytes, whereas lymphocytes then decline as indicated by the black trend line all the way up to a 100 year, old subjects. So what about all cause mortality risk? So similarly, we can see that values of around two, so somewhere in the 1,900 to 2,100 lymphocytes per microliter, was associated with lowest all cause mortality risk. And I should mention this that it's relatively large, about a 108,000 subjects. And then that data is shown on the left, slide, the age related changes. Also note that although the proportion of the variance in the lymphocyte count that can be explained by age, the r squared, is relatively small at 0.07, that lymphocytes decline during aging was a consistent effect, which would explain why the small explanation in variance is statistically significant with a p value less than zero zero, 0.001. So again, going back to the all cause mortality data, we can see lymphocyte levels 1,900 to about 2,100. Lymphocytes per microliter was associated with the lowest risk of death for for all causes. And then significantly increased risk, so, values that, for the 95% confidence interval, so the dash lines where they both, pass one, where they don't intersect with one, we can see that values less than 1,900, lymphocytes per microliter associated with a significantly increased all cause mortality risk. Now also note that higher levels of lymphocytes, greater than about 3,000 is also associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. But just just to compare, someone who has less than a thousand versus someone who has 3,000, the all cause mortality risk for someone who has a thousand lymphocytes is greater than someone, with 3,000 at least based on the data that's presented here. So having lower lymphocytes is gone, is potentially gonna be worse for, risk of death for all causes versus a slightly elevated, or moderately elevated, lymphocyte count. So based on these data, somewhere around 2,000 lymphocytes per microliter in the 1,900 to 2,100 range may be optimal. Alright. What about monocytes? So again, the reference range is a 100 to 900 cells per microliter. So what's optimal? So first, looking at the age related changes, we see a similar plot to the neutrophil data. Pretty steady increase for men in the green line from 20 to 90 years old. And again, this biphasic response in women with an increase from 20 to about 35, a decrease from 35 to 55, and then again in a a very steady, increase in monocytes all the way up to 90. So again, as a potential explanation for the biphasic, plot from monocytes in women, we can see that again pregnancy impacts monocyte levels. So this is data looking at, the trimesters. So going from the first three months, the second three months, the last three months of pregnancy, first, second, and third trimester, and looking at monocyte counts for each of those, periods during pregnancy. So what we can see is in the data that they presented, the average data is not in, microliters. So to get it into the, normalize it to, microliters not liters, you multiply by a thousand. So 0.49 times a thousand. So 490 monocytes, per microliter in the first trimester increased to five thirty in the second and up to six twenty in the third trimester. And the difference between those third three groups is statistically significant as indicated by the p value. So we can see that monocyte levels increase during pregnancy in women. So again, that potentially explain the biphasic response. A greater proportion of women are pregnant, up to about 35 when compared to 20 year olds, that would explain the monocyte increase during that time. A lower frequency of women, from 35 to 55 compared to the 20 35 group, hence the declining monocyte levels. And then, again, an age related postmenopausal increase, is is exhibited from 60 to 90 years for monocytes. Alright. What about all cause mortality data? And I should mention that based on the aging data, it looks like, five thirty and five fifty monocytes in women and men respectively, may be optimal or indicative of youth, but lower than that may be optimal. And, so in we can assess that by looking at all cause mortality risk. So all cause mortality risk is sometimes, presented as cardiovascular disease, CBD mortality, and then non CBD, mortality. So all the other, deaths that are not related to cardiovascular disease. So that's how I'm gonna present it here. And what we can see from these plots, which are, hazard ratios again, so, survival, we can see lowest risk of all cause mortality. So the lowest point, in in the data is a at a occurs for both CBD mortality and non CBD mortality at about four hundred monocytes, in both plots per microliter. So that would suggest around 400 may be optimum for lowest risk of death for all causes, CVD and non CVD related mortality. What about higher risk? So this occurs where the 95% confidence interval, the dash lines in both plots, do not intersect, with one point zero, which I've indicated by the red line. So we can see that for the CBD more mortality risk, there's increasing risk less than about, 250 and greater than around 400 monocytes per microliter for cardiovascular disease related mortality. What about non cardiovascular disease related mortality on the right? So a relatively similar, data here, we can see that less than four hundred and about greater than five fifty is associated with an increased, a non CBD mortality, risk, risk of death. Alright. So in in my initial slide, I showed the data from the Baltimore Longitudinal Study in Aging that showed, longest life expectancy starting from baseline data in around the fifties, for 3,500 to 6,000 white blood cells per microliter. But based on the data that I've presented here today, we can get more specific with that 3,500 to 6,000 range in terms of looking at the, the different white blood cell types that are that are found. So for neutrophils, based on the data, it would seem that 2,000 or 3,000, cells per microliter is optimal. For For lymphocytes, 1,900 to 2,100 and for monocytes somewhere around 400, monocytes per microliter. So when you sum that, you get a range of 4,300 to 5,500, neutrophils, lymphocytes and monocytes per microliter, which falls right in that, you know, quote unquote optimal range for white blood cells of 3,500 to 6,000. Now note that eosinophils and basophils are not included in that projection, but this is a relatively small component of the total white blood cell pool at about only 1%. So that easily gives enough, a range to stay with the within that 6,000, upper limit for total white blood cells. Okay. That's all I've got for now. You can find me lots of places online. Have a great day.