HDL. What's optimal for minimizing disease risk and for maximizing longevity? So first, we're looking at a meta analysis of 24 studies, with, including about 3,400,000 subjects for all cause mortality plotted on the y axis versus HDL with data, on the left for men and on the right for women. So first starting on the left, we can see that lowest risk for all cause mortality in men was found for, HDL values, between fifty two to 56 milligrams per deciliter. Now also note that, all cause mortality risk increases at both lower and higher levels than that with highest risk, being found for HDL levels greater than 92 milligrams per deciliter. And again, that's for data in men. What about in women? So for women, the lowest risk for all cause mortality was found in, with, HDL values between 58 to 62 milligrams per deciliter. Again, risk significantly increases with values either lower or higher than that. And then highest risk for women was found with HDL values that were greater than a 120 milligrams per deciliter. Now note that these data were, up to 85 years. So the studies included subjects up to 85 years old. What about older than that? So, first, looking at, the 85 to 99 year old group, in this data here, and I should mention that I've included studies that have a high sample size. I mean, there are many, centenarian studies and studies of adults older than 85 that include maybe less than 50 subjects or 30 subjects. But, is is that small sample size representative of the whole population? It may or may not be. So studies that have a larger sample size would be expected to, be associated with, what more of the bigger population may look like. So I've included studies on this slide that have higher, sample sizes for these age groups. So first in looking at, older adults that are 85 to 99 years old, we can see again values in that 55 to 60 range with an HDL of average HDL of 59, milligrams per deciliter. Now one study is nice. How about other studies, in this age group? So this is data from the FHS, the Framingham Heart Study, and the, Long Life Family Study, LLFS, including about 1,900 subjects, that were within the 79 sorry, 72 up to a 110. But the average age in these groups was, in this age range of of 87, which is, you know, what is shown in the ARI data. So, an average age of 86 and 91, years in both of these, the FHS and the LLFS respectively. So again, in in these, studies, we can see HDL values, fifty five and fifty five point nine. So again, having HDL values in that 55 ish range may be associated with a reduced risk of all cause mortality and, an increase potentially an increased probability of getting to, ages older than 85. But what about older than, 85 to ninety ninety nine years old? So, now we're looking at the centenarian data which is defined as older than a 100 years old. So in the 275 centenarians, that were a 100 to a 104 years old, we can again see HDL values in the fifties with an average HDL of 53. Now again, one study is nice. What about other studies? So this is data for a thousand and two centenarians with an average age of a 102 years. And again, we can see HDL of 54. Once again, close, you know, to the mid fifties that may be optimal. So what about older than a 102 years old? So for that we go to semi centenarians, a 105 to 109 years, and supercentenarians, 110 years old. And there we can see that, HDL values are lower, 45 and 44 in those two respective age groups. So that's why I've entitled the slide HDL greater than 44 is associated with extreme longevity, but it's possible that HDL, values were higher in the semi and super sem supercentenarians, say in the mid fifties and then declined towards the, towards the end of life. And to test that, we can look at the offspring of centenarians. If some of these HDL data are heritable, we'd expect that the offspring of centenarians would obviously be younger and would also have higher HDL values at those relatively younger ages. So that's what they measured in this study. They looked at a 167 offspring of centenarians with an average age of 76, and what they found was, HDL, an average HDL of 54, milligrams per deciliter. So that would suggest that HDL values may have been in the fifties for the the younger, when the centenarians were younger and then declined towards the end of aging. So cumulatively, these data suggest that, HDL between 55 to 60 may be optimal for health and longevity. So what's my HDL? As everybody may or may not know, I've been tracking my blood for, up to fifteen years for most variables, and, we can see, that, you know, single data points for many of the years up to 2015 where I wasn't tracking it more than once a year. Whereas in the last five years, we can see lots of data points from my HDL, because I've been tracking it up to six times a year. So based on all of these data, this is 30 these are 34 blood tests over the past fifteen years. My average HDL is 44.3, which would be great if I was a 105 years old or older. But, based on all of the data I've already shown, values around 55 may be, optimal for someone my age and going forward to even get to the, super longevity, years. Now, also the data I've shown you is just, you know, the associations between HDL and, all cause mortality risk in in centenarians. But, what what potential mechanism? How could HDL impact the lifespan? So one possibility may involve inflammation, specifically high sensitivity CRP, h s CRP. So what we can see here is that, I've only measured CRP over the last years. That's why I only have 12 data points for it, but I'm gonna measure it, you know, obviously up to six times every year going forward. So what we can see here is, with HDL on the y axis plotted against high sensitivity CRP on the x axis. So the higher my HDL has been, the lower my CRP is. And in this case, by extrapolating onto the trend line, we can see for my highest HDL of 56, a CRP of point two milligrams per liter. Now I'll link, you know, if you are interested in in the relationship between CRP, high sensitivity CRP with, with, all cause mortality. I'll link to that video. I have a video on that so, you can check that out. But the long long story short is values less than 0.3, a few studies have shown that that may be optimal. So for me, having very high levels or actually levels of HDL which are similar to the all cause and and centenarian data, that would get me to my lowest levels of CRP. Now conversely, my lowest levels of HDL at 28 were associated with my highest CRP levels. And I should mention this is a moderately strong correlation between HDL and CRP of negative 0.68. A correlation coefficient, of negative one or one, would be the strongest correlation. So 0.68 is a moderately strong correlation. And again, the correlation between my HDL with high high sensitivity CRP is statistically significant based on the p value. Now this data has also been shown, in bigger studies besides my own data. So this is, data for the, correlation between HDL on the y axis with high sensitivity CRP on the x axis for men on the left and women on the right. And in these studies that included, 6,000 subjects, with an average age, in in the mid forties for both genders, we can see, inverse correlations between HDL with high sensitivity CRP for both men and women. So in other words, the higher the HDL was, the lower that, high sensitivity CRP was. Now for men, the lowest CRP based on the trend line would be at an HDL of around 50, which is not too far from the optimal range, in the fifties that I've shown in the previous slides. Similarly, the, lowest CRP based on the trend line for women is at around 61 milligrams per deciliter. Now as a as a weakness of this, some may say, well, this correlation coefficient of, negative zero point o four for men and negative zero point o o nine is, for women is weak, which in theory, you know, technically by definition it is. But this effect is, more often than not, seems to be, true, in in, more often than not in both genders. That's how that's why we're able to have a highly significant p value less than zero zero one. So if if more often than not there's a correlation between HDL and CRP, the statistics would show that. So, that's what we have here. Now for my data, having a correlation coefficient of 0.68 is stronger, but it again, it goes to, you know, to the point of, epi data population based average. Not everybody may respond the same whereas for me, HDL may, there may be a stronger correlation between, HDL with my CRP when compared with the normal you know, the rest of the population, the normal population. Alright. So how will I increase my HDL? At 55, getting to around 55 is optimal, for men and getting closer to 60 if I was a woman. How will I increase my HDL? So I've tracked my diet. As many people know, I've tracked my diet with a food scale and weighing everything and logging everything for the past five years. And, so I've got macro and micronutrient data, for five years that correlate with my blood test results over that five year period. But also, you know, that's a somewhat reductionist approach. You know, macro and micronutrients may not, reproduce all of the nutrients that are in food. So, I have about two years of data, the last two years, where I've actually logged, how much of each food that I'm eating, and then I I've I can look at correlations between individual food intakes and food groups with with that whatever biomarker I I I'm interested in. So, interestingly, I saw some correlations between my nut and seed intake. Now, bear with me on this data. Some of it may look, like it's not statistically significant, and I'm not a fan of saying things are close to significance, but we'll see why I'm, introducing these data, in a minute. What we'll see why it's important. So, first this is my HDL versus my average daily, cocoa bean intake. So I make my own chocolate once or twice a week. I mix cocoa beans with dates and it's delicious. So what we can see is that the higher my average daily cocoa bean intake is, the higher my HDL, and it's a moderate strength correlation 0.54 with a p value close to significance of 0.07. Now again, similarly, my average daily coconut intake, there's a moderate correlation for that with my HDL. Again, with a with p values that are close but not statistically significant, 0.1. And I should mention this isn't coconut oil, but rather coconut butter. So you can buy coconut meat mixed with, you know, the coconut milk and coconut water, all of that together. So the consistency ends up looking like peanut butter. So it's basically like a jar of coconut butter with a similar texture to peanut butter when it's warm outside because the, you know, it'll melt and it you can mix it together, but it gets very cold in the winter. Alright. That's too much information. Alright. Nonetheless. Okay. Go so going forward then HDL versus my average daily sunflower seed intake. Again, we can see a higher intake of sunflower seeds, daily intake is correlated with higher HDL. In this case, it's a stronger correlation and the p value is statistically significant. Last, HDL versus my average daily walnut intake, we can see again the higher my average daily walnut intake, the, the higher my HDL, the correlation with my, HDL. Now again, this is also close to, statistical significance with a moderate correlation, 0.52. Now individual food groups are interesting, but I don't, you know, on most days I'll eat some of these foods on the same day. So for example, eating coconut and cocoa beans on the same day or coconut and walnut, it isn't one or the other. It isn't a binary thing where I'm either eating it or not. So I decided to combine all of these nuts and seeds. You know, my average, nut and seed intake of these four nuts and seeds in their correlation with HDL to see how that would look. And interestingly, now I've got a strong correlation. So the average daily co cocoa bean, coconut butter, sunflower seed, and walnut intake per day, is strongly correlated with my HDL levels with a correlation coefficient of 0.85. 73% of the variability in my HDL can be explained by my daily intake of these four nuts and seeds, and then the p value is highly significant. So if this correlation equals causation, I expect to see HDL greater than 50 on my next blood test, which I'll measure in a few weeks with, more than seventy grams per day of these nuts proceeds. Just these four nuts proceeds, you know, independent of eating other nuts and seeds and whatever the rest of my diet is. Alright. That's, all I've got for now. Thanks for watching. Have a great day.