There are many epigenetic clocks, but which clock is best or clocks is best for, its correlation with chronological age or other aging related, phenotypes including cancer, cell senescence, or mitochondrial dysfunction? So to address that question, the latest paper from Morgan Levine's group published less than two weeks ago, addresses that issue. So let's get into the data. So first, there are there had been 11 epigenetic clocks published since 2011. So let's just briefly go through each of them. So, the first epigenetic clock was published in, 2011 by, Bachland's group and they used, methylation data from two sites that were able to predict 70% of the variation in chronological age. So then in 2012, the Garagnani group, sorry if I'm messing up the name, used data for one methylation site and identified a stronger correlation, 0.92. A correlation of one would be perfect, so 0.92 is very strong with chronological age. In 2013, Hanham's group, used data for 71 methylation sites and identified an even stronger correlation with chronological age, 0.96. And then the, epigenetic clock that many of us know about, the Horvath clock, which is what, my DNA age uses, was the so so far the strongest of the bunch. They used, methylation data for 51 tissues and cells across 353 meth methylation sites and identified correlations of zero point nine seven and zero point nine six in different, datasets with chronological age. In 2014, the Widener's group used data for 99 to a 102 methylation sites and identified correlations ranging from 0.93 to 0.99 with chronological age. So then in 2016, Lin's group, 99 methylation sites, 0.93 correlation with, chronological age. Later that year, the Vidal Bravo, group and Yang also, used, their, methylation sites. So eight methylation sites in Vidal Bravo's group, with zero point nine seven and zero point six seven, correlations, with chronological age in training and validation cohorts. And then Yang's group, they use data for 385 methylation sites, but identified very weak correlations with chronological age in c d four and monocytes, so in immune cells. And then in late in 2017, Jang's group, used, 10 meth methylation sites and didn't measure chronological age, but, associated that with all cause mortality risk, ACM risk. And then in 2018, Levine's group, looked at, data for 513 methylation sites and identified correlations of zero point six eight and zero point seven four with chronological age. And then, Steve Horvath's group, published another epigenetic clock and updated from their earlier 20, 2013 clock and used data for 391 methylation sites and again identified strong correlations with chronological age zero point nine and zero point nine five. So in this paper, they used data from these clocks and compared them against each other. So the first comparison is how do each of those each of these clocks compare in terms of their correlation with chronological age. So to address that, they looked at correlations. They looked at data from, pooled, from 16 cell and tissue types including breast, cheek, brain, colon, cord blood, skin, monocytes, so immune cells, and other cells. So using that pool data, then they they then looked at the epigenetic age acceleration across all the different, cell types. So which one was best? So here we have all 11 clocks and their correlations. And the best performing, epigenetic clock for their association, correlation with, chronological age was the initial Horvath, epigenetic clock in 2013. So we can see that the correlation was very strong 0.94 with a highly significant p value. And interestingly, the more recent Horvath epigenetic clock had a also a strong very strong correlation of 0.85. And when comparing the other, epigenetic clocks, we can see that many of them had very weak or or or poor correlations with chronological age including Yang with correlation 0.23 or or Yang negative 0.49. So and so on. So, based on this data, Horvath both Horvath's epigenetic clocks were the best predictors of chronological age. So what about other aging related, phenotypes including cancer? So to address that, they looked at, epigenetic data for six of the epigenetic clocks and with the expectation that they'd see a higher epigenetic age in tumor samples from breast, colon, lung, and pancreas when compared with normal tissues that didn't have cancer. So which of the epigenetic clocks were best at predicting cancer essentially? And the answer for that is Levine and Yang's, epigenetic, clocks. We can see that here that the red are the tumor samples in each of the various tissues, and we can see a higher epigenetic age for the Levene and Yang epigenetic clocks, when compared with the normal tissues. Now also note that where the whereas the Horvath epigenetic clocks were best for their correlation with chronological age, in contrast, they were not significantly associated with, a higher epigenetic age when compared with normal tissues for, any of the the breast, colon, lung, or pancreas, tumor cells. So not all the epigenetic age clocks are the same at least in terms of their predictive ability for aging or cancer so far. So what about cell senescence? Which epigenetic clock is best for identifying cell senescence? So again, they looked at six of the 11 clocks, in in this analysis. And, the ones that were best were the Levine and Lynn, epigenetic clocks. So I'll get into the Hanum in a minute. First, let's go through the Lynn and Levine. So what are we looking at here? We're looking at epigenetic age acceleration and going from less senescent cells on the x axis to more senescent. So more specifically, the EP are early passage cells. These are less senescent cells. And then NS are nearly senescent cells. OYS are, oncogene induced senescent cells. And RS are replicatively senescent cells. So the going from the left side of the the x axis to the right side, we're going from less senescent to more senescent. So in terms of the Levine and Lynn epigenetic clocks, we can see that going from the less senescent cells to the, near senescent and replicatively senescent cells, there's an increase in epigenetic age. Now, there wasn't a significant increase going from the early passage cells, the less senescent cells to the OIS, the oncogene induced senescent cells for either of those clocks. In contrast, that's what we see for the Hanum, epigenetic clock. So that's the only clock that saw an increase in epigenetic age for the OIS cells when compared with the, non senescent cells. So again, not all the epigenetic clocks are the same in their ability to detect cell senescence, cancer or chronological age. There is there isn't one so far, there isn't one epigenetic clock that's best across all of them. So what about, mitochondrial function which is again, mitochondrial function declines with age. It's mitochondrial dysfunction is a hallmark of aging. So to address that, they took cells that had normal mitochondrial function, one forty three b row positive cells, and then they depleted, mitochondrial DNA in these cells which is, row, o row zero minus cells. So that's those are cells that are mitochondria mitochondrial, have depletions in mitochondrial DNA. And when there's depletions of mitochondrial DNA, they have dysfunctional mitochondrial DNA. They have dyspunct dysfunctional mitochondria. Sorry. That aren't able to produce ATP as well and produce more reactive oxygen species. So with in that situation, one would expect a higher epigenetic age acceleration in cells that have depleted mitochondrial DNA. So that's what we would look at here with, red verse versus, blue. So which epigenetic clock was best for identifying, mitochondria, epigenetic age acceleration in the mitochondrial the mitochondrial depleted cells? And in this case, four of the six were good. So Levine, Horvath's twenty eighteen epigenetic clock, the Lin and Yang epigenetic clocks, all saw all saw significant increases in epigenetic age, acceleration compared with the, cells that had normal mitochondria. In contrast, the initial Horvath clock that was great at its for its correlation with chronological age, And the Hannum clock did not see significant increases in epigenetic age in the, cells that had depletions for mitochondrial DNA. Now, each of the data I already showed compared the individual clocks. So, they then took a a basically composite of as much of the data from all 11 clocks to derive a new epigenetic clock, a meta epigenetic clock. So how does that, associate with all cause mortality risk, ACM, chronological age, CA, cancer, cell senescence and as we'll get into the next slide, Alzheimer's disease, neuropathology. So first, when looking at all cause mortality, we can see that the meta epigenetic clock was better than the two best, previously best performing clocks, the LaVine and Jiang, clocks, for the, for the correlation between an epi epigenetic an older epigenetic age with all cause mortality risk. So here having an older epigenetic age using the meta epigenetic clock had had a more than six fold increase in all cause mortality risk whereas the Levine and Zhang, clocks identified lower, all cause mortality risk around three. So the meta clock was double that. The the risk is double that for a higher epigenetic age. So what about, the association with chronologically? So we can see that in the lower left panel. And interestingly, they so first they they looked at, data from, four different tissue types including whole blood, breast, brain, and then skin cells. And whereas, the Horvath clocks had very strong correlations of 0.85 or higher, for epigenetic age with chronological age. In contrast, the meta clock was not as good as the initial Horvath clock. So, this again goes to the to the point of not all epigenetic clocks are the same in terms of their ability to correlate with chronological age or the individual, disease related phenotypes. And even in this case, we see the meta clock is better at all cause mortality risk but not as good as, predicting for predicting chronological age compared with some of the other clocks. So what about cancer? So here too, a significant increase in, epigenetic age, the red, compared with the blue. So normal cells. So tumor cells in red for the breast, colon, lung and pancreas. So there's a significant increase, a higher epigenetic age with the meta clock versus, normal normal cells. Now what's the perhaps the most interesting or one of the most interesting data for the meta clock is its association with cell senescence. So that's that's that's we see here. So whereas none of the clocks by themselves, were associated with a higher, you know, senescence. So going from n s to o I s to r s. The Levine and and and one of the other clocks were, there were significant, gosh. There were significantly more a higher epigenetic age acceleration for two of the measures of senescence, but not all three. In contrast, the metaepigenetic clock, all three measures of senescence. So, when compared with the early passage cells were significantly higher. So an older epigenetic age for each of those senescent cell types when compared with the less senescent cells when using the meta clock. And last, the metaepigenetic clock is associated with Alzheimer's disease neuropathology. So we're looking at here, are the standardized betas, which are each positive, which indicates that a higher epigenetic age, for the metaepigenetic clock is associated with more amyloid, with more neuritic plaques, with more NFT neurofibrillary tangles, and a higher tangle load, again, for a higher metaepigenetic clock, epigenetic age. So as a quick summary, not all epigenetic clocks are the same whether they're predicting chronological age, cancer, cell senescence, mitochondrial, dysfunction, or, in the case of the, metaepigenetic clock, there's a a new novel association with Alzheimer's disease neuropathology. So that's all I've got. I hope you enjoyed this video. Have a great day.