Is biological age optimal on a carnivore diet? So to address that question, I'm gonna examine Paul Saladino, who's a medical doctor. So we're gonna analyze, his blood test results. So he posted his blood test data, while being on the carnivore diet on in his show note showed show notes for when he went on, Joe Rogan's podcast. So I've, I've reviewed his data, and these are his data, for, albumin, creatinine, glucose, c reactive protein, percentage of lymphocytes, mean red cell volume, red cell distribution with alkaline phosphatase, white blood cells age, and those variables, enter into a biological age calculator known as, phenotypic age, give him a score of 39.59 years. Now that's three point four years younger than his chronological age. So from my experience, that's good that it isn't older than his actual age, but, as I'm gonna show in a minute, he can do better. And, so I'm not here to bash any dietary ideology. My view is that we should be eating, exercising, and supplementing with the goal of optimizing our internal health, including our biomarkers. So, this is just one blood test and of his. So, how is his data a few months later? Like, what's the average? You know, you'll never see in a scientific study only one data point published for one subject. So, you know, we would need more data to figure out what's his, you know, natural variation year to year. Is this an accurate an accurate, reflection of what his biological age is, for every every test? Or is this, you know, the worst of his, blood test data? Also, it's again, it's an n of one. So the, with the goal of quantifying biological age on a carnivore diet, there are currently no published studies. So I wanted to compare Paul's data against a bigger cohort, you know, to see how how it compares. But there are no studies for the carnivore diet and looking at biological age, as of yet. So with that in mind, if anyone is carnivore, vegan, vegetarian, whatever your dietary approach is, send me your data if you've got data for each of these blood tests, and we can evaluate which is which seems to be the best approach for optimizing biological age. I'm gonna argue my approach is best because I let the biomarkers dictate what my diet and even what my, exercise training approach should be. So what's my data? So I've measured four times in, 2020, and for those who have seen those previous, videos, this will be a review, and my apologies. For those of you who are new, welcome. So, my first blood test measurement that included the nine biological age, variables, was in February 2020, thereby resulting in a a phenotypic age, otherwise known as biological age, of thirty four point five years. Notice that my chronological age is 47. I turned 47 in January. So, based on this data, I'm twelve and a half years younger than my chronological age. So then I retested in March. Again, my biological age was, or 33.3, so still doing pretty great. And then worst readings, probably, because of my seasonal allergies or one reason seasonal allergies that I get in the summer. So now I've got, phenotypic age or otherwise known as biological age, 35.7. And then, again, my my measurement but nonetheless, when I take the average of these four values in 2020, I'm a little bit more than 11 younger than my chronological age. So if you remember Paul's data, it was three point four years younger than his chronological age. Age. So I'd argue that, Paul could do better. And, including all this stuff into his diet may be a wise approach, or at least doing the experiment to see how it affects his biological age. So, I didn't really introduce the biological age, calculator that I'm using, so let's take a step back with the goal of optimizing biological age. Let's take a step back and go through what it is and how can we optimize it, or what what's inherent in the test so that we can potentially, optimize it. So the, as I mentioned on the first slide, the, biological age calculator known as, Levin's phenotypic age, comprises, albumin, creatinine, glucose, c reactive protein, percentage of lymphocytes, the average red blood cell volume, the average or the red red blood cell distribution width, alkaline phosphatase, white blood cell count, and age. So the combination of these nine, biomarkers, and age was shown to predict chronological age, almost perfectly linearly. So, the correlation for for, the biological age calculator was 0.94. Note that a a correlation of one point zero is perfectly linear. So a score a a correlation of 0.94 is a very strong correlation. Now this data was, derived from NHANES three, so the third national health and nutrition examination survey. So then, they replicated this study, in another cohort, so NHANES four. And they found that even stronger correlation or very similar strong correlation of 0.96, as you can see in this picture. Phenotypic age, otherwise known as biological age, almost perfectly linear linearly correlates with chronological age. So in other words, these nine, biomarkers that are commonly found on a blood test when you go to your doc your doctor every year and age are very strongly correlated with chronological age. So what's the significance of this biological age calculator with disease risk? So having an older biological age is associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So we can see that here I've, put an arrow, and so for every one year increase in biological age, all cause mortality risk increases by nine percent. Now the those findings, were similar regardless of age. So if you were a young adult, middle aged adult, or an older adult, your if you had an older biological age, your all cause mortality risk increased, for example, here by thirteen percent, ten percent, and eight percent in young, middle aged, and older adults respectively. So what about disease specific mortality? So I've, indicated where the, having an older biological age was associated with a higher, mortality risk for each of these diseases. So heart disease, cancer, chronic respiratory disease, diabetes, influenza or or pneumonia, and, kidney related issues, nephritis or nephrosis. So for each of those outcomes, having an older biological age was associated with an increased outcome specific mortality. Now note that, having an older biological age was associated with, significantly associated with, an increased, risk for mortality from chronic lower respiratory disease and influenza or pneumonia. So for me, the obvious thought is, well, what about, coronavirus, co COVID nineteen related mortality? So in a preprint, that was recently published, we can we can see that an older biological age as assessed by this biological age calculator, Levine's phenotypic age, was associated with an increased risk for all cause mortality, ACM, in, COVID nineteen patients. So that's recent but that's a preprint. So, you know, they've got to go through the peer review process, before it's, officially published. Alright. So within so now that I've shown you the biological age calculate calculator phenotypic gauge, within the reference range, what's optimal for each of these nine biological age biomarkers? And once we know what's optimal, we can then work on optimizing the ones that should be, improved and, you know, stay the course for the ones that, are are in good shape. So I'm gonna analyze Paul's data to see where where his, biological age data is good and where it can be improved. So first, going right through this list one by one, albumin, higher is better. And how do we know that? So I'm gonna show you representative data for very large studies. The larger the study, the strong potentially the stronger the data. If you've got a very small study, you know, the the results may not be, generalizable to larger population population. Whereas if you've got large population data, the data may be reflective of, obviously, the the larger, you know, population. So in this study of, more than a million subjects, we're looking at levels of serum albumin on the y axis plotted against age. And what we can see is that albumin levels peak in youth for both men and women, and then decline through aging. Now the reference range is 35 to 50 grams per liter. Otherwise, 3.5 to five, milligrams per deciliter, but that doesn't tell you should it be high or low. I mean, clearly, the aging data suggests that it's high. Now Paul's data was four point one grams, per liter. And based on that data, through extrapolation on this aging curve, he's got the albumin levels of a 75 year old, which isn't good. So, now aging data is interesting, but what about, the association with, all cause mortality? So that's what we're looking at here in data from 1,700,000 subjects. The female mortality ratios on the y axis on the bottom, and the male mortality ratios on the y axis on the top. And I've highlighted in red that low, lowest risk for all cause mortality in men and women is four point five and four point four respectively. So you want your albumin levels to be at least those levels, if you're a man or a woman, to have the lowest risk of all cause mortality. Now note this data also, is independent of age. So regardless if you were, younger than 50, 50 to 69, or older than 70 years, all cause mortality risk increased in both genders with lower levels of albumin. So, albumin, higher levels are better. I'd argue is close to five, which is found in youth, would be ideal. So creatinine, not too low, but not too high. So, first, so so, let's take a look and see if if, Paul's zero point nine eight milligrams per deciliter is optimal or not. So, there weren't any pretty pictures, but creatinine has been shown to increase, from one point zero five milligrams per deciliter in 39, thirty to fifty nine year olds to one point one four, in sixty to seventy five year olds. And then what about all cause mortality risk? I should say too that creatinine is well known to increase during aging because, the eGFR, the estimated, glomerular filtration rate, which is a measure of kidney function, uses creatinine, to derive the eGFR formula. And eGFR is well known to decline with age. So for it to decline with age, creatinine has to go up. So alright. All cause mortality risk. So that's what we're looking at here, with the mortality odds ratio on the y axis and creatinine in milligrams per deciliter on the x axis. So the reference range is zero point seven six to one point two seven milligrams per deciliter, but that doesn't suggest what's optimal. So in this study of more than 30,000 subs subjects, we can see that the lowest risk for all cause mortality was around zero point eight milligrams per deciliter with risk significantly increasing at levels below that, and risk significantly increasing for, creatinine levels that are higher than that. So, creatinine levels can also besides being a marker of kidney function, creatinine levels can also be an indicator of muscle mass, because it's one of the storage locations for creatinine in the body. So, generally, if someone has more muscle mass, they'll also have higher levels of creatinine. So even though, you know, 0.8 has been shown to be lowest risk for all cause mortality, I'd argue that, Paul's zero point nine eight isn't too far from optimal because he, carries more muscle mass than the average person. Alright. Glucose. This is an easy one and probably everybody knows this data already. So, eighty to ninety milligrams per decimeter per deciliter is optimal. And Paul's right in that range, eighty seven. So where am I getting those numbers from? So first, this is data in more than 12,000,000 subjects looking at glucose levels on the fasting glucose levels on the y axis plotted against, age. And what we can see is for both men and women, glucose levels are in the mid eighties in youth, around 20 years old, and then they both increase, during aging to levels of 100 or greater, for both, genders. What about all cause mortality risk? So here we can see that 80 ninety four is associated with the lowest point of this j curve with, values lower than 80 being, associated with a higher all cause mortality risk, and values greater than 95 also associated with, an increased all cause mortality risk. So again, Paul's 87. His glucose levels glucose levels are looking good as of now. Alright. C reactive protein. So, first, Paul's data was 1.7, which which based on the reference range, which can go as high as three milligrams per liter, would be considered fine. And I know Paul posted on his, web page for the for the Rogan show notes, another blood test measurement of zero point eight showing that his CRP was elevated because he did a hard workout the day before, and he posted a a lower CRP. But when I looked at the test date, his test date for the data that I'm showing you was in, July, and then his pre his subsequent test date for his lower CRP was in September. So and he didn't post corresponding, you know, all these other corresponding biomarker data with CRP. So I can't just plug in 0.8 into this data because all of these data occurred on the same day. It it it you know, it's impossible to speculate what his other data would have been on the 0.8 CRP. So hopefully, Paul will post all of his data, and more of it so we can get a better picture of what his biological age, data is. Is it 39 or is it something else? Alright. So in looking at that one point seven milligrams per liter CRP, does it, you know, is that is that good or bad? And let so let's have a look at the aging data and the all cause mortality data. So first, we're looking at what we're looking at here in this study is that CRP levels increase during age aging from, starting from the 20 39 year olds through 40 to 49, 50 to 64, and so on. We can see that CRP levels are lowest in the young youngest age group. Now, these data are not in absolute, values, so not in grams per liter. These are log transformed data. I don't for whatever reason, the the authors, log transformed their data prior to, to perform statistical analysis. So these aren't absolute numbers. Nonetheless, what we can see is that for women, CRP levels triple such that, an 85 year old has three fold higher levels of CRP than a twenty to thirty nine year old. And similarly for men, CRP levels go up by 5.4 fold for an 85 year old versus a a young adult, twenty to thirty nine year years old. So for for that, lower would suggest to be better. So what about all cause mortality risk? So, lower CRP has been, associated with a, reduced all cause mortality risk in many studies. So let's have a look. So first, less than three milligrams per liter. That's one study. So based on that if that's the only study that I showed you, you would say, Paul's data is great. Alright. But then we've got three studies showing less than one milligram per liter is, optimal. So now we're in a limbo game. How low can you go? So two studies showed less than zero point eight six and zero point eight three were associated with lowest all cause mortality risk. But then two two additional studies showed zero point five to 0.8 for CRP. And then lastly, four studies have shown that having CRP levels less than 0.33 milligrams per liter, was associated with a maximally reduced all cause mortality rate. So based on this data, I'd argue that the 1.7 is far from optimal and getting as close to zero, may be optimal. Alright. So lymphocyte percentage. And there isn't any data. I I couldn't find any published data for lymphocyte percentage, with all cause mortality risk, but there is data for how it changes during aging. Alright. So let's have a look at that. So first, Paul's data was 26.8%. So of the total white blood cell, count, lymphocytes are 2026.8% of that. So in the in the in the data, we're looking at the percentage of lymphocytes plotted against chronological age, and the sample size in this subject in this study was about 378,000 subjects. Notice that the reference range for the percentage of lymphocytes has not been established yet. But usually on a blood test, the absolute numbers, of lymphocytes are are reported in addition to the, percentage, but it's just that the reference range for the percentage hasn't been isn't like an official thing. Alright. So what we can see in youth is that for both men and women, so women in the blue and men, in the green, they start off in youth with values between 27 to around 28, 29% of the, of their total white blood cell count. So, based on that data, we could argue that, Paul's level of 26.8 is pretty close to optimal. I mean, it's not too far from the 28 or so. So, you know, it that that's pretty close. However, note that, for men, lymphocytes consistently decline during decline during aging, such that someone in, you know, in their twenties with a 28 lymphocyte percentage, compared with someone in their nineties having a lymphocyte lymphocyte percentage of 18%. And then a weird curve for women. So lymphocyte percentage declines to about 35, increases, until fifty five sixty, and then declines again. Nonetheless, if you compared a young, woman's data with, an eighty to ninety year old, the eighty to ninety year old, based on this, data, would have less, a lower lymphocyte percentage compared with the, younger woman. Alright. MCV. So the mean corpuscular volume. And this is essentially a measure of, what's the fluid? How big, is, the red blood cell? Are they big and have a high volume, or are they small and have a a smaller volume? So, there aren't many studies that have looked at, MCV in terms of how it changes during aging, but nonetheless, this data is representative. So, I'm gonna show you here, data for, this data this this, study included both longitudinal and cross sectional data. So a smaller number, and that's in the, you know, top here. So for example, looking at young sample number 25, the data for MCV under mean, that's the longitudinal data for those subjects. And then the data in parenthesis is the cross sectional data. So you've got three different groups, and then one group that was sampled over many years. So what we can see that for both, so first, I should say that Paul's data was eighty three point seven. So let's see how it fits into the aging data and all cause mortality. So, so I've boxed both the cross sectional and the longitudinal data together. Longitudinal data on top, cross sectional data on the bottom. And what we can see is that, there's a significant increase in MCV levels from young, middle to middle aged, and old going from about eighty nine percent to ninety one percent to ninety two, ninety three percent. So, having lower MCV would be, what you would, be expected to find in young adults. So, how does how does that, all cause mortality risk look in terms of MCV? And that's what we're we see here in the study of 36,000 subjects. So what we can see is that compared to the reference, so, having lower levels of MCV, in this case, ninety point five to ninety three percent, having higher MCV levels, greater than, 95.8, at least in men, or actually both in men and women, is associated with a higher, all cause mortality risk related to, MCV having a higher MCV. Similar data is found in women, albeit with, somewhat different numbers. So eighty nine point two to ninety one point six as the reference for lowest risk, and then greater than ninety four, for MCV would be associated with higher all cause mortality risk. So Paul's data would fall into the first quartile, which is not significantly different from the second quartile looking at this data. So, one could argue that his MCV data is, is optimal. Alright. Red blood cell distribution width. So, most aren't familiar with this, biomarker, so I'm just gonna introduce it, a little bit. Alright. So his value of 13.4. Let's see how, that fits into the aging and all cause mortality story. So first, what is the RDW? So basically, it's a measure of the variability in size of your red blood cells. So if you have red blood cells that are all approximately the same size, your RDW, the the you know, the variability in size will be relatively small, so you'll have a relatively smaller RDW. In contrast, when you have uh-uh uh-uh some variability in the distribution in size, so you have some large red blood cells and some intermediate and and small, red blood cells. There's more variability in size there, so your RDW will be higher. So RDW increases during aging, and that's what we can see here with, RDW, percent on the y axis, plotted against age. And we can see the trend line clearly going up from value somewhere around 12 to, 14 or greater, in older adults. What about all cause mortality risk? Let's see how that 13.4 fits in. So first I'm looking at a study of about 30,000 subjects, and we're looking at the survival plotted on the y axis. So lowest, all cause mortality risk was found for, RDW's of nine point seven to 12. That's the black line. And then Paul's data would fall into, the orange line right here. And those data are significantly different. So people who had a lower, RDW, nine point seven to 12, had an improved survival compared with where Paul's data is. So let's look at a bigger study. So in this case, 240,000 plus subjects. And what we can see here is that having an RDW less than 12.5, was with, was considered well, was found to be the lowest risk, and then values that Paul had, 13.4, had a 19 would, have, in this study at least, have a nineteen percent higher risk of all cause mortality. So can we go higher than 240,000 subjects in the study? So in this study in this study, three point two million approximately. And, we can see what we can see is that when, compared with lowest risk, so that would be the group that had, RDW of eight point one to twelve point five percent, having, an RDW of greater than 13.1, as I've shown by the hour, was associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So based on this data, Paul's RDW is not optimal, and there needs to, you know, he needs to do some stuff to improve it. Alright. Alkaline phosphatase. So, Paul's data was, around 89, and I've put in the in the title slide that values around 50 are associated with lowest all cause mortality risk. So, before we get to that, what about the aging data? So, it increases during aging, but there weren't any pretty pictures. So let let's have a look at the all cause mortality data. So this is data in 8,900,000 subjects, and we're looking at, relative risk for all cause mortality on the y axis plotted against the concentration of alkaline phosphatase on the x. So the place where, the 95% confidence interval, and that's shown by the dashed lines, with the the the strong line, the the undashed line in the middle, the place where, all of that crosses one, that's where risk significantly starts to increase or decrease. In this case, increases. So for values higher than, around 50, we can see that the 95% confidence interval completely passes one. So values higher than 50 would be associated with a higher all cause mortality risk. So what where's Paul's data? So we can see based on his 89 that he'd be at approximately two fold higher all cause mortality risk based on his alkaline phosphatase data. So there's some room for improvement there too. Alright. White blood cells. Paul's data is 5.1, otherwise known as 5,100 cells per microliter. Let's see how that fits, in terms of the aging and the all cause mortality data. So first, I'm gonna show you data from the Baltimore Longitudinal Longitudinal Study on Aging. That's where the same subject subjects gave, blood test data, repeatedly many times, in in, in most cases up to thirty years. So they're they're followed, you know, for up to thirty years. So what we can see is that in the about twenty two years, before their death, white blood cells start to increase all the way until the end of death. So what about, life expectancy? So most of the subjects in the study came in at approximately middle age. So 40 to fifties. And this is life expectancy from the baseline visit, baseline, white blood cell count at the baseline visit. What was their life expectancy based on that? So, and it's important to note that the reference range for white blood cells is 3.4 to 10.8, thousand cells per, microliter. So that doesn't tell you much. It's a giant range. So first, we can see that the life expectancy for the white blood cell group, that had 3,500 to 6,000 had the longest life expectancy. In comparison, having 6,000 to 10,000 had a shorter life expectancy by about eight years. Even worse, having higher than 10,000, so that would be, you know, the high end of the white blood cell reference range, range, lived about ten years shorter than the 3,500 to 6,000. And worst of all, the group that had, less than 3,500 white blood cells lived the shortest. So having white blood cells in 3,500 to 6,000 cells per microliter range is, looks like it would be optimal. Alright. So as a summary of Paul Saladino, MD's biomarkers on the carnivore diet. So biomarkers that are within the optimal range, glucose, I put creatinine in there probably because of muscle mass, and it's not too far from the 0.8. MCV, percentage of lymphocytes and white blood cells. But there are also biomarkers that can be improved. Albumin, CRP, RDW, alkaline phosphatase. And by playing with his diet, so that maybe it's a little bit less meat heavy and adding some other stuff, I'd I'd argue he could, find the diet that's best for him, not necessarily sticking to the absolutism of it needs to be the carnivore diet. Alright. That's all I've got. You can find me lots of places online. Have a great day.