The biological age calculator that I'm gonna talk about today is Levine's phenotypic age. And, what that comprises, are nine, clinical clinical variables, and that's shown here, including albumin, creatinine, serum glucose, inflammation, c reactive protein, the percentage of lymphocytes of total white blood cells, the average red cell volume, red cell distribution width, alkaline phosphatase, white blood cell count, and age as the tenth variable. So the importance of this biological age calculator, is, illustrated by the finding that it's highly correlated with chronological age. So these 10 variables, the, its correlation with chronological age is 0.94. So a chrono a a a a correlation of one or negative one is, ideal, optimal, as good as it gets. So 0.94 is pretty close to one. So it's a very strong correlation between these biomarkers with being able to predict, biological age. Or yeah. So that that data was derived from, the National Health and Nutrition, study, a big dataset, relatively big dataset of about 10,000 people. So they replicated that, these findings, the phenotypic age calculator as a, measure of biological aging by looking at a separate dataset in Haines four, and this dataset included 11,000 people. And you can see visually that, phenotypic age was, a little bit even more strongly correlated with chronological age with a correlation coefficient of 0.96. Now just to put this in perspective, the, epigenetic clock, Corvast, initial epigenetic clock, the correlation between that with chronological age was, 0.97. So 0.94 to 0.96 is pretty close to that, if not, you know, identical, somewhat identical. So alright. So why is it important, besides its ability to predict, biological age? So the combination of those 10 variables are also associated with, risk of death from all causes, also known as all cause mortality risk. So for every one year increase in phenotypic age or your biological age, all cause mortality risk increases by nine percent. You can see that here by looking at all cause mortality for the full sample. Nine percent increase significant significant nine percent increase for each one year increase in, biological age. Now this, finding was also true whether it was looking at young adults, middle aged adults, or older older adults. So there was a higher risk of all cause mortality with a one year increase, in phenotypic age. Now in terms of disease specific, deaths, almost all of them on the list here, heart disease, cancer, chronic lower respiratory disease, diabetes, influenza, or pneumonia, which may have some relevance to COVID related conditions, but that's pure speculation. And then nephritis. So, for for again, for every one year increase in phenotypic age, each of these outcomes, the risk for each of these the death from each of these out outcomes increased with the one exception for, cerebral vascular disease. Phenotypic age was not associated with that in, in Haines four. So optimizing biological age. How do you do it? So, you just go to your doctor, get your the standard chemistry panel, which is commonly performed at the yearly physical, plus the CBC, the the standard blood chemistry count, which includes white blood cells, red blood cells, hemoglobin, and the differentials. And then, it also you would have to ask for c reactive protein. So the combination of those two, 75 to $80, at least in The US, it may be different in other, countries. And just for for comparison, well yeah. So it's it's relatively cheap, compared to other, measures of biological age, including the epigenetic clock. So, I have, somebody, crunched the numbers and and, so that I embedded that link on, this link here. So if you wanna calculate your phenotypic age, if you have all these blood test data, you can actually, calculate your own, biological age using the phenotypic age calculator. And knowing your biological age is interesting, but optimizing it is better. So how do you do that? So how does eGanalyte change during aging? What's its association with risk of death from all causes? And then what's my data? I'm gonna show some of my data where it took where applicable. Can diet, fitness, or optimization of body composition impact it? And for the last part of this, I just wanna mention that, I could've I could've used, you know, large epidemiological studies to say, hey. In this study of 10,000 people, this has been shown to reduce albumin. But and I actually started with that, approach, when I first started tracking. And I noticed that a lot of what's published in the epidemiological study weren't affecting my biomarkers. And it wasn't until I started more rigorous, blood testing and dietary tracking that I was able to find the diet pattern that best influences my biomarkers as opposed to what's been published in large, cohorts. So let's see what the so let's start with what's my biological age. So this is my last blood test measurement, two months ago in March. And, after putting in all of my data, I come up with a phenotypic age of 31 31.61. I should mention, I've I I think I have eight or nine measurements that include all of these blood test variables over the last two years. When I first started measuring, my phenotypic age was higher. It was actually 35 something, and I have articles on my website if for anyone wants to read about that. So in theory, you could say I've reduced my, biological age over the past year or so. And that's mostly by changing my diet, improving my fitness and, body composition, which wasn't bad to start with. But nonetheless, it is indeed possible to improve this, in the short short term. So, the the importance of this number, the 31 around, you know, 31 to 32 years old, it's important because my chronological age is actually 47. So I'm at least fifteen years younger than my chronological age. So as I mentioned, one way that I'm reducing, my biological age is through diet. So every day with a food scale, I I weigh all my food, and then I track that data using free freely available online, software. So I track everything, including macro and micronutrients. So protein, carbs, fat, and then vitamins, minerals, whatever the food tracking software can track. I log it into an Excel file. And then over the past, year or so, I started tracking actual food intake. So how much of each food that I'm consuming? Because to just break down food into macro and micronutrients, I may be missing a whole bunch of phytochemicals that that, may be optimizing certain biomarkers. So, by looking at individual foods, it it kind of accounts for that. So, I've been blood testing about four to six times per year. And, because I'm tracking my diet, I can then take the average dietary intake during that period that corresponds to the blood test, and that's one data point. So with enough data points, I can have, enough statistical power to identify potentially meaningful correlations between stuff in my diet and my blood test. Now if you only measure once a year or less off less off less often, it's gonna be harder to do that because, you just won't know it's too imprecise. So, that's what I do. And then once I identify correlations between diet with my blood test results, I make dietary changes. I'm constantly changing stuff in my diet to to to tweak my diet to see how it affects and to try to push my biomarkers in the right direction.