Hey, everybody. My name is Mike Lustgarten. I'm a scientist at Tufts University. And today, we're gonna talk about optimizing biological age. So the biological age calculator that I'm gonna talk about today is Levine's phenotypic age. And, what that comprises, are nine, clinical clinical variables, and that's shown here, including albumin, creatinine, serum glucose, inflammation, c reactive protein, the percentage of lymphocytes of total white blood cells, the average red cell volume, red cell distribution width, alkaline phosphatase, white blood cell count, and age as the tenth variable. So the importance of this biological age calculator, is, illustrated by the finding that it's highly correlated with chronological age. So these 10 variables, the, its correlation with chronological age is 0.94. So a a a correlation of one or negative one is, ideal, optimal, as good as it gets. So 0.94 is pretty close to one. So it's a very strong correlation between these biomarkers with being able to predict biological age. Yeah. So that that data was derived from, the National Health and Nutrition, study, a big dataset relatively big dataset of about 10,000 people. So they replicated that, these findings, the, the phenotypic age calculator as a, measure of biological aging by looking at a separate dataset in Haines four, and this dataset included 11,000 people. And you can see visually that, phenotypic age was, a little bit even more strongly correlated with chronological age with a correlation coefficient of 0.96. Now just to put this in perspective, the epigenetic clock, Corvast, initial epigenetic clock, the correlation between that with chronological age was 0.97. So 0.94 to 0.96 is pretty close to that, if not, you know, identical, somewhat identical. So alright. So why is it important, besides its ability to predict, biological age? So the combination of those 10 variables are also associated with, risk of death from all causes, also known as all cause mortality risk. So for every one year increase in phenotypic age or your biological age, all cause mortality risk increases by nine percent. You can see that here by looking at all cause mortality for the full sample, nine percent increase significant significant nine percent increase for each one year increase in, biological age. Now this, finding was also true whether it was looking at young adults, middle aged adults, or old older adults. So there was a higher risk of all cause mortality with a one year increase, in phenotypic age. Now in terms of disease specific, deaths, almost all of them on the list here, heart disease, cancer, chronic lower respiratory disease, diabetes, influenza, or pneumonia, which may have some relevance to COVID related conditions, but that's pure speculation. And then nephritis. So, for for again, for every one year increase in phenotypic age, each of these outcomes, the risk for each of these the death from each of these outcomes increased with the one exception for, cerebral vascular disease. Phenotypic age was not associated with that in, in Haines four. So optimizing biological age. How do you do it? So, you just go to your doctor, get your the standard chemistry panel, which is commonly performed at the year of the physical, plus the CDC, the the standard blood chemistry count, which includes white blood cells, red blood cells, hemoglobin, and the differentials. And then, it also you would have to ask for c reactive proteins. So the combination of those two, 75 to $80, at least in The US. It may be different than other, countries. And just for for comparison, well yeah. So it's it's relatively cheap, compared to other, measures of biological age, including the epigenetic clock. So, I have somebody, crunched the numbers and and, so that I embedded that link on, this link here. So if you wanna calculate your phenotypic age, if you have all these blood test data, you can actually, calculate your own biological age using the phenotypic age calculator. And knowing your biological age is interesting, but optimizing it is better. So how do you do that? So how does eGanalyte change during aging? What's its association with risk of death from all causes? And then what's my data? I'm gonna show some of my data where I took where applicable can diet, fitness, or optimization of body composition impact it. And for the last part of this, I just wanna mention that, I could've I could've used, you know, large epidemiological studies to say, hey. In this study of 10,000 people, this has been shown to reduce albumin. But and I actually started with that, approach, when I first started tracking. And I noticed that a lot of what's published in the epidemiological study weren't affecting my biomarkers. And it wasn't until I started more rigorous, blood testing and dietary tracking that I was able to find the diet pattern that best influences my biomarkers as opposed to what's been published in large, cohorts. So let's see what the. So let's start with what's my biological age. So this is my last blood test measurement, two months ago in March. And, after putting in all of my data, I come up with a phenotypic age of 31 years 31.61 years. I should mention, I've I think I have eight or nine measurements that include all of these blood test variables over the last two years. When I first started measuring, my phenotypic age was higher. It was actually 35, and I have articles on my website if for anyone who wants to read about that. So in theory, you could say I've reduced my, biological age over the past year or so, and that's mostly by changing my diet, improving my fitness, and, body composition, which wasn't bad to start with. But nonetheless, it is indeed possible to improve this, in the short short term. So, the the importance of this number, the 31 around you know, 31 to 32 years old, it's important because my chronological age is actually 47. So I'm at least fifteen years younger than my chronological age. So as I mentioned, one way that I'm reducing, my biological age is through diet. So every day with a food scale, I I weigh all my food, and then I track that data using free freely available online, software. So I track everything, including macro and micronutrients. So protein, carbs, fat, and then vitamins, minerals, whatever the food tracking software can track. I log it into an Excel file. And then over the past, year or so, I started tracking actual food intake. So how much of each food that I'm consuming because to just break down food into macro and micronutrients, I may be missing a whole bunch of phytochemicals that that, may be optimizing certain biomarkers. So, by looking at individual foods, it it kind of accounts for that. So, I've been blood testing about four to six times per year. And, because I'm tracking my diet, I can then take the average dietary intake during that period that corresponds to the blood test, and that's one data point. So with enough data points, I can have enough statistical power to identify potentially meaningful correlations between stuff in my diet and my blood test. Now if you only measure once a year or less off less off less often, it's gonna be harder to do that because, you just won't know it's too imprecise. So, well, that's what I do. And then once I identify correlations between diet with my blood test results, I make dietary changes. I'm constantly changing stuff in my diet to to to tweak my diet to see how it affects and to try to push my biomarkers in the right direction. And it doesn't always do that. So that's that's the trial and error. That's the neural net. I use that information, and then I, make further changes, after that. So in looking again at the phenotypic age variables, I've just posted the reference range. And the problem is most people don't know what the optimal range would be. And, so what I'm gonna show everybody today is that, based on how these variables change during aging and their risk, how they change with risk of disease for all causes, I think we can come pretty close to knowing, an optimal age. So we'll go over that. Alright. So let's start with albumin. And and I'm gonna go through every one of the nine variables, on the list. And I wanna mention that, obviously, for the for the sake of time, there's no possible way I can go through every study from each variable. So for the point of brevity, I I'm gonna focus on the, biggest studies that have, enrolled the largest amounts of subjects. These would have more, statistical power to identify meaningful correlations and associations when compared with studies that may have a few 100 or or or a few thousand subjects. For example, here in the in this albumin study, this is a sample size that included more than 1,000,000 subjects. So okay. The reference rate for albumin is 35 to 50 grams per liter. But what's optimal? So higher albumin levels are associated with biological youth. And we can see that here. So we're looking at albumin levels on the y axis versus age. And, we can see the female plot, and then we can see the male plot. So males tend to have higher abdomen up until about 60 or 65, than females. So what about risk of death, fall cause? Actually, before we go there. So yeah. And then going forward, you can see that albumin very clearly decreases, with age for both sexes. So what about all cause mortality? All cause mortality risk. So this is, again, a big study, 1,700,000 subjects. And we're looking at female mortality ratios on on on this side and then male mortality ratios on that side. And then the x axis goes from higher albumin levels to lower albumin levels. So how we translate this is higher albumin here, so it would be greater than, 45. I have it as I have it in milligrams per deciliter. I didn't convert it back, but it's the same. So, four point five milligrams per deciliter or forty five grams per liter in men. And for women, greater than 44, would be associated with the lowest risk of death for all causes. And then each of these different data points, are for different age groups. So men less than 50, men or women less than 50, 50 to 69 years old, and greater than 70. So what we can see is that as albumin levels, decrease, risk of death for all causes increases for both sexes. So can albumin levels be optimized? So, I first started tracking all of my blood stuff, fifteen years ago. And at that time, it was only about once a year. I didn't really understand the importance, of, testing more off more often back then. So based on those approximately once a year measurements for for about ten years in my thirties, my average abdomen level was 4.74, milligrams per deciliter, which translates into, 47. It's it's listed unit difference, but, yeah, it's 47, grams per deciliter. So already, I don't you know, whatever I was doing at that time, you know, I was already, off the chart, you know, with higher levels being associated with biological youth when I should have been somewhere around here. So whatever I was doing at that time, it was definitely on the right track. But I should say I don't have longevity DNA. The long slip person, long slip man in my family is currently my dad who's 78. Before that, it was his dad who was 67. So I don't have longevity DNA. I wouldn't attribute this to genetics. So then in 2015, I started tracking more often. I started dietary tracking and blood testing four to six times a year. So I have 23 data points now for abdomen in the last five years. And what we can see is that I've been able to increase my abdomen levels from the 4.74 to 4.93. And using using t test, these values are significantly different. So now I'm even higher off the chart than it was before when I should be somewhere here, and there should have been some age related decrease. So I've been able to resist the age related decline, in Albany. So one way I'm doing that is through diet. And when looking at correlations between my diet with, albumin, the strongest correlation is for beta carotene. And so each data point corresponds to, obviously, albumin levels. But then as I mentioned, I track my diet so I can look at correlations between my diet with the, biomarker, in this case, the albumin. So the correlation for beta carotene with albumin, is moderately strong about 0.6. Remember, a correlation of one or negative one as close to those extremes as possible is close to as linear as is a linear correlation, but it it it increases in strength as you get closer to one. So, granted, it's not perfect, but it's a moderately strong correlation. So, I shoot for, about five, which is biological youth. And to get there, if you just look go across, you can see that, based on the plot, around sixty thousand micrograms or sixty milligrams of beta carotene should get me there. Now I don't supplement beta carotene. For me, primary sources of beta carotene are carrots, orange sweet potatoes, red bell red bell peppers, spinach, and parsley. So I eat a ton of that stuff to get enough beta carotene to to potentially, keep my albumin levels high. So moving forward, glucose, glucose increases during aging and higher levels are associated with an increased mortality risk. So first starting with how it changes during age, large study again, twelve point five million subjects. We can see that, so glucose levels on the y axis and age on the x. And, women in red, men in blue, we see that, men increase, their glucose levels increase to about 60 where they somewhat plateau with a further, you know, additional increase towards later life in the eighties. Whereas for women, the the increase is more linear from around 28 or so all the way up to the oldest age here. So we can see that on, you know, that lowers is is better, especially when considering that it increases during the ages. So somewhere around 85, 86 is is found in biological youth. Now that that number is important because if you look at risk of death for all causes, and that's what's shown here, it has a ratio versus the circulating concentration of glucose levels. So the lowest point of the curve is where lowest risk for all cause mortality would be, and that for that, it's for 80 to 94 milligrams per deciliter. So notice that below 80, 80 milligrams per deciliter, all cause mortality risk is significantly increased. And, also, anything higher than 94 is significantly increased. So based on this large, dataset, we could suggest the 80 to 94 would be optimal. So resisting the gain related increase in glucose. So, again, in looking at my once a year measurements, from 2005 to 2015, my average blood glucose level was 89. And then, as I've gotten more serious and tracked more often and tracked my diet, it's 87.7. So comparing these two groups of data, they are not different. So I basically resisted the age related change in, glucose levels at least for now. So how's my diet correlated with blood glucose? So, this is actually a strong correlation between, blood glucose levels and my fat intake, total grams of fat per day on the x axis. And the the this correlation is 0.75, so it's pretty strong. So what it's basically saying or suggesting is that as I eat more fat, my glucose levels go up, which is going in the wrong direction. And fat is not, all just one thing. Fats comprised of monounsaturated fats, polyunsaturated fats, and saturated fats. So they may not all equally affect or be correlated with my glucose levels. So within my fat intake, the correlation between saturated fat with glucose is moderately strong. So that may be driving this association, saturated fat. So, this the easy answer would be maybe to keep my blood glucose low, just eat less saturated fat. But as we'll see in a couple slides, it may not be that simple. So going forward, c reactive protein, also increases with aging and higher levels are associated with, a higher all cause mortality risk. So the reference range is zero to three milligrams per liter, but that doesn't really tell us which way, you know, the or how much CRP should be in terms of optimal for aging and risk of death for all causes. So, granted, not many studies, giant studies, I mean, millions of subjects have looked at CRP, in terms of aging. The largest that I could find had 1,300 or so subjects, which is still pretty big compared to other studies. But nonetheless, these aren't absolute numbers too because even though it says it's in grams later, the data were back transform log transform and back transform. But the magnitude of the changes is what what's important here. So we're looking at CRP levels for men and women, during aging. So looking at, you know, the various age groups all the way up to 85 or older. We can see that for men, CRP increases more than five fold. And for women, it increases more than three fold. Now, again, as I mentioned, the reference ranges from zero to two milligrams per depth per liter, but that doesn't tell us what's optimal. It is is a CRP of two just as just as good as a CRP of one or less. So let's have a look at some of that data. So less than three, lower CRP, lower than three, is associated with a lower all cause mortality risk. Can we go lower? So in three studies, less than one milligram per liter was associated with, reduced all cause mortality risk. How about lower than that? Well, in these two studies, point eight six and point eight three milligrams per liter in these two studies. And we we can go even further. Another two studies found point five to point eight may be optimal. But it didn't doesn't doesn't stop there. Four studies, found that, CRP levels less than point three three milligrams per liter were associated with lowest risk of death from all causes. So, from this, we can conclude or, you know, the data suggests that, lower is better for CRP and as close to zero as you can get, maybe optimal. So looking at my diet with CRP, and I have less data for CRP because I just started tracking it, last year. So I think I have eight eight data points, two, four, six, eight data points. And the strongest correlation, is with my average daily fat intake. So in this case, higher fat intake, total fat intake is correlated with a lower CRP on the y axis. And even going forward within my fat intake, the the correlation between saturated fat actually should be a negative correlation. So it so higher saturated fat intake strongly correlated with a lower CRP in my data. So that would suggest if I eat more saturated fat and I get most of my saturated fat from coconut butter and, cocoa beans, I make homemade chocolate with cocoa beans. So that may be a good way to lower CRP at least based on this data, but not so fast. Because if you remember a couple slides ago, higher fat intake and a higher saturated fat intake were associated with higher glucose levels, which should be going in the wrong direction. So these data, illustrate that, you know, that it's a constant trial and error process. You know, anyone who who, you know, professes to say off of one blood test, hey. This is what you should eat. I think that's, you know, spurious. It it's a constant trial and error process. And I've as I mentioned, I have 20 up to 25 blood tests, and I'm still, you know, constantly tweaking my diet to find out what's optimal across the board, not just for one or or two biomarkers. So finding the sweet spot for that is is key. So going forward, creatinine also increases with aging, which is associated with a higher all cause mortality risk. So there there weren't any good pictures for how creatinine changes during aging, but in this study of 9,000 people, again, Morgan Levine's group, they found increases. And all the studies have found increases for creatinine during aging, even less directly. But, relatedly, creatinine is a measure of kidney function. So, kidney function is estimated with the glomerular filtration rate, eGFR. So because creatinine is a component of that, eGFR is a measure of kidney function declines with patients. Plenty of data showing eGFR is estimated with creatinine levels, decline with aging. So that so it's pretty well established that creatinine increases with aging as a long story short. So what about risk of death toll causes? So in a study of 30,000 or 30 around 31,000 subjects, looking at risk of death for all causes here versus a creatinine level, even though the reference range is somewhat wide, the mortality risk is actually with a lower within a more narrow range. So what we can see is is lowest risk is about zero point eight milligrams per deciliter. But as you go below that, risk increases. And as you go above that, risk increases. But when risk fall falls below one, that's considered to be reducing risk. So within that range is 0.6 to zero, one point one milligrams per decimeter, which is still tighter range, than or or more, you know yeah. It's a tighter range in the reference range. So resisting the age related increase for creatinine. So, pre tracking values, my diet, my average value over eight measurements, in my thirties was 1.11. And I've actually reduced that, over the last five years, whereas creatinine, as I mentioned, increases during aging. And, again, these two groups of data are significantly different. So, whereas there was more variability in my data, just as another illustration of why more data is better, you know, there's more variability when I was tracking this often, but you can see the data is more tight. There's less range. And and one component of that may be, you know, dietary tracking too. So but I just wanna I just popped the arrow up because in my last few measurements, I've been kinda playing with my diet looking to optimize my biomarkers, and you can see that my creatinine levels increased. So, in addition to tracking, you know, the macro and micronutrients, I also track food intake, but I haven't done that for the whole five year period. I've just been doing that for the past a year and a half or so, so I have less data for it. But within that data, I think this is nine data points, three, six. Yeah. So nine data points, for creatinine levels with my daily, average daily intake of eggs and cheese. I don't need it every day, but it's the average amount, every day. And, actually, there was a time when I increased it to see how it would affect my biomarkers. So what we see is as my intake of eggs and cheese increased, my creatinine levels went up, which is going in the wrong direction. So with that in mind, I've cut back on my, egg and cheese intake, and that actually resulted in bringing my creatinine levels back down. So for whatever reason, whether it's acid load or too much animal protein or or what, eating I I limit how much of of the egg and and cheese that I take in to keep my creatinine levels from, going up. So, just to illustrate so by tracking from all this data so far, by tracking daily diet circulating biomarkers, you can identify the dietary pattern to leads that leads to the best biomarker profile for you. Alright. So most of the data that I'm gonna show you going forward or some at least, the rest of the phenotypic age biomarkers, I don't have as strong data for my own data with it, but wherever possible, I'm gonna show that data. So, next on the list is a lymphocyte percentage, and a higher lymphocyte percentage is associated with chronological use. Now this data may look a little screwy, superficial. This is a lymphocyte percentage as a function of chronological age in a large study, 380 or so thousand people. So what we can see is for men in green, it pretty standardly decreases from 28% of all white blood cells to somewhere around eighteen percent. So about a ten percent decrease for the men. But for women, the the data is more, obviously, more variable. So it starts it starts relatively high. It comes down in the thirties. It goes back up to the fifties, and then it goes down again. So that a woman at 80 or or even 70 does indeed have less, a lower lymphocyte percentage than when she was in her twenties. So there most studies don't actually look at the percentage of lymphocytes. They look at the absolute number of lymphocytes, that, and how they are associated with all cause mortality risk. So let's have a look at some of that data. So, again, big study, thirty thirty thousand subjects or so, all cause mortality risk versus, lymphocyte levels, and we see that, with the different colors. So lowest risk for all cause mortality was found for lymphocytes, between two and two point six. So 2,000 to 2,600 should actually, they shouldn't be either be here. The tenth of the third is 2,000 to 2,600 lymphocytes per microliter. That's lowest risk of all cause mortality. And then, the the highest risk of all cause mortality is pretty pretty obvious here. That's having lymphocytes less than 1.5 or 1,500 cells per microliter. So, in for the case of lymphocytes and you could even make the argument that having two high lymphocytes, 2,600 per, cells per microliter. There there is a small increase in mortality risk with the yellow line, which should be indicated there. So, for lymphocytes, you don't wanna go too high, but you definitely don't wanna go too low. And especially in the age of coronavirus, it seems that, lymphocytes are dramatically depleted so that, people who have died, from their studies and preprints that are that are out there that, people who have died from it have, lymphocyte levels around 800. So that would put them obviously in this black. Not good. Alright. And as I mentioned, I don't have any dietary data that's strongly correlated. So all I can say for that is stay tuned. I'm gonna keep blood testing. I'm gonna keep dietary tracking, and hopefully, with more data, I'll be able to identify stronger correlations. So mean corpuscular volume also on the list. How does that change with age? And, also, again, a lot a lot of these biomarkers aren't well studied in terms of aging, in terms of sample size that have looked sample sizes that have looked at that in studies. So this is a relatively small sample, but, it has some it has some weight. But before I go there, of note, the mean corpuscular volume is basically how swollen your red blood cells. Are they filled with fluid, or are they smaller and have less fluid in them? So, the reference range is somewhat large, 79 to 97%. And this data is presented in two ways. So this is data from the Baltimore Longitudinal Study on Aging where they track subjects longitudinally, repeated measures over time up to forty years or more. So they had a small group of people who had multiple measurements for up to forty years, twenty five, '22, and thirty seven people, but we're tracking them. There is strength in the data because you're looking at the same person over time repeatedly. And that'll I'll illustrate that, you know, why that's important in a minute. So we're looking at the data longitudinally. We see that the MCV, immune core vascular volume, it increases from 88.8 all the way up to 92.4 in old. Now looking at the data cross sectionally, so just groups of young middle aged or old that were not tracked longitudinally, we see basically similar data, MCV increases during aging. So in looking at mortality risk, in a relatively big study, 36,000 subjects, mortality risk for men and women, lower MCVs, which are found in biological youth, are indeed associated with a lower risk of death for all causes. And we see that here for the men, lower MCV is is as the reference, and then higher MCVs are associated with a higher all cause mortality risk and similar findings for the women. So for MCV, lower is better. So next on the list, red blood cell distribution with, which most people, at least not for me, when I first got my blood test, you know, you go to the doctor, you get your physical, you get your RDW, just gloss over it because it's nobody ever talks about it. But clearly based on, it being identified as one of the biomarkers on, you know, that's important for calculating biological age. It's important. So what is it? So it it's essentially the range of the distribution of your, red blood cells in terms of are they, you know, filled excessively filled with fluid or not. So, in this case, you'd have a low RDW because all the cells are approximately same the same size. So the the the standard deviation of the MCV, which is how the RDW is calculated, is relatively small. But when you have red blood cell populations that are very big and very small, we have a larger range, and that results in a larger RDW percent. So what's optimal? Well, it increases during the agent. See that here with the RDW percentage versus age. Lots of data points. These are individual subject data, so it's a big big sample size. And we can see that the RDW increases during age. What about mortality risk? So this is data from about 30,000 subjects, and, all cause mortality risk on the y axis. And, so we can see that, the lowest risk of death for all causes is for RDWs less than twelve percent. And as you go higher, each of these each of these plots are higher values of NCV. So at at least in terms of all cross mortality risk in this study, lower is better. But we can go even bigger than the sample size of 30,000 subjects for MCB. In this case, they looked at more than 240,000 subjects, but the same trend was identified Using RDWs of less than RDW percentages of less than 12.5 as the reference, you can see that higher RDWs is significantly higher risk of all cause mortality. But 240,000 subjects isn't the biggest study that's looked at this. There's actually a study that looked at more than 3,000,000 subjects. And for that, lowest risk of death for all causes was for eight point one to twelve point five percent for the RDW, whereas risks significantly increased above thirteen point one percent. So for the RDW, it would seem that lower is better. So, I have some data that is moderately correlated with RDW, whether it's applicable to everyone, I don't know. For me, this may be a part of the story. And, how many calories I eat per day is moderately strongly correlated with a correlation coefficient of 0.5, with the RDW. So because lower so higher calorie based on this plot, it would suggest that higher calorie intakes would be associated with a higher RDW, which is going in the wrong direction. So I've tried to shoot for values 12.5 or less at least based on the last slide. And to get there, if you bring the plot forward, it's somewhere in the 2,400 to 2,500 calorie range. So right now, I currently average somewhere in the low 25 hundreds. And my goal is to get it somewhere closer to here, but, one step at a time. Alright. So this doesn't tell you what, you know, calories can come from anything. So what what could be driving this? What should I cut out of my calories? You know, what food groups should I cut? And, I identified a moderately strong correlation between my average daily fructose intake with the RDW. So the higher my fructose intake, the higher my RDW, at least based on this this plot. So I don't drink sugary drinks or sodas. That's almost well, I should say not never, but it's almost never. So, most of my fructose is coming from fruit and vegetables, mostly from fruit, though. So, nonetheless, with the goal of if this correlation is in fact driving changes in RDW, if I reduce my or keep my fructose levels relatively lower, I'd expect to see lower RDW. So with that in mind, I've been shooting for, the left side of this in terms of fructose intake. So, somewhere around 70 or even or even less. So, two more biomarkers on the list. Alkaline phosphatase also increases during aging and higher values are associated with the higher all cause mortality risk. So first, Levine, again, she found that alkaline phosphates increases during aging. There are other studies that have also indicated this, but, you know, don't have the time to list them all. And then what about all cause mortality risk? So giant study, about nine million people. This is our risk of death from all causes versus the alkaline fossil space level. So the reference range is big, 39 to one seventeen. You really don't know if you're just looking at reference range which which way is optimal. So what we can see is that all cause mortality rates starts to pass one once you pass around 48, units per liter. So based on that, one could say that, as close to 48, is is optimal, and resisting an age related increase for alkaline phosphatase should, also be suggested. So last on the list, white blood cells, which increase during aging and higher values are associated with a shorter life expectancy. So, this is data from the Baltimore Longitudinal Study on Aging where they, again, they measure the the same subjects for up to or longer than forty years. And what we can see is, when looking at white blood cells and this is, the the time prior to their death. So we can see that for for those subjects that white blood cells increase for the twenty or so period twenty or so year period up to death. And then how does that, associate with life expectancy? So, this we're looking at survival in the y axis versus time. And the reference range for white blood cells is large. It and it doesn't tell you what's optimal. So in looking at survival, that may tell us more about what could be optimal. So when you look at fifty percent survival that, you can you can kind of, predict life expectancy based on that. So, when looking at that, the, group that had the longest life ex expectancy had a white blood cell count between 3,506,000 cells per microliter, and you see that here. So, starting from the measurement time measurement, they lived about thirty eight years, that group that had white blood cells at baseline at that level. So what about, higher level? Actually, what about lower levels? So lower than 35 are actually the worst on the list. They only live twenty two years. So, you know, making sure that your white blood cells are in this range, I mean, that's a 15 difference in life expectancy. It's a big deal. So what about higher than 6,000? So 6,000 to 10,000 cells per microliter. So their life expectancy is better than the less than 3,500, but still not as good, obviously, as the 3,500 to 6,000. So they live about five years shorter than the best group. And then greater than 10,000, they live, second shortest. So they live about twenty five years, but still thirteen years less than the group that had white blood cells, in the 3,500 to 6,000 range. So just as a quick what can optimize it, this is just a study from Biosphere two where the, subjects that were, were were involved, ended up having to calorie restrict. And, there are other larger studies that illustrate this, but I think that the picture here is really quick and easy. So they started off with white blood cells somewhere on the seven range. And because they were calorie restricting or eating less calories than they normally would, their white blood cell counts came very quickly down to somewhere in the low fours. And then once they left biosphere two, they returned to the normal cap calorie intakes, and we can see that it increased again. And then they, you know, self adjusted and cut their calories again, and then we see it coming down again. So white blood cells may be sensitive to changes in calorie intake. But for me, I have weak correlations between my calorie intake. But for others, this may be a worthwhile try. So as I mentioned, I posted all the reference ranges, in the beginning. But, after going through all the data, I'd suggest that all everything I've put here and we've talked about, you know, these numbers as potentially being an optimal range. So just as some notes, if anyone's interested in more information about optimizing these variables, I have relatively brief literature reviews but with obviously more citations and more references for each of these biomarkers on my website. And then it's important to note that some biomarkers may be easier to modify through diet, exercise, or supplements, fitness, or other means, than others. For example, for me, I'd I'd say that, you know, how many glucose c reactive protein creatinine in white blood cells may be easier to modify versus the others. And this is a continuous trial process. Continuous trial and error process. You know, to think that you could just do it once and have it perfect, I'd argue that that that's not the case. And, that's all I got. Thanks for your attention. And I'll take any questions. Yeah. And a big thanks to their to the Boston Police Department. Big shout out to, to them. Thanks for that, guys. Oh, dear. It's always the way, isn't it? There's always somebody with an alarm. Yeah. Oh, Boston's terrible. For that, it's, you know, they've gotta catch or do whatever. Yeah. It's loud. Loud city. Yeah. I I would have thought it had been a bit quieter with, with isolation and lockdown at the moment. I don't know what the situation is Yeah. In Boston? Yeah. It's just I'm on a major street, so that's probably what it is. But, you know, the traffic on the major streets is gonna be louder, especially if the police were I live across the street from the fire department, so that's always interesting. Yeah. So, yeah, I can appreciate that. Where we used to live was right by the, the city hospital. So, yeah, it was, constantly sirens going off and all sorts. And everybody used to think I lived in a high crime area. It's just that we happen to be here at the back of, the the next street and, obviously, all the ambulances are leaving. Yeah. So there we go. Alright. So we've got questions. Oh. Correlation between age and the nine biomarkers is the same in different populations. Yeah. That's a good point. For example, the glucose data was in a Korean population, but, I mean, at least for glucose, the the data is similar, you know, regardless of, geography, whether it's European or or, North American. It's pretty most of these biomarkers are pretty standard across geography and, ethnicity. Yeah. Okay. Tools for data collection. So I'm just using an Excel file, and I just log everything in that. And then I'm just for now, I'm just using, simple correlations in Excel. And in other cases, multi variable regression models, but also in Excel. So instead of just looking at correlations between individual, you know, dietary variables, sometimes I'll add a few dietary variables together to build the model to see if the model is better than the individual variable at predicting the the biomarker. So simple correlations for now. I've I've had talks with people to use a machine learning approach, and I've talked about this before, especially at the LEAF conference last year if anybody wanted to help me use a machine learning approach. But, the people that have reached out to me and that I've reached out to have basically said that I'd need a ton more data than just and I say just eighteen hundred days of dietary data and 20 something blood tests. So, yeah. We do know people involved in machine learning, so we may be able to plug you in as it were. InSilicon Medicine comes to mind, they are doing, a lot of, work with, machine learning, deep learning. Yeah. Yeah. I reached out to Poly about, crunching the numbers between my diet and, biomarkers, but I don't think they were interested at that time. And I had Farla's data at that time too. Yes. Polly Polly Manasheena. Yes. Manasheena. Alright. Let's see. Calling white blood cell count a biomarker is very misleading. It's not me that's calling it the biomarker. I mean, Morgan Levine, you know, they they used an unbiased approach and came identified the variables that, best predicted biological age. So that's one of them. So, I mean, it's included on her biological age calculator, phenotypic age, which is almost perfectly correlated with, chronological age. So, you know, calling it a biomarker is I mean, I don't think that's a far stretch. And I wouldn't call it a crude way to measure immune health too because, you know, they increase during aging, they increase during infection. Now if you said that, from Steve, Steve, if you said that, not all white blood cells are the same, then we'd have, you know, a point of agreement because within white blood cells, the two main components in terms of, how many cells are there are neutrophils and lymphocytes. Neutrophils increase during aging, and actually, lymphocytes go the other way and decrease during aging. So I also track my neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio, which I would argue would be a better metric than, total white blood cells, especially when considering that they go in opposite directions during aging. But Morgan Levine and others that have used these, clinical variables haven't looked at the neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio, as a potential variable for biological age. I don't know. I I I would say that it is actually a fair biomarker, to be honest. It is indicative of of something, but, you know, arguable point, I suppose. Did anybody, in here have a question? That's what I meant to ask. If anybody has a question, do feel free to raise your hand or or, or put it in the text. If any any of us here on the call would like to ask Mike a question. If not, we've got quite a lot of things coming in from Facebook as well. So you're gonna be popular this afternoon, mate. Anybody for a question in in chat? No? Nothing yet? Oh, there's a load of questions in the, in the text there for you. Yeah. So Adrian, so, yeah, I did I did so I did plot, fat intake versus creatinine. I don't remember it off off the top of my head, but, yeah, I'm gonna go back and look at it after we're done. I don't know that it's the fat intake, though, but but and I also have the, you know, potential renal acid load. So, you know, the foods that you eat, the amount of acid that your kidneys would see as a potential, variable for, resulting in increased, creatinine levels, which would suggest decreased kidney function. I also, you know, track that too. So, you you know, it could be the eggs and cheese, because they, you know, they have a lot of variables that increase the potential renal acid load. But I'm gonna go back and take another look at that and see what it is. But regardless of what the reason would be, whether it's eggs and cheese or something else, for me, all I care about is getting my biomarkers to go in the right direction. So I noticed that reducing them, they go back to the right direction. And if I increase them, then they go back to, you know, in the wrong direction. See, Tony. Yeah. I haven't looked into senescent cells. I'd say the field is probably at least a few years of including that into biological age calculators, mostly because they aren't widely tested for. So, you know, you may have small studies, you know, relatively small studies in terms of the amount of subjects in the study, that have senescent cell marker measurements, but to have large studies, like, you know, NHANES that had nine or 10,000 or 11,000 subjects. I don't I don't think that data exists yet. So I think it'll be at least a few years before there's, large population data on that to be able to derive, you know, biological, or to include it as a biological age marker. Other biological age clocks that I would consider as reference. So I do use aging.ai. I did use that, but, the correlation for aging.ai with, it's 19 or up to, I think, 31 biomarkers, its correlation at best was somewhere in the 0.8 range, which isn't as good as, obviously, 0.94 to nine six of Morgan Levine's phenotypic gauge calculator. So, I've I've placed most of my, analysis on the, phenotypic age. I got a bunch of questions. When is too late to change your biological age? Never. Whenever you the active tracking will improve your biological age sooner, hopefully sooner than later, but eventually. And I I say that not just with my diet, but I also track my fitness levels in terms of resting heart rate and heart rate variability. These are things that also change with age. And, just by tracking them so I wear a fitness tracker just by tracking that daily for the last year and a half, I've actually made improvements and resisted age related changes there too. So I'd say it's never never too late to start. The more you track, the better you'll be able to figure out what works best for optimizing, you know, your engine, your car, and that should reduce biologically age and risk of disease. See. I mean, it's tough, you know, your with your grandmother. I mean, you'd want to obviously, you'd wanna you'd wanna make very small changes, and I would only change, you know, obvious things like diet. I wouldn't add supplements or drugs unless she has to take medications, you know, because of the advanced age. But, you know, simple simple low risk strategies, you know, whether it's changing a certain food or eating more of another food, whether it's more fiber or more nutrient density, These are low risk strategies that could could potentially yield greater rewards, or even, you know, adding a little, you know, a little extra walking. You know? These are small small small steps can lead to great gains. So, and I'd say it's never too late. Thoughts on Calico's, looking for longevity genes. Oh, man. That's a I don't wanna please, mate. No swearing, mate. This is a family show. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I don't wanna say anything negative. They're doing a lot of work on on model organisms and looking at longevity genes, but trans translatability to humans is very debatable. But I'd say that the more people looking at longevity genes, the better. Keep it keep it like that. Yeah. I mean, you know, the the the case for longevity genes isn't isn't fantastic. I think there is, there were a few like clotho or Clotho. Clotho? Clotho? Clotho, Foxo, Foxo three a. There's a few. And genes associated with, like, the sirtuins, the sirtuins network as well. Yep. How big, how big a variance in age, you know, life expectancy that equates to, a lot of people seem to think it's not gonna be that significant. But but that also along those lines too. Let's say you don't have those longevity genes or others. Right? So what are we supposed to do? You know? Oh, I don't have longevity genes, so I guess I'm just gonna, you know, burn my candle at both ends. Who cares? Because I don't have longevity genes. I'd argue that whatever whatever your your DNA is, in terms of your maximum lifespan, whether that's one fifteen or it's 95, by optimizing as much as you can optimize to get the most out of your genes, that's my approach. So I don't have I don't I don't have longevity genes. So I'm trying to squeeze or at least not yet one. It hasn't, you know, been evident yet in my family. So Well, I'm trying to say I would say epigenetics might probably has a greater effect on your on on your lifespan than anything else, you know, the environmental factors that are influencing gene expression Yep. Rather than the genes that you've got per se. I certainly don't subscribe to the idea that there are death genes Yeah. That are out to get you because I think I just I just think that that idea is absurd. I mean, we're not salmon. Yeah. Yeah. And along those lines well, I mean, there there have been papers that have, you know, shown that that actually longevity is a balance between how many longevity genes and, you know, life lifespan shortening genes you have. Right? But but, I agree with you about the epigenetic, aging and and, along those lines in the Horvath group, their papers that have looked at epigenetic age and relationship with diet or exercise, actually, it's exactly as you would predict. You know, people who had, exercise and had better physical activity had a younger epigenetic age. People who ate more basically fruits and vegetables and that higher carotenoid slit, circulating carotenoids. One of them being beta carotene, which is associated with albumin, had a younger epigenetic age. So there is some overlap there too. Beta carotene, isn't that found, in carrots and similar vegetables? Carrots, sweet potatoes. I've cut down on the carrots and replaced it with, sweet potatoes to get the same amount of beta carotene. But, yeah, I could try to have more variety. Well, now you mentioned sweet potatoes, which are really, really tasty. The only thing is that comes to mind with those is that they're, they're a simple carb, a bit like potatoes. And I'm, I'm sort of of the thought that you need to keep your GI, as as sort of low as possible so that you've got a steady blood sugar. Yeah. And things like, sweet potatoes and potatoes and similar to, vegetables can actually cause, obviously, a spike in your in your, in your glucose. Any thoughts on that? I mean, you know Yeah. So so, in terms of carrots, actually, they they do have a lot of sugar, whether it's fructose or sucrose compared to sweet potatoes, which basically don't have any. So that that is indeed a fair point. But carrots have a lot of soluble fiber, which is fermented by you know, we're not gonna get into it today, but, they're soluble fiber density. So the amount of soluble fiber that they have per 100 calories compared to a sweet potato is greater. So, they may I I'd argue they may be more beneficial for the gut microbiome, but it's a it's a, you know, it's a it's a, you know, two eggs of one or or two eggs of the other. Right? So carrots have more sugar but more but also more soluble fiber, whereas the sweet potatoes have less sugar and less soluble fiber, but other things that can also affect the microbiome. So And it's it's also how they're prepared, obviously, because, you know, cooking vegetables Yep. Can cause them to rise in, in in their GI. Their GI can go up if you cook them as opposed to them being raw. So raw carrots are okay. But if you cook as soon as you start cooking them, woah. Hello. Blood sugar, you know? So there's another there's another metric there, and and all of us don't have the same response the blood sugar response to foods. And that that study was, you know, Aaron Aaron Segal's group, they showed that not everybody responds to a white bread meal in terms of blood sugar rise. So whereas I may have and I haven't done this experiment yet, but at some point, I I wanna get a continuous blood, blood glucose meter, you know, stick it to my arm and see how individual foods affect, my blood sugar levels. But, yeah, it's variable. Right? I mean but I I'd also argue that whether you're eating carrots or sweet potatoes and their potential effects on GI, these are gonna be far better than eating, you know, processed refined foods. Right? So, yeah. Sounds good news if you if you like your salad, folks. Alright. Let's see here. Biomarkers to reduce cross linking. That's such a big question. I mean, I'd yeah. I'd argue that, you know, optimal body composition and, and a nutrient dense diet, just because, so when I think about collagen cross linking or cross linking in the ECM, I think about oxidation. I think about glycation, and these are things that would be minimized being basically lean and fit and eating a nutrient dense diet. Now if you wanna ask me for more specifics on terms of, you know, whether it's glucose glucosapain or other other, you know, senolytics. I'm not there yet, but, that's definitely on my list is to eventually jump into that and, you know, so I can at least delay aging for as long as possible. And there's gonna come a point where no matter what dietary change or how fit I am, we're gonna need these rejuvenation, you know, therapies. So, yeah, that's on my list. Not there yet though. Well, Spain is your man for glucosapain. There you go. Well, I I wanted also pop in on the previous question that Tony had asked and that was the biomarkers for senescent cells and the thing is that in the human body the only thing that or one of the only things you have easy access to is of course to blood. We are kind of limited in what we can look for and senescent cells are not floating around in the blood and there are not really any biomarkers in the blood that really reflect the amount of senescent cells in your body. You could say senescent cells secrete inflammatory factors but that's mostly paracrine in the near environment of the senescent cell and don't really get much in the blood. Anyway measuring inflammatory markers in the blood will make more reflect other things that also cause inflammation in the blood like you know if you have any type of infections or you know your gut microbiome that goes in that leakiness of your gut could induce increases in inflammation or by dietary factors that induce inflammation so there is not anything in the blood that you can measure that really reflects the SNES cells easily and kind of the same applies to glycation or cross linking of the extracellular matrix. Then of course your blood glucose levels will be important, your hb1ac level which reflects like your long term glucose level in your blood will be important but that all looks at glucose and there are other factors that do cross linking like methylglyoxal for example which is way more factors that do cross linking like methylglyoxal for example which is way more reactive and which you really can't measure in your blood. We certainly are limited in what we can measure as biomarkers in an easy accessible way. Good point. He's right, you know? Yeah. Great point. Mind you, we did work on glucosapain, so he's got a home advantage. You know, you worked at David Spiegel's lab, didn't you, for for a while? Yes. For one year. So he is mister CrossLinks. So we're fortunate to have him here with us today. Nice. Alright. Let's go to more questions here. So, the difference in subjective well-being slash performance. Yes. Definitely a 100%. As I mentioned, at least in terms of physical performance, my strength is pretty good. I I posted a couple of videos on YouTube about me doing pull ups and shoulder presses, so I'm still pretty strong. That hasn't changed. And I've improved my, cardiovascular fitness as evident by my, lower resting heart rate and higher heart rate variability. Subjective well-being, I'm always working on improving that. I think I can always feel better, but, you know, attract my sleep. So I'm always trying to improve, you know, the amount of deep sleep that I get and having consistent sleep time. So I'm I'm obsessed with optimal physical and mental health condition. And, you know, there were times in my life where I ate more processed foods and less nutrient dense, diets and, you know, I'm not gonna say I feel outstanding. I feel pretty good. You know, I everybody would love to be chronologically 20. So but, yeah, for my chronological age, I'd say I feel pretty good. And the performance is there too. Right? So but always room for improvement. With changes in diet over 65. Well, yeah, I'd argue that, yes. And that may be the group that would need dietary changes the most. I've got a grant in submission right now that's gonna look at a high fiber diet in older adults to see how it affects their, muscle, muscle related measures, muscle mass, composition, physical function. So, yeah, I'd argue that and there is plenty of data that older adults eat nutrient poor diets. And so, but, yeah, there are a few studies that have looked at, you know, you know, nutrient dense, whole food based diets, in that age group. So, yeah, I'd argue that older adults would need, you know, better diets across the board. So for Thomas, in terms of reading more, I I'd say to to look up some more, papers on biological age. I mean, we just went through how to optimize it, but for more background, you can go to, you know, Morgan Levine's papers or other other papers at the genetic page, Corbat's group. You know, maybe it's not pure biological age. It's a it's a it's a it's a it's a I've people have argued with me. I'm not that they think it's not really biological age, but that it correlates with chronological age indeed indicates that it is a measure of a cumulative measure of biological age. Nonetheless, let let's say let's say that these this this panel of nine bar mark biomarkers isn't a measure of biological agent. I mean, granted, it's associated with all cause mortality risk, so that's important. But one of the, you know, main points of of my presentation was that, you know, how do these things change with age and what's associated with biological youth? So, you know, even if someone doesn't wanna identify them as a, quote, unquote, biologic marker of age, how you're circulating, markers of health change during aging and with disease risk and optimizing them so we get closer to biological youth and lower disease risk. So whatever you wanna call that biological age marker or or what, I'd say that's important. So so whether that's an indicator of health span, you know? Yeah. Okay. So in terms of inflammation, so for Steve, I I only have eight or nine CRP measurements right now. So, you know, even though it seems like a lot of data, it's easy to have very strong or very weak correlations. So stay tuned on how my CRP associates with other biomarkers, but I have up to 25 measurements for glucose, abdomen, and and the standard chemistry panel. So, yeah, I do indeed look for correlations between within stuff that's usually found on a blood test to potentially give me more insight, at times to figure out how I can optimize them. Let's see Steve again. So it's not actually all me, to be fair. It's me it's me typing it in the chat. I'm copying and pasting it from Facebook, and I'm I'm putting the person's name at the front. So it's definitely not all me. I haven't asked all these questions today, mate. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I see it now. Right. My fault. So, yeah, I'm a big fan of Greg Fahy's approach and that he wanted to optimize biological age, but not to not to sound negative, but just to be objective, they achieved only a two and a half year reduction in biological age using that combination HGH, metformin, you know, etcetera. Just as, you know, just just from last year, you know, so last year, I think I had three or four phenotypic age measurements. And as I mentioned, I started at 35 years old, 35.4, 35.6 when I was 46. So already, I started off ten years younger than my chronological. And just looking at the four depth blood test from last year with the two or three that I have this year, I'm three years two to three years younger. And purposefully, I've reduced my body weight. I've changed my diet, optimized my fitness. So you could make the argument that you don't need for for someone that was already biologically younger than their chronological age, you can make further gains by changing lifestyle related stuff of the same magnitude that the drugs used. So, but the point about thymus evolution is a good one. Steve and I talked about this before too. It's it's a huge, especially in the age of coronavirus, getting that virus rejuvenated and, cells that are able like, you know, whether also hematopoiesis. So we've got more, immune cells, whether they're t cells, b cells, or other lymphocytes to fight off, infectious agents. It's essential. So that that's a billion dollar question. If we had the answer to regenerating the thymus and boosting, immune cell production that can help our, you know, antiviral defense, I mean, it would be everywhere. But it's in my mind, you know? So the vegetarian data is tricky because, yeah, there I've seen data that goes both ways. I've seen data that compares vegetarians to omnivores, and they're the same in terms of, outcome variables and or not. So I think it goes deeper than just, you know, what your what your, dietary ideologies. I should say, Mariela, that, you know, I tried going vegan, almost pretty close raw vegan. I've presented this at other times and other presentations. So I went, raw vegan essentially pretty close to it for about a year, and my triglycerides went up and my HDL went down. So these are things that are going in the wrong direction. That's these are basically age related changes that I've based I basically used diet to cause. And then once I added fish back in, those went back to normal. So clearly being vegan isn't optimal for my biochemistry. And then even going forward, I've played around with how much beef, cheese, and eggs, to add in. And then, you know and so I for me, those, it's minimal. You know? Once a week, once a month. But for others, maybe they would have better biomarkers on those diets. But then also, interestingly, red blood cells decrease with age, which is problem because if you have left less red blood cells, to carry hemoglobin, to carry oxygen, you're gonna feel exhausted all the time. You're not gonna have enough oxygen to perform cellular work. And my red blood cells for a few years were trending downward, and I wasn't able to see, values that I had seen fifteen years ago. So I was almost, you know, admitting to myself, well, I'm trying everything I can do, and I don't see anything improving this. What, you know, what am I gonna do? I guess I'm on that road of for a age related decline. And for whatever reason, I added full fat, plain yogurt into my diet. And whether that caused it or not, I haven't seen red blood cell levels that are lower than five, which is what's found in biological youth. Whereas for 15 or so blood test measurements, I was never able to get them out of the four seven range. So, so it's variable. It may be variable for everyone. I don't I don't wanna say eat go vegetarian or vegan or omnivore or carnivore. I mean, if you've got blood test results across the board, not just an isolated biomarker, not just your glucose levels are great or your TG to HDL level is great. If you can show across the board that your biomarkers are good and you have low inflammation and you're low biological age, whatever that dietary ideology may be, go for it, I'd say. Let's see. The best foods to support the micros producing short chain fatty acids. Fiber. Soluble fiber. And, to most people, that conjures up an image of, whole grains, and that's not true. And the reason that that's not true is because if you look at the soluble fiber content for whole grains, as they're listed by serving size, they have more than vegetables. But vegetables are more nutrient dense but calorie poor. So for the same 100 calories, for if you compare a 100 grams of whole grains and pick your whole grain, oats, rice, you know, barley, whatever it may be, a 100 grams of your whole grain versus a 100 grams of vegetable, the vegetable has more soluble fiber. The problem is, almost no study well, only a few studies have looked at very high vegetable diets, in terms of their ability to increase short chain fatty acid levels. And I'm I'm actually working on a grant now that I'm gonna submit in June that goes after that idea in older adults. But, if you're looking to support your microbes, high fiber diet. But even there, there's some variability. I at one point, I was averaging over a 100 grams a day. I've been playing around with 80 a day to see how that affects some stuff. And I may go back, to a very high fiber diet, but, even that's variable. Finding the fiber amount that works best for you, yeah, is is individual. Do all genes affect lifespan? That's a very simplistic all genes are not necessarily involved in metabolism. I mean, that's I mean, I hate to say it. Have you seen the biochemistry chart with all the interconnected pathways? I mean, that's that's what I think of as an answer. It's so comprehensive. But, what I just said would be an argument for not using nine biomarkers as an index of biological age. But the argument against that is the the nine biomarkers that are on the gene's phenotypic age calculator have been studied in terms of aging and disease risk for fifty to a hundred years or more. Whereas, you know, the human genome was first sequenced in 2001. So we've got about twenty years of data on genes and even less data on epidemiological studies for genes that are associated with aging or lifespan, and even disease risk. So, you know, I I tend to favor the data. There's way more data on what's on the phenotypic phenotypic age calculator in terms of, how how should how should how do these variables change with age and disease risk compared to the genes, which could be all over the place or not even not have any data yet, actionable data yet. Gut microbiota. Have not, checked my own, in about two years maybe. UBiome closed down, so I haven't done my own since then. But, it's tricky with the microbiome because I I think it's easy to get caught up on is my microbiome optimal without looking at the blood test stuff. So for now, I've I'm completely focused on my on my, circulating biomarkers. But if, you know, if if I if I found something that was resistant to change in my, circulating biomarkers, then I may wanna look deeper. You know, go to microbiome or, you know, go to even individual nutrient levels like circulating folate or or circulating, you know, something to get more insight, you know, to do a metabolome, in the blood. But so far, I don't think I need to do that. Yeah. I was never I was never really looking at the link between the gut microbiota and biological age. You know? A big part of my hypothesis is that the microbiome does have, and there's a lot of data that supports it, that the microbiome has a big impact on aging. You know, I'd I'd like to say I'm on the right track because I see the chronological age being relatively low. So, there are other people are looking at the gut microbiome gut gut microbiome as a predictor of biological age, but, you know, I'd like to see I'd like to see, you know, their diet and their and their physical activity levels. These are all things that that can affect the gut microbiome. So I think we definitely need more studies on on that. It's a dramatically understudied topic. Blue zones. So, there's this, you know, the blue zones give incredible hype to the idea that centenarians in part get there by nutrient dense diets. And I hate to say, but that couldn't be further from the truth. There are some longevity related societies, you know, in Italy, for example, that do eat more fruits and vegetables and and and whole grains than, than other long lived societies. But from the from my study of the literature, you know, I'd say the older you get, the actually, the worse the worse the diet is. And I I'd argue that most people who get to a 100 or a 110 don't get there because of their diets at all. But, you know, because because many so many aren't getting there based on their diet, that would potentially leave room for improvement. So, but the the idea of the blue zones that, you know, let's eat these nutrient dense diets, I'm all for it. And and that doesn't mean I'm vegan or vegetarian. More nutrient density, you know, can't be a bad thing. Now it could be too that the blue zones are eating less processed and refined foods. Because of reading more nutrient dense and you've cut out the junk, that could be a contributing factor. So, you know, how much longer would we all live if we we cut down on the junk food and eat more nutrient dense foods? I mean, longevity and location. Yeah. I don't think I don't think longevity I know people can argue that longevity has an impact on it. I mean, if you're living in the North Pole and you're freezing to death every day, then maybe. But I don't know. I mean, there's there's data to support heat shock proteins, like, so if you are getting frozen every day but not dying, you might even live longer. Yeah. Could. Right? But, that's variable. Right? How about this? How about this? If your ancestors evolved for thousands, if not hundreds of thousands of years in Europe, but now you live in a temperate zone. Like so your genes are adapted to the colder climates, but now you're living in a in a climate that your genes are not adapted for. That may reduce your longevity. And conversely, right, if you're if you evolved in a warm temper climate and now you're in a cold environment that your genes are not evolutionarily adapted for that, I'd argue it may not be, but it's so much speculation. Right? I have seen people you know, I have seen studies talking about the impact of geography on longevity, and there are indeed, villages where it seems like longevity genes are concentrated, but as a broader geography like a, you know, a country. I'm not so sure. Latitude, longitude, not so sure. Now if you showed if you showed me that, you know, SARS CoV two had a greater impact in the winter in the northern latitudes and a lesser impact in the southern latitudes in in the in the in the, you know, in the winter months. Okay. Maybe because that would directly impact, you know, your longevity. So but, I mean, it's speculation at this point. I mean, there's certainly some data for, using saunas and things. I saw, Ron Patrick was covering that, very recently, saunas. And, I've got a feeling hot tubs as well. So Yeah. Again, you you know, that's the heat shock proteins, and there's there's there's, you know, there's some good data for that. Yeah. Yeah. So I think in Finland, don't they, they have the sauna and then they sit and sweat for an hour and then they go outside and roll in the snow. Of course. Yeah. Think about that. I mean, I've see I've seen the sauna data, and I'm not I'm not, you know, knocking it at all. But so exercise. When you exercise, you get your core body temperature up. And if it's hot enough, you'll sweat. So you're getting your heat shock proteins activated. Now is the sauna, you know, is the sauna data in sedentary people of a certain BMI who don't exercise, who do exercise? I think there's a lot of a lot of factors there. Now if you showed me data that the sauna reduces inflammation and improves these biomarkers, I haven't seen that data yet. But, I mean, it's a low risk strategy. Right? But, yeah. But even even the but even the opposite side, you know, the cryotherapy for three minutes standing in the minus 80 or or colder for three minutes. I'm not sure that that stuff is doing anything regardless of, you know, whatever few publications that that are out there. I mean, these things are a cold shower, I can I can see that? You know, evolutionarily, we may have, you know, jumped in cold ponds where it, you know, been doing that maybe for maybe millions of years, but, minus 200 degrees Fahrenheit. How is that evolutionarily accurate? Yeah. I don't fancy that, to be honest. Yeah. But, but we are getting a hot tub, I think, soon. So, I could do, I could do, a one person experiment, my monitor my bios. Sounds good. Yeah. Sounds very good, actually. Post the pre and post, blood test data. Or or, you know, it may be even short term. Right? Maybe sauna improves, you know, glucose response where you're better able to metabolize glucose. It could be just, you know, short term acute effects of it. Yeah. And, and and speaking of how to monitor that, Iris Jacobs has asked on Facebook, what what should what are your thoughts on, wearable monitors? I have my own. I'm not gonna shout out who because they don't sponsor me. But, if you see my wrist, you can probably guess. Yeah. I'm a big fan of wearable metrics, wearable monitors. Mine does resting heart rate, heart rate variability, and then sleep stages. I don't think there are other products that do more than that. In terms of fitness variables. Maybe they'll do more than that in terms of you can listen to your, you know, music or something, but I don't need any of that. And since I I started tracking in August 2018, so I have about a year and a half of tracking my cardiovascular metrics, the resting heart rate, heart rate variability. Like I said, I changed I changed my whole workout approach. I was training, like, once every three or four days for two or three hours at a time, lifting heavy all the time, and I was killing my metric, my cardiovascular health metrics. My heart rate variability went down. Resting heart rate was, higher than it is now. So, yeah, that I'm tracking my fitness. I'm tracking my diet. I I have a blood pressure cuff. I track that too. There may be stuff in my diet that affects it, so I I'm constantly tweaking that to optimize the blood pressure too. So, yeah, I'm trying to track as much stuff as possible. So yeah. Although Iris is apparently talking about ones that can actually assess blood composition. Oh, yeah. We're not That's sort of that's getting into hardcore proper medical devices Yeah. Rather than, you know, like the fitness and lifestyle wear lifestyle wearables. Although they are getting more sophisticated as well, aren't they? Yeah. But I don't know that I don't know that the wearable would ever get I mean, when you take a blood sample and you can do a full metabolomic analysis on that, for a wearable to do that, I mean, maybe you've got a few, you know, biomarkers that the wearable could check. I mean, glucose would be relatively easy. But to have the full panel, you know, to do a full metabolome to measure, you know, hundreds of chemicals like you could do in a blood sample with a mass spectrometer, you can't have the mass spectrometer on your wrist. That's we don't it doesn't exist yet. Maybe at some point in the future. Right? But, no. I'm not even close. Yeah. I mean, the how I would envisage that it would be done would be that you would ingest or implant somewhere within the bloodstream, some kind of sensors, you know, for glucose and and various things. And then that would wirelessly link up to, a monitor either on your wrist or or or nearby computer. I could I can honestly see that being done Yeah. And and, you know, achievable in the next few years. So you could then look at your, metabolite in real time, which would be really interesting. Yeah. But then you'd also have to make sure that whatever you're swallowing wasn't adversely affecting, you know, and it was benign in terms of you affecting your step you know, your system of physiology. Right? I don't know how easy that would be. I mean, I like the idea, though. Obviously, I like the idea. Yeah. I mean, you know, it's, it's all part of, the quantifiable self. So Yes. If you've got real time telemetry coming in, you can you can adjust it for maximum performance. Yeah. It's a bit like the matrix really, ain't it? Yeah. I like I like the I like the thought. Yeah. I mean, you would think the the idea of quantified self, you'd see more people tracking their, you know, stem and physiology or circulating biochemistry, and I I I don't I hardly see any of that. I see people tracking their mood and, you know, work productivity. I mean, anyway, I guess I want the world to track, you know, to track their metrics of health. Improve the health of the world, the physical. Yeah. Enzymes, I mean, yeah, I don't even know how to start there. Yeah. I haven't focused on bloodletting for Dan Doherty. There I guess there's some data where if you if you if you, donate blood that can reduce your, circulating iron levels, which can be beneficial for health. But in terms of longevity, I haven't haven't looked into that. And then in terms of the enzyme question for for John, I mean, that's a that could be a genetics question. Right? If you have a gene for a certain protein or certain enzyme and someone's got a, you know, one letter difference in that gene to have a different, protein that has a slightly less or more functional, effect, I mean, I guess that gets at that. So that's a genetics question. Well, I mean, I I'm not an expert on on enzymes but I think that the majority of the amino acids in the protein don't matter that much. It's of course the active site where it matters a lot and if you make a mutation there it will change the functionality of your enzyme quite a lot but in most cases unless it's of course interferes with the normal folding of your protein it has very little effect most of these mutations. Of course it is possible to make a mutation in an enzyme that will make the enzyme better but of course that also depends on what does better mean of course. Is it necessary for the enzyme to have a higher rate of of catalytic conversion of your substrate? Is that necessary? Right? I mean is that better? Maybe in some cases, in other cases, it might not be better. So it's there is no general answer to that question. And then if if that enzyme is at the center of a node that that controls the activity of hundreds or thousands of other proteins, okay, making changes in that one protein one way or the other, right, like, positive or negative could impact hundreds of thousands of proteins, but I don't know how many proteins that would be true for. Right? Like, maybe mTOR, if you, you know, mess with mTOR. I mean, there are a few proteins, but there are so many animal models where you knock out a gene or, you know, or over express it and it doesn't do anything to the systemic physiology, you know. So but, yeah, I I get your point. And even mTOR is, not completely, as as straightforward as some people think it is as well. So, you know, you got talk one and talk two, the different the two different complexes, And everyone was assuming that two was bad and one was good. But it it's too reductionist according to some new data coming in, to do with rapamycin. Again, it's it's it's absolutely not clear. And this is the problem when you go so far downstream and you start tinkering with metabolism. Nothing nothing at all works in isolation. So it's very hard when you drill down straight to actually, say whether anything's definitively good or bad. And it's all about I mean, one thing I learned from Irina Conboy was, everything is, well, everything has a potential to be harmful or beneficial depending on the context and the levels at which it is. So like TGF beta, for example. Everyone goes, oh, TGF beta is bad. It's bad. It's bad. Yeah. But you need it because if you didn't have any, you'd be in real trouble. So it it's all about calibrating, and it's the further you drill down into the details, the more difficult it gets to control it. So Yes. True. True point. True. True. True. So the, we got one about magnets here. Mike, Mike, any thoughts on that? Filtering blood out with magnets? Have you seen that one? I don't know about filtering it with magnets, but there are labs that are attempting to filter out pathogens, and I'm all for that. I mean, there there are a few studies that have shown that, microbial burden in the blood, goes up with age. So, yeah, whether it's magnets, I mean, if there are good studies that show that magnets can do it or some other device, I'm all for that. Yeah. You know, it's the idea of blood filtering is it it is a solid idea, you know, filtering out on what the elements. I'm gonna talk about, Irina Conboy again. She's obviously work her and Michael are working on, calibrating various regulatory, molecules in the blood, like master regulators, TGF beta, TNF alpha, and IL six. Few of those. There's a handful of things at the top of the pyramid that she thinks controls a lot of stuff underneath. So her idea is to actually use, it's a little bit like dialysis. Yeah. And, I think it's plasmaspisis, plasmaspheres. I can't say that word. But they feed it through a that's it. They they feed it through a membrane, and it's able to isolate these particular molecules that they don't want. And, of course, in animal studies that they've done it in, they've demonstrated rejuvenation. So there's every reason to think if you pick the right things and calibrate them correctly, you could result in, the result could be, rejuvenation. And same with senescent cells, if you could fish those out of the bloodstream or the SASP factors and and tamp them down to the level that they should be at when you're younger, again, one would expect, rejuvenation or resumption of tissue maintenance. The only issue that happens. Yeah. Yeah. The only issue that I have with that approach is that, that assumes that, why they were produced, why those molecules that have TGF beta or other molecules, why they're produced in the first place, What's the root? Right? So, I mean, it's that I see some of that with the COVID story. You know, people talking about the cytokine storm. Let's treat the cytokine storm. What's the root? Right? The root is, the cytokine storm is there. It's a signal to the immune system to make more immune cells. But because the person can't make more immune cells, the it it's a positive feedback loop of a higher side cytokine storm. So, you know, I I find it interesting, especially at least even in animal models, microbial burden in the blood increases during aging, whether it's LPS or NDP. So I find it interesting that, you know, the convoy group hasn't decided to filter out microbes or microbial products yet. And potentially, that would lead to reductions in some of the, you know, inflammatory molecules, whether it's TGF beta or inflammatory molecules in higher amounts, they should be there. And it's also just impractical to do this type of filtering devices. I mean you know because whatever you are trying to filter out will increase normally again if you don't take away the cost of it so then every few weeks you will have to go to hospital and lay to a machine that filters your blood for hours on end and there are people who do that it's being done plasmapheresis for example for people who who have very high levels of lipoproteins certain lipoproteins when they have inherited hyperlipidemia diseases but I mean it's it's very impractical it's not pleasant to go to hospital and lay there for, for so many hours, once or twice a month, and it's also very expensive, obviously. Good point. Good. Good point. My average blood pressure so going back to Adrian, my average blood pressure is one twenty over 70 ish, which can be better. So, yeah, I'm working on that. What about ketones? I don't track ketones. So the ketone story goes back to there's a lot of ways to fry fish. And in terms of ketosis and longevity, so, yes, a high fat I I've seen data on a ketogenic diet improving lifespan in mice, but the magnitude of the lifespan on, ketogenic diet in mice isn't what was found on just the CR, just at you know, comparing a CR, group versus ad lib without being in, ketosis. So, but in terms of the ketosis story, I mean, if you can show that you've, you know, got low inflammation and, all the other biomarkers, on, you know, standard ten panel and CBC, are good and youthful, I mean, you know, there's a lot of ways to skin a cat. So, if if getting into ketosis and eating a high fat diet works for you along those lines, then, you know, I'm all for it. But I haven't measured ketosis to inch answer Richard's question. But I bet that I have a lot of ketone bodies because, eating a high fiber diet leads to a high production of the short chain fatty acid butyrate, and that's one step away from, hydroxylation to form beta hydroxybutyrate, which is a ketone. So, yeah, there's a lot of ways to get to the same pinpoint. Yeah. We all like butyrate because, obviously, cells like colonocytes, they get about 70% of their, energy from, from that from those short chain fatty acids. And I know that some people try and claim that leaky gut, they they suggest that leaky gut is is woo and, you know, it's pseudoscience. I I actually think the picture's changing, on on that as the data comes in. You know, the actual membrane integrity of the intestines is definitely compromised as you get older. Yeah. And there is there is considerable data now to suggest that the changes in the bacterial populations in the microbiome are very instrumental in that happening. So like like the colonocytes that rely on butyrate and, you know, those sorts of things. So it's, the microbiome, it's been overlooked for years, Mike, and it's now starting to get the recognition it deserves. Is it the origin point of inflammaging? Yeah. I think there's a good case for it. Yeah. I don't I wouldn't say it's the origin point, but it's definitely a contributing factor. Right? Because it I know we've talked about this before, but even in the absence of a microbiome, germ free mice aren't immortal. So there is endogenous cell aging that's independent of the microbiome. Right? So what as, Don Bodish's paper a couple years ago showed, you know, there's a vicious cycle. So the there with the the gut microbiome changes there. So when you consider the germ free finding, right, that there is indeed endogenous cell aging in the absence of the microbiome. There are also gut microbiome changes compositionally, with aging too. And that ends up leading to the official cycle of of increased inflammation, further worsen microbiome, further increased inflammation. So but that on top of the cellular changes during aging or, you know, for ourselves. So, yeah, it's definitely a component. How much I mean, you know, even if it's only 10%, I mean, that's 10%. You can optimize your lifespan 10% on a hundred and twenty year lifespan is twelve years. I'll take that. So, and most people most people aren't even considering how to optimize their microbiome. So, yeah, it's important. It is important. There's definitely a case for it in terms of longevity as well where they looked at, there was a study in Japan, last year. I'm sure you've seen it, where they looked at, people that lived, over 100, and they compared a range of microbiomes and they found that the super ages, the people at one hundred-one hundred and ten, their microbiomes was, you know, similar to people in their 30s and 40s, which is, you know, that's significant. You know, people that tended to age well had a much much more, I'm gonna say, youthful microbiome or stable, if that's better word. So they did in some ways, but the other, studies that I've seen in centenarians and their microbiomes and, actually, some of the metabolic products that besides the short chain fatty acids that are produced by the microbiome are higher in centenarians. So for example, paracresol sulfate is one of those metabolites. Another one is phenyl acetylglutamine. And, the the study that I have in my mind, they were calling the those metabolites, which are produced only by the gut microbiome. Well, actually, phenyl acetylglutamine is produced in conjunction with us, so we conjugate it to glutamine. So, anyway, phenyl without mechanism, just long story short, they're derived from gut microbiome metabolism. But, anyway, they're finding that it was higher in the centenarians. The study author suggested that these were pro longevity metabolites. However, these are known uremic toxins. Meaning, if you have kidney failure, they're elevated in the blood. So how do you reconcile those two those two findings? I'd argue that centenarians have got microbes that produce these things that aren't good for health, but then they have others. Probably they have better short chain fatty acid producing bacteria and more short chain fatty acids, that are similar to people who are at a younger age. Right? So the good outweighing the bad. But, yeah, it's I just think it's funny because I see a lot of centenarian studies and they'll say things like that where they'll call these known metabolites that are that are, you know, that are bad for health, and they'll call them pro longevity metabolites. It couldn't be farther from the truth. Well, you know, everyone's, everyone's got their little pet pet subjects, haven't they? But, but, yeah, I mean, I I think if anything, it it shows that there's a strong case for eating more fiber. Yeah. Definitely. As one part of it, you know. Because even the fiber supplementation studies, you know, because I get that too. Like, should I just take fiber, Metamucil, or or whatever? I I, you know, because I'm working on a grant, I I had to do a lit review basically on, you know, the individual fiber supplements. And most of the time, they don't even raise short chain fatty acid levels, which you would predict. You know, if you're taking sixteen grams or twenty grams of a fiber supplement and that's sixteen grams of just it's gonna get fermented by the gut bacteria in the short chains because that's what the gut bacteria do. And you see no effect. I mean, I think that's important. Right? So but, yeah, on a whole food diet, with a similar 15 or 20 gram increase, you see increases in the short chain. So there's something about the whole food and the, you know, being together in a food matrix combined with potentially other nutrients, whether it's polyphenols or or what, that, you know, further maximizes the gut microbiome independent of just taking fiber as a supplement. And actually, too, in mice, there's one study where they gave soluble fiber by itself as a supplement, and the mice ended up having a greater incidence of liver cancer. So, you know, this isn't happening in people, but, you know, maybe it's an effect specific to mice. But it shows that just taking a food component outside of it existing in food may not be good for health. Well, there is some data for butyrate, supplementation. You know, there's some reason But not in old people. But, you know, that could be a case of that that their, the populations of bacteria that use it are not, are not present in high numbers as they are in you. So I mean, you've got to have the bacteria in order to process the the the the nutritional substances, haven't you? So you can put as much fiber in, but if you've not got the bacteria that are processing that fiber so again, that's another argument for seeding the gut with, optimal, microbes again. And we look you know, I'm surprised somebody hasn't mentioned it already today, but probiotics, you know, that always comes up. Where do you stand on that? And the answer is, well, we don't really know enough about probiotics yet to really say. Fecal transplants? Yeah. Maybe. So in terms of probiotics, I mean, my stance has always been, get your gut microbiome sequenced, figure out what you think is missing or what you want to be there because it's variable. Right? I mean, you know, to just say, oh, I don't have this species or I don't have this species. I wanna have this species. And then then I'm gonna add this species. They exist as a community. Right? So if you're adding one, are you changing the community structure to make it better or worse? And then you you've also got the the the factor of, you know, is the probiotic you're taking even gonna survive the acidity of the stomach? I mean, so not all not all probiotics are are designed like that. So and then what's the dose that you would need to seed it if indeed that is something you wanna seed your gut microbiome with? So I think most people indiscriminately take probiotics without even thinking about it. And then not only that, they don't they they'll seed they'll attempt to seed their microbiome, and then they won't add the prebiotics that the that those bugs like. Right? So if you're seeding it with a bacteria that likes inulin and then you don't eat inulin, well, you've basically wasted your money because the bug is just gonna get passed out of your colon. So, yeah, I think there's a lot of factors that, most people don't, appreciate when it comes to probiotic supplementation. I'm not currently taking any probiotics. I attempted to seed my own with bifidobacteria a while ago and actually got it to go up, higher than it was before, but nowhere near, you know, other like, for example, known butyrate producer, fecalibacterium. I think I had, like, 40% of my gut microbiome with that species, whereas the bacteria, I got it to less than 1%. So does that make any difference systemically? I mean, I don't know. Right? So but the butyrate but the butyrate argument people, I mean so, if besides diet, diet isn't the only thing that can affect the short chain fatty acid producers in your gut, exercise too. And there's not a lot of data on this, which is another reason I wanna I've gone after in grants. Somehow exercise, at least in a in young adults, led to the increase in short chain fatty acid producing bacteria and the content of short chain fatty acids in the gut in the gut. So how the hell is exercise, which you're just moving your muscles? How is that affecting affecting the composition of the of the gut microbiome and what it's producing? So, there's only one study I know, the the that there was a paper last year where they, you know, they use lactate. Did you see that paper? They use lactate and, and the mice ran longer. I think I have seen that. Yeah. So lactate is produced by the muscles during exercise, so it increases after exercise. So they postulated that it was metabolized into propionate, which is also a short chain fatty acid. But aside from that, nobody's looked at it mechanistically. I actually think that exercise, which is known to you know, so you've got glycolysis and then the end product of glycolysis pyruvate. So there are pyruvate degrading bacteria into acetate. Acetate is then converted into butyrate. So nobody's gone after that, hypothesis, but that's I'm kicking around that idea in my head all the time. You know? Going after so right. That's only one side of the story. Diet, microbiome, effects on health. But then the other side is how is muscle or movement affecting the microbiome, which in turn is further affecting muscle. Right? So Good, it's a good answer. Yeah. We'd the the the basic the folks is we don't know. We don't know yet. More more studies needed. Yeah. More research needed, folks. So, yeah. That that's the that's the standard answer, isn't it, in in academia is, oh, we found this exciting thing out, but more study definitely needed. So Yeah. Or more study. Iris, diet and exercise optimize the image individual. Yes. That that's associated or correlated with younger epigenetic age in, the Horvath group and Morgan of some of Morgan Levine's papers that she's on too. So and, yes, diet and exercise is definitely a bridge. Whether that gets me ten years of extra life or thirty years of extra life, who knows? But the the you know, in terms of in terms of the importance of optimizing the fitness approach, so exercise is well known. I said this before. Exercise is well known to increase average lifespan in, animal models, but it doesn't increase maximum lifespan. Basically, the gold standard of increasing lifespan in animal models is calorie restriction. So, when you consider the exercise data okay. So if I live longer than average and the average lifespan for a man is eighty years and I get to 95 or a 100. Okay. But I haven't gotten to one twenty. Right? So I would need some calorie restriction in there too. But why should exercise get you an increase in average but not an increase in maximum? Is it possible that you're doing too much? Is it chronic stress as opposed to hormetic stress that's beneficial for lifespan? I mean, so that's that goes back to tracking the the the, markers, the fitness markers, whether it's resting heart rate or heart rate variability. These can tell you if you're overtrained or you've got too much sympathetic activation and not enough parasympathetic activation, which is an indicator of chronic stress. So, you know, I'm trying to come up with the dose, whether it's diet and exercise that can maximize everything. Now, yes. It is a bridge. As I mentioned before, we're gonna need rejuvenation tech, and I hope that I can jump into that field eventually. But, unfortunately, in science, unless you start in rejuvenation tech, like, you're you're doing your PhD program in rejuvenation tech, then you do you're a postdoc in rejuvenation tech. Right? I didn't start in rejuvenation tech. So, I started in oxidative stress and then serum metabolomics and then the gut microbiome. So I hope I can evolve my way into rejuvenation tech eventually. But for me, that's gonna be a longer journey versus someone who's actually, you know, been studying it their whole scientific career. Yes. Do do time does time of the day So I'm a big fan of I've become a big fan of time restricted feeding, and I completely changed my diet, in terms of what time of the day. It may not affect my biomarkers because, you know, I'm I'm, there my biomarkers data the blood biomarker data is all under fasted conditions. So, you know, after so I I haven't done the study, you know, after I've eaten, what are my bio biomarkers look like? I don't know. But I can tell you that, couple years ago, I was eating one meal a day. I was on the one meal a day diet, OMAD. Right? I would fast all day. I actually had drink green tea in the morning, fast all day, come home around six, and then eat 2,000 or 2,500 calories, whatever my maintenance calorie intake was was at that time from six to 09:00. And I'd wake up every morning feeling, like, complete to completely terrible. And it took me a while to even figure out why that would be. And then once the, the feed the time restricted feeding studies would be well, I shouldn't say once, but once I became aware of them that, you know, they improved measures of metabolic health by having the same amount of calories, but at it, you know, or eating them earlier in the day, I completely flipped my eating schedule to eating the majority of my calories, almost all of them earlier in the day. And in fact, now, you know, now now that we're all on quarantine, I don't have to wait to eat the small amount that I have left in the day at 06:00 when we get home when I get home. I can eat the you know, I can finish eating at three or 04:00 now. And, you know, it it seems to affect my sleep better. You know, I'm not waking up as much whereas sometimes I wake up four times at night because, you know, if you eat a giant salad, a two pound salad, you're waking up four times a night. Two pounds of salad. Yeah. Yeah. You more vegetables, more fiber. But so long story short. Right? So, yeah, when I so now I'm eating most of my stuff during the day. I have more time to use the bathroom during the day. I'm not waking up as much during the night. I can get better quality sleep. I don't feel groggy and feel completely terrible in the morning. So I'd argue time of day definitely has a big impact on, at least at least, you know, psycholog my psychological health. But then again, if if I feel terrible, because I've eaten my calories too late to bedtime, that's gonna affect my workouts the next day if I do them at all on that day. So, yeah, it's all connected. Reminds me of that paper I read not long ago about, they did a mouse study and then they took it to humans. Their hypothesis was because mice, which are of course related to us, are not are predominantly nocturnal feeders. They wondered whether time restriction for humans would work, so they actually had people eating a breakfast before dawn. I can't even imagine that time in my mind. They had them eating breakfast before sunrise, and then they were not allowed to eat, I think it was fourteen hours until sun until sundown, and then they had another meal. And it it improved quite a number of health biomarkers. So there you go. It seems to suggest that we are really big mice. So that's basically the Ramadan diet. Like, eat before, you know, the sun comes up and you're eating after the sun. My diet isn't too far from that to be totally honest. Usually during the week, you know, before probably by 08:30, I've got most of my calories in and then I'll have a small amount, you know, basically when the sun is getting ready to go down where I fast completely during the day now. So, but that's a little different now. Now I kinda graze until, eat every couple of hours until, you know, 02:00 or so. But then I try to shut down my calorie intake after about four ish. But that may be different for everyone. I mean, you could make a point, you know, you could make a point evolutionarily. When the sun went down, unless you can make fire, you weren't eating. You can't forage food when it's pitch black, and you're the prey instead of being the predator if you're actually foraging and it's pitch black. So you can make the argument that when the sun goes down, shut it down. No eating. Not even even to wake up in the middle of the night. I don't think evolutionarily we were waking up to pee in the middle of the night because you're, again, you're potential prey. So There's a lot more. I mean, our, Neolithic ancestors, you know, Mesolithic Mesolithic ancestors, they would have been at the whim and mercy of nature and, you know, as you say, being outside at night, not a good idea when you've got stuff like, saber tooth tigers and and all sorts of other night predators that are out to get you. So Yeah. Yeah. I don't know. But yeah. Yeah. And you are right. It was it was it is the Ramadan. And they actually had, it was done in The UK, this study. And they had, access I think it was in London, and they had access to quite a large amount of people who were observing Ramadan. And it was very interesting. And I think things like inflammation biomarkers were reduced and insulin sensitivity was addressed, somewhat. So, yeah, people used to tell me well, it's funny. My mom used to tell me off and other people when I was younger about midnight feasting, midnight snacking. You know, going sneaking down to the fridge and helping yourself to some food, you know, after midnight. I wish I had the data to show her then. Mhmm. I just said, well, actually, science proves you wrong, mom. You know, so carry on snacking. Alright. Well, it depends on what time that was. If it was truly at midnight, then maybe not. But if it was, you know, five in the morning, maybe. Right? Oh, I don't know. I don't know. And then depending on the age too. Right? I mean, I bet when you're young, when you're, you know, chronologically young, you could probably get away with eating anytime whenever you want. Right? But then as you ate or as you ate, which may probably contribute to an accelerated age. Right? Probably take it away with doing that stuff. Yeah. True. I mean, definitely, when when I was younger, I can I can distinctly remember, you know, you you you could go out, dance, and mess about it, go clubbing all night dancing, and you'd you'd eat your you'd eat your body weight in kebabs and drink, you know, drink so many I didn't even wanna think about how many pints of lager we drunk and the amount of calories in an average night? I mean, good grief. The amount of sugar we must have consumed. Yeah. But it didn't really affect you when you were younger because your body was just, yeah, whatever. You know, it's easy and it's able to to tidy itself up and and maintain itself so much better. But, yeah, it's like I often say, oh, I'm not going out in the clubs now. Drinking's a young man's game, and it it it really is. Yep. I I you know, if I have a few, drinks nowadays, there's no way I'm bouncing back like it used to. It's Yeah. So, yeah, there's definitely, definitely age is a factor. Yeah. We need rejuvenation, Mike. Otherwise, we can't go and hit the clubs. Yeah. That's a good point. It's a good point. That that's the main isn't this why we're after rejuvenation technology? I've been thinking about it all wrong. I've been thinking about it all wrong. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. That's it. We wanna tear it up like we used to, you know. That's the truth. Yep. But there you go. That's enough about, that's enough about my, my my taste in music. You know, it was good. The eighties was good, but but that's another topic for another time. Yeah. True. And, but there we go. I don't know if range. Oh, hang on. We got one more question. So for Joel, b, there is data for so lymphocyte percentage isn't generally studied as a marker of all cause mortality. So but I there is there was data, I think, from 300,000 subjects that, showed, lymphocyte percentage and how it changes during aging. So because, to get more insight for the all cause mortality data, I use the total number of lymphocytes. So you can I mean, I should I guess I should have said this? You can basically take if around 2,000 cells per microliter is optimal, I would use that to figure out what lymphocyte percentage corresponds to that. So, but I I'd argue that, you know, somewhere in the 2,000 to 3,000 range may be optimal for neutrophils. So 3,000 plus 2,000 plus a few 100 for monocytes, eosinophils, and bath thousand fills. So I I maybe argue that probably closer to 40% lymphocytes lymphocyte percentage may be optimal, but there just isn't data, you know, in terms of all cause mortality risk. Slides available for download. That's up to Steve and Leif. Well, I mean I mean, it's no problem no problem with us, is it? I mean, they're your slides, Mike. So Yeah. Put them out there. If you want if you want us to put them out there, we can try to we can probably, yeah, we can. Yeah. When we, we'll actually be posting the video onto the website, once it's uploaded to YouTube, you know, probably, in the next few days. So look out for that early in the week. What I'll do is I'll attach the files and we can we can embed them in the article as well if if, you know, people wanna have a look. So, yeah, I don't see any reason why not, if if you're okay with that, Mike. Yeah. Sounds good. As long as I get a copy of the video. Because even what we're doing now, this is like podcast style. We could chop it up in Eclipse and, you know, release it as, you know, Joe Rogan and lots of, you know, YouTubers are, you know, posting the whole the whole video and then chopping it up into, you know, shorter clips. I think that's a good approach. So Yeah. Yeah. You know, it's, it takes all sorts. So, looks like it looks like we're the the torrent, and it has been a torrent of questions. Quite quite a lot of them actually today. So you you I did say you were gonna be popular, Mike. So, it does look like that the the the torrent has now, gone to a trickle, finally. But I'm glad, I'm glad that people have asked so many questions and we've had, you know, good steady figures all the way through the stream. So and of course many more people watch this later on either YouTube, the website, LinkedIn or Facebook. So you know, it'll definitely do the rounds. I'll be interested to see how many people we reach in the end. But it's great that we've had so many questions. So thanks for everybody at home watching who's asked questions. It's fascinating And and Mike is a wealth of information on all things microbial and dietary and biomarker. Biomarkery. That's not really a word, but I'm gonna use it because you know what I mean. So thanks thanks for everyone joining us, and, yeah, and thanks for everybody who came in in on the call as well. So if anybody here has got any more questions, I guess we can we can wrap it up. And big thanks to Mike for doing the doing the journal club with us. Thanks. He's doing alright. He's doing alright, didn't he? Yeah. We'll have him back, folks, I reckon. We'll have him back. He's done alright today. But, yeah. So this time I mean, you've been on the journal club before with us, haven't you? But, this time, you were in the captain's chair. So, yeah, you've done done great, and I think everybody at home's enjoyed it. Seeing a lot of, a lot of likes and a lot of questions, and that usually means that it's popular. So, yeah, we'll, we'll do it again. And, yeah. So, thanks everybody who got involved today. Thanks to Mike as well for doing this. And if you want the slides and such like, they will be up soon on the website. And, of course, we are here thanks to the support of the Lifespan Heroes who are our monthly patrons. So thanks to you guys. We really do appreciate it, and it allows us to do shows like this. We're also doing a panel on May 7. You can find the details on the Facebook events in on this on on the page where we're streaming to. And we we're gonna have Philippe, Felipe Sierra from the NIA, Tina Woods. We've got Darya Calderina. We've got Aubrey de Grey and David Sinclair. Good grief. What a what a what a great discussion that's gonna be. So that's May 7. So if you if you're about and you you fancy some entertainment, they're gonna be talking about COVID and what opportunities, if any, it brings for the research world in the context of aging. Could there be some good that comes of it? I'm gonna be honest, I think there will possibly be an upside to this and it's not all negative. So but we'll find out what the experts think on May 7, so do tune in for that as well. And, as I say, thanks to the heroes. And if you're interested in becoming a hero and supporting this, and allowing us to do more, check it out at www.lifespan.io/hero. And with that said, we will, we'll see you next time. Alright. Thanks, buddy. See you guys later. Have a nice day. Bye bye. Bye. Yeah. Stay healthy, guys. Bye.