Resting heart rate and heart rate variability. What's optimal? So first we're looking at a plot of, the relative risk, for all cause mortality against the resting heart rate in beats per minute. And what we can see is that a resting heart rate of about 45 beats per minute is associated with a maximally reduced all cause mortality risk. So with that in mind, what's my data? So I've been tracking my resting heart rate, with a fitness tracker for almost two full years from August 2018 through June 2020. And what we can see is that I started, so each blue dot corresponds to the average, resting heart rate for that month. So, we can see that I started with a resting heart rate, around 52 to 53 and then, it came down, went back up, and then went back down again, and then went back up again. So, there's a noticeable trend here that my resting heart rate has been lowest in the winter and but highest in the summer. So what's going on with that? Well, in the summertime, I suffer from, a hay fever, so allergies, to grass and pollen, and that increases my resting heart rate for from May until July. At least that's what happened in 2019. In 2020, I was better able to manage those symptoms and my resting heart rate went up less. So, that's the trend for me. But what about in the published literature? Are there seasonal trends? So what we're looking at here is data from 9292, about 92,000 subjects, and resting heart rate for, women in the green line and for men in the blue line. And what we can see is that, the resting heart rate is actually lower in the summer for this cohort of 90,000 plus subjects and highest in the winter. So this data is basically opposite my data, and I I just included that to illustrate that epi data from large epidemiological studies are important. But what's more important is seeing how your data agrees with it or not. And if it doesn't, well, you've gotta figure out, you know, why and how to how then to optimize it. So based on all cause mortality risk, my resting heart rate, data is close to optimal. So you can see it. My 2020 data, my average resting heart rate's around forty seven forty eight. But I didn't include how resting heart rate RHR changes during aging. So let's have a look at that data. So resting heart rate increases then decreases during aging, and I've included data for two different studies here with basically the same trend. So we're looking at the average resting heart rate on the y axis plotted against age. And what we can see is that, resting heart rate peaks at about 50 in both, cohorts and then declines towards the end of life. So if you remember my data, my resting heart rate was actually I started at a relatively high level and then over the past two years, I've reduced it. So how do I know that I'm I didn't peak, and then I'm on the slow downward trend for lower resting heart rate, towards the end of life. How do I know? So with that, we can look at the heart rate variability for more insight about my, cardiovascular health. So first, what is heart rate variability? So, the simple definition is it's the variation in time in between successive heartbeats. So if your resting heart rate is 60 beats per minute, on average, your heart beats once every second, but it's not exactly once every second. Some beats may be point nine seconds, some beats may be 1.1 seconds, and some beats may be exactly one second. So if you take the average of those three, sure, it's one beat per minute, but the time in itself is is different. The so that's the heart rate variability. It's the variability, in the time in between those heartbeats. So we can see that illustrated here by that picture and I won't get into the math. But, my fitness tracker measures heart rate variability, with the RMSSD, which stands for the root mean square of successive dis differences between heartbeats. So the RMSSD, why is that important, and how does it change with age? So it declines during aging. And first, we can see that here in a study of about 200 or of of 260 subjects, the, RMSSD, which is basically heart rate variability, that's how they assessed it in this case. It starts off at about fifty three in young subjects, ten to nineteen years old, and then you can see it slowly declines for each age group until eighty to ninety nine year olds who then have a, a heart rate variability of 21. So significantly decreased heart rate variability with age. So these data were confirmed in another study, a little bit bigger, 344 subjects. And, so again, the young adults are actually, you know, kids, too. So 53, heart rate variability, 53 milliseconds that also declined all the way, until seventy to seventy nine years, where they had a nineteen millisecond, RMSSD. But then note that the eighty to ninety nine year olds actually had an increase to 30. So the authors of this paper, proposed the idea that having a higher heart rate variability than your age group may be a promoter of longevity. So these data are in relatively small studies, though. Two hundred and sixty and three hundred and forty four subjects respectively. What about in bigger study? So in a study of 8,000,000 subjects, we can see that data here. But first I wanna, note that these data are based on Fitbit users. So, we may have a healthy user bias in that the data that I just showed you with the smaller sample sizes, these are people from the general population. And, you know, Fitbit users are more likely to care about their health because they're buying a Fitbit. So they may be starting or have a higher level of fitness than general population. So along those lines, we can see that the the heart rate variability of the the Fitbit users in this study at a young age, 20 to 25 years old had, RMSSD. So heart rate variability values, you know, 65 into the seventies whereas the other studies had, you know, 53 was the high. So, there may be a little bit of a healthy user bias in this cohort. Nonetheless, we can see that heart rate variability, declines, through aging. You know? So so from values, you know, around 70 in youth all the way to around 40 in in 60 year olds. So, the low heart rate variability, the the importance of that is also illustrated by the findings that it's associated with an increased risk for sudden cardiac death, SCD, and all cause mortality risk, ACM. So first, this is a plot for the relative risk for sudden cardiac death in a group of twelve and a half thousand people. And what we can see is that, for people that had that had heart rate variability, variability, scores, RMSSDs of less than 18, they had an increased risk for sudden cardiac death relative to people who had higher than twenty nine milliseconds. So lower heart heart rate variability, potentially bad for sudden cardiac death. And then along those lines, there was an increased all cause mortality risk that had, RMSSDs of less than eight milliseconds. So long story short, very low heart rate variability, potentially bad for all cause mortality and sudden cardiac death. Now these are values very low values that you'd expect to see in someone who's very old. If you look at the Fitbit data, you know, the average value was around, thirty five forty. So, but it's also pop possible, you know, with an unfit sedentary lifestyle lifestyle to have very low heart rate variability. So, having higher values for RMSSD as the measure of heart rate variability may be important for cardiovascular and and and health in general. So and just to also illustrate. So I I noted that, resting heart rate declines with aging and so does heart rate variability. So if you have a low RHR and a low HRV, that's worse cardiovascular CV fitness. So what's my data? How you know, we started on this path to determine if, you know, my resting heart rate maybe peaked and now is on the towards the end of life trend. And we're using heart rate variability to try to elucidate more of the picture. So what's my data? So here's my data for the past, twenty three months, and my fitness tracker uses, the RMSSD, metric for heart rate variability. So we can see, you know, slowly, increase in and with a, you know, massive spike in the winter of, 2019 into 2020, but an increase over time. And when I look at the average, my average value in 2018, so August through December, my when I started off, my heart rate variability was 47.3. The full year average, three hundred sixty five days for 2019 was higher, 56.2. And then for the first six months of 2020, I've been able to get it even higher at 61. And one way I'm doing that is by, you know, use better better integrating rest, not overtraining, monitoring the intensity and duration of my workouts, and all that collectively over the past few years. I I guess I've been doing a good job based on my heart rate variability data. So just to bring back the aging data to illustrate, the importance of my my data and how it fits into the literature. So I started tracking when I was 45 years old. And just based on the Fitbit users in this study, the average heart rate variability, the RMSSD was around 38, you know, 40, somewhere in that ballpark. So already, even though my training and rest periods and all that stuff was, suboptimal at the time compared to where I am now, I was still a little bit better than the average Fitbit user, with, you know, my values around 47. Now looking at my 2019 data and how it fits on this curve, we can see that, compared to the average Fitbit user, my heart rate, variability, age, is some is equivalent to that of a 30 year old, which is pretty good if you ask me. And then but in 2020, I've also improved. So, you know, one can one could argue that, you know, relative to my chronological age, I've got the heart rate variability of someone that's closer to 26 years old rather than 45 year years old. And I'd argue that may be one of the reasons why I have a relatively young, biological age as indicated by the Vien's phenotypic age calculator, video. I have a video on that if you're interested. Just check out my videos. So, collectively, my eight my reduced heart rate, resting heart rate over time, but I I have a reduced RHR over time, but an increased heart rate variability. So I'd argue that I'm on the right track. So the idea that I hit the peak for resting heart rate and now I'm on the slow age related decline towards death, based on my heart rate variability data in combination with the resting heart rate data, I'd argue that that's not the case. So you can find me lots of places online. If you're interested, reach out. Have a great day.