Total cholesterol blood test. What's optimal? So to adjust that question, first, let's have a look at how levels of total cholesterol change during aging. So what we're looking at here is data for, almost 13,000,000 subjects, with total cholesterol levels plotted on the y axis against age at entry on the x axis. So first, we can see that lower levels of total cholesterol are found in youth. Values around a 170 for women and a 160 for men are found in 18 year olds. Well then, cholesterol levels increase during aging. So for women, the the 170 goes up to about two ten, at about 50 with a peak at about 56 years of age. Whereas in men, it goes from one sixty to about 200, at at around 48 to 50 years of age. And then after those ages, cholesterol levels, total cholesterol levels decline towards the end of life. So what about risk of death for all causes? So, using data from the same study, we can see that there's a u shaped association for the association between total cholesterol levels with all cause mortality risk. So risk of death for all causes including cardiovascular disease, cancer, respiratory diseases, all of them combined. And lowest risk of death for all causes, as highlighted here by the red arrows, is found for total cholesterol levels between two ten to 249. Now also notice that, risk of death increases at levels lower than that, at all levels lower than that. And, risk of death for all causes, ACM increases, above two forty nine. So, but also interestingly note that, having levels less than about one forty in women and about one fifty in men, the risk of death for all causes for cholesterol levels lower than that is actually higher than having very high levels of cholesterol, even up to 300. So, that data just illustrates the, that lower cholesterol is potentially not better than having higher cholesterol. So based on this data, should two ten to two forty nine, be considered optimal? Well, it's important to note that in this study, there was a very wide age distribution that included a ton of subjects. And I've highlighted the age distribution here, and you can see that there are millions of subjects for every, age distribution with the exception of the older ages above 65. But even over from 65 to 99, it's about 1,300,000 subjects. So that's still a ton of data. So is two ten to two forty nine associated with the lowest all cause mortality mortality risk for all of the age groups? Let's have a look at the data. So I'm gonna show the data starting from the oldest age groups and work work backwards. So first, two ten to two forty nine is associated with the lowest risk of death for all causes in, people, men and women, 75 to 99 years of age. Now notice here that this curve is more flat than the curves we're about to see. But again, also notice that, lower values, in this case, below around one forty, seem to have a higher risk of death for all causes compared with the very high levels, you know, two eighty, three hundred, etcetera. Alright. What about younger than 75? So, similar similar trend. Again, two ten to two forty nine is, was associated with the lowest risk for both men and women. And again, increasing, risk of death for all causes with lower and also higher levels of, total cholesterol. What about, in adults younger than 65 years? Again, similar trend, 02/10 to February optimal. Lower cholesterol seems to have a higher risk than higher cholesterol. Nonetheless, higher risk at at both low and high levels of total cholesterol relative to two ten to two forty nine. And again, forty five to fifty four, similar trend. Now, where the data gets, a little more interesting is in the younger age group. So thirty five to forty four years. Let's start there. So the, 02/1949 that was optimal at the older age groups, is not optimal at, thirty five to forty four year age group. So, for the women, a hundred and eighty to two twenty was associated with the lowest risk of death for all causes. And then, at the lower levels of cholesterol, risk increases only significantly, for levels that are, one thirty to one thirty nine and less than one twenty. And risk also increases for women at higher levels, greater than two eighty. But also notice in this case at the younger age group that, having lower levels of cholesterol less than one forty in this case doesn't seem to have impart impart a higher risk compared with greater than two eighty. So that's one way that the younger data diverges from the older data. Well, what about the data for men in this age group? So in this case, two ten to two twenty nine was associated with lowest risk of death for all causes. And then, risk increases for men at total cholesterol, less than two ten, and then, between two thirty and two thirty nine and greater than two fifty. Alright. How about in the youngest age group? So, first lowest risk starting with the women, the data for the women, the lowest risk of death, for all causes was one sixty to two hundred. And then note that there was no, significant increase in, all cause mortality risk for values lower than one sixty. So lower cholesterol in women eighteen to thirty four years lower than one sixty was not associated with an increased risk of death for all causes, which is in contrast to all of the other data, at the in the other age groups. And once again, very high values, in this case, greater than two eighty were associated with higher risk, for the eighteen to thirty four year old women. What about the data for the men? So in this case, one eighty to two twenty is associated with lowest risk of death for all causes, and then, risk increases, at total cholesterol levels less than one fifty, and then also, greater than two sixty. So for the men, in this case, u shaped curve, albeit with, values that are, different from the older age groups. And then, all the data I showed, in the past few slides, was a lot. So to simplify it, I put it into table form. So wherever your age group, is, you can have an easy and quick look at the data. That's all I've got. You can find me lots of places online. Have a great day.