NAD decreases during aging. Why is that important and what can we do about it? So first, in looking at the simplified graph here on the left, we can see, activity or levels on the y axis plotted versus age. And NAD, blue line, activity decreases during age. So why is that important? Well, N A D levels are involved in the health and functioning of virtually every organ system and tissue in the human body. So how can we, increase N A D levels during aging? Well, there are a variety of strategies that have been shown to work. For example, NAD boosters such as, nicotinamide riboside, nicotinamide mononucleotide. In terms of exercise, exercise has been shown to raise NED levels. And in terms of diet, fasting and calorie restriction also, increase NED levels. But in terms of diet, that doesn't really say what components within the diet can boost NED levels. And two components, Apigenin and Quercetin, have been shown to inhibit c d 38 activity. So, c d 38 is a NAD ACE, which means that is a protein that, degrades NAD. So, CD 38, levels are shown on the graph increase during age, which is one explanation for why NAD levels decrease during aging. So just to have a look at the epigenin and Quercetin CD 38 data. So, we can see here on the y axis, CD 38 activity plotted against the concentration of epigenin. So as the epigenin concentration increases, intracellular levels of CD 38 activity, decrease. Similar data is found for quercetin. As the quercetin concentration, increases, CD 38 activity, inside cells decreases. Now that's an important because, NAD levels correspondingly increase. And we can see that here for epigenin. Epigenin levels, increase about 50%. Sorry. NAD levels increase about 50% in the presence of epigenin, the white bars. Intracellular NAD levels. And, a smaller, but still significant increase for NAD levels is found for, quercetin. So, where can we get foods, or which foods have epigenin and quercetin with the goal of maximizing, intracellular NAD levels? So the most concentrated source of epigenin is found in parsley. Two hundred and fifteen and a half milligrams per hundred grams. So to get that into my diet, I add about 40 grams, to a smoothie, every other day. Now in terms of quercetin, the two best sources of quercetin are found in dill, fifty five and a half milligrams per hundred grams, and in red or purple onions. So the to actually eat more dill than I do purple, red or purple onions. So when I run out of pickles, I'll take a bunch or a few bunches of dill, and some jalapenos, and and whatever spices are left in the in the in the pickle juice, and I'll pickle the dill. So when once it ferments after a couple days, I'll then eat the pickle dill about 15 grams or more. So, I always favor whole foods over supplements. So with this in mind, it may be a good idea to include foods such as parsley, dill, purple onions, and there are other foods. If you wanna look at, other but less concentrated sources of Apigenin and Quercetin, I've included the link. That's all I've got. You can find me lots of places online. Have a great day.