In an earlier video, I went over the blood test data for a 100 year old centenarian subject. Now valid criticism of that video was that her data may not have been representative of other centenarians. So I scoured literature and looked for big studies in terms of sample sizes that have studied centenarians. So that's what I'm gonna go over today. So in terms of how many centenarians, data we're gonna look at, so it's 275 centenarians, that's a 100 to a 104 years old. 387 semi centenarians, that's that were a 105 to 109 years old. And then 22 people for centenarians who lived older than a 110 years. But then also as control groups, there were, 536 community dwelling older adults that were 85 to 99 years, and then 334 centenarian offspring, and their spouses that were about 75 years. So pretty nice, age distribution for for, 75 to over 110 year, old subjects. In contrast, most studies are only studying up to about 80. So we're we're gonna look at blood test data today past that limit. So, let's have a look at the data. Blood test data for subjects, 75 to a 110 years old. So there's a lot of data here. Let's just unpack it very slowly. So first, in the left two columns, we've got data for the family of centenarians. In the left column are the offspring of centenarians, and, as you can see the distribution of men to women was more men than women. And then in the next column, unrelated family, these were the spouses of the offspring. And you can see it's, exactly the opposite. So, less men and more women. And the age groups, of these two, columns are in the around the mid seventies. And then we've got very old subjects who are unrelated to the centenarians or their offspring, with age range of 85 to 99 years, and an average age of about 87. So then the centenarians. So the average, centenarian, a 100 to a 104 years old, their average, age there was about a 101 years old. So the semi centenarians, a 105 to 109 years old. Average age of about a 107 years old in that group. And then the 110 year old, the super centenarians, only 22 subjects in the group but, with an average age of a 111 years. So what, just before getting into the blood test data, I just wanna highlight an important point here. So if you look at the age, the gender distribution of of the centenarian groups. So when looking at the hundred to hundred and four year old group, about 21 out of every 100 centenarians were men. So, eight out of 10 are women, and only about two out of 10 are men. So the probability of getting to a 100 is far far better if you're a woman than a man. So that, probability gets worse as the age groups, go up in age. So for the hundred and five to hundred and nine year old group, only 12 out of every 100 subjects were men, and 88 would be women. So, far better odds of getting to to the extreme ages if you're a woman, which again is verified by the super centenarians. We're only nine out of every 100 super centenarians were men with 91 being women. So, if you're a woman who's got longevity genes, congratulations. I don't. I'm gonna have to science the out of aging to get there, and, by studying blood test data and diet and all the ways that I do it, that's how I anticipate getting there if I can. So, let's have a look at all of this blood test data. So first, some of this is gonna be a review. I've, published some of this data in other videos that I'll link in the right corner, so I'm kinda gonna, I'd like to fly through some of this where I've already, discussed it. For those of you who haven't seen it, welcome. Alright. So white blood cells. So that's what I've got highlighted here. We can see that it's in mostly, in the, 5,500 to 6,000 range for all of the age groups with the exception of the supercentenarians where we've got 6,300, around 6,300, white blood cells per microliter. So, how does it change with age and then, what's what's optimal? Alright. So first, in terms of the reference range, that isn't gonna tell you what's optimal because it's right within the reference range. So, perhaps the strongest data for white blood cells with, aging comes from the Baltimore Longitudinal Study on Aging where, subjects came in repeatedly, up to about forty years. So baseline visit, they kept coming in for up to forty years. So the same subjects have data track for a long period of time relative to cross sectional studies studies where you're just looking at groups, separate groups, which is important but not as strong as longitudinal data. So what we can see is, white blood cell counts, in different, amounts. So less than 3,500, 3,500 to 6,000, 6,001 to 10,000, and then greater than 10,000. So what's optimal? So, we can look at average life expectancy at fifty percent survival. The the the time when half of the cohort has died or half is still alive. And, what we can see is that, so for the, thirty five hundred to six thousand group, the average life life expectancy, when compared with baseline is about thirty eight years. So I've got that, highlighted with the red lines, on the x axis. So in comparison, having higher than 6,000, 6,000 to 10,000, the average life expectancy was only thirty years. So an eight year increase in lifespan or life expectancy, sorry, for those who had 3,500 to 6,000. And even though those are both within the reference range, it's pretty clear that having 3,500 to 6,000 would be better for life expectancy. So, in contrast having more than 10,000, that's an error there. I should have fixed that, not less than. Having more than 10,000, the life expectancy was only twenty five years. So, 35 100 to 6,000 is optimal, and then we're looking in the centenarian data, this is pretty good. They're right within that range with the exception of the supercentenarians who kinda get a little bit above it, but that's not too high. Now I should mention that white blood cells are all, not all created equal. They they're mostly comprised of neutrophils and lymphocytes, and I won't go into that data today but, neutrophils go up with age and lymphocytes go down. So that's that's gonna be a topic for another video. So so far, in terms of white blood cells, centenarians, and their offspring, and spouses of the offspring, and community dwellers 85 to 99 years old, not not doing too badly. Alright. Red blood cells and hemoglobin. Some of this data have already gone over but some of it, I have not. So, white blood cells first, you can see starting from the left side and going to the right, they decrease from about 4.44, and, get into the, less than four, three six two, 3.61, 3.77. So they decrease during aging there. Now, hemoglobin, which carries oxygen, is found within red blood cells. So if your red blood cells are decreasing during aging, so is your hemoglobin, or or your hemoglobin levels. And that's exactly what we see here from values, thirteen point eight and thirteen point three. And the seven year olds, 70 year olds to in the low to mid elevens in the centenarians. So the rep, you know, the reference range, there for red blood cells, they'd be out of the reference range and for hemoglobin, they'd also be out of the reference range but that doesn't tell you much. So first, how did the red blood cells change with age? I've shown this in another video, and this just verifies the data for the, centenarians or the decrease with aging that we see from the, centenarian offspring going towards centenarians. So red blood cells decreased from values of around four point eight and four point three in men and women respectively, down to about 3.9 in 90 year olds, which again, we see a similar trend in the centenarians. So, what about mortality risk? So here's, all cause mortality risk or risk of death for all causes, for levels of hemoglobin, in the left for men and on the right for women. So, when considering that most of the centenarian offspring were men, values around 13.8 aren't too bad, you know, they in terms of the values in the all cause mortality plot for men that be associated with an increased mortality risk. But it could be worse because if it was less than 13. Well, so for any of the centenarians that are men, they get to less than 13 with the values shown on the right in the elevens, they'd be at a higher all cause mortality risk. In contrast to women, for all cause mortality risk to be elevated based on hemoglobin levels, they need to be less than 11. So, in terms of the centenarian data that are in the elevens, they're it's close. It's borderline. So, I should say that based on all of this, the red blood cell and hemoglobin data isn't great, but, it's also not terrible. And in the way I see it, there's room for improvement. Alright, platelets. So, platelets here, they start off, in the 70 year olds, 70 year olds, 21.5 to 21.9, and I'm just gonna use these in 100 units, so it would be platelets times tenth of the third per microliter, not 10 times tenth of the fourth. So two fifteen, two nineteen in the 70 year olds. And then in the centenarians, we see values around one eighty nine to one ninety three. So there's an age related decrease, however slight it is. Now, the reference range doesn't tell you anything about that because it's within range. However, platelets decrease with aging, and that's what I've shown here by the red arrows in this plot. So this is a relatively big study of more than, 500,000 subjects, and what we can see is based on, you know, with the age groups, from 20 to 90 to 100 years old, platelets decrease in the men from values around two thirty to around two ten, and then and then in women from around two sixty to around two forty. So we actually have a greater decrease here, right? Because we get into the one nineties, which isn't reflected by, this, age related data. So it's a little worse than what's, been published. Now what about all cause mortality risk? So we're looking at that data here in a study of a 131 plus subjects. So, platelet values, and I've got it highlighted with the arrow, that are in the 200 to 300 range are associated with lowest risk of death for all causes. And risk of death for all causes increases as you go below two hundred, and even worse, having less than a 100, you can see the risk is ninety three percent increase relative to the eight percent increase, for 100 to 200 platelets. And also for very high platelet levels, 300 to 400, there's also an increased risk of mortality. So for the platelets, this also isn't terrible. They're barely below 200, so not so bad. It could be far worse. It could have had less than a 100 platelets based on the all cause mortality data. Alright. Total cholesterol, and I've done a a video on this too, so check it out if you're interested. So I'm just gonna go through it real quick. So, there you can see the total cholesterol levels from the seven year olds, for an an eighty eighty eight year old, group. So values around 200 to two ten that then decrease, into, you know, from one seventy two to one sixty five, one fifty six in the centenarians. And as I showed in that video, total cholesterol levels increase during aging, and then decrease. So this data in the centenarians and their offspring and the other age groups just verifies that. And then in terms of mortality risk, so, at the younger ages, less than 100, they'd be close to optimal as I've got highlighted here with the black lines. But then we can see the centenarian groups with the trend towards very, or lower values that they would be starting to increase their all cause all cause mortality risk based on their cholesterol data. What about HDL? So I haven't shown this data before. Let's have a look at it. So, for HDL, there wasn't much of an age related decrease until about a 105 years old. So values in the fifties for the younger than 105 year old age groups, but then you can see at the 100 five to 110 year old groups, 45 and 44 respectively. So, fortunately though, having lower cholesterol levels or at least, HDL cholesterol levels in these ranges, are not associated with dramatic increases in all cause mortality risk. So this is data on HDL and risk of death from cardiovascular related, issues. So, CB death, cancer death, and then other deaths. So there are three columns there. And then for it with for the plot, in men, so starting off in the fifties, which what the age the younger age groups, had HDL levels, in the fifties. So for any men in the younger age groups that had HDL values in the fifties, reducing that to the forties, there's no significant increase in risk of death for all causes. However, for the women, having values in the fifties that drop to the forties, there's an increase in, risk for death from CV related issues and other deaths. However, the increase is small. It's a small increase relative to having HDL levels in the thirties which, that's not what the average values here were in the older, the semi and the super centenarian groups. So HDL, not not bad. Alright. Albumin. And I'd argue that albumin may be the most underrated biomarker, that exists. I mean, most people think about glucose and inflammation. There are several biological age calculators that seem to always pay, you know, come up with, albumin, as one of their most important biological age predictors. So I've shown this in another video and, let's have a look at their data. So albumin levels from the younger age groups, values around around 4.2, 4.2 that decrease, all the way up to semi super, sorry, the supercentenarians to, values around 3.2. Now, in terms of the reference range, so they barely get out of the reference range. And, how does it change during aging? So, we can see that albumin levels decrease with age. That's what I've shown here in the study of more than a million subjects. And if we would look at where the data starts for the youngest age group, the people in the seventies, and then, the centenarians and beyond. We can see that they're just on the age related decrease, you know, the decrease for abdomen with age that there isn't anything special going on here other than following the trend like this study of a million subjects. And then in terms of all cause mortality risk, having higher levels of abdomen are associated with lower all cause mortality risk. So, in for men having values greater than 4.5, and then in women, values greater than 4.4 are associated with lowest risk of death for all causes. So anything lower than those values is associated with higher mortality risk, regardless of age, at younger ages and at older ages. And you can see that data here for both the men and the women. So their albumin level isn't great. Now what's important is that, albumin levels from my experience are malleable. You can you can, alter it with diet. So, I'd like to see some studies in very old, subject semi and supercentenarians that try to, you know, alter their diet with the goal of, improving their albumin levels. Alright. Kidney function. So let's have a look at that. And one way to look at that is by looking at their creatinine levels, and that's what we see here. So based on our creatinine levels, even though there is a small increase and then decrease, throughout the groups during aging, because creatinine levels increase during aging, we'd expect to see very high levels of creatinine in the oldest old, but that's not what we see here. So, and if you just look at the reference range, they're pretty much within range. There's nothing to be worried about. All cause mortality data, a similar story. We can see that the lowest risk of death for all causes has been reported in the zero point six to one point one milligram per deciliter range for creatinine, and they'd be just, you know, around the lowest risk there. Now, there may be something go on going on here though, and what I mean by that is creatinine levels are correlated with muscle mass. Now, whereas creatinine levels, increase on their on their own, independent of muscle mass, when you have a decrease in muscle mass, you're gonna have a decrease in creatinine. So you've got the age related creatinine increases related to decreased kidney function, but then you've also got a decrease in muscle mass and creatinine is stored within muscle or a large portion of it is stored within muscle. So you have an age related increase because of decreased kidney function, but then you have decreased muscle mass which would decrease creatinine levels. So the the effect, maybe, you know, washed out here in terms of one thing's going up, one thing's going down, so you do really don't see any change in it. So I'd argue other measures of kidney function, should probably be investigated in in each of these subjects to to further get at the what's going on with, kidney function. Alright. And then inflammation and and, you know, I shouldn't have to emphasize this too much but everybody pretty much knows, inflammation goes up with age and it's bad for health. Let's just take a relatively quick look at the, data here though. So they looked at c reactive protein, CRP, interleukin six, IL six, and TNF alpha. And what you can see, for each of these, inflammatory markers is they all increased, during aging from the 70 year olds to the supercentenarians a 100 and, 11 years old. So I've gone over CRP in another video. I'll link to that in the right corner. Let's have a look at the other data, IL six and TNF alpha. So first, in a meta analysis of nine IL six studies, this just shows that having higher IL six, and I've rectangle that on the bottom. So there's a forty nine percent increase with having in in all cause mortality risk with higher IL six values compared to lower values. So just verifying that having higher IL six during aging is not good. Now in contrast, the data for t and f alpha is a little bit more variable than the CRP and IL six data. So first, and then, age related, increases for CRP and IL six but not t and f alpha, were found in the first study. And then higher I l six and CRP were associated with an increased all cause mortality risk in the next study but not TNF alpha. So the first two inflammatory markers increases, all cause mortality risk in the second study but no association for TNF alpha with mortality risk in that study. And then there is data that shows, an increased all cause mortality risk for t n f alpha but that was shown only in men but not women in the last study here. So, CRP and IL six, I'd argue more established markers of in, age related, inflammation than t n f alpha. And then last but not least, cytomegalovirus. So it's it's a virus and it's if you look at the data here, it's up in every group. And not just up, if you look at the, percentage here in each group, so starting in the seven year old, so ninety seven point six percent of the first group, ninety nine point four percent, ninety eight point one percent, ninety nine point six percent, and then the semi and supercentenarians all had c m infection, either active or previous. Now, there's so much emphasis on coronavirus and, you know, there should be because it's, you know, instantaneous and you you you can be dead in a month. Whereas CMV can, sit late for decades, but, CMV does does does deserves its own video, but just just briefly introduce CMV to everybody. I should say it's it's one of the herpes viruses. It's, HHV five. So that's cytomegalovirus. It increases during aging. That's what I've shown here. So starting off in kids, six to 11 years old, the, prevalence of them being effect infected with CMV, thirty six percent, and then if you go down each age group, you can see that in, adults older than 80 in this study, around ninety one percent had been infected or were currently infected with CMV. So this data here in the older than 80 age groups, we can see it's even more than ninety percent. It it's, you know, if you live long enough, we're all gonna get it. And then as an interesting, brief story, it ties in potentially to the NAD story. So in this study here, they found that infecting endothelial cells, in this case, human umbilical vein endothelial cells, huevox cells, infecting those cells with CMV resulted in significantly decreased SIRT one protein levels. So, SIRT one is a, you know, anti aging protein, so having less of it would be bad for aging. And I'm probably gonna talk more about CMV, SIRT one, and, the other effects of CMV on aging in another video so stay tuned for that. Alright. If you made it to the end, thanks a lot and, that's all I've got. You can find me lots of places online. Have a great day.