ApoE is associated with longevity independent of Alzheimer's disease. This is a paper that was published about three weeks ago, so let's have a look at that data. So first, what we're looking at is survival on the y axis plotted against age, and this is data in humans, for carriers of APOE two, which is defined as having two e two alleles or one e two and one e three allele in blue, APOE three defined as having two e three alleles, or APOE four, in red, defined as having one e three and one e four allele or two e four alleles. So, at fifty percent survival, the that's the time, at which half of the population is alive and the other, half of the population has died. We can assess average, lifespan. And what we can see is that, average lifespan was, longest for the APOE two carriers in blue at about 95 years. A smaller, lifespan, a shorter lifespan was found for the APOE three carriers in green at about 91 or 92 years. And then the shortest lifespan of them all was present for APOE four carriers, in red at about 89 years. So about a five to six year difference between APOE two and APOE four. So that explains the first half of the title of this paper, APOE two is associated with longevity. What about its, association with Alzheimer's or death related to Alzheimer's disease? And that's we're looking at here. So first comparing APOE four carriers versus APOE three carriers, when comparing, the presence or absence of Alzheimer's disease AD, there was an increased, mortality risk regardless if subjects, had Alzheimer's no, AD or did not have Alzheimer's, no AD, in APOE four carriers when compared with APOE three. Conversely, what about APOE two carriers versus APOE three? Well, there we can see a reduced mortality risk regardless if, the subjects had Alzheimer's disease or did not have Alzheimer's disease. So hence the conclusion that APOE two is associated with longevity independent of Alzheimer's disease. Now this isn't the only study to have identified associations for APOE two the APOE gene with mortality risk. This is data from a larger study, about a 106,000 subjects. So first, let's have a look at the dementia associated mortality, which is relevant to Alzheimer's disease. So, first, when comparing, APOE e four carriers with the referent, APOE e three, we can see that there's an increase significantly increased, mortality risk related to dementia for the APOE e four carriers. So having one e four allele is associated with a 2.33 fold increased risk of dementia associated mortality compared to ApoE three. And even worse, carrying two alleles, e four e four four was associated with a 6.49, fold increased risk of dementia associated mortality when compared with ApoE three, carriers to having two alleles of ApoE three. So, dementia associated mortality is just one, outcome related to, death. What about all cause mortality, which includes, all the deaths related to cardiovascular disease, Alzheimer's disease, cancer, etcetera? So that's what we're looking at here. And again, we can see that compared to APOE three, E three three, having one allele for APOE four was associated with a 10% increase all cause mortality risk, and having two e four alleles was associated with a forty three percent increased all cause mortality risk. So conversely, having one allele of, APOE two, so e three two here, was associated with a significantly reduced all cause mortality risk when compared with, APOE three. So associations are interesting, which is what I've shown you, but what about causation? So to test that, Shinohara's group, the the, group that I mentioned on the previous slide, they engineered mice to, have either APOE two in blue, APOE three in green, APOE four in red, and then they completely knocked out, the APOE four gene in purple. And this is a survival, plotted against, age. So, how was lifespan affected? So again, just like the human data, although that was association, this potentially more, gets more at causation here. We can see that the, mice that had the APOE two gene, lived the longest, had the longest average lifespan. The APOE three carriers lived intermediate, and the APOE four carriers lived the shortest. Again, just like the human data. So from this we can, conclude that ApoE, beyond its associations, may have a causative role in impacting longevity in people. So what's my ApoE status? I'm interested obviously in living longer than anyone that's ever lived before, so having an APOE two genotype would be a good start to get there. So I've had this, measured. I've had the SNPs for APOE that are relevant to lifespan, r s four two nine three five eight and r s seven four one two, measured. And, as we can see below, my APOE, genotype for the RS429358 is, t and t. And for these RS7412, it's c and c. And based on, that genotype, I'm the ApoE three, I'm an ApoE three carrier. So, what are your, ApoE what's your ApoE status? Leave leave a note in the comments below. Let's see who's got some longevity genes. Alright. That's all I've got for now. For more info, you can find me lots of places online. Have a great day.