In my last video, I talked about why vitamin K intakes greater than what's recommended may be optimal for health. Similarly, today, I'm gonna talk about why vitamin C intakes greater than what's recommended may be optimal for health. So what we're looking at is the, RDA, the recommended dietary allowance for vitamin c intake throughout the lifespan, and I've got highlight highlighted with the rectangle, the red rectangle, the recommended intake for adults that are 19 years old or older for men and women, ninety and seventy five milligrams per day respectively. Now higher intakes are recommended for smokers and for breastfeeding women, a hundred and twenty micrograms. But at most, a hundred and twenty five micrograms per day per day is recommended for vitamin c intake. So how much do I take in? Well, my average daily vitamin c intake is plotted here. We can see vitamin c in milligrams per day on the y axis plotted against time. So this is two years two full years of data from July 2018 to July 2020. Each blue dot, is a data point each day of vitamin c intake during that period. And, the solid red line is my average intake during that period. So nine hundred thirty milligrams per day. So why so much? So first, let's have a look at the association between dietary vitamin c intake with all cause mortality risk. So risk of death for cardiovascular disease, cancer, respiratory diseases, infection, all of them, etcetera. So what we're looking at on the y axis is the relative risk for all those diseases combined. And, so when you have the, the solid line surrounded by its dash lines, which is the 95% confidence interval, well, when all of that is below one, then it's that data is significantly different, and in this case, it indicates reduced risk for, vitamin c intakes all the way up to about four hundred and fifty milligrams per day. Now if you really wanna, look at it more closely, you can kind of say that it looks like the lowest all cause mortality risk is for vitamin c intakes at two hundred milligrams per day when compared with, four hundred or four hundred and fifty milligrams per day, but they didn't make that comparison. They didn't do that comparison in the study, so that's unknown. And I should have mentioned that this data is based on a meta analysis of 14 studies. That's a lot of data. So what about intakes higher than, four hundred fifty milligrams per day? So to that, we'll look at the circulating vitamin c values and how they associate with risk of death for all causes. And in this case, higher circulating vitamin c levels shown on the x axis, again plotted against relative risk on the y axis r r for all cause mortality. We can see an almost linear decrease in death risk as the circulating vitamin c concentration increase increases. So, how can we get to, the far end of this vitamin c concentration, eighty micromoles, eighty micromoles per liter or greater? So what we're looking at here is a, on the y axis a a peak plasma as ascorbic acid which is vitamin c, plotted against the ingested dose of vitamin c. So first we can see that the current RDA, for for men and women would get you to only about, 25, micromole micromolar, which isn't very much because again we're shooting for eighty, based on the all cause mortality data. So how can we get to eighty micromolar for circulating, ascorbic acid or vitamin c? So I've highlighted that here by the red, line, that red arrow. And to get to eighty micromolar, for vitamin c, it looks like a a thousand milligrams per day, of daily intake will get you there. Now what about higher doses? So all the way up to twenty five hundred milligrams per day. It looks like there's a small increase, in the circulating vitamin c concentration. Maybe eighty two micromolar versus seventy eight. So is it worth it though to take in fifteen hundred milligrams more? I'm not sure. So, if you remember back to my first slide, I mentioned that I average about nine hundred thirty milligrams per day. This data in in association with the all cause mortality data is basically why. Because we see a thousand milligrams per day basically saturates the circulating levels of vitamin c in the blood. So where where can we get vitamin c from? Now I'm always in favor of whole foods first, and supplements second unless foods aren't making a difference. So what are the best vitamin c containing foods? So to address that, I sorted food based on their, how much vitamin c they have per calorie, which is essentially the definition of nutrient density, nutrient per calorie. So each of these foods for a 100 calories, the vitamin c content that's highest is found in peppers. So sweet bell peppers. In this case, yellow bell peppers have the highest vitamin c, six hundred seventy nine milligrams per one hundred calories of yellow, peppers. So I'm not gonna go through the whole list, but I eat a lot to get my vitamin c, at nine hundred or more milligrams per day. I eat a bunch of red bell peppers, two to three a day, fourteen to 15 ounces, but I also get significant amounts of vitamin c in my diet from, broccoli and spinach. Now as a last note, if you're if you're interested in optimizing your circulating vitamin c concentrations, it's important to note that, vitamin c transport into intestinal cells from the diet, is mediated by a transporter that also requires two sodium, anion two sodium ions. So that's what we're looking at here. So basically, when you eat vitamin c, you'll need two, moles of sodium for each mole of a s c minus which is the ascorbate anion which is vitamin c. So if you're eating a high vitamin c diet but a low sodium diet, you'll be limited in how much you actually absorb through the transport into the intestinal cells and that you get into your blood. So with this in mind, when considering that I average around nine hundred and thirty milligrams of vitamin c a day, I shoot for about eighteen hundred milligrams of sodium per day so that I can optimize, fully optimize how much vitamin c I've got in my blood. So that's all I've got. For more info, you can check out my web website. And if you've got questions or comments, you can find me lots of places online. Have a great day.