Deep sleep. How does it change during aging? What's its connection to Alzheimer's disease? And what's my data? So first, we're looking at a hypnograph, which is a, measure of sleep stage on the y axis versus, hours of sleep on the x axis. So starting from being awake, when we fall asleep, we progress through various, stages of sleep. Light sleep being n one and n two defined as n one and n two and n three being defined as, deep sleep otherwise known as slow wave sleep. So the subject in this, picture spends about an hour in deep sleep and then they progress, up to, n two, relatively light sleep where they, but then they go to REM sleep and spend a few minutes there. So that right there is one sleep cycle and then the subject in this picture, goes through another sleep cycle. So first through n two and then to n three where they spend a little bit of more time in slow wave sleep or deep sleep. And this process continues throughout the night, until we wake up at some point later in the future. So, just as a quick, aside, notice that most of the deep sleep, is, accumulates within the first four hours or so and then it goes away. Conversely, REM sleep starts off relatively low and then accumulates throughout the night such that when we wake up, it's mostly, REM sleep. Dreams and dream sleep, not so much slow wave sleep. So how does slow wave sleep change during aging? So before answering that, first, it's important to go through how total sleep time changes during aging. So this is, data, from a meta analysis of 65 studies and I'll post the link to all of these studies in the description for the video. So, for a young subject, in this case, 20 years old, young people sleep about four hundred fifty minutes, per night. So, in contrast, an 80 year old, only gets about three hundred and fifty minutes of sleep per night. So what about slow wave sleep? So in this case, the percentage of sleep, divide, or or slow wave sleep divided by total sleep time, otherwise known as, slow wave sleep percentage also declines during aging. So for a 20 year old, 20 year old gets about 20% of the total sleep time as slow wave sleep, which when considering data in the previous slide, four hundred minute four hundred fifty minutes of total sleep time, that's about ninety minutes of deep sleep per night for the 20 year old. However, the for the older, subject, for the older adult, an 80 year old in this case, they only get about 9% of, their total sleep time as slow wave sleep, which considering that they, an 80 year old gets about three hundred and fifty minutes of, sleep per night that translates to about thirty two minutes of slow wave sleep. So about three fold less slow wave sleep for an older adult when compared to a younger subject. So how does getting less sleep during aging affect health? Well one way is linked with, Alzheimer's disease or amyloid beta, production, which is found in Alzheimer's disease patients. So, first, in in looking at, this plot here, what what it basically shows is that a higher baseline proportion of slow wave activity during sleep is correlated with a reduced four year accumulation of brain amyloid beta a beta in 76 year old subjects. So, just looking at that at plot, so we've got rate of, a beta accumulation on the y axis and then brain slow wave activity on the x axis. And what we can see by extrapolating with the trend line, we can see that for subjects that had higher, brain slow wave activity during sleep, they had lower levels of a beta accumulation in their brains over a four year period. So this was a longitudinal study. So that's a good thing. Get more slow wave sleep, have less a beta in the brain at least in this study. Conversely, subjects that got, a lower proportion of slow wave, sleep had a higher rate of a beta accumulation in their brain over that four year period as as indicated by the arrow. So why is a beta important? So, in looking at this, simplified cartoon, a beta affects, the synapses, the the points at which neurons communicate with each other. So first, in looking at the normal synapse, and the condition when there is no a beta, there's normal, neuronal activity, normal neuronal inter, you know, interneuronal communication. However, in in the situation where there is a lot of a beta in between the, or at the synapse in between neurons, it induces neuronal hyperactivation which leads to neurodegeneration. So getting getting enough deep sleep to, minimize a beta is important. So one way, I plan on, or try I plan on trying to, reduce a beta in my brain is by tracking my slow wave sleep. So I do that by wearing a fitness tracker and I should point out that I'm not sponsored to promote them so I'm just gonna briefly mention who they are. So I wear Whoop and Whoop has been compared against, the gold standard for measuring sleep in overnight sleep studies which is polysom somno polysomnography PSG. So, so Whoop was compared against PSG for detecting each of the sleep stages. So TST total sleep time, wakefulness, light sleep, slow wave sleep, SWS, and REM sleep. So how did WHOOP do when compared with the gold standard for measuring these sleep cycles or sleep stages? So first in in terms of total sleep time, WHOOP was just as good as the gold standard and similarly for slow wave sleep, it was, yeah, as good as PSG for detecting, the amount of slow wave sleep. So the values between the the the two different methods, WHOOP and PSG, was not, statistically, different. So, based on this small this was a small study I think it was in like 12 subjects. One could argue that WHOOP is as good as the gold standard for, you know PSG for detecting, total sleep time and slow wave sleep. Now well, I should also mention too for wakefulness and light sleep it was also not different from PSG. However, notice that for the REM sleep, WHOOP actually overestimated REM sleep by about, fifteen minutes. So, however, however, discussion of REM sleep isn't in this video. So, but for what for what we want, total sleep time and slow wave sleep, WHOOP is is based on this data just as good as the gold standard. So how much nightly slow wave sleep slow wave sleep do I get? So this is data for, the last five twenty six days so from May 2019 through October 2020. So the amount of slow wave sleep in hours is plotted on the y axis against time and, each day each dot refers, corresponds to a a day, you know, one day over the last, you know, year and a half. So, based on the trend line, I get about ninety three, minutes of slow wave sleep per day. So that would indicate that my slow wave sleep amount is relatively youthful which is a good thing. So, that may change with time and if it does, I'll try different things to try to, get it going back towards youth. So what variables affect slow wave sleep with the goal of optimizing it and if you can optimize it potentially we could reduce our accumulation of a beta with, with time. So two two things that I think may have an impact are I keep a consistent sleep schedule. So I try to get to sleep between nine, to 10PM, every night without fail. And even there are some nights where I'm I'm trying to go to bed, you know, during from eight to 09:00. Earlier, the better. If it's dark outside, time to get to sleep. That's what that's how we evolved for millions of years. And also try to stop eating or drinking at least three hours before bedtime. And on many days now, it's way early way earlier than that. So maybe, you know, six to seven hours before, bedtime. So a long overnight fast. But are there other factors that affect slow wave sleep? So the obvious would be just sleep more. If you sleep more, you'll get more deep sleep. But is that true? What does the data say? So at least for me, for my data, when comparing when looking at the correlation for, slow wave sleep versus total sleep time, so slow wave sleep on the y axis, total sleep time on the, x axis, there is a significant a moderate, significant correlation between those two. So, more sleep time, more total sleep time, more slow wave sleep. That's a statistically significant correlation in my data. And, to get the ninety minutes of slow wave sleep that's found in youth, I would need to sleep about seven hours a night, which is isn't isn't too tough for me to do so far, at least at my age, current age. Alright. But which factors impact total sleep time? You know, it's easy to say just sleep more but how do you control your brain's, how do you control your brain sleeping more while you're asleep? You know, it's one thing for me to say, okay. I'm gonna eat x y or z in my diet and that may impact, you know, muscle mass, you know, for example, protein impacting protein synthesis but how can you use, you know, diet or supplements or anything to impact you while you're asleep? That's a whole another ballgame at least that, you know, my opinion. So, so to investigate that, I started looking at correlations between my diet with total sleep time with hypothesis that maybe there are things in my diet that can affect how much sleep I get and if I get more sleep, potentially I'm getting more slow wave sleep. So the strong strongest correlation between total sleep time with all of my dietary variables was total calorie intake, the average daily calorie intake. And again this is during the same 526 period, from last year to, this October and we can see a moderate, correlation 0.35 for total sleep time with daily calorie intake and what it shows is the higher my calorie intake the longer I'll sleep. So with that hypothesis if if I just simply increase my daily calorie intake I should get more total sleep time and more slow wave sleep. So, in support of the hypothesis so that's just total sleep time versus daily calorie intake. The goal is to get map you know, to maximize slow wave sleep. What's the correlation between daily calorie intake with slow wave sleep? So there there's a weak correlation but statistically significant so the correlation is 0.13 and it's significant at a p value of 0.003. So what about the effect of an increased calorie intake on other metrics? If I if I increase my calorie intake to increase total sleep time to increase slow wave sleep and we know that having more slow wave sleep may be good for reducing, amyloid beta accumulation in the brain. If I optimize that but it negative negatively getting too many calories of negatively affects other variables, well, that's not good. So, what about other metrics? So first increasing calorie intake may negatively affect resting heart rate, RHR, and heart rate variability. These are two cardiovascular related metrics. Actually heart rate variability is a measure of sympathetic nervous system divided by parasympathetic nervous system. So it's not just the cardiovascular system. So first, I'm looking at heart rate, versus calorie intake, resting heart rate on the y axis versus versus, total calorie intake on the x axis. We can see that for a higher calorie intake, there's also a higher resting heart rate. And based on Brighten, my average calorie intake is somewhere around 25 to 2,600 calories a day. That would put me at a resting heart rate of about 48 beats per minute. And if any if you if you've seen my previous video on what's optimal for resting heart rate, values closer to 45 are associated with maximally reduced all cause mortality risk. So, eating about 2,600 calories, at least based on this core, correlation with resting heart rate, does puts me at 48, which is isn't too far from the 45, that's that may be optimal for health. So if I increase my calorie intake, resting heart rate would increase which is going in the wrong direction. So similar data is observed for heart rate variability. So, based on my diet right now, about 25 to 2,600 calories a day, my heart rate variability, is about 60, 60 milliseconds. And, as I noted in my last, on on my in my video for, heart rate variability, again, link in the right corner, values, close to 70 are found in youth. So, if I increase my calorie intake based on the negative correlation here, I'd expect my rest, heart rate variability to be reduced, which also is going in the wrong direction. So, just on to illustrate, you know, the the the link between calorie intake, total sleep time, slow wave sleep, and these cardiovascular metrics, it's important to identify the calorie intake that maximizes all of them, not just selectively one, but not others. So finding the sweet spot is key. And that's all I've got for now. You can find me in lots of places online. Have a great day.