Calorie restriction, the gold standard for lifespan extension. Let's have a look at that data. So here we see survival curves for, female c three, b 10, f one mice that underwent lifelong CR r calorie restriction, which means eating less calories than they would normally eat if they were enabled to eat as much as they wanted. So c r was started from one month of age, so right after almost right after birth. So, when looking at survival curves, the place where there is fifty percent survival, so half the population is dead and half is still alive, we can assess average, lifespan. So, starting from the mice that ate as much as they wanted at libitum. So no calorie restriction. They lived an average of twenty nine months, and they had a maximum, if you just extend their curve down all the way down, a maximum lifespan of thirty six months. So how did the calorie restrict calorie restricted female mice do? So, forty seven percent CR, in this case, they ate 85, kilocalories or calories, of food per week in comparison to eating as much as they wanted, a 160, calories per week. So that 47% reduction in calorie intake, extended lifespan. You can see the lifespan curve was shifted to the right for both for both average and maximum lifespan, resulting in an average lifespan of thirty three months and a maximum lifespan of forty two months. So a little bit more than a 10% increase with eating less calories. What about even cutting calories more than that? So, they gave the mice fifty k cals per week, which is a 69 calorie reduction calorie yeah. Calorie reduction. And we can see that lifespan was even further shifted to the right. So, mice, female mice that were subjected to sixty nine percent CR had an average lifespan of forty five months and a maximum of fifty two months. So then they they they cut the calories a little more. Now 40 k cals per week. That's a 75% reduction in daily calorie intake, or weekly calorie intake, sorry. And, those mice lived an average of forty seven months and a maximum of fifty five months. So, also, the data on the inset just shows all of this data here that when you reduce calorie intake, both average and maximum life span plotted on the y axis increases at least for female c three, b 10 f one mice. So what about the data in the male, mice? So this is, again, same genotype, male c three b 10 f one mice. And in this case, they started calorie restriction from 12 of age, which is equivalent to starting, CR in your thirties or mid thirties. So again, we're looking at survival. So, fifty percent survival. We can look at average lifespan for both the control and the CR groups, and we can see the control animals without CR had an average and maximum lifespan or average and maximum lifespans of 35 and 43 respectively, and that calorie restriction shifted those curves to the right, as you can see, to average and maximum lifespans of thirty eight and forty eight months. So just based on these data from these two, animals, females and males, on the same genotype, we can see that calorie restriction, resulted in lifespans in, at most, in the forty five to fifty five month old age. So if any intervention is gonna beat it, I'd expect to see, lifespans that get to forty five to fifty five months. So can any supplements beat it? So rapamycin. So I'm gonna show data from three studies on rapamycin. Let's see how they compare with, the calorie restriction mediated improvements for lifespan. So first, in this study, they, gave, c 57 black six j mice. That's the genetic background. Rapamycin, in this case, it was a hundred and twenty six parts per million, which is the highest dose that I'm gonna show of all the rapamycin, data coming coming next. So they started this, supplementation of rapamycin at twenty three to twenty four months of age. So average lifespan in c 57 black six mice is about thirty months. This is a late life supplementation of rapamycin. And first, so looking at average, lifespan for the controls and the rapamycin, treated animals, we can see the average was thirty to thirty one months, and there was a significant increase in average lifespan for the rapamycin treated, mice. In this case, thirty one to thirty two months. So small, but significant increase in average lifespan. But maximum lifespan was not increased, which was thirty six to thirty seven months in both the control placebo fed, you drag it. I don't know if I'm saying that right. The pronouncing it right nonetheless. And the and the rapamycin treated, live the same amount maximally. So that's data for females c 57 black six mice supplemented with rapamycin. What about the males? So okay. Fifty percent survival. We, we see a dramatic increase in average and maximum lifespan in the males fed rapamycin. In this case, the, average lifespan for the rapamycin, supplement to c fifty seven mice was male mice was thirty four to thirty five months. And, again, even though there was an increase in the maximal lifespan compared to the con, controlled placebo fed mice, it still didn't beat thirty six to thirty seven months. And so here's that data, and that's gonna be important for our next slide because we're gonna compare it to CR. So before we go there, just notice that the maximum life span did not break forty months in con in contrast to the CR data, which we saw 45 to 55. So the appropriate comparison for rapamycin fed to c 57 black six mice would be calorie restricted in c 57 black six mice. Same genetic background, different intervention. So let's have a look at that data. So first, we're looking at the survival curves for c 57 black six j female mice that were subject subjected to 20% CR, the blue line, or 40% CR. So again, this is, is a survival curve. So, we can, address average lifespan by, the 50% survival point, and we can see that twenty percent CR that with twenty percent CR, there was a dramatic increase in both average and maximum lifespan. So in compare in comparison to the control lifespan, twenty five to twenty six months and thirty three months for average and maximum lifespan, the mice female mice, c 57 black six j that were fed 20% CR or on a 20% CR diet had average and maximum life spans of thirty six to thirty seven months. And then once again, maximal life spans then in around the mid forties, forty four to forty five months. Now to compare that with rapamycin, again, same genetic background, just different intervention. We can see that the mice subjected to twenty percent CR had, an increased average lifespan compared to the females. So thirty six to thirty seven months versus thirty one to thirty two months, and a higher, maximal life span too. 45 forty four to forty five months for the twenty percent CR versus thirty six to thirty seven months. So it looks like CR is better than rapamycin, when comparing 20% calorie restriction, versus, rapamycin. So, it's also important to note that 40% CR, so even a further, reduction in calorie intake, did not extend average or maximal lifespan. So here you can see the red line. The survival curve is, female c 57 black six j mice that were subjected to 40% CR, and their average and maximum lifespans were not different from the control animals. So, although calorie restriction is the gold standard, clearly here, the dose of how much you restrict is important. So what about the data in the male mice? So, again, starting with fifty percent survival, we can see average lifespan is twenty five to twenty six months, and then ex, extending the the black line curve down, the maximum lifespan was thirty six months. And then both, in this case, 2040% CR, both extended, lifespan. So first, for the 20% CR, the the blue line, we can see that average lifespan was thirty three to thirty four months, maximum forty one to forty two. And then how does that compare with rapamycin in the previous data? So, we can see that the twenty percent CR for the male c 57 black six j mice had a very similar life span to rapamycin treated males, thirty four to thirty five months for rapa, thirty three to thirty four months for CR. But where they differ is twenty percent CR. The maximum lifespan was forty one to forty two months, whereas for rapamycin, in the male mice, it was thirty six to thirty seven. And then just also the 40% CR, although it didn't work in the female c 57 black six j mice, it extended average lifespan in the male mice. So we can see that the red line, the the survival curve is shifted to the right, so they had an increased average lifespan around thirty months, but maximum was not different, around, thirty six months. So it's not just the dose of CR, it's also, gender specific effects to consider for CR. Alright. So rapamycin study number two. And, like I said, as I mentioned, there there are gonna be three rapamycin studies that we're gonna look at, and we're gonna see if they can beat, that forty five to fifty five month, high lifespan score for calorie calorie restriction. So, rapamycin study number two, in this case they used genetically heterogeneous mice. Meaning, they mixed a bunch of, mice with different genetic backgrounds. So I've got those listed up here. And then they used fourteen parts per million, rapamycin in the food. In contrast, that's a lower dose compared to the earlier data I showed for rapamycin, which was a hundred and twenty six parts per million. And in this case, they did, studies lifespan studies for rapamycin at three different universities, University of Texas, Health Science Center at San Antonio, my alma mater, University of Michigan, and the Jackson Lab, TJ TJL. And then they combined all of those data because, you know, bigger study, more animals, potentially greater statistical, power to detect significant, effects. So, in this case, we're looking at, controls versus, rapamycin for survival. So first, starting for the, average and maximum lifespan curves for the controls, we can see clearly a shift in the curve for both average and maximum lifespan for the rapamycin treated, female mice, female genetically heterogeneous mice. So, the average and maximum lifespan was thirty three to thirty four months for rapamycin treated, and forty one to forty two months. Both significant increase compared to controls, but, again, we're not getting into the forty five to fifty five, month range as CR does yet. Or will it? So, okay. What about the males? So, again, looking at average survival, we can see clearly that the average lifespan is shifted to the right for the rapamycin treated males, with, lifespan average and maximum lifespan of thirty one to thirty two months and 39, 49 for maximal. Now, if there it doesn't look like there was an increase in maximal lifespan for for the rapamycin treated males, at at 14 parts million rapamycin in this study. So alright. Rapamycin study number three. So in this case, they gave a variety of, different amounts of rapamycin. So compared to the control animals, again, this is survival curve plotted on the y axis. So control, survival in the blue line, and then a low relatively low dose of rapamycin, so in the green circles, and then, higher dose again, fourteen parts per million just like in the last study, The orange squares, and then the, red diamonds in red. That's forty two parts a million. So all of these doses are less than a 126 in the first study that I mentioned. Okay. So what about survival? So compared to the controls, we can see that all of the doses, and this is data for females, and again, genetically heterogeneous mice, slightly different from the genetically heterogeneous mice group, mouse group in the previous data. So we can see that all of the survival curves for the different rapamycin, treated animals had extended, average and maximum lifespan. And in this case, the maximum lifespan when compared to the controls was forty two to forty three months. So a significant, finding, but it's we still haven't beaten CR's forty five, to fifty five month, high high score. What about the males? So again, starting with survival, and looking at the three different rapamycin, intake groups, we can see that there was an increased median and maximal life span for the higher rapamycin doses, fourteen to forty two parts per million, but not the lower rapamycin dose in the male mice, male genetically heterogeneous mice, the the green, circles, no change in life span there. And at best, maximum lifespan was forty to forty one forty one months in the fourteen and forty two part per million rapamycin groups. So at best, rapamycin supplemented mice live forty two to forty three months. That's based on the data from these three different studies, which falls short of forty five to fifty five months for CR. Now CR isn't perfect. As I mentioned, it depends on the magnitude, you know, 20%, 40%, you know, of your calorie restriction. And it can also depend on gender with females, in some cases, having longer lifespans on CR than males. And then there's also data that not every genetic background, has extended lifespan in response to CR. But as a potential upper limit, the the the the greatest increase in terms of intervention that's been shown at extend lifespan so far is CR. So that's all I've got. You can find me lots of places online. Have a great day.