What's up everybody? So on Tuesday, I got my blood drawn again in order to measure biological age for the fourth time, this year. So before we get into that data, let's just do a quick recap of my three previous tests so far in 2020, and then I'll provide a good segue, into what my data was, for the other day. So my first measurement in 2020 was in February, and we can see that my phenotypic age was, about fourteen years younger than my chronological age around, 33, 32.75. Now it's important to note that this data, had a respiratory infection at that time, so I expected it to be suboptimal or not as young as it possibly could be. So I didn't really change much. I just recovered and, retested again, in March. And we can see that just by recovering, that reduced my biological age by about a year. We can see that my white blood cells, which were at 5.8 in February, came down to 4.7, which is what you would expect with a rest recovery from respiratory infection. Also my lymphocytes went back up. Evidently respiratory infections reduced my percentage of lymphocytes. So by recovering, I was able to go back up a little bit. But, notice that I didn't do anything purposely to lower my creatinine, but, whatever I did at that time lowered it, from 1.08 to 0.97, which is going in the right direction. Higher levels of creatinine are, creatinine increases with age and higher levels are associated with an increased all cause mortality rates, so lower is better. Although I didn't do anything purposefully in the March blood test to, improve that. Now, I suffer from grass and pollen allergies from, late May to early August, so I expected worst data in June when I tested last month. And it's exactly what I got. Phenotypic age of about 34 years, so still thirteen years younger than my chronological age, and my worst, reading, to date, for for 2020. So, glucose and creatinine have been going in the wrong direction for about a year and a half. So, in order to improve on the June blood test, independent of, you know, the effect of my, allergies on my, biological age, glucose and creatinine have been going in the wrong direction. So, I've been focused lately on trying to improve those so that I can, reduce my biological age even if I've got allergy, allergies negatively impacting my data. So first, what's impacting my glucose level? So, as everybody probably knows, every time I blood test, that blood test correlates with an average dietary period, because I track my dietary data every day. So if a given blood test is say three months, two blood tests are three months apart, I have three months of dietary data that would correspond to the next, blood test. So by doing that, I can then start to look at correlations between my diet with that blood test results and with enough diet blood test result data, I can investigate correlation. So this is data for the last five years, and what we can see is that my average daily fat intake is strongly correlated with my plasma glucose level. So this is the this is data, 23 data points. And we can see that the correlation coefficient is 0.72, which is technically strong, and the p value is statistically significant. So higher fat intake, daily fat intake, higher levels of plasma glucose, or at least that's the correlation. So if I cut my fat intake, will it affect the other phenotypic age variable? So I investigated those correlations and, there were non significant correlations between my daily fat intake with RDW, alkaline phosphatase, and albumin. However, higher fat intake was also positively correlated with creatinine and white blood cell counts. So higher fat daily fat intake, higher creatinine and white blood cells which is going in the wrong direction. Lower levels of creatinine and white blood cells are found in youth and are associated with a lower all cause mortality risk. However, actually going in the other direction, a higher daily fat intake is negatively correlated with the lower lymphocyte, a percentage of lymphocytes. So that's actually going in the wrong direction because a higher level of lymphocyte percentage is found in youth, and having more lymphocytes is is, associated with lower all cause mortality risk. And similarly, a higher my, for me, a higher daily fat intake is correlated with lower levels of CRP. So when considering cumulatively that, my daily fat intake was correlated with three things going in the wrong direction, but two things, not going in the wrong direction, I decided to cut my fat intake and see what that would do. My total fat intake and see what that would do to my, glucose, creatinine and all the biomarkers. So within my fat intake, it the percentage of calories from saturated fat was significantly correlated with plasma glucose. And that's important because daily fat intake can you know, consists of monounsaturated, polyunsaturated, omega three, omega six. So of all the fats, saturated fat was significantly correlated with plasma glucose. So higher saturated fat intake, daily saturated fat intake, higher plasma glucose, at least that's the correlation. So my primary sources of saturated fat are coconut butter and cocoa beans. So I reduced my intake of these foods. Now I should also mention that I get about 11 grams of saturated fat from plain full fat yogurt every day, but I didn't wanna cut that because of a potential effect on my red blood cell counts. And I'll get into that a little bit later. So just to show, how much that I that I cut of the cocoa beans and coconut butter, we can see that my average what I've got listed here is my average dietary intake for the blood test previous to the one that I took, a couple days ago. And what we can see is that I cut my cacao, my cocoa bean intake by about half, 47%. Similarly, I cut my coconut butter intake by about half. I cut my total fat intake by, which doesn't seem like much, 12 grams. And I cut my saturated fat by about eight grams, 22% cut. Now based on cutting my, total, daily fat intake, which was around 93 grams on my last measurement, when you look at the trend line for the correlation between plasma glucose with my daily fat intake, that correlates with a, ninety ninety two grams a day of a daily fat intake correlates with about a 91, plasma glucose level. So by cutting it, my daily fat intake to around 80, grams per day, including the cuts from saturated fat. I expected to see plasma glucose levels you know, in the high eighties, somewhere around 88. That's assuming causation. I understand that. That's, you know, why do these, experiments because with enough data, but but I'll have a hypothesis and test the hypothesis. And if doesn't work, well the correlations will, you know, self adjust based on how the data went and then I'll be able to find what really does cause things to change in my body based on diet or other other variables. So I expect to see, glucose levels at around in the high eighties. Did I make any other diet did I make sorry, did I make any other dietary changes? And I did. So let's take a look at that. So, a higher dietary fiber intake per hundred one hundred calories, otherwise known as dietary fiber density, is significantly correlated with lower plasma glucose. And that's what we can see here. So glucose plotted on the y axis against fiber density, grams of fiber per 100 calories on the x axis. What we can see is that as the fiber density increases, the plasma glucose level my plasma glucose level, decreases. And, it's close to a strong correlation with a correlation coefficient of 0.62 and this is a statistically significant, correlation. So I also saw significant correlations for vitamin C, potential renal acid load, P Rau, and the potassium to sodium ratio with glucose. So in other words, higher levels of vitamin C were correlated with lower glucose, a more negative potential renal acid load, P Rau, was correlated with lower glucose, and a higher potassium K to NA ratio was associated with lower glucose. So when considering that broccoli, positively positively affects each of these variables, I added 300 grams of broccoli, around 300 grams of broccoli per day. So those who follow me, probably know that I eat, you know, large quantities of vegetables. So some might say, oh, how are you gonna add 300 if you're already eating a lot of broccoli? So, this is my dietary intake of broccoli over the last two years, broken down by, average dietary period that corresponds to each blood test. And while I was eating, you know, significant significant average daily amounts of broccoli every day, up until about the last, eight months or so, I started to cut it down on purpose to try to see what effect that would have on my biomarkers. So as, you know, just looking at the last blood test, on June 23, where I, you know, only took in an average of 19 grams broccoli per day, on my for my latest blood test, I I averaged 295 grams broccoli a day for the, you know, thirty ish, day period that preceded my blood test. Now, so, I've increased my broccoli intake relative to the to the last blood test, and did that affect these other variables that were correlated with my glucose levels including vitamin c, the potassium to sodium ratio, and potential renal acid load, p rau. So, we can see that I increased my vitamin c intake, about a hundred fifty milligrams per day. My potassium to sodium ratio went up by one one unit, and my, PROW, went more negative. So each of these changes, because they were correlated with plasma levels of glucose, I expected to see lower levels of glucose in addition to the changes in the fat intake. So what was the impact? Now that I've shown you all the things that I did, what was the impact on my blood test the other day? Well, highly unexpected result. My phenotypic age first of all, 37.65. So even though it's nine and the third years younger than my chronological age, this is my worst reading in seven tests. I didn't expect this value at all going in completely in the wrong direction. So the impact of the dietary changes that I made on creatinine and glucose, it didn't do anything. Creatinine is still too high compared to where I'd like it to be and my glucose levels at 99. That's the second 99 I've gotten in my past, actually in 2020. And that's definitely going in the wrong direction. But also, CRP one point o one milligrams per liter. I mean, this is two and a half fold elevated compared to my nine measurements of CRP that I have since 2018. Now, one reason for that is definitely seasonal allergies. You can see here I've highlighted or I've arrowed, dates in June and July when I blood tested. So with the exception of July 2019, we could see that my CRP at, you know, 0.67, 0.53, 1 o 1. It's always significantly higher than any other time, with the exception of that one blood test in 2019. But even if I take that July 2019 blood test into account, my average value in June's and July from 2018, 2019, 2020 is still about double compared to non June and July, measurements. So definitely seasonal seasonal allergies are playing a role there but there are other factors that I'm not gonna get into, in this video, or other factors that I think are contributing, but I won't. I'll save that for another video. Also my MCV and RDW are definitely going in the wrong direction. Lower lower levels of both MCV and RDW are associated biological youth and lower risk of all cause mortality risk. I have a video on that. I'll link that in the right corner. So that's the bad news. The good news is even when I average my four biological age measurements over twenty twenty, cumulatively that's thirty four years, which is still thirteen years younger than my chronological age, which isn't terrible, but I I wanted to be as young as possible. And also in in comparison, my average phenotypic age in twenty nineteen was 33.44 years. So, even though 2020, you know, I still have a couple more measurements to go in 2020, at worst if I am able to maintain a 34 biological age in 2020, that means over one year, one year will have passed chronologically, but I may have only aged around, you know, point five to point six, years which that's pretty good. Nonetheless, I'm I'm determined to improve on my data especially this blood test, which again was completely unexpected. So what do I try next to go to get it going in the right direction? I'm only gonna focus on a little bit, you know, I've already bombarded everybody with data in this, video, so I'll save, some of the other, data for another video. But, I didn't wanna cut my yogurt intake, but let's have a look at some data. So So I'm still interested in reducing my glucose and creatinine levels first. So I didn't eat yogurt up until around a year ish ago and so I didn't eat it at all. It wasn't in my diet for four years. So this is data since 2015. And what we can see is that my glucose levels without yogurt listed versus with yogurt in the six measurements with it. So, when looking at the average value without yogurt, I'm around 87 milligrams per deciliter for glucose. But with yogurt, my glucose levels are are significantly higher around 95. So a similar trend is also going on for creatinine. So, and that's what I've plotted here. And all of the data that I have, blood test data that corresponds to dietary intake without yogurt, and then in the six, blood test, blood test that I have that I have eaten yogurt, during those, dietary periods that correspond to blood test data. And what we can see here too is that, without yogurt is sick, my creatinine levels are significantly lower than when I have yogurt in my diet. And again, having lower glucose levels and having lower creatinine at least where I am now, would be associated with a lower biological age and potentially lower risk of all cause mortality and all the other good stuff that goes with that. So, why haven't I cut yogurt then? What what's going on there? So, for some reason, for whatever reason, my red blood cells are strongly correlated with my average daily yogurt intake. So again, this is data from twenty fifteen to 2020, and this is, 23 data points. So 23 blood tests that correspond to 23 dietary intake. So I've plotted red blood cells in the y axis against yogurt intake on the x axis. And, so first, this correlation in the right side here, again it's strong. It's 0.9 o. And again, a correlation of one or negative one as close as you can get to those values is as good as it gets. And that's why it's a highly significant correlation here that with the p value that you can see. So first, without yogurt in my diet, you can see they're all lined up on the y axis. So my range without it was somewhere around 4.45 to 4.8. And that's 17 measurements where I couldn't get it higher than 14.8 no matter what my best efforts were. And I tried a lot of different things over the the four year period to try to get it to to go up. But then what you can see too is that once I added yogurt in the six measurements since, even with the yogurt intake somewhere in the, two forty to two fifty range, and then higher amounts, around four fifty. So so literally about a pound of, plain full fat, yogurt every day. My red blood cells were never less than five. Now, why is that important? So red blood cell counts, higher red blood cell counts are found in youth, and they decline during aging. And red blood cells carry oxygen. So if you have less red blood cells, you're gonna have less hemoglobin, less hemoglobin to carry oxygen. Your your cells may be suboptimal in in being able to get oxygen then, and in that case, you know, you're you're gonna make energy inefficiently because you don't have oxygen which is, you know, it's more efficient, to to, go through beta oxidation. So, red blood cells in youth, in men, in the young men, it's about 4.8, and then they decline to about 3.9 for nine year olds and older. And for women, red blood cells decline from, about 4.3 to, values around also 3.9 and nine year olds older. So that my, you know, that I could get without yogurt values as high as 4.8 was okay. But for me, I wanna have red blood cells higher than five. I've had red blood cell counts higher than five in the past from, you know, about fifteen years ago. My my my data for red blood cells. So I wanted to get them back to where they where they should be. So what am I gonna do? So if I cut my yogurt intake from about four forty, grams per day to 300, by extrapolating based on the trend line, I should be able to If this correlation is causal, We don't know that. But, if I cut it to 300 grams a day by extrapolating on the trend line, I should be able to get a red blood cell count around five, thereby enabling me to keep my red blood cells as close to biological youth as possible. And if yogurt actually is involved in some causes, whatever it may be, if it's a saturated fat in yogurt that is indeed causing higher levels of glucose and creatinine for me, by reducing it by my intake by about a third, that may also reduce my my glucose and creatinine levels, which is what I want. So lower glucose and creatinine while keeping my red blood cell counts high. So again, what about CRP, MCV, and RDW, everything that went in the wrong direction on my last blood test? Again, I bombarded you guys enough with data for today. That'll be, another video. And that's all I've got. You can find me lots of places online. Have a great day.