In an earlier video, I showed evidence that LPS, also known as lipopolysaccharide or endotoxin, increases CD 38 expression. And I also showed data that CR calorie restriction can reduce LPS, which, introduces a hypothesis that, one of the reasons that CR may, result in increased NAD levels is because of its effect on reducing LPS. Now that's one intervention that can reduce LPS. Are there other interventions that can also reduce it with the goal of maximizing NAD production? So I'm gonna maximizing NAD production? So I'm gonna talk about that in a few slides. But before we get there, it's important to just do a quick review because it's gonna be, important to the discussion, in a slide or two. So first, levels of LPS increase during aging. And that's been shown on in the left in mice and in people. And again, if you want more of a review of this topic, I'll link the previous video in the right corner. Now the age related increase in LPS is important again, as I mentioned, because CD 38 gene expression and macrophages has increased up to sevenfold as shown here, in the presence of LPS. And also, when macrophages are exposed to LPS, they don't just increase gene expression within macrophages. They release c c d 38, eight, into the external environment. So that potentially would indicate an increase in circulating c d 38 to, negatively impact NAD levels, systemically. Not a good thing. So where is this LPS coming from? How did it get there? And then what can we do to reduce it? So I showed this data in that previous video too, but I'm gonna add a little bit more information, that'll lead us into the story for this video. So lipopolysaccharides found in the outer membrane of gram negative bacteria and that's what shown here. And so there's the outer membrane and then you can see, lipopolysaccharide as the metabolites sticking out from the outer membrane. Now what I didn't show and highlight in the last video is that, in the proportion of the LPS molecule, I've highlighted two phosphates that are found in its lipid a portion. And this is important because I'm gonna introduce a protein later on that takes those, phosphates off that dephosphorylates it which detoxifies LPS. So, that data is coming in a little bit. So when considering that LPS increases during aging and that LPS is found in the outer wall of gram negative bacteria, does that mean that the LPS that's in the blood, is that coming from an increased amount of blood bacteria? And in in part, there is evidence to support that hypothesis. So we're looking at here is the incidence of e coli, bacteremia, which means the presence of e coli bacteria in the blood as a function of age. So first, what we can see is that the incidence of having e coli found in the blood is very high for babies, zero to one years old, and then it dramatically decreases, you know, up till about fifteen to twenty four years. But then when comparing that age group with 25 to 49 year olds, we can see that 25 49 year olds have about a double incidence of having e coli in the blood. But even worse than that is that 74 year olds or older have about a 10 times higher incidence of having E. Coli bacteria in the blood compared to the twenty five to forty nine year old. So there's definitely an increase in LPS containing E. Coli in the blood during aging. So where did it come from? How's it how's it getting into the blood? Well, one possibility is that it's coming from the intestine. And intestinal levels of e coli increase during aging, which would make sense, based on the blood e coli data. So what we're looking at, here is e coli abundance in the intestine as a function of age. So in younger than 20 year olds, e coli levels range intestinal e coli levels range from about eight to 10% that then decrease, a little bit, to, until you get to about 40 to 49 years old where it's more tightly around 8%, seven ish to 8%. But then you can also see that the e coli levels then dramatically increase such that, 80 people who are over the age of eighty eighty have E. Coli levels that are 12 to 14% of the total, bacterial amount in the intestines. So a six around a 6% increase in E. Coli levels in the blood. Sorry, in the intestine. So, I didn't show some of this data in that I just wrote down here. But during aging, there's an obviously, which I showed, there's an increased intestinal amount of LPS containing bacteria, but there's also decreased barrier function. I didn't get into that. But the decreased barrier function would then, be an explanation why there would be an increase of LPS containing e coli in the blood. So is there a way to reduce intestinal e coli levels to improve gut barrier function and also to detoxify LPS. And remember, the end game here is, reducing LPS so that we can reduce CD 38 expression to maximize NAD and boost health health span and lifespan and all the good things that come with that. So, I'm gonna introduce a protein here and that's intestinal alkaline phosphatase. And that protein is found obviously in the intestine as its name says, and it's been shown to detoxify LPS. Now how it detoxifies LPS is partly encoded in its name. It's a phosphatase. So if you remember a couple of slides ago, I'd introduced that, LPS has, phosphate groups in its lipid a core that, this protein IAP defosporolates and removes them thereby reducing LPS's activity. So that's what we see here in this picture. So starting from the top of it, with the luminal microflora, that's the microbiome contained in in your stool. And some of the bacteria in that mic, microflora have LPS, and then you can see the phosphate groups in in yellow that are attached. And then the IAP that's in green dephosphorylates those, phosphate groups on LPS and removes them. And that's what you can see with the LPS with its free phosphate groups. Now that's important because on the left side, we see LPS intact. That's intact. And when it's intact, it binds to its receptor. In this case, intestinal epithelial cells, its receptor is called TLR, toll like receptor. And when LPS binds to the TLR receptor, actually in any cell, not just intestinal epithelial cells, it it's it signals a pro inflammatory cascade. Inflammation is bad. It's I don't have to explain it in this is this video. You know, everybody knows having too much inflammation is bad. It increases during aging. So in contrast, when IAP, intestinal alkaline phosphatase, defossorylates LPS, that detoxifies it. And LPS can no longer bind to TLR, its its TLR receptor, to stimulate that pro inflammatory cascade. So IAP is good for potentially reducing inflammation based on this, you know, this, data. So while that seems like IAP would be very important in this LPS story, however, intestinal levels of IAP IAP decreased during aging, and that's what's shown here in human data. So this is actually IAP in intestinal contents, as a function of age. That's what's plotted. And we can very clearly see that someone in their thirties with values around 0.4, are reduced to about half 0.2 to someone that's 70. So they're, you know, aging induces a decreased IAP activity. And that's got functional consequences. So in this case, this is data in mice, and this is a frailty index data, data, as a function of age. So they they looked at frailty in four, 12, and 21 old mice. So so what did they compare? So they compared frailty in wild type animals who have IAP, and then they knocked it out, which would basically simulate the aging condition where it's dramatically decreased. So it it didn't do anything in the four month old mice. This is essentially, you know, a tenth, you know, maximum mouse lifespan is about forty months that's not on CR, just a normal lifespan. So four divided by forty months is one tenth of of the lifespan, which in human years would be about a teenager, 12 year old. So, but there was no effect, you know, when comparing, having less IAP on frailty in young mice. However, in the 12 and 21 old mice, we can see that not having IAP, the mice were more frail, significantly more frail when compared with the animals that had, IAP at both ages. So not having IAP obviously will, induce frailty in the mice. But what about having more IAP? If this hypothesis of IAP having anything to do with health is true, we'd expect to see opposite effects if you add more of it in. So that's what they did. And again, this is the, again in mice. And what we can see is in animals that were treated with IAP, that were 18 old and 21 old, we can see that the animals treated with IAP. And this is wild type animals, not the knockout animals. So give the normal mice more IAP and the blue bar show that they were less frail at both 18 and twenty one twenty one months of age. So, functionally, IAP is important, but more important I I don't or or equally to some, important is lifespan. What effect did does IAP have on lifespan? So that's what we see here. Survival plotted against age. And again, this is mouse data. So they compared the normal lifespan with the black line versus IAP knockout mice, which do not have, intestinal alkaline phosphatase. And, they also compared supplementing the mice with IAP. And the mice that didn't have IAP live significantly shorter. You can see that with the red line. And in contrast, the animals that were supplement supplemented with IAP had both an increased average and maximum lifespan. So we could argue based on this data that IAP is important for both health and longevity. So with all that, to consider which interventions, increase IAP. So first, omega three fatty acids, have been shown to increase, intestinal levels of alkaline phosphatase. So what they did in this study was they, used transgenic animals that would have an in an increased omega three level in tissues, which then would reduce the omega six to omega three ratio. But they also did experiments directly supplementing the animals with fish oil. So the omega three in this case would refer to fish oil. So what happened when they had, higher levels of omega three in tissues and a lower omega six to omega three ratio? Well, it induced changes in the gut microbiome, and we can see that here. IAP IAP levels increased. E coli levels, which again contain LPS decreased. Correspondingly levels of intestinal LPS decreased. I didn't box it, but gut permeability also decreased. And the net effect of those changes were, decreased levels of LPS in the blood, which would be good, again, with the CD eight story because less LPS, potentially less CD 38, potentially more NAD, and all the good stuff that would come from that. Now they also did experiments, inhibiting IEP to to look at its contribution to, its ability to affect the gut microbiome composition and its ability to affect circulating levels of LPS and gut permeability and found that it was, you know, while omega three induced IEP, it was IEP that was was driving the changes in less e coli, less LPS, less gut gut permeability, and also less circulating LPS. Now, also just to play this forward on on this, picture a little bit more. Again, so with less circulating LPS that, there's less of it that binds to TLR four and then less of the intracellular, signaling cascade that activates, it pro inflammatory, gene expression or, you know, actually protein levels of TNF alpha, IL six, and IL one beta, which are pro inflammatory molecules. So, omega three and the IAP story would be good potentially not just for the for NAD, but also for reducing, systemic levels of inflammation. So So what about other interventions? Well, another intervention that increases IEP is potentially a high soluble fiber diet. So not all fiber is the same. Fiber is comprised of insoluble fiber, which is not fermented by gut bacteria and soluble fiber, which is fermented by gut bacteria into the short chain fatty acids here. Acetate, c two, two carbon fatty acid, propionate, c three, a three carbon fatty acid, and butyrate, c four, a four carbon fatty acid. And why those are, fatty acids, those short chain fatty acids are important is because when colonic epithelial cells are exposed to short chain fatty acids, in this case, they also besides using c two, c three, c four, they also did c five and c six or five and six carbon fatty acids. So, when adding a short chain fatty acids and looking at, IAP gene expression, compared to actin, a a loading control, they found that, highest levels of IAP were induced by butyrate c four. So when considering that butyrate is increased by a high fiber diet, one could posit that eating a high fiber diet would also increase IAP levels in the intestine. Now those on a on a ketogenic, diet could also make a similar argument because, with, high fat ketogenic diet, you're gonna have an increase in, fatty acid oxidation and that fat increase in fatty acid oxidation should lead to an increase in acetate. Acetate is a c two, short chain fatty acid as I mentioned here, but then acetate is also it can it can also be combined into butyrate. So, but I look for more direct evidence for a ketogenic diet on increasing short chain fatty acid levels, and I didn't find any RCTs on that. So that's purely a hypothesis. Whereas a high soluble fiber diet has been, well published, well known. It's well known to increase, you know, intestinal levels of short chain fatty acids. Now last, vitamin k has been shown to increase intestinal levels of, alkaline phosphatase. So, what we're looking at here is both k one and k two were, given to rats. And then their levels of intestinal phosphatase activity, IAP, were compared against controls or or control fed animals. So in the duodenum, we can see that k one resulted in increased IAP activity relative to control, but k two did not. However, in the jejunum, both vitamin k one and vitamin k two increased IEP activity when when compared to, animals that were not supplemented with, either of the vitamin k, isoforms. So it's also important to note that the rats were fed in this study, six hundred milligrams of vitamin k one or k two per kilogram of food, and that the animals also ate 15 to 16 grams of food per day. So when you crunch the numbers there and consider that the, the body size conversion for rats to humans is divide by six, the equivalent human dose to get this boost in IAP activity would be at about fifteen hundred micrograms of vitamin k one, per day, just as an example. And I didn't include this in my k one video. I'll link to the k one video for those that are interested in the right corner here. But one reason why I shoot for the fifteen hundred micrograms of k one per day, which is dramatically higher than the adequate intake of about a hundred or so micrograms per day is in part because of this data. So just as a quick summary, if we increase IAP with diet, one would expect less LPS. And when considering the association between LPS and CD 38, that potentially would result in more NAD. Now the last half of this, of of this hypothesis has not been tested. I look for evidence, published evidence for IEP and NAD levels and it hasn't been tested yet. But based on everything I've shown you so far, it it seems like a pretty low risk approach to change it with diet with the potential, high benefit of improving NAD levels. And that's all I've got. You can find me lots of places online. Have a great day.