What's up everybody? Today, I'm gonna talk about, quantifying phenotypic age. I posted a video earlier on phenotypic age, which is also known as, biological age. It's a measure of disease risk and risk of death for all causes. So, let's have a look at my data. So, a couple days ago, I I got the, standard blood chemistry screen screen also known as the CBC, and, c reactive protein measured, and that's basically all you need, to calculate your biological age. So, what we can see is I had, high levels of albumin which are found in biological youth. So that's good news. Higher than expected creatinine, bad news. Higher than expected glucose, also bad news. The trend continues higher than average c reactive protein. Stellar levels of, lymphocyte percentage, pretty good, mean, red blood cell volume and red cell distribution with, biological youth values for alkaline phosphatase and higher than average, my average values for white blood cells. My average is about four and a half, somewhere in that range. So with a collection of those variables results in a phenotypic age of about 34 years, which isn't bad considering that my chronological age is 47. So I'm about thirteen years younger than my chronological age. So one blood test is nice, but I've also, as as this, the slide shows, I've also measured, my phenotypic age, two other times during the year. So we can get a more complete picture of my, aging processes, with more data. So compared to my March, measurement, my phenotypic age was significantly younger, about two two and a third years younger than in June. And I also met measured in February, which was a little bit worse, than the March measurement, but also better than the June measurement at thirty two point seven five years. So I just wanna highlight that, you know, one blood test is nice, but from my experience, and I've I've have about 25 blood test measurements over the past five years. Six times a year is important for seeing your own trends in the data. And what I mean by that is every February in that range, January, February, mid February, I, get some kind of respiratory infection. Up until this year, it was likely influenza. I thought I had coronavirus at exactly pretty close to exactly this time in February. The antibody test, though came up negative, so I didn't have it. So, I had a cough and no fever, but, nonetheless, that increased my white blood cells to higher than, average values for me as I mentioned earlier. Around 4.5 is is, my average for white blood cells, thereby resulting in in what I thought was a higher than expected phenotypic age. Now once I recovered from that a month later, as expected, the white blood cells came down, and, my blood test variables improved enough to reduce my phenotypic age by a little more than a year. Now in going to the June measurement, I didn't have a respiratory infection, but potentially worse. And I say that with all respect to people who do have coronavirus. But for me every year in June and July, I'm afflicted with hay fever, and this is, you know, brought on by bouts of sneezing and, stuffy nose, you know, red itchy eyes. It's awful. And again, I don't wanna diminish coronavirus people who have that. This I'll I'll survive, hay fever. But in terms of my biological age, it doesn't it clearly doesn't positively impact it. And just to highlight, my c reactive protein, which was point five three milligrams per liter in this measurement in June, it's usually about half that in measurements that are not in June. And we'll see that data, in a couple more slides. So, So, if I only measured in, you know, say March, I would miss the June trends. And because I'm measuring every June or almost every June, I should be able to come up with, better strategies whether it's dietary or other strategies to improve my, phenotypic age going forward because I'm tracking it. Okay. So, based on these three blood tests so far in 2020, my average phenotypic age is 32.78 years, which again is fourteen plus years younger than my chronological age. Not bad. What about 2019 data? So, although I said I have 25 blood tests, results for the past over the past five years, I've only included CRP since about, one once in 2018 and twice in 2019. All my blood test measurements going forward are gonna include c r c reactive protein, so I should be able to measure, you know, phenotypic age in every blood test going forward. So in September and late October of last year, I measured twice. In September, my phenotypic age was, about 35, and then I improved that in October to about 31.3. Now how how that's a big drop. How did I do it? Well, I started cutting my calories up until September. I was not calorie restricted at all. My average calorie intake was somewhere in the 27 to twenty hundred range. I track my calories every day with a food scale, so that's pretty close to accurate. So starting in September, I then started cutting my calories and then, now I cut them by about two to 300 a day. I think my average is somewhere around twenty five fifty. And that reduction was sing was able to, reduce my phenotypic age significantly. Now, you know, this is 2019 versus 2020 in the previous slide, but, I I don't have any data yet for the second half of this year, whereas I didn't have any data for the first half of last year. So you could make the argument that these these data, these two data points in addition to my 2020 data are a full year of quantifying phenotypic or biological age. And if if you compare them, they're pretty similar. The average my average phenotypic age in 2019 was, 33 point four four years, whereas this year so far, it's thirty two point seven eight. So if you, you know, take the average of those values is around thirty three years. Still fourteen years younger than my chronological age. So what about 2018? So I mentioned that I I did have measurement, did have CRP measured in 2018. And, as I mentioned, hay fever, is is terrible for me, and that's reflected, you know, biochemically, you can see my c reactive protein at 0.67, which again is about double my, average value that does not include June measurements. So six non June measurements versus two June measurements. The June measurements, I have double CRP than I do the rest of the times during the year. Now the importance of that is further illustrated by, you know, the hay fever for me is pretty bad in June and, early July, and then it starts to fade, which is ridiculous because it seems like it takes me two months to adapt to, you know, the grass and pollen in the air, which is incredibly slow for, you know, an immune, to build immune tolerance. Nonetheless, that's two months out of every year that I have approximately double the, c reactive protein levels that I have for the rest of the year. Now, over sixty years, that's one in six years or 10 in sixty years that I would have double the normal the my normal inflammation. So for 10 of the next sixty years, just based on my June and July, CRP data, even though I didn't show July data. I haven't measured that yet. But I'm assuming that my July CRP data is is, elevated too based on my symptoms. That's that's ten years out of 60, which is a significant amount of time. So, obviously, I'm, you know, interested in doing whatever I can do to reduce my c reactive protein during my periods of hay fever, so that I can live, you know, with lower levels of inflammation during that period potentially further enhancing my, you know, my measures of health including, phenotypic age. So two years ago, my phenotypic age based on my measurements, my bat my variables, blood test, variables is 34 half. Now if you remember, 2019, it was less than that. 33.4 and 32.8. So one could make the argument that I've actually reduced my biological age by about a year and a half going from twenty eighteen. The other interesting measure measurement is that comparing June 2018 versus June 2020. So two full years have passed, but yet I've I've been able to reduce my phenotypic age by half a year, although two years of chronological age have passed. So I'd say that I'm on the right track in terms of improving my year over year or year, you know, biannual June measurements. And one component of that is reduced c react protein. Just as a last, aside here, I didn't go over it in the earlier slides, but, they're all all is not perfect here and there is room definite room for improvement. As you can see, my glucose levels here and in my, measurement earlier this week, were at 99 milligrams per deciliter. And, since 2018, I have, you know, a bunch of measurements that are in the nineties and that's going in the wrong direction. I have a video showing, data that, values of blood glucose between, eighty and ninety four milligrams per deciliter are associated with reduced all cause mortality risk and values closer to 80 are found in biological youth and they increase during aging. So my glucose levels are going in the wrong direction. Similarly, my creatinine levels have been consistently, going towards one or higher which translates into a reduction in kidney function, over the past two years or so. So, I'm not gonna go into it in this video, but in upcoming videos, I'm gonna look at associations between my diet with my creatinine and glucose levels, and then make interventions to potentially reduce my glucose levels and and creatinine levels, which should further reduce my phenotypic age. So stay tuned for that. For more info, you can visit my website and if you've got questions or comments, here are all the places that you can find me online. That's all I've got. Have a great day.