In an earlier video, I showed data that there's an increased incidence of e coli bloodstream infections during aging. Well, e coli isn't the only microbe that increases during aging. Other microbes increase in the blood during aging too. One of these is Candida. So, during aging, there's an eleven to twelve fold increased incidence of Candida bloodstream infections during aging. So let's have a look at the data. So here we see the number of cases of Candida bloodstream infections, by year. So in 2000, in 2001, 2002, all the way through, 2005. And the number of Candida cases broken down by age group. So first, in looking at the youngest age group, 18 to 44 years, we can see that there's a one point four to two point three, cases of candida bloodstream infections in the youngest age group. Now that increases during aging. So for the forty five to sixty four, year age group, we can see that there are four point five to six point eight cases of Candida bloodstream infections with Candida per 100,000 population, and that's a three fold increase, which only increases further into the 80, sixty five to eighty four year age group, where we can see a, range of twelve point five to eighteen point six cases of bloodstream infections with Candida fungi per 100,000 population, which is a eight to nine fold increase relative to the youngest age group. And then in looking at the oldest age group, older than 85 years, we can see that there are seventeen point three to twenty five cases per 100,000 population of Candida bloodstream infections, for that age group, which is an 11 to twelve fold increase relative to the youngest group. So what's the significance of this age related increase, in increased incidence for candida fungi in the blood? Well, microbes in the blood, potentially, microbes in the brain. And in this case, candida albicans, a species of candida, is found in various brain regions in an Alzheimer's disease patient. So in looking at, sections of different regions of the brain, in this case, the, external frontal cortex, the cerebellar hippocampus, and the entorhinal, cortex slash hippocampus, and I've highlighted those regions of of the brain there. We can see that there are candida albicans fungi in the brain. So blue stains DAPI, which, recognizes nuclei. Red is, an antibody that recognizes human neurofilament. And wherever you see green are are Candida albicans. These, the green are are antibodies that recognize and bind to, candida albicans. And again, these are in brain sections. So, just to highlight, you can see the green there as I've highlighted by the, yellow yellow stars. And then in the, cerebellar hippocampus, there are lots of green there, and then even more green in the third slice. So, candida albicans is found in the brain of Alzheimer's disease or at least one Alzheimer's disease patient. So data for one is good, but more data is generally better. So here we're looking at brain sections of the, entorhinal con cortex for 10 different Alzheimer's disease patients. So in this case, again, blue stains, DAPI, nuclei. Red is an antibody that recognizes alpha tubulin. And green are antibodies that recognize, Candida albicans. So wherever you see green, there is fungi. Whenever you see wherever you see yellow, there's also fungi because red plus green equals yellow. So green or yellow, we've got fungi in the brain. So just to highlight in each of these patients, because each section, here is data for different Alzheimer's disease patient. So we've got, candida there, there, and just to go through them all. So you can see the green or yellow in each of these, Alzheimer's disease patients, fungi in the brain. Now it isn't just candida albicans that's been found in the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients. Other candida species have been found in the brain too. In this case, candida glabrata. So, again, green recognizes, is an antibody that recognizes candida glabrata. So wherever you see green or red, which in this case is stained for alpha tubulin, sorry. Yellow. Green plus red equals yellow. So wherever you see green or yellow, we've got, candida glabrata in the brain. So I've highlighted that each of these subjects, Alzheimer's disease patients, have, either green or yellow indicating they've got candida species, in this case, glabrata in the brain. So what about the control subjects? Do they have, candida in the brain? So we're looking at, sections of the entorhinal cortex. And, again, green is the antibody that will recognize candida glabrata. So wherever there would be green or yellow, because red plus green equals yellow, we would have, candida in the brain. And as you can see from each of the 10 control subjects, data for 10 control subjects, for brain sections here, there's no green and there's no yellow. So, for whatever reason, candida is in the brain of Alzheimer's disease patients, and I'd argue that based on the age related increase for can candida in the blood, that may be one potential explanation. So that's not the only study that's found fungi in the in the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients, and I've, listed just two papers here in case anyone's interested in checking that out. So rapamycin to the rescue, and why would that be? So here we're looking at in vitro, data for the ability of rapamycin to kill fungi. Rap rapamycin's a well known antifungal, but let's have a look at some of that data. So on the first plate to the left, that's a plate that does not have rapamycin. So, in only focusing on the wild type, this is, normal Candida albicans. The other the other, parts of this plate are are have, various Candida albicans mutants. I'm not gonna get into that data. I'm more concerned with the effect of rapamycin on, the normal, the full genotype normal wild type Candida albicans. So what's the effect of rap rapamycin on Candida albicans? Well, we can see that in the next box here. So when you add rapamycin to that dish that had a Candida in the right corner, in the presence of rapamycin, there is no, candida albicans growth. Completely eliminates it. So in vitro data is nice in cells, but what about in animals? So here in this study, the, they gave, injections of candida albicans to mice. So it's in the blood when you inject it. And, without rapamycin, we can see the dose of zero, survival zero. So no rapamycin IV injection of candida albicans kills all the mice. So what happens with increasing doses of rapamycin? Well, survival increases, and it increases to the point where the twenty milligrams per kilogram dose of rapamycin for mice that are, IV injected with candida albicans, there's a hundred percent survival. So rapamycin protects against, candida in the blood. And when considering the in vitro data in vitro data where it, completely eliminates growth of candida albicans, one could argue that it improves survival by basically eradicating the candida that was IV injected. So from this, we can conclude that rapamycin is a potent antifungal against candida albicans. Now if you remember the earlier slides I showed not just candida albicans fungi in the brain, but candida glabrata, a different species of candida that was also found in the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients. How does rapamycin do against that? So here we're looking at that data. So first, this is, candida glabrata growth in the presence or absence of rapamycin. So first, no rapamycin. You can see rapamycin on the x axis in micrograms per mil. So when there are zero rapamycin added, there is full growth of candida glabrata. But as the rapamycin concentration, increases, in this case from five micrograms per mil to ten micrograms per mil, Candida glabrata growth is reduced, maximally reduced. In this case, there's a four to six fold reduction for Candida glabrata as rapamycin levels are increased. So when considering all of these data, one would hope that there are randomized controlled trials, RCTs, that use rapamycin to prevent or slow Alzheimer's disease progression. And as far as I could see and I looked, there were no studies that have done that yet. Now, there is one early phase RCT, that's using rapamycin treatment in Alzheimer's disease patients. But this, study just started recruiting, a couple months ago, June 2020. So hope let's hope for positive data, for that going forward. Alright. That's all I've got for now. You can find me lots of places on online. Have a great day.