The, role of the gut microbiome and its metabolic products on the maintenance of muscle mass, muscle composition, essentially how much, fat is within muscle, which is not good for muscle health, and on physical function in older adults. So, this is a picture from a review in 2016 that essentially shows that the gut microbiome has been, implicated in the health and functioning of almost every tissue or organ in the body. So, starting from the brain, it's been linked with autism, stress, and stroke. With the lung, in terms of allergic asthma, it's been linked with the liver, not, with nonalcoholic, fatty liver disease. It's been linked with the skin, atopic dermatitis. It's been linked with fat, adipose tissue, in terms of inflammation and obesity. And in terms of the whole body, it's been, linked with, type two diabetes, lupus, malnourishment, and atherosclerosis. Notably absent from this review as recently as four years ago is muscle. So that's what obviously, that's what I'm gonna talk about today. So, so today I'm gonna go over, so we reviewed the existing literature in 2018, our group, what was known at that time. So I'm gonna talk about that, a lot of that data. And then, I updated the literature, based on you know, I did a lit review. There were about nine studies that came out last year. It was a big year for, the role of the gut microbiome on muscle last year. So I updated that, in a in a review from last year. And then what are my contributions to the gut muscle axis? So I'm gonna talk about a couple studies that, our group published, in the last six months. So, first, let's even see if there's enough data to define a gut muscle axis. So what we're looking at here is, SPF. These are specific pathogen free mice. These are mice that have a microbiome, a defined microbiome, in comparison with germ free mice, mice that don't have a microbiome. They're grown in a bubble. And what I highlighted is that muscle in germ free mice is, lower. It's, there is less muscle mass in germ free mice compared to the microbiome containing mice. Now, it's important to also note that body weight was not different when comparing these two groups of mice, because if if body weight was down and muscle was down and liver weight was down, is it really a an effect of the microbiome on muscle or is it just an overall effect of the, smaller body, smaller animal? So, they could be the the group this group here, compared the muscle mass to body weight ratio and it was still lower in the germ free mice, which suggests a role for the gut microbiome on main and soft muscle mass. So these data were confirmed in a study last year. And again, what we're looking at is the muscle weight to body weight ratio. And, they looked at, various lower, leg muscles, soleus, gastrocnemius, tibialis anterior TA, quadriceps. And they compared pathogen free mice, again, these are mice that have microbiome, with germ free mice. So let's start there. So for the gastrocnemius, tibialis anterior, and the quadriceps, the germ free mice had lower muscle mass, normalized body weight when compared with the microbiome containing mice. So what happens with if you colonize germ free mice with fecal samples from aged matched microbiome containing mice, and what happens to muscle mass? So, starting with the gastrocnemius, we see a trend for an increase, but, the muscle mass to body weight ratio was increased for animals that, germ free mice that received the fecal transplant from microbiome containing mice and also for the quadriceps. It was increased. So, collectively, these data suggest that there are factors within the microbiome that promote muscle mass. So the micro microbiome isn't just comprised of bacteria. It's also comprised of viruses, fungi, archaea, etcetera. So, evidence that it's bacteria that may be involved in mechanisms related to muscle mass comes from antibiotic, studies of antibiotic treatment in mice. And in looking at, these data here, starting from control animals and the antibiotic treated animals, we can see that the antibiotic treated animals have a lower, muscle mass to body weight ratio for two of the biggest muscles in the lower leg, gastrocnemius and quadriceps. So, when they in further support that gut bacteria play some role on the maintenance of muscle mass, when they remove the antibiotic treatment and then expose those mice to bedding and feces from mice that had, had not been treated with antibiotics. This allows the microbiome to recede in antibiotic treated mice. So what happened to muscle mass? And what we can see is that it increased in both muscles. So, these data have been confirmed in other studies, at least part of it in terms of antibiotic treatment where antibiotic treatment results in a lower muscle mass to body weight ratio in a couple other studies. So collectively, these five studies demonstrate that, gut bacteria may be involved in, mechanisms related to the maintenance of muscle mass. So that doesn't say anything about which gut bacterial species may be involved in mechanisms related to muscle mass. So what about those? So, in this study from last year, the, knee knees group compared, young animals and then what they considered old even though their definition of old were 10 c 57 black six mice, which is not at all old. Average lifespan is thirty months. Nonetheless, they can call them old. It's not old. But so they fed, these 10 old mice, black bars, either lactobacillus or the fitobacterium longum. And then looked at the muscle weight to body weight ratio for the quadriceps, gastrocnemius, and tibialis muscles in the lower leg. And hashtags were where they saw significant differences. So lactobacillus and bifidobacterium increased muscle mass compared to untreated, mice, and bifidobacterium increased tibialis muscle mass when compared with untreated mice. So, separately, in a leukemia mouse model, from, a longer a longer time, you know, eight years ago. So they, gave, so muscle mass is reduced in in this leukemia mouse model. And when they supplemented the mice with a various lactobacillus species, muscle mass was increased. So let's have a look at that data. So this is the tibialis, muscle mass, lower leg muscle, and just weight. They didn't look at, the body weight, the muscle muscle mass to body ratio. So first, starting with the controls, tibialis weight controls plus the lack of bacillus, bacteria, no effect on muscle mass in the controls. Leukemia mouse model had a small but significantly different, significantly different, or reduced muscle mass compared to, control mice. And then when they fed the leukemia mouse model, the probiotic species, the lactobacillus species, there was a small but significant increase, in muscle mass. So while these data suggest the role for the gut microbiome, gut bacteria, and individual gut back bacterial species on muscle mass, it doesn't say how that they could do that. So let's take a look at how this could possibly happen. So, metabolites produced by gut bacteria can affect muscle mass. And one group of metabolites that can do that are the short chain fatty acids, which are produced by the bacterial ferment fermentation of diet dietary fiber, which have been shown to increase, muscle mass. So, that's what's shown here. So, in a study from last year, they looked at the gastrocnemius muscle weight divided by body weight in germ free mice and then germ free mice that were fed short chain fatty acids. So it's important to note germ free mice don't have any short chain fatty acids or in their feces because they don't have a microbiome to produce them. They can't degrade dietary fiber to prove short chain fatty acids. So when you give germ free mice short chain fatty acids, their gastrocnemius, their muscle mass divided by their body weight is increased. And just to highlight, these are the short chain fatty acids that they gave them were, acetate, propionate, and butyrate. These are two carbon, three carbon, and four carbon fatty acids, hence the name short chain fatty acids. So going into old mice, in this study, they gave, butyrate only one of these short chain fatty acids starting at 16 of age until 26 of age. 26 of age is pretty old in a mouse. Like I said earlier, the average lifespan in c 56, black six mice is 30. So six 26 is relatively old. So first, we can see that there is an age related decrease in muscle mass of the gastrocnemius soleus tibialis anterior quadriceps. Again, lower leg muscles in the mouse. So white bar to black bar, it's decreased in each of these muscles indicated by the stars. So what happens when they fed butyrate? So young mice fed butyrate compared with unsupplemented young mice, no effect. No effect in any of the muscles for the young mice. But when they fed the, older mice starting at 16 of age or 10, butyrate, when they fed them butyrate, each of these muscles, the muscle mass to body ratio was increased. So hashtag, hashtag, hashtag, hashtag, which again supports a role for the short chain fatty acids on the maintenance of muscle mass both in young and old animals. Now whereas there are metabolites that positively affect muscle or can positively affect muscle in animal models, conversely, there are also gut bacteria derived metabolites that can negatively affect muscle. Now one of these is called endoxosulfate. Endoxosulfate is found in the blood from microbiome containing mice, but not it's not found in germ free mice, thereby identifying it as a gut bacteria derived metabolite. So in vitro, indoxysulfate negatively affects muscle development. Muscle development proceeds from satellite cells, which differentiate into myoblast, which under, undergo further differentiation and proliferation into myotubes, which then fuse undergo several several cycles of fusion to form mature muscle. Endoxisulfate negatively affects each of these, components. So first, in the presence of endoxisulfate when controlled with untreated myoblast, there is less myoblast proliferation in the presence of endoxisulfate. So, so then, going forward, when myotubes are exposed to, endoxisulfate, they, they shrink, they atrophy, and, there are also less mild tubes in the presence of indoxisulfate. So at least two of these components of the road from satellite cells to mature muscle are negatively impacted by indoxisulfate. So what about the impact of indoxisulfate on mature muscle? So, endoxysulfate is a uremic metabolite, meaning that its levels are elevated in the presence of kidney disease. So to simulate that condition, the authors of this study removed the kidney. So, these are animals that have only one kidney, and then they, injected in in doxyzole sulfate, daily for twelve weeks and then looked at various outcomes. And what we can see is that in in doxyzole sulfate treated mice, there was a reduction in muscle mass for the tibialis anterior, for the soleus, and the gastrocnemius. Each of the muscles had decreased muscle mass. But I should also point out that body weight was also decreased as a result of the indoxisulfate, injections. So is this an effect on muscle mass or is this a bigger, you know, effect on body size? That's not known and studies haven't replicated the in vivo effects. But hopefully at some point in the future, I can go after studies, related to that. So, in addition to endoxysulfate, another, uremic metabolite, this time known as per percresol sulfate, can negative affect skeletal muscle. And, again, skeletal muscle is not found in conventional conventionally raised microbiome containing mice or it is found in conventionally, raised microbiome containing mice. It's not found in germ free mice, thereby identifying it as a gut microbiome derived metabolite. So, exposure to paracresol sulfate negatively affects muscle composition, in this case, indicated by tissue lipid content. So, mice that were injected with, paracresol sulfate, once a day or twice a day, something like once or twice, I can't remember, but for a month, had increased levels of lipids within muscle. And it's important to note that, they also had a mouse model of chronic kidney disease, which is a situation where there's also an increase in muscle gastrocnemius muscle tissue lipid content. And just by itself, pericrysal sulfate was almost able to replicate the adverse effects on muscle composition compared to the more extreme case chronic kidney disease. So just as a quick intro, why is muscle composition important? Well, in older adults, poor muscle composition, in this case indicated by increased lipids within and or between muscle skeletal muscle cells, it's associated with insulin resistance, reduced mobility and physical function, frailty, and an increased all cause mortality risk. So collectively, all the data that I've shown so far suggests a support role for gut microbiome derived metabolites on muscle mass and composition. So what about the role of the gut microbiome on muscle function? So, physical function is reduced, in both, germ free and in antibiotic treated mice. So first, in germ free mice compared with, microbiome containing mice, there's decreased gut grip strength. And then germ free mice compared with, microbiome containing mice have a reduced swimming endurance, capacity. That's what's shown here in both of these, these two studies. And then when you treat, microbiome containing mice with antibiotics, an intervention that reduces gut bacterial content, we can see that half of the colony, or half of the cohort, that was treated with antibiotics, is is exhausted at about a 100 where the non antibiotic treated mice exhausted, you know, much later, at about a 150 minutes. So antibiotic treatment negatively affects endurance treadmill endurance capacity. So, again, this suggests a role for the microbiome on physical function, but it doesn't tell us about gut bacteria species that can affect muscle strength or endurance capacity. So which could those be? So, similar to the, study that I mentioned earlier where they call 10 old mice old, which isn't, again, they, they're they fed lactobacillus case a or bifidobacterium long one, and they also start increases in grip strength compared with unsupplemented mice. So we see the lactobacillus and bifidobacteria had higher grip strength compared with unsupplemented controls. And then, swimming endurance capacity in the germ free mice, was reduced compared to, mice that have microbiome. But then, feeding germ free mice, Bacteroides fragilis, increased their swimming endurance capacity. In another study, so when looking at, four groups, four separate groups of germ free mice presupplementation with various, bacteria. And then after supplementation with various bacteria, Eubacterium rectale, shown here, and Clostridium cochoidis, shown here, had higher swimming endurance capacity when compared with germ free mice that were not supplemented with bacteria. And then in the study another study published last year, they, scavenged, valenella atypical, into, mice that actually had a microbiome. So it increased the amount of valinella valinella bacteria that were in the mice, and they saw an increase in treadmill endurance capacity. So, similar to what I showed earlier, while it's adjustable for individual gut bacteria species on physical function, it doesn't say anything about how these gut bacteria can affect, function. So what about bacterial factors that can affect physical function? So once again, the short chain fatty acids are involved. So whereas they improve muscle mass, they also improve muscle strength. So we see that here. Germ free mice. Germ free mice treated with short chain fatty acids have a higher grip strength when compared with germ free mice. And then interestingly, so it's important to note that the germ free mice, like, a short chain fatty acids, these were a combination of acetate, propionate, and butyrate, which may be important because when fiber is fermented, it isn't fermented into only butyrate. It's fermented into, you know, proportions of each of these short chain fatty acids. Now why that's important is because when aged mice were fed butyrate, for ten months, there was no difference in grip strength. So here we have the control diet, young versus old. There's an age related decrease in grip strength. And then young versus old that were treated or or supplemented with butyrate for ten months. Again, there's that age related decrease in grip strength that was not, attenuated by, butyrate supplementation. So it may be that, feeding short chain fatty acids or feeding fiber, it may be important to have all of the combinations of these short chains rather than individually like butyrate in this case. So, in other studies, acetate, the other short chain fatty acids, acetate and propionate improve treadmill endurance capacity. So here, as I mentioned, antibiotic treated mice in green run a a significantly shorter, distance on the treadmill compared with untreated, control mice. So when you feed antibiotic treated mice, the the short chain fatty acid acetate is shown here. They have better treadmill endurance capacity. And then, if, intra rectal infusion of propionate, which is where it would be produced when it's fermented by, dietary fiber. So propionate in the colon resulted in increased treadmill time in mice, which is shown here versus, injection with PBS. So collectively, these data support a role for the gut microbiome, individual bacterial species, and bacterial metabolites on the maintenance of muscle mass and physical function, but in mice. So what about in humans? So there isn't a lot of data in humans, and I'm just gonna kinda highlight a couple key points, in the interest of time. So first, elite athletes have a different microbiome and higher fecal short chain fatty acids when compared with, normal weight and obese controls. So what we see here is, unweighted, UniFrac. So that's essentially a measure of microbiome community structure. And what we can see is that the athletes in the black dots, cluster separately. I mean, it's pretty clear they cluster separately from, people who had a BMI less than twenty five and higher than, thirty as as shown here. And then as you would ex well, as you would expect based on the animal data, the athletes have higher levels of fecal short chain fatty acids as shown here. So acetate, propionate, and butyrate, gray bars, higher when compared with the, less than 25 and higher than 30, BMI controls. So athlete athlete athlete higher than the green, controls. So what about in older adults? So the first study in this field is fifteen years ago. Van Tongeren, his group, looked in a small study, looked at differences for various, gut bacteria. When comparing, less frail older adults, these were about 88 years old, less frail older adults with more frail older adults. And what they found was, were differences for four main groups, bacteroides prevotella. Prevotella can produce short chain fatty acid, propionate. Fecalibacterium prausnitzii, and lack lactobacillus, enterococcus. These three groups of bacteria were higher in the less frail older adults when compared with the more frail older adults. And just to highlight, fecalibacterium are known butyrate producers. Again, Prevotella and nopropionate producers. And then if you remember in some of the earlier slides, lactobacillus, species were involved in mechanisms related to muscle mass and and, muscle function. So, I'd argue these bacteria may be involved also in mechanisms related to at least frailty in older adults. Now what I didn't talk about yet were, enterobacteria, and their importance is illustrated, as they were higher in the more frail group and lower in less frail group. And these, data have actually been, shown in other studies where enterobacteria are higher and more frail. I got it. I left an extra n in there. Sorry about that. Enterobacteria higher and more frail when compared with less frail older adults. And they'll pop up again in a in a few slides. So it's important to mention that frailty was measured in these studies with a questionnaire that included questions about mobility and physical fitness, but it wasn't specific for, physical function or muscle mass. So are there studies that more specifically address the gut muscle access in older adults? So that's where, my contribution starts to, come into this story. I didn't actually have interest in the gut microbiome at all in terms of muscle. It kind of evolved out of my my, findings, in a in a few studies, 2013, 2014, and 2015. So what we did is we used a serum metabolomic approach. So looking at about three to 400 different metabolites in blood and how they associated with muscle mass, muscle composition, and physical function in older adults. Actually, in both young and older adults. And, interestingly, I've listed the, these metabolites here, which are either exclusively derived from gut bacteria or are products of gut bacteria, human cometabolism. And these metabolites were associated with, muscle in in both young and older adults. And just to highlight, real quickly, if you remember, indoxysulfate and pericrysisulfate were negatively associated with muscle in animal models. Similarly, they were also negatively associated with, muscle related outcomes in older adults. So with these data and other published data, I got a few grants published. And with that in mind, started to investigate this question. So, my hypothesis is that gut bacteria are associated with and causively involved the mechanisms related to the maintenance of, whole body lean mass and physical function in in older adults. And we published this these data last year, and it was a relatively small study. So, two different groups of older adults, that we defined as high functioning HF and low functioning LF. And our main inclusion criteria was the short physical performance battery, SPBB, which includes a few, measures physical function. So we expected to have two groups that were different in terms of, physical function. And in addition, that were potentially different in terms of body composition, and that's what we ended up with. So just real quick, these two groups, high functioning and low functioning, were not different in terms of percent percentage, female, age, and BMI when comparing the two groups. The high functioning group had a more favorable body composition including, 5% higher whole body lean mass percentage and a sig also 5% lower fat mass percentage, but no difference in bone mineral content, BMC. And as expected, there was better fit better physical function in the high functioning group by the defined by the SPBB and each of its components. They, these, high functioning older adults were able to, complete a 400 meter, walk faster than the low functioning group. And the high functioning group also had better muscle strength as indicated by the leg press one repetition maximum. So the obvious question is is gut microbiome composition different when comparing these two groups? So what we're looking at here is average family level relative abundance when comparing to low functioning group with high functioning group the high functioning group. And what we can see is that the high functioning group has more prevotelaceae, when compared with the low functioning group. Now conversely, the high functioning group has less enterobacteria, whereas the low functioning group has more about threefold more. So, if you remember earlier in the Vanatongren, study, they actually saw similar findings where more enterobacteria were associated with frailty and, more prevotella were found in less frail older adults. We kinda see a similar pattern here in our, not not our our cohort wasn't frail. So these data are interesting, but are they reproducible? And so if I would go and get my body composition, you know, my lean mass, my fat mass by DEXA or CT or some other means measured and my physical function also measured, you know, today, and then didn't change my diet or my fitness approach or my supplements or whatever, sleep, all the factors, and then remeasured a month from now, we'd expect that those data would be pretty similar. But in terms of gut microbiome studies, that it isn't really it it isn't it isn't so well studied for people to look at for groups to look at, you know, are your findings reproducible? Do you see similar effects, longitudinally? So we wanted to investigate that. So, one month after the baseline visit, we had our our subjects come back and then perform the measures of, you know, physical function and body composition, and we also looked at their gut microbiome composition. And if we would see changes in the gut microbiome at the baseline visit that were similarly represented at the follow-up visit, this may add additional strength to our findings. So once again, we saw that prevotella were higher in the high function group. See that here. And, it looks like the enterobacteria would be higher in the less functioning group lower functioning group, but those data weren't statistically significant. And if you remember that we had a total study sample size of 29 subjects, it's possible we weren't, powered to see this as a significant difference. And then I haven't shown all the data, you know, for differences in bacteria, but these were the main findings. But we also saw differences in genus love of prevotella and varicella and the bacterial species varicella intestine hominis. These bacteria significantly different, at both study visits. So, based on that, I'd argue that those bacteria may be involved in mechanisms to related to the maintenance of muscle mass and physical function in older adults. So those are associations though. How can we test causation? So one way that people have done that is by fecal transfer into germ free mice. So we took six fecal samples from the high functioning group and six from the low functioning group, transplanted them into young germ free mice, animals that don't have microbiome, waited a month, and then looked to see if we had high functioning and low functioning mice, respectively, that correspond with their respective donors. So the first step is, do we was do we see microbiome differences when comparing the human fecal donors and their colonized mice? And then do we even see differences in body composition or physical function in the human colonized mice? So first, I'm looking at, microbiome differences between the 12 human fecal donors, the six high functioning and six low functioning human fecal donors, and their microbiome containing mice. These are bacterial difference differences at each taxonomic level. So file a class order, family, genus, species, and then I'm not gonna go over all of them. But I'd predict that the strongest data for a role for the gut microbiome on the maintenance of body composition, including lean mass and fat mass and physical function, would be, present for the findings that we saw in our larger human group, n equals 29. Our smaller human group, n equals 12, the human fecal donors. And then if those data were also significantly different when comparing the human microbiome containing mice. So for that, we see similar differences for each of those three, groups for prevotellaceae, barnicella, prevotel, and varnish yellow intestine hominis. So now the key question is, did we see changes in body composition or physical function? Because if we just saw changes in the microbiome but didn't didn't see changes in outcome measures, it doesn't really mean much. So, I should have mentioned that we used three mice per each human fecal donors, so each fecal sample is transplanted into three mice. And because we had six fecal donors for each group, that leaves 18 mice that were colonized between human fecal samples per group. So these two groups were matched for, sex. And then there we didn't see differences in body weight or, in body composition. And this is was actually a surprise because, whereas in the larger human group, we saw differences of about 5% for whole body lean mass and fat mass. The human fecal donors were actually more extreme than that. There were differences of 10%. So the, yeah, high functioning human fecal donors had 10% more lean mass than the low low functioning, fecal donors. So but nonetheless, it didn't it didn't transfer in this study. And then when we ran the animals to exhaustion on the treadmill, we didn't see a significant difference. And then you can even make an argument that the trend would be going towards the opposite direction for the low low functioning colonized mice to have, better endurance capacity. And I could potentially talk about why that would be, even though I should mention it's close to significance but not significant. But then interestingly, we actually did see a difference for grip strength. So the high functioning, colonized mice had a small but significant increase in grip strength. So it's shown here. So, based on these data, because of the overlap for those various bacteria's, taxa that we saw, are they related to mechanisms involved in, muscle strength in older adults? So what would next steps from this be? So if we transplant those bacteria into germ free mice, would we see changes in muscle strain? And if so, how? Prevotella prevotelaceae and barnicella can contain genes that produce these short chain fatty acids. Are they involved? And then conversely, if, resistance training, RT, is well known to improve muscle related measures, including muscle strain. So if we improve muscle strength with resistance training, does that affect the gut? And if so, which bacteria change as a result? So, these are my next steps, to be pitched in grant, submissions coming up. So, going further from here, earlier this year, our group published, the potential role of diet and dietary fiber on the gut muscle axis. So, earlier, I presented data that short chain fatty acids positively impact muscle. And dietary fiber isn't, homogeneous, meaning it's comprised of insoluble fiber, which is not fermented by gut bacteria, and soluble fiber, which is fermented by gut bacteria to produce short chain fatty acids. So how is dietary fiber related to the gut muscle axis? Very few studies have looked at this. Only one RCT has been performed. And in that study, they looked the change in grip strength in response to thirteen weeks of soluble fiber, supplementation. In this case, it was inulin and fructooligosaccharides. So thirteen weeks supplementation in older adults. And what they found was looking at grip strength of the right hand and the dominant hand in this cohort, they saw about a 20% increase for the, soluble fiber supplemented group when compared with baseline. Whereas the placebo group placebo group actually saw a decrease in their grip strength, over the thirteen week study. Now, I didn't mention it, but they did not see differences in the grip strength of the left hand when, for either placebo or the soluble fiber supplementation. So, to date, this is the only study that's looked at it. So, more study is needed to investigate if dietary fiber can, alter muscle related outcomes. So it's also important to note in this study, even though they gave soluble fiber as a supplement, they didn't look at changes in the microbiome or short chain fatty acids. So how this could even occur, it would be unknown. So to further explore the role of dietary fiber and look up muscle axis, I recently analyzed data from a large, study, the osteoporotic fractures in men's study, also known as MR. OSS. And, this is unpublished data. It should we should have put it in the paper, but, we didn't. But nonetheless so what we're looking at here is the percentage of whole body lean mass, and on the x axis fiber density. So this is grams of fiber normalized to 100 calories. So, if you just look at fiber intake versus, lean mass or any outcome measure, you know, one could argue that higher fiber with high fiber, there could also be higher calories. So by looking at fiber fiber, density, you kinda account for that. You're accounting for calorie intake, in addition to fiber intake. So what we see is that there's an increase significant increase, for fiber density with the percentage of whole body lean mass. So as fiber density of the diet increases, there's an increase for, the percentage of whole body lean mass. So, to further investigate this in terms of the microbiome and its functions that could be playing a role, we decided to separate that data into tertiles. So a group that was in the highest tertile for dietary die dietary fiber density and the percentage of whole body lean mass and then the lowest tertiles for those two variables. So, our cohorts, we had 42 in the high fiber density, high lean mass group versus 32 in the in the low, group. These were 85 year old men. Women were not included into the study, unfortunately, to look at, the effect for women if it was similar. And then, other key, points here are so are as expected, the the, high fiber, high lean mass group had about 13% better, or higher whole body lean mass and about 13% lower whole body fat mass. So a better body composition and lower BMI was found in the t three t three or high fiber density, high lean mass percentage and lean mass group. But they also were more physically active, so we accounted for that by adjusting all of our microbiome models for their physical activity score. It's also important to note that this group, the high fiber, high percentage lean mass group also had better physical functions, so higher short physical performance battery score and better grip strength. And then as I noted, they had a higher dietary fiber and a higher fiber density when compared with the, low fiber, low, lean mass percentage, group. So, essentially, we have a group that's got better physical function and, a better body composition and that consume more dietary fiber. So what did we see for changes in bacteria, gut bacteria and function? So this is a genus level, plot visualization. So the, high fiber, high a whole body lean mass group versus a, comparatively below group. And just to highlight a couple key findings, so rumenococcus were lower in the low fiber group and higher. You can see that here, the orange. Lots more orange versus the, low group. And also I've illustrated here tab tabular format. And, actually, by percent relative abundance, the changes the differences from women or caucus were were greatest in terms of, how much of them were there, in the in the high fiber group. And then conversely, parabacteroides were higher in the low fiber, low lean mass group when compared with the high fiber group, which had less. And, again, we can see that here. Now what we can't see here because, these plots are difficult to read when you have much lower relative abundance, but clostridium and lacnospira were also higher in the high fiber group. And these three, clostridium, ruminococcus, and lacnospira are known butyrate producing bacteria. So investigating further, we also looked at, gut bacterial functions. And, without going into that data but just noting the key findings, we saw that, the genes that produce butyrate were higher in the high fiber, high, percentage of lean mass, high physical function group when compared with the lower group. So, while these associations are interesting and it suggests a role for dietary fiber on the gut muscle axis in older adults, they're just associations. So, in a couple of brands so far this year, I've, pitched, this idea that a high soluble fiber dietary intervention and coming from whole food and not from, supplemental soluble fiber. And I can get into that, the why behind that. So a high soluble fiber dietary intervention may positively affect the gut muscle axis and and and maybe even through short chain fatty acids and other related metabolites. So future study. So that's all I've got. Ready for questions. And, like, if you guys wanna find me, anyone wants to find me, I've got, lots of, you could find me in a lot of places. So thanks a lot.