The microbiome affects lifespan. Let's have a look at that data. So first, Swiss webster mice that are grown in a bubble without a microbiome, extends their lifespan. And that's what we're looking at here. So first, the survival curves. So 50% survival, that's half when the the time when half the colony is dead and half is still alive. And this is for the, wild type animals that have a microbiome. So, the average maximum lifespan for the wild type animals in this, study for Swiss webster, mice was, fifteen to seventeen months average lifespan, and twenty six to twenty eight months, maximal as indicated by the arrow. So, the Swiss Swiss webster mice that didn't have a micron that were grown in a bubble had significantly increased lifespan, both the females and males. The females, in the squares and the males in the circles. We can see that extension of lifespan such that the average, lifespan was now increased from fifteen to seventeen months to twenty three to twenty four months, and the maximum lifespan was increased from twenty six to twenty eight months for animals that had a microbiome to thirty three to thirty nine months for animals that did not have a microbiome, but notice that they lived in a bubble. This isn't, you know, no microbiome free living in the world. So, one study is nice. Many studies to replicate these findings would add some strength to the data that it's a real effect. And other studies have have also shown this. So, first, this we're looking at here the survival curves, survival plotted on the y axis for female c 57 black six, germ free mice. And, they're being compared against wild type animals, in terms of survival animals that had a microbiome. So the, germ free mice are shown with the dotted line, whereas the wild type are the solid lines. And, they didn't allow the animals to live fully to 50% survival which which would be great so we could, you know, identify median, survival. But, they determined that, the proportion of germ free, female mice that, were still alive at six hundred days was greater than the wild type, animals that had a microbiome. And we can see that there by the by the, arrows. So now study number three, germ free mice, in the top compared against SPF specific pathogen free mice. So these are animals that have a microbiome, but without defined pathogens that can, negatively affect mice. So those are the wild type animals. Alright. So in terms of, average lifespan, we can see that the, SPF mice have an average lifespan of seventy six weeks, whereas the germ free mice lived, significantly longer, eighty nine weeks. However, this is, and I should have mentioned this is, data for male germ free ICR mice. So a different genetic background than the Swiss Webster and the c 57 black six mice. But interestingly in this study, maximalized men was not different when comparing the germ free mice with the SPF mice. Now, to replicate these findings, people would have to permanently live in a bubble, which is, impractical. Now what what's more practical is identifying microbiome derived factors that affect lifespan, and then optimizing them. So what are some of those factors? Well, gut bacterial production of short chain fatty acids, SCFA's, including acetate, two carbon fatty acid, propionate, a three carbon fatty acid and butyrate, which is a four carbon fatty acid, may be involved in mechanisms related to lifespan. And how do we know that? So a supplement known as Acarbose increases lifespan and correspondingly increases, s, short chain fatty acids that are found in fecal samples. So let's have a look at that data. So first, the lifespan data. A carbo extends lifespan, and the one is this is the first study. I'm gonna show two studies that, showed, this effect. So, this is genetically heterogeneous mice. So they mixed mice of different genetic backgrounds, and, the, three different study sites were used. So they, looked at survival at three different universities. In this case, the University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio, University of Michigan, and the Jackson Lab in Maine. So first, in looking at survival for the male mice that were treated with, acarbos, the red circles compared to the, blue triangles that control fed animals. We can see that acarbos significantly increased, lifespan in the male mice, and that's a 22% increase in median lifespan for a carbo supplemented mice. Now, for females, the effect was much smaller. There was a 5%, a significant increase in median lifespan, a 5% increase. But again, much smaller effect in the female mice, than in the male mice supplemented with a carbos. So in a second study, again, genetically heterogeneous mice were used and again at those same three, study sites and, they, this is data I should have mentioned also in the previous slide. This is pool data meaning the, you know, individual data for each of the three universities was pulled into one, you know, one data, one survival plot for all of the data combined. Which is stronger than individual, you know, the data the individual universities. So here they fed, well, female mice is on the left and then male mice is on the right, three different concentrations of a carbos in comparison with, non supplemented control fed animals, in the blue triangles. So, first looking at the females, a carbo supplementation increased lifespan but only at the middle and high doses. And again, it was a small effect in the females but significant increase in lifespan. So there was a four to 5% increase for a carbo supplemented, female mice, with the medium and the high doses, and a 3% increase in maximum lifespan, but only at the highest a carbo dose in female, genetically heterogeneous mice. In males, again, there was a bigger effect, on life span as a result of a carbox, which we can see in the image to the right. So again, looking at, fifty percent survival when compared to the control animals. There was a sixteen to seventeen percent increased median lifespan for the middle and high dose for the male mice, and an eight to eleven percent increase maximum lifespan for the for the Acarbose treated, animals. So based on these two studies, it's pretty clear that Acarbose, extends lifespan, more in males than females. So how is a carbox impacting lifespan? What does it do? So, a carbox inhibits, alpha, a protein known as, alpha glucosidase, which is found in the small intestine. So when we eat food, disaccharides, reach the small intestine and proteins like a carbo degrade those disaccharides. In this case, it would be maltose, which is a combination of two glucose molecules, or sucrose, which is glucose bound to fructose. So, alpha gluco glucosidase degrades maltose into its individual monomers, you know, individual, monomers of glucose whereas sucrose because it's come, comprised of glucose plus fructose, alpha glucosidase degrades that into glucose plus fructose. So, when alpha glucosidase is present, one would expect, you know, the maximum efficiency for disaccharide degradation, and then, glucose and fructose to be absorbed maximally into the blood from the small intestine. However, a carbo inhibits alpha glucosidase, which should reduce sugar absorption from the small intestine into the blood. So, they actually study that in these a carbo studies that I just showed you guys. And, first in looking at the male mice, this is the blood glucose response on the y axis plotted against time. And first, and this is after eating the blood glucose response. So we can see first, for example, just at the sixty minute time point, the blood glucose response, for, male mice, rises to a 150 milligrams per deciliter around there. Maybe about a 160. Whereas, the a carbose, treated animals after eating have significantly lower levels of blood glucose which is exactly, you know, how the theory would break predict based on the on the picture. And similar data were obtained at the hundred and eighty and three hundred, 60, minute time points after eating for the, highest a carbose treated, mice. Now interestingly in in the female mice, there wasn't a significant, decrease in blood glucose, the blood glucose concentration as a result of a carbo supplementation, which is interesting, because, the the reduced glucose response as a result of a carbo's treatment could, potentially play a role in the life lifespan extension in the male mice. And if you remember the two previous slides, the female mice had a significantly, less lifespan increase as a result of a carbo's. And when considering that the glucose response was not improved as a result of a carbo's in the female mice, that would suggest other things may be impacting the the lifespan increase in the female a carbo's treated mice. So what could those factors be? Well, not only, should there be less glucose and you know, other simple sugars absorbed into the blood as a result as a result of, alpha glucosidase inhibition, those those, disaccharides and other polysaccharides would would then, reach the colon. Normally, sugars are absorbed into the small intestine and very few of that should reach the large intestine. Now that we're inhibiting disaccharide and other polysaccharides from being degraded, more of them will reach the co colon where they can be fermented into by gut bacteria into short chain fatty acids. So let's have a quick look at that. So, again diet and polysaccharides that escape absorption in the small intestine are fermented by large intestinal bacteria into short chain fatty acids. So it's a quick overview of that. So non absorbed carbohydrates in the small intestine, reach the colon and in this case, these non absorbed carbohydrates can include things like cellulose, fructans fructans which are large polymers of fructose, starch which are large polymers of glucose, xylans, gums, pectins and other dye and polysaccharides. So those, sugars are then fermented by colonic, bacteria into the short chain fatty acids, butyrate, propionate and acetate. And then they're absorbed by colonic epithelial cells where they can be used to, make energy, or they can be absorbed into the blood to impact systemic physiology. So how do the short chain fat fatty acids relate to lifespan? So in one of those studies that showed a lifespan extending effect of a Carbose treatment, they also found increases in fecal levels of the short chain fatty acids propionate and butyrate. And they also did some modeling to identify that those fatty ass short chain fatty acids were associated with the longevity that, a carbo's imposed in the mice. So then they also modeled the, potential lifespan extending effect of the higher propionate and butyrate levels, based on male mice at one of the test site test sites at the University of Michigan. So that's what's shown in the left image. So based on, control animals that were not treated with a carbo, the, right shift in the survival curve is based on the, increased amount of propionate and butyrate that was observed in their study. So we can see a five to ten percent increase in median lifespan as a result of or or modeled a, five to 10% increase lifespan as a result of the higher fecal levels of these short chain fatty acids as shown there. So, how much of an increase in the short the short chain fatty acids would be related to that, increased lifespan. So with, looking at the right image, we've got propionate, propionate concentration on the y axis, butyrate on the x. So starting from the blue circle and then going up, we can see that propionate levels approximately doubled and butyrate levels, also approximately doubled the arrow going to the right. So to to get that five to 1010% increase median life span, we're looking at approximately doubled concentration, a double doubling of the concentration for propionate and butyrate, as fecal levels of these of these short chain fatty acids. So based on these data for the short chain fatty acids, I mean, that's just an association. They saw increases in in propionate and butyrate in association with the a carbose mediated increase in lifespan. So how can how can we more directly test the role of short chain fatty acids on lifespan? Well, an intervention that is known to directly impact short chain fatty acid production, should, be pretty good evidence. So one of those, interventions is feeding fiber. In this case, it's oligofructose enriched inulin which are long polymers of fructose. Now we don't digest that as fructose. Even though they're long polymers of fructose, they, reach the colon undigested, unabsorbed where, gut bacteria ferment that into short chain fatty acids as I'll show in the next slide. So rats that are fed this fiber, oligofructose enriched, inulin, have increased survival for both male and female rats. So that's what we're looking, here, in terms of survival at, various months twelve, eighteen and twenty four months in male rats fed the control diet, the white bars versus the, oligofructose enriched inulin in the black bars. So first at 18 and 24, we can see significant, so the rats that were fed the fiber, more of them were alive at 18 and 24 compared to the control fed animals that were not fed that fiber. And for females, that effect was, significant at 24. More female rats fed fiber, were still alive compared to the control animals, control fed animals that were not fed fiber. So rats fed oligofructose enriched inulin also have increased fecal short chain fatty acids and this is in a different study. So that's what we can see here. Short chain, fatty acids in cecal contents and then, how much of it is there for the control fed animals in black versus the, fiber fed animals in gray. So for, acidic, propionic and butyrate, which is acetate, propionate and butyrate, we can see that, feeding this fiber to rats increases each of these short chain fatty acids. So one could argue that that's, because the this fiber is directly fermented by gut bacteria. It's not fermented by, the host or it's not used by the host and it's not absorbed. Only fermented by gut bacteria. One could argue that this is direct evidence for a role for the, gut bacteria and short chain fatty acids on increased lifespan, at least when combined with the previous data in the previous slide. So with all of this in mind, would a high fiber diet increase short chain fatty acids in humans? So there is that data and this is data in young subjects. So first we're looking at the short chain fatty acid output in the, left column, for formate which is a c one one carbon fatty acid, and then we got we've got acetate, propionate, butyrate, and then, valerate which is a five carbon fatty acid. So first, in looking at, pretty typical diet 25, around 25 grams of fiber per day. We can see that there's about 15 millimoles of short chain, collectively of short chain fatty acids that are produced. Now what happens when you approximately double that fiber intake to 45, point four grams of fiber per day? Well, we can see, a pretty close to a doubling of the total short chain fatty acid, content, in feces. And notice that most of these is coming from the combination of acetate, propionate and butyrate which at least double for each of those, in response to the approximately double doubling increase for the fiber. Now what happens if we dramatically increase the fiber? In this case, to a 150. So six times higher than the twenty five grams per day, fiber. And we can see that we get an almost short chain fatty acid levels compared to the twenty five gram dose. And again, you know, when comparing things like acetate, from eight to about 50, we get about a six fold increase. So from this, we can conclude that fecal short chain fatty acids proportionally increase as the dietary fiber content increases in the diet. Now fiber intake isn't the only way that we can increase fecal levels of short chain fatty acids. Another way is through exercise training. So this is a study done in young subjects that were, trained on a treadmill for six weeks. And this is the, fecal, levels of acetate, propanate, and butyrate, at e zero which is their baseline before training and they were all sedentary to be included into the study. And then at e six, this is six weeks after exercise training. What are their acetate, propionate, and butyrate levels? So, for acetate, we can see the increase propionate and butyrate. So each of these short chain fatty acids increased in lean, BMI less than 25. But for whatever reason, the obese subjects with a BMI higher than 30 did not have higher levels of fecal short chain fatty acids in response to exercise training. So with all of this in mind, it would seem that increasing short chain fatty acids through a high fiber diet and exercise may be a good way to, extend lifespan. And that's all I've got. Have a great day.