The main ways that we're told to slow the spread of the coronavirus infection are to wear a mask, wash your hands, and socially distance. But what about diet? It's almost never talked about. So, today I'm gonna talk about a paper that proposed the idea that is hesperidin a metabolite that's found in peppermint leaves, lemon, orange, including navels and blood oranges. Is it is that metabolite essential for prophylaxis? In other words, prevention and treatment of the COVID nineteen, infection. So let's have a look at what they propose. So there are three main ways that they proposed that hesperidin, may, prevent and or treat, the coronavirus infection. So first, when looking at the, coronavirus itself and its structure, coronavirus, spike proteins bind to the ACE two receptor allowing it to enter cells, where it then tricks our cells to make more of itself leading to immune activation and excessive, pro inflammatory response. Now in a virtual screening study, it was shown that hesperidin was a very strong inhibitor of this process. So essentially preventing the the, SARS CoV two virus to enter, cells. So that would be the first way, that it could prevent and or treat coronavirus infection. Now in the second way, this is an in vitro study, meaning it was done in cells where hesperidin has been shown to, up regulate the interferon MAP kinase pathway, which is involved in increasing cell immunity against infection. In this case, the infection was influenza a virus. Now studies looking at the ability of hesperidin to up regulate this pathway to improve, our immune system's response to the SARS CoV two virus have not yet been performed. But there is data in in the COVID nineteen, disease that the MAP Kinase pathway is an important pathway for, in people who have survived, the infection. So and then third, the cytokine storm. In other words, an immune overreaction to the infection, is is widely known. And included amongst those, pro inflammatory molecules are interleukin one beta, and interleukins two and six, interferon gamma, and TNF alpha. Now hesperidin in a variety of studies, that were not looking at the ability of hesperidin to inhibit these, pro inflammatory molecules in the COVID nineteen situation. But in other studies, hesperidin has been shown to inhibit each of these inflammatory metabolites, which would suggest that it would also work in the COVID nineteen situation. Now I should say no randomized controlled trials, no RCTs have yet looked at the ability to have hespiride and to actually do these things in the COVID nineteen situation. But based on the data that they present in the paper for each of these pathways, it may be a good option. So where can we get hesperidin from? So as I mentioned, it's found in, in relatively high concentrations in lemons, oranges, and peppermint. So to look up that data, I went to phenolexplorer.eu. And if you wanna look up that data yourself, I took a screenshot so you could see the data. And, just looking at the pure juice, not necessarily from concentrate, I I'd wanna go with whole foods and not supplements or not, you know, the concentrate from the food. I'd wanna eat the whole food to get it from the whole food. So when looking at it like that, we can see that, lemon juice, navel oranges, otherwise known as blonde oranges, and blood oranges have pretty decent amounts of of, hesperidin. Now, the highest amounts of hesperidin on this list are found in dried peppermint. Now this is a bit bit misleading because nobody's gonna go and eat, a 100 grams of dried peppermint which is what this value four hundred and eighty one milligrams per 100 grams of dried peppermint peppermint leaves. But, one gram of dried peppermint translates into about four grams of fresh peppermint. So to you can then divide this four eighty one by four, so you get about a 120 of of hesperidin per 100 grams of fresh peppermint leaves. And I've actually been taking about 70, grams of peppermint, putting it in smoothies, and blending it with other stuff, to try to get more hesperidin, into my diet. So that's all I've got. There are lots of ways to find me online. All of them listed here. Have a good day.