Is it possible to have low levels of total cholesterol and also have optimal health? So here we're looking at my values for total cholesterol for the past fifteen years. Total cholesterol plotted on the y axis against time. And I've measured it 36 times during that period. So my range for total cholesterol, my lowest value was one fourteen, and my highest value was one eighty five. The average value during that time is a 144 milligrams per deciliter. Now I also presented in an earlier video that, lower levels of total cholesterol are found in youth, and that's what we see here with values of, one seventy and one sixty for women and men, respectively. But, cholesterol levels also decline towards the end of life with, the arrows, the black arrows here, declining towards, the oldest age reported in that study, which was about 88 years old. But cholesterol levels continue to decline past 88, which I presented in my last video, including, centenarians, semi centenarians, and super centenarians, and that's what we can see here. So looking, at 85 to 99 years old, we can see cholesterol values of about 201. And then as we get older than that, in the columns to the right, we can see cholesterol goes to one seventy two, one sixty five, and one fifty six. So total cholesterol values in the one sixty range are found in super longevity, but they're also found in youth. Now, that total cholesterol levels are low in advanced, age, that's actually bad for health, and that's what we can see here. So, just looking at the all cause mortality data, so risk of death for all causes for seventy five to ninety nine ninety nine year olds in women and men. We can see that lowest risk of death for all causes is, for cholesterol levels in the two ten to two forty range. And then using the data that I just showed for the centenarians in the one sixty range, we can see that their risk of death for all causes is significantly increased. Now I also have values less than one sixty. In fact, that that average value of one forty four for the past fifteen years. And if in looking at the age group based on my chronological age for risk of death for all causes based on total cholesterol levels, optimal, here too for this age group is in the two ten to two forty range. And based on my values over the past, fifteen years, I'd be at at and in at least, forty percent increased risk of death for all causes. So, but lower levels of total cholesterol are also found in youth. So which is it? Am I at a higher risk of all cause mortality or are my levels indicative of biological youth? So let's have a look at some data to help clarify the story. So it's been shown that having high levels of albumin and high HDL in the presence of low cholesterol, in this case lower than one sixty, those individuals have a similar survival when compared with, subjects who have higher levels of total cholesterol. So that's what we can see here in this chart with survival, up to six years after the initial baseline visit. And in in this study, the subjects are about 79 years old. So this is old subjects who have low low total cholesterol and high albumin and high HDL and how they compare in terms of survival. And what we can see is that the survival of those subjects who have high relatively high levels of albumin and HDL have a similar survival to the other, total cholesterol groups. In this case, one sixty one to two thirty nine and greater than two forty. So also note that higher levels of albumin, this makes sense because higher levels of albumin and higher levels of HDL are also found in youth. So high albumin, high HDL, high total cholesterol, since all of them are found in youth, it would make sense that that would also be associated with, the best survival or similar survival to the other cholesterol groups. Now we can look at this even further in subjects that, only in subjects that had total cholesterol levels that were less than one sixty. So how does it break down versus albumin and HDL for those subjects? So first, highest all cause mortality risk was present when subjects had low total cholesterol, low albumin, and either low or high HDL, which I've boxed here. That's the highest risk group. And then risk starts to decrease with higher albumin. So high albumin but low HDL. There's a thirty two percent risk of, decreased risk of all all cause mortality risk for those subjects. But the maximally reduced risk of all cause mortality for subjects that had low total cholesterol was for high albumin, well relatively high albumin which is 38 grams per liter and relatively high HDL of 47 milligrams per deciliter. So the long story short is for total cholesterol less than one sixty, lowest all cause mortality risk, ACM risk when albumin is greater than 38 grams per liter and HDL is greater than 47. So if you remember, my, I showed my cholesterol data earlier, but what's my data in terms of albumin and HDL? How do I fit into this story? So this is, 25 blood tests over the past four years, and, you can see first that my average, albumin level is 49.4. So I'm good there. I'm way higher than the 38. And how about, HDL? So 45.4. So I'm close to that 47 cut point. So I've got a little bit of work to do. I'm gonna go back into my data and look for some correlations and see what I can do to, continuously keep my HDL above 47. So again, the take home is if your TC, total cholesterol is less than one sixty, making sure that your albumin and HDL levels are relatively high is important for reducing all cause mortality risk. Alright. That's all I've got. You can find me lots of places online. Have a great day.