Calorie restriction is well known to extend lifespan in a variety of animal models. For example, in the data here, on the left, we see, the lifespan extending effect of various levels of calorie restriction, 47% CR, 69% CR, and 75% CR, each of with each of which extends both average and maximum lifespan, with similar data in the male mice on the right. So 44% calorie restriction, extended both average and maximum lifespan. So these data are are in mice, and although the data is similar in a variety of other animal models, including fly including flies, yeast, and worms, what about in people? So, longitudinal studies, using calorie restriction are impossible. We'd have to do an eighty plus year study to see if calorie restriction really extends, average well, at least average lifespan on people, and we need it to be a hundred and twenty years or more to see if it extends, maximum. So how can we get at this issue of whether or not calorie restriction will positively impact health and lifespan in people? So one way is to assess biological age. And, in a study done in 2018, calorie restriction was shown to slow biological aging. So here what we're looking at is, biological age on the on the y axis, and on the x axis are the baseline twelve months of CR and twenty month twenty four months of CR. And this data is from the CALERIE study, c a l e r I e, that again that was mentioned that that was performed in 2018. So, first, this, study was in a relatively young cohort cohort, around third well, 38 years, was the average age. Just barely above the, normal or lean BMI definition with a BMI of twenty five point one. A BMI less than twenty five is considered normal or lean. And then, there were 70, ad libitum controls, meaning they ate their normal diet, and then a hundred and thirty were randomized to undergo, calorie restriction with the goal of 25%, a 25% reduction in calories. So first, as we can see by the arrow, there was no difference in, biological age when comparing the ad lib and CR groups. So they're starting from the same biological age, and actually interesting, their biological age at 37 years was virtually identical to their chronological age of 38 years. So what happened, after a year of calorie restriction versus a year of not being calorie restricted? So we can see that the ad lib group who ate their normal diet and didn't restrict their calories, for the one year that passed, they experienced a, 0.71 increase in their biological age. In contrast, the CR group only, aged by point one one years. So, we can see the 95% confidence intervals between these two, groups of data. So the shaded, is the 95% confidence interval and, the confidence intervals of both of these groups are not overlapping, so the data are significantly different. And, this rate of aging was slowed, similarly after two years of calorie restriction with the CR group, experiencing, 0.2. So only two tenths of a year passed biologically, but yet two years passed chronologically, whereas the ad lib group experienced the 1.4, year increase in their biological age, for the two years that passed. So a significant reduction in biological age over the two year period that, participants, were on a CR diet. So how much CR was able to, impact, biological age? So that's the data we can see here. That's a percentage of CR on the y axis, plotted against time. So first, for the first six months of the study, probably more people were most people were, you know, super excited, I guess, to calorie restrict, And the CR group reduced their calories by an average of 480 calories per day down from twenty four sixty seven, which was their baseline intake, which was a reduction of about 20%. Now for the remaining eighteen months of the study, they weren't able to, the CR group wasn't able to restrict as much. So there was about a nine to 10% reduction in their calorie intake, so thereby reducing their daily calorie intake by 234 calories. And cumulatively over the twenty four month, study, the CR group reduced their calorie intake by an average of about 12%. So were there differences in biological age depending on the level of CR? Did the group that within the CR group did, subjects who had more CR, a higher restriction, experienced an even lower biological age compared to people who restricted less. And, although it looks like there are differences, so, what we're looking at here is biological age again plotted on the y axis against time, And you can see the ad lib group in the, dark blue circles. Again, that one point four year increase in biological age over the two year period. So when comparing the, subjects who had less than 10% CR, the light blue circles, versus 10% or more CR, the dark blue circles, Although those data look like they're different, they were not statistically, significantly different. So one could argue that, having more than 10% CR or less than 10% CR, you can get you could get the, biological slowing effects of calorie restriction. So, which biomarkers are included in this biological age calculator and how good is it? I haven't shown that data. So let's just take a quick look at that. So the biological age calculator that calculated that they use is called the called the Chlamara Duval biological age, and that was first published, in 2006. So it contains, 10 biomarkers and age. So, albumin, alkaline phosphatase, blood urea nitrogen, c react protein, creatinine, glycated hemoglobin, which is actually glucose levels. They calculated, glycate, HBA one c from the glucose, levels. Systolic blood pressure, total cholesterol, uric acid, and white blood cell count. Now notice, that five of these biomarkers on, Levine's phenotypic age biological age calculator, which which I've talked about in many videos. So there is some overlap between these two biological age calculators. So, the this biological age calculator, the chlamydia do ball, biological age calculator is strongly correlated with chronological age in the calorie study, and that's what we can see here. So the correlation between these biomarkers with chronological age as a box with the red rectangle below was 0.88, which is a strong correlation, for the biological age calculator with chronological age. Now these data are in, sample size of 200 subjects. It's almost always better to have larger larger datasets because if if they if an effect is actually significant, you'd see it in a very large cohort. Whereas with smaller subject sizes, you you know, the data could be more variable and the effect may be real or not because it's of the sample size, of the small sample size. So what about in a larger study? So they looked at the correlation between the 10 biomarkers and age, so 11, with chronological age in this larger study, 2000, nine to 2010, NHANES, which is the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. So in that study, there was, data for 7,700 blood test data and, blood pressure, systolic blood pressure data for 7,700 subjects. And we can see with the red rectangle at the corner that the correlation coefficient for this biological age calculator with chronological age was even a little bit better at 0.92. Now for a little bit of perspective, Levine's phenotypic age calculator has a correlation coefficient of zero point nine four and zero point nine six in two large studies, that included more than 9,000 subjects. So one could argue that the Chlamara Duvall method, KDM, is similar in its, correlation with, Morgan Levin's, phenotypic age calculator. So what about, all cause mortality risk? So there weren't any pretty pictures for this, but, the Clomair Duval biological age calculator has been shown to be a better predictor of all cause mortality risk when compared with chronological age in in a large study in Haines three, which included 9,000 plus subjects. So just to break that down real quick, so age increasing age is associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So, basically, they found that this biological age calculator was better better able to predict all cause mortality risk than chronological age. So that's all I've got for now. You can find me lots of places online. Have a great day.