Dietary intake of advanced glycation end products, also known as age products, impact insulin resistance, inflammation, and lifespan. Although I'd like to jump right into the data, it's important to first define, how they're formed and where they're found in food. So first in looking at the simplified cartoon here, we can see that starting from, bread, when you heat bread for, some period of time, that forms the, you know, the brown, the crisp. And, of the molecules that are found in the brown and the crisp are age products, amongst other molecules. But some of the molecules that are or or metabolites that are found in there are age products. So two of the age products that are found, are formed during the browning process, I've I've shown them here. So n six carboxymethyl lysine, also known as CML, and methylglyoxal. So I'm gonna talk about those two age products a lot, as I go through this, video. So where is, where are age products found, in the diet? So, this is, CML content. So again, carboxymethyl lysine, in a in a few different foods and just, illustrating how, cooking foods at a high a temperature higher than a 100 degrees Celsius, 200 degrees, two twelve, degrees Fahrenheit. So anything higher than boiling temperature will create, more age products. So just looking first at raw cashews, we see the CML content, sixty seven thirty kilo units per 100 grams of cashews. But then roasting, there's a a greater formation of age products around 3,000, units. Now it isn't just cashews that, have this issue. So, roasting sunflower seeds, we see also around a 2,000 unit increase in CML content, because of roasting. But then going to something like beef, beef has a, relatively lower, CML, content when it's raw. But when you broil it, grill it, or pan fry, we can see a a a dramatic increase, you know, from tenfold for for broiling and grilling to fourteenfold increase in age product, CML content, for beef. Now I'm not, using this data to to to demonize beef, just to illustrate that there may be healthier ways to prepare it if your goal is to reduce age product, content. So one way is by stewing the beef. So cooking it at a lower temperature for a longer period of time, we can see that stewing beef has about a threefold less, age product content compared with broiling and grilling around a four to five fold less than pan frying and only a, you know, about a three and a half fold increase compared to raw. So stewing may be better in terms of age product, content. So I haven't shown you why age products are important, so let's have a look at that data in terms of, age products and their impact on health and lifespan. So first, reducing age product, dietary age products increases lifespan in male c 57 black six j mice. Now there's no data for females. This is the, data that exists. So first, they fed, mice, a a regular age product, a regular diet containing normal amounts of age products, and then a lower age product doc diet that they, made by heating the, animal pellet at a lower temperature. So, first, we can see that the, macronutrient composition of both diets are are the same. So any effects we would see would not be because of macronutrient composition. However, you can obviously see that the age product content is half in the low age diet. So what effect did the did eating the low age diet have on lifespan? So here we're looking at, survival. So this is a survival curve plotted on the y axis, against, age in weeks on the x axis. So, when comparing the, fifty percent survival, which they've already highlighted, for me with the black line, we can see that eating the low age diet increased lifespan, as indicated by the arrow. Both average and maximal lifespan compared to the regular age diet. So an an obvious question when seeing these data is, well, did the mice eat less food on the low age diet? And that would basically in you know, induce a calorie restriction, which could explain this lifespan extending effect, of the quote unquote low age, diet. So they measured measured that and, first we can see in the inset of this, figure here that food intake between the two groups was not different. So the lifespan extending effect of the low age diet was not related to, eating less food. Also interestingly though, in the bigger picture, the body weight, plotted, on the y axis against age, we can see that the body weight for the low age diet fed mice in the, black triangles was lower, albeit not statistically significant, was lower than the regular age diet for the majority of the study, and then finally became statistically significant starting at ninety six weeks on the diet. So this data would suggest that eating the low age diet, increased, improved, metabolism. So the, their metabolism is more efficient. So they're because they're not eating less food, they're eating the same amount of food, but they have a lower body weight, which suggests more efficient, utilization of nutrients, so that they're not, carrying more body fat because of an inefficient metabolism. Alright. So that's the effect of a low age diet on lifespan, an extension of lifespan on the low age diet. What's the effect of a high age diet plus calorie restriction, which is the gold standard of lifespan extension? So, first in looking at the diets between the three groups, so we have the regular diet, a CR diet, and then a CR diet fed a high amount of age products, which they heated the mouse pellet for longer, resulting in more, age products in the, mouse food. So before we go into that, first, it's important to note that the macronutrient composition of the three diets between these three different groups, regular CR and CR high, was not different. So protein, fat, carbs, and calories, all the same between the diets. And, also, the CML and and methylglyoxal, MG, the two age products that they quantified, was similar between the regular and the CR groups. So basically, the food is the same for the regular and CR groups, but the CR animals are eating less. In this case, 40% less. So you can see food intake grams per day, where the CR groups were eating three grams a day versus the regular group, which, were eating five grams a day, so that's a 40% CR. Now correspondingly, because the CR mice were eating less food, they were also eating less age products as as shown here with the CML and and methylglyoxal, MG. So the CR mice, because they're eating less food, they're also eating less age products. So to account for that, the, authors of this study created a high age product diet that were fed to mice that were calorie restricted. And that's what we see we can see there. So the, although the macronutrient composition of the diets between these three groups was similar, they, heated the pellet longer for the CR high age product fed mice so that it had a higher amount of CML and MG and, thereby resulting as shown in the lower, data, thereby resulting in about a two and a half fold increase in CML, daily CML intake for CR high age products versus just CR, and also an increase of about 55% for the high age product CR group versus regular CR. So what effect did eating more age products have for calorie restriction when compared with the regular CR diet? So here are the lifespan curves or survival, sorry. So cumulative survival in the y axis plotted against age. So first, in looking at the average, lifespan, we can see that obviously CR as well known increased lifespan, from about a hundred weeks, average to, around a 120. It also increased the maximum lifespan too from about one ten to one thirty, weeks. So what effect did the, high CR, high age product plus CR, group have with lifespan? So, that data is indicated by the gray circles, and we can see that eating more age products, but the same amount of food on a CR diet shortened lifespan. So when considering that a, low age diet increases lifespan and a high age product diet plus CR will shorten lifespan, this suggested that, dietary age product intake is a very powerful, effector of lifespan. So what about insulin resistance and inflammation? So, so first we're looking at the, data for insulin levels in 24 old mice that were fed, a high or a low age product diet for their, lifespan. So, as we can see, the insulin levels in the low age product diet had about half the insulin levels. And I didn't show you the glucose levels, which were different between the groups. But one measure of insulin sensitivity is the HOMA IR index, which is essentially a multiplication of insulin times glucose. And although the authors didn't evaluate if that was statistically significant in the study or not, because they reported the data for insulin and glucose, we can see that the mice on the regular age product diet had a, HOMA IR of 20, you know, 23.7, which is, more than double the, HOMA IR IR value of the low age product diet, which, suggests that the animals on the low age product diet were more insulin sensitive relative to the regular age diet group. Alright. So what is the, what's the effect of, dietary age products on inflammation? So here we're looking at the effect of, a high age product diet or a low age product diet on TNF alpha on the y axis in picograms per milliliter as a as one indicator of inflammation. And again, this data is both these data are in mice. So regardless if the mice were on a high fat diet HF or on a low fat diet LF, we can see that animals that were fed the low age product diet were had had lower inflammation as indicated by lower TNF alpha. So, everything I've shown you so far is in mice. Is there similar data similar data in humans? I mean, it's nice to have animal studies, but we wanna know if this stuff is gonna impact health and and disease risk and lifespan in humans. So there's a meta, meta analysis of, randomized controlled trials, RCTs, where they compared a low age product diet versus high. So this is an intervention. They this isn't an association. So in five studies, it's, that that reported HOMA IR values, eating a low age product diet decreased HOMA IR. So eating less age products, more insulin sensitive. In six studies that fed a low age or a high age product diet, the low age product diet was, basically induced lower levels of inflammation as indicated by t and f alpha. So so far, it would appear that the at least some of this data for the mice in humans is similar, at least in terms of insulin resistance and inflammation. So what about disease risk? And actually, I should say, what about lifespan? Right? Ideally, we'd wanna have dietary intake of age products, whether it's CML, methylglyoxal, or or others. And, you know, what's their association with longevity? But clearly, that's a very difficult study to do. We would need decades of of data on people. It hasn't been done yet. So we can look at, dietary intake of age products and their association with disease risk, and all cause mortality risk to, you know, provide some more insight on this, story. So first, higher diet higher dietary, CML content is associated with pancreatic cancer in men and breast cancer in women. So first we're looking at the, pancreatic cancer in men data. So, we're looking at CML, in quintiles. So going from one to five, lowest dietary CML intake is one, highest CML, dietary CML intake is five. And when looking at the, fully adjusted model, not partially adjusted with the other hazard ratios at three and four there, so they adjusted for many things, but not everything. When looking at the fully adjusted model, when comparing a low dietary intake of, CML with the higher intakes, in this case, the fourth and fifth quintiles, we see a fifty four percent and a forty percent increased, incidence or increased risk of having pancreatic cancer. So higher dietary age, dietary, CML intake is associated with a higher, pancreatic, cancer, incidence in men. Now similar data is obtained for women. So, again, we're looking here at, quintiles of CML, dietary CML intake. So q one is a low dietary intake of, CML, the age product CML, and q five is a high dietary intake. And similarly, in the fully adjusted model, when compared with q one, the lowest intake of dietary CML, we can see the highest the highest two, quintiles of of CML intake, q four and q five were associated with a twenty four percent and a thirty percent significant, twenty four percent and thirty percent increased, risk for breast cancer. So having a higher intake of dietary age products, so far not, it's associated with with worse outcomes. Now all of the data doesn't show that though. In a study, published two weeks ago, actually, the CONVERSE data was reported. So, an eleven percent decrease all cause mortality risk, ACN risk, for the highest versus the lowest intake of dietary CML was reported in men. They didn't find an association between age product intake with women. So this is opposite the, you know, the hypothesis being for dietary age products being, bad for health and disease risk because this is this association suggests that dietary age products would be associated with a lower all cause death from all causes risk. So let's have a little bit, a a little deeper look at the that data. So in the previous slide, I showed you data for cancer in men and women. So first, they reported, dietary intake of, CML with quartiles this time, q one to q four. So lowest intake of dietary CML, q one highest intake, q four. And for cancer mortality, they didn't see an association, a significant association for cancer mortality with dietary CML intake. Similarly, they didn't see, an association between dietary CML intake with CBD mortality. But they did find a significant association for non cancer, non CBD mortality, which is a big box. It could be lots of different things. It could be respiratory diseases. It could be, accidents. It could be a lot of different things. But nonetheless, they found a twenty six percent decreased risk of non cancer, non CBD mortality in the fully adjusted model, for, in association with dietary, age products. Now this is the only study that's been reported for, the association between, age products, dietary age product intake with all cause mortality. So more data is definitely needed to, you know, to, discern what's the true story. But so far based on the cancer data and this one study, I'd suggest and based on the data for the insulin resistance and inflammation story both in mice and humans and the animal data showing, you know, the effects of age products and lifespan, I'd suggest that there's more than enough data to support the hypothesis that reducing dietary age products, may be an important strategy to improve health and potentially, lifespan in people. Alright. That's all I've got. You can find me lots of places online. Have a great day.