Inadequate intake for vitamin k one, also known as phylloquinone, for adults older than 19 years, in males, it's a hundred and twenty micrograms a day, and in females, it's ninety micrograms a day. But are these values optimal for health? So let's have a look at some data. So first, in terms of the incidence of all cause mortality, plotted on the y axis here against years of follow-up for subjects or groups of people who consumed more than adequate intake, a hundred and twenty and ninety micrograms respectively for males and females. So for subjects that consumed a hundred and seventy one micrograms a day, we can see that the incidence of all cause mortality was actually highest, which argues would argue what good is the adequate intake if consuming above that is actually associated with the worst incidence of all cause mortality. Similarly, groups of people who consumed on average two hundred and seventy six or three hundred and fifty micrograms of vitamin similar incidence of all cause mortality compared to the hundred and seventy one micrograms per day. So, these data had been confirmed in a separate study where there was no difference for all cause mortality risk when comparing eighty eight micrograms a day with two hundred and fifty one micrograms of vitamin k one per day. So when considering these data, potentially vitamin k one intakes much greater than three hundred fifty micrograms may be important for, in the incidence of all cause mortality. And in support of that, we can see that six hundred and twenty six micrograms a day was associated with about half the risk of death from all causes when compared with lesser intakes. So based on these data, should an updated adequate, intake AI include a vitamin k one intake greater than six hundred and twenty six micrograms per day? There's actually data that suggests it should be higher. So one way that we can, investigate, whether a higher intake of vitamin k one may be optimal for health is to look at, the activity of proteins that require vitamin k one as a cofactor. And one of these proteins is called gamma glutamyl carboxylase. And what it does is it uses vitamin k as a cofactor, as I mentioned, and carbon dioxide and oxygen, and it carboxylates. It adds COO groups, to on the left side under carboxylated osteocalcin, thereby converting it into carboxylated osteocalcin. And you can see the carboxyl group addition c o o minus, in it, to the middle methyl group on carboxylated osteocalcin. So when vitamin k one, phylloquinone, is at insufficient, is sufficient, when there is sufficient amounts of it, gamma glutamyl carboxyl carboxylase excuse me. Levels will be, maximal. Our activity will be maximal. There'll be more carboxylated osteocalcin. There'll be less undercarboxylated osteocalcin. So how much vitamin k is important for optimizing gamma glutamylcarboxylase? So, in looking at the data, we're looking at the serum levels of undercarboxylated osteocalcin, UCOC, on the y axis here. And what we can see is that people that were fed in people that were fed a placebo, the percentage of, undercarboxylated osteocalcin relative to the total osteocalcin concentration was about seven percent. So subjects that then consumed two hundred and fifty micrograms of vitamin k one per day, and that did didn't do anything to the levels of, under carboxylated osteocalcin. So, five hundred micrograms of phylloquinone were indeed sufficient to start to reduce it. We can see that here to about, 2% of the total osteocalcin was under carboxylated now. A dramatic reduction from the 7%. But although the, five hundred micrograms, a thousand micrograms, and two thousand micrograms all have stars, This study showed that at at about a thousand micrograms of vitamin k one per day, serum levels of undercarboxylated osteocalcin were maximally reduced. So based on this data, one could argue that, at least a thousand micrograms of vitamin k one may be optimal, to consume every day. And in support of this hypothesis, randomized controlled trials that have given subjects a thousand micrograms of vitamin one vitamin k one per day, reduced undercarboxylated osteocalcin and, for example, reduced the age related loss of bone mineral density, improved insulin sensitivity. And in the third study, although they didn't look at, levels of under carboxylated osteocalcin, they, that a thousand micrograms of vitamin k one was sufficient to reduce the age related decline in aortic elasticity. So collectively, based on the all cause mortality data, the incidence of all cause mortality risk and the osteocalcin data, these, findings suggest that at least a thousand micrograms of vitamin k one per day may be optimal. So how can we get that into our our diet? So vitamin k one rich vegetables, isn't anything new. You can find this information lots of places online. What's different though is I sorted the data based on the amount that you would need to eat to get at least a thousand micrograms of vitamin k one per day. So we can see first that the all star for quickly getting vitamin k one, a thousand micrograms of it would be for raw fresh parsley. So only you would only need sixty one grams of that and only 22 calories to get a thousand micrograms of vitamin k one per day. And I have another video on parsley and it's, high epigenetic content. So you may wanna check that out. Apigen and and NAD, video. So, what's my vitamin k one intake? So what we're looking at here is, two full years of my daily vitamin k one intake from July 2018 through July, 2020. And the red line is indicative of my average, phylloquinone intake during that period, which was 14 of one thousand four hundred eighty six micrograms per day. So I'm well above the a thousand micrograms a day, that are required to maximize gamma glutamyl carboxylase activity, and that were associated with reduced, reduced incidence of all cause mortality risk. So that's all I've got. For more info, you can visit my website, or if you have questions or comments, you can find me lots of places online. Have a great day.