LDL cholesterol, what's optimal for health? So in this paper from 2004, they proposed that the optimal low density optimal concentration for low density lipoprotein or LDL is 50 to 70 milligrams per deciliter. So is this true? Well, LDL increases during aging, with values, between a 100 to one thirty, not 50 to 70 milligrams per deciliter found in youth. So that data is here with data for, men on the left and women on the right. So, in in terms of, what LDL levels look like in youth, we can see that for men fifteen to thirty four years old, the average LDL, was a 120 milligrams per deciliter, not 50 to 70. So what about for women? So when looking at the data for women for fifteen to thirty four years old, the average LDL is a 108 per deciliter. So in just looking at the aging data, this idea that the optimal low density lipoprotein, range of 50 to 70 is inaccurate. What about all cause mortality risk? So risk of death for all causes. So, first in looking at the Kangbuk Sam Samsung health, health study, this was a study that included, more than 347,000, non statin users. So people who are not on lipid lowering or LDL lowering, medication. And also subjects that had a history of cardiovascular disease, CBD, or diabetes were excluded from this analysis. And that's important because if, subjects were ill or had a disease that could potentially, adversely affect their LDL or other variables and that would, you know, skew any subjects that had similar LDL variables that they would also look, you know, they'd be all they'd be grouped together because low LDL relatively healthy, low LDL potentially sick. So to account for that, the authors of this study excluded the subjects that had, CBD or diabetes, when looking at the data. So this is a a study that had a 199,000 subjects, or a 199,000 men. And again on the y axis, we're looking at all cause mortality risk plotted against the LDL concentration on the x axis. So, what we can see is that, lowest all cause mortality risk was found for, LDL, between a 100 to one 29. So what about higher risk? So to find that, we put the, hazard ratio bar, right at one and then, places on on the chart where we see the dash lines, which is the 95% confidence interval, which are either completely above or completely below. The red line would be indicative of higher or lower risk. So in this case, we we can see that higher risk significantly higher risk compared to the 100 to one twenty nine LDL at the lowest point. Well, I should say highest risk first was, very close to highest risk was for LDL greater than one sixty, but that is right on the border. What's clear is the low, the higher risk for having a lower LDL. And in this case, LDL less than 70 milligrams per deciliter is associated with a significantly, increased all cause mortality risk in men. So what about in women? So interestingly, LDL was not associated with all cause mortality risk in the 148,000, women in this study. So, when compared with the, lowest risk, which was again one one hundred to one twenty nine, Although there there were, you know, there seems to be a point, in the in the curve where LDL less than 70 looks like it's, at increased risk, and that's significant when adjusted for age. But when they, authors of this study adjusted, you know, in their fully adjusted, models, LDL was no longer significantly associated with all cause mortality risk in women. So having low LDL less than 70, in 40 year olds, in this study in the 40 year olds of this study, is associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. What about older than 40 years old? So, that data we have here, and this is the Korean genome epidemiology study with subjects that had an average age of 53 years. And, what we can see first is when looking at the data for men and again, they in this study, they, didn't include data for people that were taking, LDL lowering or lipid lowering medications. So they excluded people who were taking statins from their analysis. So this is sixty three thousand, men that were not taking statins. So when compared to the reference of, an LDL range of one hundred to one twenty nine milligrams per deciliter, men that had lower levels, first, less than, 70 to 99 and less than 70, had a significantly increased all cause mortality risk. So relatively relatively similar data to the, slide I showed, previously. So, when looking at model three, which is the fully adjusted, model, first, when looking at LDL of seventeen ninety nine, we can see that compared with 100 to one twenty nine for LDL, those subjects had a thirty seven percent higher risk for all cause mortality. And then for this for the, group of men that had LDL even lower, less than 70, they had an eighty three percent increase all cause mortality risk when compared with the hundred to one twenty nine group. So lower LDL in this study, in in an older a little bit older group, again, not good for health. So what about higher than, one twenty nine in men? In in that case, that data was not significantly different than, when compared with the reference group, a 100 to one twenty nine. Nine. So from that, you can, conclude that having higher LDL, may not be associated with an increased all cause mortality risk in the 53 year old men, in this study. So what about in women? And again, these were not, statin users. They were excluded from the analysis for also for the women. So, large study, almost a 120,000 women in the study. And again, when compared with, a 100 to one twenty nine were lower or higher levels of LDL associated with an increased all cause mortality risk for women. And interestingly, similar to the data on the last slide, LDL at this age, at these levels were were not was not associated with all cause mortality risk. So what about older than 53 years old with an average population age of 53? So, I'm gonna show data from, the Copenhagen general population study, and this included 58 year old on average, men and women. So, again, this is data, for subjects that were not taking, statins. So no they weren't taking any they didn't they weren't prescribed or taking any, lipid lowering medications. So this is a study that included data included data for 40, about forty two thousand men, and we're looking at all cause mortality on the y axis, plotted against l LDL cholesterol on the x. And then also on the right side of the the y axis, it's got the, population density, which is the thin blue line, which is basically the, you know, the the population based average for the distribution of LDL, and we can see that the average LDL is somewhere around one thirty. Now when looking at the all cause mortality risk data, we can see that lowest risk for all cause mortality for this, age group, is at around one forty milligrams per deciliter, not 50 to 70. So higher again may be better. So, what about increased risk? So, in this case, we can see that there's an increased all cause mortality risk for having LDL values less than one thirty one, but then also greater than one eighty nine. So there's a sweet spot for LDL for this age group. So what about in women? So unlike the earlier data in 40, and 53 year old women where LDL was not associated with an all cause mortality risk, now we start to see that there is a significant association. So when compared with lowest risk, one forty three, an LDL of one forty three was, associated with lowest all cause mortality risk. We see an increased risk, for lower levels, less than 92, but also, greater than one eighty nine. So again, there's a sweet spot for the LDL, for potentially for an optimal range for minimizing, all cause mortality risk. So, can the increased all cause mortality risk for low LDL be explained by reverse causation? So just to briefly introduce that again. So if if you have an illness and that illness then negatively impacts your circulating biomarkers, and then you're, you know, you'd also have a group of people who do not have, you know, over illness and, so they're gonna be grouped together. So to to account for reverse causation, you can, do a few things to try to, to try to identify, you know, is it the sick or is it the sick and disease that are driving the data or is this an effect that's found in the general population that's free of disease? So in in the study that I just showed, they tried to account for reverse causation negatively impacting the data, by, removing subjects that didn't have data for within a five year follow-up. And what that means is basically that, that would be the if if they didn't have a five year follow-up data or up to five years of follow-up, it's possible that the majority of those subjects died, and that's why they didn't have additional follow-up data. So by excluding the, subjects that didn't have five year follow-up data, you're potentially accounting for, reverse causation because you're eliminating that data, from the start. Now inherent in the, potential for people to die within that five year follow-up are dying from individual diseases. So they also, excluded data for people that, were diagnosed with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. For, they excluded people that had cancer and then they excluded people that had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, COPD. And then looked at the data in association in association with all cause mortality risk for each, for you as LDL increased. Okay. So what did they find? So first when looking at, the the first, chart, to the left, so they route people that didn't have five year follow-up data. When compared with, the lowest risk for all cause mortality, which again was at one forty three milligrams per deciliter for LDL. Once again, we see low LDL is associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So what about, after removing, people that were diagnosed with atherosclerosis, at baseline? So, in this case, then again, lowest all cause, mortality risk is for an LDL of one forty with increasing risk, for low levels of LDL and also high levels of LDL as shown by the arrows. What about excluding people diagnosed with cancer at the baseline study visit? Well, in this case, again, LD an optimal, LDL was around one forty three, lowest all cause mortality risk, and then a higher all cause mortality risk was for values lower than one forty three. And then, again, excluding, for, COPD patients that were diagnosed with COPD at the baseline visit, again, having too low or too high above that one thirty two optimal LDL value was associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So this is data in, up to 58 years old. Can we go older? What's the association for LDL with all cause mortality risk in adults older than 58? So, I'm gonna show two studies, first in 74 year olds and then in 94 year olds. So first, we're looking at data for about 70,000, subjects with an average age of 74 years. And all cause mortality is plotted on the y axis against LDL cholesterol on the x. And what we can see is decreasing all cause mortality risk as the LDL is, you know, all the way up to values of LDL greater than one, you know, around one forty one. So we can see that there. When so when compared with, lower LDL, in this case, less than a 100, subjects that had or 74 year olds that had greater than one forty or one forty one had a lower all cause mortality risk. So once again, this is data showing that having, you know, higher LDL but not super high is better than having lower LDL. What about 94 year olds? So this is data from, 935, subjects that had an average age of 94 years, and obviously the sample size is gonna get much smaller as we get to, subjects that are, you know, older than older than 90. So what we can see here, and this is a survival, survival curve, we can see that the black line were was is the survival curve for people who had an LDL greater than one thirty, and the dash line where the, you know, the the the jagged line is had was people who had an LDL less than one thirty. So, this is, you know, up to three and a half years of survival when compared sorry. This is a three and a half year survival after measuring LDL levels at the baseline visit. So they were either higher than one thirty or lower than one thirty. And what we can see is that, that there was a better survival for the 94 year olds that had higher levels of LDL higher than one thirty when compared with the, survival of the people who had, of 94 year olds that had an LDL less than one thirty. So, how high can we go here? What are the LDL levels in even older subjects and centenarians? Is it 50 to 70 or is it higher like I've shown for all of the data through the various age groups? So this is data in a thousand and two centenarians, so, older than a 100 years old. And accordingly, the average age of this cohort was 102 years old. And their average LDL value, that that's in millimoles per liter here, but also I put the data for milligrams per deciliter. Average LDL, 107. Not 50 to 70 as proposed in that paper from 2004 and that I've seen in many circles online, you know, postulating that this is the optimal, LDL for health and and, longevity and minimizing disease risk. So so what is optimal for LDL then? Well, if you're healthy and what I mean by that is disease free, you haven't been diagnosed with a disease and not taking lipid lowering medication, based on all the data I've shown here today, somewhere in the hundred to one forty milligrams per deciliter range for LDL. Now if you are taking Lipidore medication, there is actually data that's different from what I presented here in terms of what's optimal for all cause mortality risk. So if you're interested in, checking that out, just, leave a comment and, I'll post that paper. Alright. That's all I've got for now. You can find me lots of places online. Have a great day.