NAD levels decrease during aging and a major reason for that is because of CD 38, which directly degrades NAD. Well, can we bypass CD 30 eight's effects on NAD by supplementing with nicotinamide riboside n r or nicotinamide mononucleotide So, why would we think that? Well, n r is converted to m n n m n, which is converted into n a d. So by supplementing with n r or n m n, one would expect higher levels of n a d. Well, maybe not. So why maybe not? Because CD 38 degrades NR. So mice that were injected into the abdominal cavity, so IP injection, and then NR levels were, followed over time. In this case shown in the y on the x axis, in you know, thirty minutes after injection, seventy five minutes, and a hundred and fifty minutes after injection with NR. And what we can see is that in the wild type animals, which have CD 38, NR levels rapidly decline. In contrast, CD 38 knockout animals, mice that do not have c CD 38 anywhere in their body, we can see that NR, levels are stable over time. So that suggests or strongly suggest that CD 38 degrades NR. Well, in that situation, it isn't just NR that's getting degraded. The, NMN and NAD are also, lower in animals that have c v 38. So, what about NMN? What if we just give NMN, supplement supplementation to, to mice? What happens? So it's a similar story to the n r, NR story where we can see that, the wild type animals have a rapid decline in NMN levels in, in contrast to the CD 38 knockout animals which have higher levels of NMN when compared with the wild type. So CD 38 degrades NMN. So for maximum efficiency of NR and NMN supplementation on NAD levels, having low levels of CD 38 is gonna be important. Now if everything I just showed was, a major part of the story, why is it that when considering that CD 38 degrades NR, why wasn't NAD, reduced or why wasn't there no change at worst, no change for NAD levels in this n r supplementation study? And I've shown the important data from that study here where a thousand milligrams a day of n r increased n a d levels. However, in two other studies, n a n r supplementation did not increase n a d. So first and left, they supplemented, subjects with two thousand milligrams a day of n r, but n a d levels were not different when compared with, placebo. Similarly, in the, image to the right, adding a thousand milligrams or supplementing with a thousand milligrams a day of NR didn't change NAD levels either. So what's different between these three studies? Why would it work in one situation but not in two others? So the BMI in the first study was twenty four, which is considered, normal weight. Normal weight is considered, BMI less than twenty five. In contrast, in the study to left, the BMI was thirty, which is, defined as obese. And similarly, also obese in the other study, thirty three. So for whatever reason, n r supplementation did not work in the obese subjects, when compared with the normal weight or lean subjects. So what does obesity have to do with the NAD story? So first, what we're looking at is serum, endotoxin activity, sorted by, BMI. So the white bars are in normal weight with with an average BMI of 23 kilograms per meter squared. And, the the gray bars, like shaded bars, the subjects had a BMI of thirty, which is, defined as obese. And what we can see is that the obese subjects had significantly higher, levels of endotoxin. So what is endotoxin? Why is that important? What does that have to do with this, c d 38 and n a d story? So first, endotoxin, which is also known as lipopolysaccharide or LPS, is found in the outer membrane of gram negative bacteria. And just to illustrate, what that means and where it is, so, this is the cell wall of gram negative bacteria, and then this is the outer membrane. And you can see that the shapes, the blue shapes are, lipopolysaccharide, a metabolite that's anchored to the outer membrane of bacteria. So what does LPS have to do with the CD 38 story? Well, in macrophages that are exposed to LPS, after twenty four hours, we can see a five fold increase in this is CD 38 gene expression. So gene expression in macrophages is five fold increase, following exposure to LPS for twenty four hours. And after forty eight hours that the macrophages are exposed to LPS, it's CD 38 gene expression is seven fold increase. Now I didn't show it here, but also, CD 38 gene expression isn't just increased, but CD 38 is then released from the macrophages in response to LPS. So then higher higher systemic levels of CD 38 can go and inhibit NAD metabolism anywhere, which is a bad thing. So with all of these data I just showed you, with obesity, there's increased circulating, LPS And then potentially, when considering the link between LPS and CD 38 gene expression, increase CD 38. Would that explain why there was no effect of NR supplementation on NAD levels in the two studies that had obese subjects? So what does this have to do with aging? We all care about aging. I care about aging. So what does it have to do with aging? Well, LPS increases during aging. First in mice, we're looking at plasma endotoxin levels, which is again LPS. In, young mice, y m versus adult mice. And the young mice are four months, so maximum lifespan of mice is 40. So this is one twelfth of the lifespan. So this is like, data in 12 year olds. And the adult mice were 18 of age. Again, 18 divided by 40 is is, in in equivalent terms for a human, a hundred and twenty year, lifespan is about a 54 year old, subject. So we're comparing 12 year olds with 54, you know, around middle age. And we can see around a two fold increase in the middle age, mice when compared with, young. Similarly, LPS increases during aging in, in people. So we're looking at plasma endotoxin levels, in young 26 year olds versus older adults, 74 year olds. And again, about a two fold increase in old versus young. So when considering these data, age related increase for LPS, potentially increased CD 38 expression, would we then have a decreased efficacy for NR and NMN supplementation on NAD levels? So when considering the effects of LPS on CD 38, which interventions reduce LPS? And, I'm just gonna show data for CR calorie restriction here because that's the gold standard for lifespan extension. Animals, mice that are, calorie restricted don't live a maximum of forty months, they live fifty months. So, you know, a 25% lifespan increase or or around or around that. So, one mechanism for that lifespan extension may involve that, calorie restricted my CR have lower levels of serum endotoxin as shown here. So when compared with the ad lib mice, meaning they eat as much as they want, animals that ate or mice that ate 40% fewer calories had about half the serum endotoxin levels. So with this in mind, CR decreases LPS, potentially having low CD 38 levels. Would that lead to maximize NAD levels in calorie restricted mice and humans? So I couldn't find any randomized, control trials using calorie restriction and then, measurement of NAD. But in in, you know, yeast and worms and other model organisms, calorie restricted is calorie restriction is well documented to increase NAD. So I'd posit that one mechanism for that may involve calorie restriction's ability to reduce, systemic levels of LPS. Now when considering that the LPSC 38 story, another interesting hypothesis is that calorie restriction plus n r or n m n, would we get further increased n a d and or maximize n a d as high as the system could get for that. So that's all I've got for now. You can find me lots of places online. Have a great day.