Today's video is going to be all about chocolate. And one reason for that is because a couple of months ago, a paper was published that showed chocolate consumption to be associated with reduced risk for all cause and cause specific mortality. So let's have a look at the data. So here, we're looking at the hazard ratio for all cause mortality to risk on the y axis plotted against chocolate consumption and servings per week on the x axis. And note that one serving of chocolate was defined as less than one average bar or less than one ounce, so about 28 grams. Now, the hazard ratio of one is where we can assess statistical significance. So when the purple the dashed purple dotted lines, which is indicative of the 95% confidence interval, is completely below a hazard ratio of one, in this case, we have statistical significance. So what does the data show? When compared with the red arrow, people who consume no chocolate, we can see that the green arrow was the lowest all cause mortality risk, and now it's present for a little bit more than half of a serving of chocolate per week, So around 18 grams of chocolate per week. But note that for all chocolate intakes, one up to eight plus servings per week, we can see that the dashed purple line is below a hazard ratio of one, which, when compared with no chocolate intake, all cause mortality risk was reduced for all chocolate intakes as high as eight plus servings per week in never smokers. So what about in smokers? So in smokers, there was a a lesser effect where, it was about eight to a nine percent decreased all cause mortality risk, ACM risk, for current or firm former smokers and with a pretty large sample size too similar to the nonsmoker, so about 47,000 subjects. But in their case, it was significant for one serving of chocolate per week when compared with no servings of chocolate per week. And then higher intakes of chocolate were not associated with the reduced all cause mortality risk in the current or former smokers. So a small amount of chocolate may be beneficial based on this data when compared with, not eating any chocolate. Now cause specific mortality was also reduced, not just all cause mortality risk. So let's have a look at that data. So first, starting with cardiovascular disease mortality, when comparing people who didn't eat any chocolate, so the, zero chocolate intake per week, that was defined as the reference. And then when looking at higher intakes of chocolate per week, so up to half a serving, zero to point five, half a serving to one serving, one to two servings per week, and then greater than two servings per week, we can see that all intakes of chocolate above zero, regardless of the model, so the less adjusted model, model one, including more variables, model two, and then the fully adjusted model, model three, we can see that all intakes of chocolate above zero was associated with a significantly reduced cardiovascular disease mortality risk. Similarly, Alzheimer's disease mortality risk was also reduced for people who consumed, more chocolate than none. So when compared with no chocolate intake, which was used as the reference, we can see that half a serving up to two servings, per day, regardless of the model, model one, two, or three, was associated with significantly reduced Alzheimer's disease mortality risk. Now, models one and two weren't significantly associated with a reduced Alzheimer's disease mortality risk for people who consume more than two servings of chocolate per day, but we can see the fully adjusted model, model three, was indeed statistically significant for, people who consumed more than two servings of chocolate per week when compared with no chocolate per week. Also note that, up to half a serving per week for Alzheimer's disease mortality risk was not significantly different from people who did not consume any chocolate per week. So based on this, we can conclude that chocolate consumption is significantly associated with a reduced risk for cardiovascular and Alzheimer's disease mortality. Now note that cancer, cerebrovascular, and respiratory mortality were not significantly associated with any intake of chocolate. So is this just related to healthy user bias? So do people who eat more chocolate than none have a healthier overall lifestyle which is potentially explaining these effects? So to assess that, they, the authors of this study examined some metrics that can be related to healthy user bias including, the amount of physical activity in minutes per week, fruit and vegetable intake, and added sugar. So for in people that consume no chocolate, they actually had higher levels of physical activity and fruit and vegetable intake when compared with people who had relatively higher amounts of chocolate intake as shown there with the red box. Similarly, people who consume no chocolate had a lower added sugar intake when compared with the, chocolate consumers more than two servings per week who had almost double of an added sugar intake. So from this, we can conclude that maybe healthy user bias is not involved here, that, chocolate consumers were less physically active, ate less fruit and vegetables, but more added sugars. So note that this study is based on associations, and association doesn't equal causation. So is there, is there data for an impact of chocolate on health in randomized controlled trials, RCTs? So in one of these, and there are many RCTs for chocolates, intake chocolate intake's effects on health, and I'll link to those studies below for So I'm just gonna go through one of these studies, in this video. So in this study, they compared people consuming a 100 grams per day of dark chocolate versus 90 of white chocolate in 15 subjects for fifteen days. And this was this was in relative to young subjects that were at 34 years old and had a normal weight, BMI of twenty three. So first, what was the effect on insulin sensitivity? So to assess that, they, looked at HOMA IR, which is the homeostasis model assessment, and the IR stands for insulin resistance. So they compared HOMA IR values, which are calculated based on fasting data for insulin and glucose in people before the study started and then after the fifteen days when they were consuming the a hundred grams per day of dark chocolate. And then similarly, they compared HOMA IR values before and after the study for people who were consuming white chocolate. Now note that white chocolate, differs from all of the other chocolates. So milk, dark, bittersweet, cocoa powder, cocoa beans, etcetera. White chocolate contains, cocoa butter but no cocoa solids which contain, most of the polyphenols and that'll become important in a in a minute. So in terms of insulin sensitivity as defined by HOMA IR, a lower HOMA IR value is indicative of more insulin sensitivity. And we can see in that the the people that were consuming the dark chocolate, they had a reduction in HOMA IR, which is an improvement insulin sensitivity. In contrast, the people that were consuming white chocolate did not see a reduction in HOMA IR. No reduction, no improvement in insulin sensitivity. So the authors of this study oh, just a just as a quick blurb. So there was, this data shows that there was improved insulin sensitivity in the dark, but not the white chocolate group. So the authors of this study also looked at the effect of chocolate intake on blood pressure in the two different, groups, dark chocolate versus white chocolate. And that's what we can see here. So systolic blood pressure on the y axis before and after, so not consuming, so before the study started and then after dark chocolate consumption. And then similarly, we see systolic blood pressure on the y axis here before and after white chocolate consumption. And what we can see is that in the dark chocolate consumers, there was a reduction in blood pressure for the dark chocolate group but not in the white chocolate group. So what are some potential mechanisms for chocolate's effects on health? And one potential explanation involves the polyphenol epicatechin. So why is epicatechin important? Well, simply, it extends lifespan at least in mice. So that's what's shown here. So in this study, epicatechin EC, was administered in the drinking water to 20 old mice, which, when considering a 40, maximal lifespan in mice, that's equivalent to about a 60 year old person. So OC are the, old controls that were not given epicatechin compared to the EC epicatechin. So this was a study that was a thirty seven week study, and then after thirty seven weeks, they assessed survival in epicatechin supplemented versus the old mice that were not getting not eat not drinking, epicatechin. So after thirty seven weeks in the, old controls, so no catechin, only thirty nine percent, of the mice were still alive. In contrast, the epicatechin supplement in mice, seventy percent was were still alive. And then even seven weeks after this the thirty seven week study, forty four percent of the epicatechin mice were still alive so we can see that lifespan extending effect of epicatechin. So, with that in mind, how much epicatechin is in chocolate? So this is data obtained from the USDA flavonoid database and I'll link to that, in the description below video's description below. So here, we're looking at, white chocolate, milk chocolate, dark chocolate, and bittersweet chocolate. So white chocolate has no epicatechin content, and this is in milligrams of epicatechin per 100 grams of food. Milk chocolate has more, eleven, milligrams per 100 grams. Dark chocolate has 42 to 84 per 100 grams. And then, bittersweet chocolate, or sorry, baking chocolate, which is essentially the same thing, has a hundred and forty three milligrams of epicatechin per 100 grams. But cocoa powder is the all star here for epicatechin content. As we can see, it has a hundred and ninety six milligrams of epicatechin per 100 grams. Now, these are all processed. All of these versions of chocolate are the processed version of the whole food which is cocoa beans. So to get, epicatechin into my diet, I grind whole, cocoa beans and I mix them with dates. And, also note that I've tracked my dietary intake as many of you know on this channel. Since 2015, I've been tracking macro and micronutrients and I started tracking food intake in July 2018. So with that in mind, is 18 of chocolate, and that should be per week, or some other amount optimal for health? And we can assess that by looking at my own n of one data. So how much cocoa is optimal based on my own n of one data? And as I mentioned, I have three plus years of, everyday tracking my dietary intake. And over that time period, I have 17 blood tests that correspond. So this is gonna be my average daily, cocoa bean intake versus the big picture biomarkers. And if you've seen my recent videos, these are biomarkers of overall systemic health as shown here. So there are 22, biomarkers including glucose, which should be obvious for any, pro longevity strategy. In recent videos, I had homocysteine here, but I only have six blood tests for homocysteine so I didn't include it for this video. But as I have more data for homocysteine, I'll likely include it. So I've got three markers of kidney function, four markers of liver function, all of the major lipoproteins. I've got a few immune cells, the major immune cells, neutrophils, lymphocytes, percentage lymphocytes, platelets, red blood cells, and then a couple of red blood cell related measures, inflammation including high sensitivity c reactive protein, and then the overall biological age score when using Levine's Phenotypic Age and aging dot ai. And note that the little n is indicative of how many blood tests that I have over this three plus year period. So what is co cocoa, my average daily cocoa bean intake associated with? Is it associated with any biomarkers going the right direction or in the wrong direction? So first, in terms of biomarkers going in the right direction, we can see that a relatively higher cocoa bean intake is associated with a lower, amount of AST, the liver enzyme acrylate aminotransferase, and that's potentially a good thing because my AST, levels can trend as high as 40. And if you've missed my AST video, value somewhere in the low twenties, may be optimal. So that's one biomarker going in the right direction. Similarly, a higher cocoa bean intake is significantly correlated with higher higher levels of red bloods red blood cells, and that's important because red blood cells decline during aging. Now, conversely, also going in the right direction though is a higher cocoa bean intake is associated with a lower MCV. MCV or the mean red blood cell volume, increases during aging and relatively higher levels are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk so that they're associated with lower a lower MCVs potentially going in the right direction. So I've got three biomarkers going in the right direction in correlation with cocoa bean intake. What about going in the wrong direction? So there's only one that's, statistically significant and that's the percentage of lymphocytes. So a relatively higher cocoa bean intake is correlated with correlated with a lower percentage of lymphocytes. And the percentage of lymphocytes declines during aging, so that's just one reason why that's going in the wrong direction. So the overall score there is plus two. Three going in the right direction, one going in the wrong direction in terms of their correlation with my cocoa bean intake. But note that one of these four significant correlations, at least based on the nominal p value with a p value less than 0.05, may be a false positive. And that's because by definition, when the p value is 0.05, that means you've got one false positive for 20 measurements, and I just did 22 measurements. So it's possible that one of these will be a false positive. So to account for that, we can, we can calculate the adjusted p value. And in this, example, I used the Benjaminie Hochberg Hochberg method. So that, helps to ask the question, what's the probability that the nominally significant p values are false positives? So, in this case, when looking at the four sig statistically significant, values based on p values, we can see that the adjusted p values range from 0.17 to 0.2 o. So there isn't really an improvement in p over p values in this case as there's an 80 to 83% chance, that these four correlations are not false positives. So, based on this data, it when considering that one of them may be a false positive, at worst, the net score is plus one. So instead of having three going in the right direction, now it's two. Two versus one going the wrong direction, net plus one. But at best, I've got a net of plus three. For example, the lymph lymphocyte percentage may be a false positive, so it'll be three going the right direction, none going in the wrong direction. So when considering that the overall effect is net positive in this case, cocoa bean intake is significantly correlated with a better than average effect on my, systemic biomarkers. Now note that if there were there was an equal amount of biomarkers going in the right and wrong direction, the net effect would be neutral. And conversely, if I had more biomarkers going in the wrong direction and then in the right direction, that would suggest that cocoa cocoa bean intake would have a net negative effect on my overall systemic health. So with that in mind and based on this data, how much cocoa, may be optimal for me? So this is my cocoa bean intake over the past three plus years period and each data point, corresponds to the average intake that corresponds to a blood test. So during this three plus year period, my average daily cocoa bean intake is 12 grams per day, but I have a pretty wide range from as low as about one gram, of cocoa beans per day to about 18, 19, grams per day. So when considering that my net score was positive, this suggests that, I should eat somewhere, from my average intake to my highest intake. If the net score was neutral, I'd eat as close to my average as possible. And if my net score was negative, I'd eat below my average intake for the next blood test. And then I would continually reassess these correlations this to try to get as close to the truth as possible. Now note that in in contrast with the Zhang et al study that identified 18 grams of chocolate per week as optimal, my own n of one data suggests that somewhere between 12 to, you know, about 19 grams of cocoa beans per day, not per week, may be optimal. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more, in terms of my biohacking approach, for aging, you can check us out on Patreon and, thanks for watching. I hope you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.