I wanna jump right in. And, I think I think a lot a lot more people in the aging space know about you, you know, man. It wasn't like that ten years ago, which is crazy. I'm you know, I knew about you, but most people didn't still. So, I think it's important that we, start from, your lab being one of the few, if the only, that's extended lifespan without using drugs or, you know, any pharmaceuticals you can think of or calorie restriction. So I think I I think a good place to start would be the experimental evolution approach explaining that and then going into the magnitude of the lifespan extension that you saw as a result. Okay. Well, thank you for this opportunity, Mike. And it's it's it's great to be interacting with you like this. Cool. I've been admired yourself for some time. Oh my. So in 1977 at the University of Sussex Library, I was reading an article by, a very early, gerontology person called Watier, a Belgian, who actually had worked in the lab of Theodosius Stojansky. But Watteau was a neo Lamarckian and he was looking for neo Lamarckian effects on lifespan. And he did a experiment where he bred flies exclusively from older adults. He did this in two different Drosophila species, subobscura and pseudoobscura. And in both cases, he got an increase in lifespan which he interpreted in terms of the lancing effect or an an inverse lancing effect because when lancing did it, the flag it was staffed and it died out for completely different reasons. I I read the article and I thought, oh, Yi modified the first stage of reproduction which according to Hamilton's forces of natural selection means that given enough time, these populations should involve delayed aging. And, which which was not Waitiel's interpretation of his own experiment whatsoever. So I thought well why don't I do a cleaner version of this experiment using nicely outbred fruit flies which I did during my doctorate at Sussex in the 1970s. And it worked just as well for me in my one population pilot experiment as it had for Watteau. And I wrote up that experiment and a few others that I've been doing during my doctorate. I sent them off to an obscure journal called Nature which, published the article in 1980. It's called A Test of Evolutionary Theories of Senescence. And, I was so enamored with this very simple experimental evolution project where you just change the early stage at which you allow organisms to reproduce and then you take advantage of evolutionary genetic theory, the most hardcore theory in biology, and it does the work for you. Only, second time I did the experiment starting in 1980 I did it with five populations, with delayed reproduction and five control populations. And off we went, starting in February 1980 and, those populations still exist. They I sold them to, an antiaging company called Mesquite, which still owns them. And, I still work with them intermittently as a consultant to to various companies that are interested in working with those. Since then in my lab, University of California in Irvine, we have taken lifespan up using experimental evolution, taking it down, using experimental evolution, taking it back up again. We have also modified lifespan using diet, using drugs as have other people. So I have been manipulating aging since 1977 as well as studying this underlying genetics, genomics, and transcriptomics in partnership ever since the nineteen seventies. And all of the work suggests that, aging is not, an uncontrollable process of molecular damage. It is instead the tuning of adaptation of the two age, which is easily done by natural selection, which indeed, through its dereliction of doing that job engenders aging. And, the genomic means by which natural selection tunes aging involves hundreds of sites in the genome. Not one, not two, not seven, hundreds as I said in dozens of interviews over the last decade. And that in turn tunes hundreds of transcript levels both qualitatively and quantitatively and it in turn tunes hundreds of metabolites of all different kinds and then it retunes all the organ systems in the flies. The hard thing is to find something that is not connected to aging. Almost everything is connected to aging even in a very simple organism like a very far And I would say very confidently by way of extrapolation, I think it means also. So you So So you started from the same founder group of flies, and then you separated them into the long live versus the short short live? Or, yeah. Is it is that's basically the Well, the the the the the material protocol is to tune the life cycle. If you tune the life cycle so that there's a long period of time between when an egg becomes or is given, adult that is produced by the egg is given the opportunity to reproduce. The longer that life cycle is, the greater the lifespan that that population will evolve and it does so at considerable speed. And then if you then reverse the procedure and take long life cycles wise and even shorter life cycles, they will rapidly evolve shorter lifespans. And so going up, going down, going up, going down, that's something I've now been doing for forty four years. Yeah. So that so that approach is clearly showing that you can use evolution to extend lifespan and not extend it by a little bit, by 10 or 15 or 20%, you know, by by Two times, three times, five times. Yeah. So the question is how many generations did it take before you saw, say, a doubling of lifespan in in Drosophila? The doubling of lifespan took about 80 generations. 80 generations. So twenty five years if we're gonna extrapolate that into human years. Right? Twenty five years per generation. So we're looking at, what, two thousand years? 80 times 25? Right. So so, together with my very good colleague, Larry Mueller, we published a paper in around 1990, somewhere between '89 and '91, about thirty years ago, on how long it would take if you wanted to use this approach with human lifespan. And it's not worth doing. So actually, since '84 at the instigation at First of Journalists and then by more and more people that I've met over the last, thirty seven years, I've I've been working on coming up with faster and faster ways of doing this that don't involve experimental evolution. So okay. Can you can you tell us more about that or is that, a Sure. So so we published an article in, what was it? Early two let me try to get the year. Circa 2010 in a book called The Future of Aging. It was edited by Greg Faye and Steve Gools and a couple of other people where, we outlined one idea that, a company called Chinesse was founded on, and that company still exists. And that was basically a layered supplementation approach. Very Michael Westgardens, I might say. Except instead of experimenting on Michael Westgardens himself, the idea was to experiment with fruit flies and see what we could get to work there and, look at the omics of how it was done in fruit flies and then use an omic bridge to to humans because so much of our genomes are transcriptomes and metabolomes over the lab. So would have been an omic, guided, bridging to human intervention. So that was a technology I was very enamored with fifteen years ago when that company was founded. Then I founded another company with a man called Larry Cabral about six years ago. It's called Lyceum. And that was based on another strategy and I don't know if the company is mostly still in student business but the website might still be up. And, so I've gone through a whole succession of of technological ideas for how to intervene in the human aging process that do not involve experimental evaluation, and I'm still, interested in that project. So wouldn't so, I guess the idea would be to come up with a cocktail of as many different or, you know, supplements, drugs, etcetera, as possible to kinda replicate the, omic, multi omic, signature that you see in the extended lifespan dramatically extended lifespan in the, food flies. But I'm guessing that that's gonna fall short because, I mean, you're you know, as you mentioned, you're dealing with hundreds of genes and then hundreds of transcriptomic sites and then, you know, maybe more than that in terms of metabolites. So how close were you able to get using the multi, multisupplement, you know, drug based approach in terms of, extending lifespan in flies? So Genescient made a good start in that project, and that research actually led to a supplement which is available right now. It's marketed by a company called Cheniere, g e n a I r e. And I can't remember the name of the product, but you can look up the company name on Amazon. I was not directly involved in developing that that product or testing it, but it eased some of my ideas. And and, I guess, I think they call it rebuilder or something like that. And, right now it's being marketed as a cognitive health product. Since I left Gymnasium in 2010, for the last eleven years I've been very interested in using AI more precisely machine learning to, master the intricacies of going from fruit fly genomes to human genomes, of going from, omic effects to clinical efficacy in humans. We are now engaged in a series of publications which started in 2017 with a massive, genomics paper. And, then in 2018, we published our AI methodology, which is called FLAM, f l I e m. Look, we didn't develop the machine learning tool. In that article, first author is is Moore, m e l r e r, l d Moore, my last author. That presents some of the machine learning we use. Then in 2019, we published a transcriptomics paper. We are working on the tableomic stuff. Haven't submitted the manuscript yet. So, you know, in parallel with my aging career, I've just generally worked on quantitative genetics of adaptation. And and aging is just in a sense an aspect of adaptation. And, you know, right from my earliest work on this stuff in the late seventies, it was quite apparent that the genetic foundations of adaptation and aging are complex. So one of the things I have worked on very hard over the last forty one years is strategies for unpacking complexity and making our way through complexity both from the standpoint of scientific inference and from the standpoint of technological intervention. So, as some of your listeners or viewers may already know, I did a website called 55 theses, t h e s e s, modeled after Martin Luther's 95 theses, but shorter, And they're here. Where I I try to outline the insights that I had as of ten years ago. But over the last ten years, we've made a lot of additional progress, which we're trying to publish. I mean, we are publishing it in this sort of sequence of papers that started in 2017. You can find them on my Google Scholar page, Michael Argo's, and most of our publications since, 2017 in the same. And there'll be more to come over the next three years. We have one, under review, under endless revision of the journal. I will not know to protect the guilty. So I think by 2023, People interested in genomics, people interested in adaptation, people interested in aging should all have a pretty clear understanding of how complicated the core omics foundations of all this stuff are and also how machine learning can sort through all these things and, thus potentially furthermore how we can bounce back around going from, you know, fruit flies to humans, humans back to fruit flies, and make all the connections thanks to biology. Because it turns out that the Metazoan toolkit for adaptation and for aging has huge overlaps. You're not when you do experiments with Drosophila or for that matter humans, you're not just studying Drosophila or humans. You're studying basic features of aging, adaptation, and genomics that are in common between medicinal the majority of the time, the clear majority of the time. And, you know, we're gonna be making that quite clear. First, with Christoffel, then we'll be doing some projects with humanomic data and the same machine learning tools and using So the the 55 pieces, your website is a great segue coming going from the machine learning approach into actionable ways to, extend human lifespan now. Right? But then Mhmm. Once once the machine learning, approach has characterized the omics of, you know, extreme longevity, at least in Drosophila. Mhmm. And the challenge is gonna be, and even if even if slash when that's done in humans within the next few years, the challenge is gonna be, how do you positively impact that impact that with the goal of getting significant increases in lifespan. And, unfortunately, in the reductionist science era that we live in, most studies are gonna be one supplement at a time. And if you propose multi ingredient formulations, probably it'll get back at or rejected in review. So So there what do you think about the technical hurdles in terms of going from characterizing the phenotype of comprehensive characterization of the phenotype of aging into now using the similar machine learning approach to, get dramatic increases in in, health and lifespan. Okay. So there's an intermediate step that I think is available in this decade. You can use all the same tools in order to properly characterize what supplements or pharmaceuticals you're doing. As you know full well, the only real difference between supplement and the pharmaceutical is its legal status. Right? So, basically, any given supplement of pharmaceutical is going to have effects that are as complicated as the effects of experimental evolution. And evidence to to that effect has been accumulating over the last twenty years since we got good genomic and in some transcription tools. There is no simplicity to be found even if you are doing one substance unit interventions. All through the twentieth century, you know, biology was the science of the math phobic except for my fields, which are evolution and quantitative genetics, which is where those of us who like math, That's how we do our biology. We do it with math and serious math, not trivial math. Well it turns out that in the twentieth century, this kind of kindergarten for biology where biologists got away with doing the simplest experiments that could give you interpretable results which are great, you know, for genetic diseases. Where you do have one or a few major pathways that are colossally screwed up. But as soon as you step away from that to most people's chronic aging associated disorders, thus aging itself, you're dealing with a whole world of painful complexity, which only people with my background will enjoy. Unfortunately, genomics arrived, at the end of the twentieth century, start of the twenty first century, and qualitatively blew up the game for the reductionist who wanted to study anything more complicated than genetic diseases or, you know, the consequences of simple pathogens of viruses. So even though the reduction is still low to admit it and even though they dominate NIH in large swathes of NSF, they're dead. They're just scientifically and technologically dead in the water. They're floating. They stand, you know, like William Holden at the start of Sunset Boulevard. It's over for them. And, you know, like the, heliocentric, tole Ptolemaic astronomers, in the seventeenth century, the century of Galileo and Newton, they are not accepting their obsolescence with any great grace, magnanimity or care for the welfare of their god human. They're fighting tooth and nail against the destruction of reductionism. But reductionism is being destroyed with every good genomic transcriptomic and metabolomic publication because they all show complexity. And the beauty of it is people like myself, Alex Havrenkov, a whole bunch of other people are just, you know, we're not hanging around if you know the reductionist. We're just moving on. And we're using machine learning tools to try to parse that complexity and find ways forward. And and that that's where the action is going to be. So even with the machine learning based approach, and I'm a 100% on board. I've been thinking about that for the longest time too. So even with the machine learning based approach, let's say you've got a big study of thousands of hundreds of thousands of more people, and you use machine learning AI based approach to come up with, a set of parameters that could potentially extend health and lifespan in that cohort. At the end of the day, though, for the average person, they still would have to use the machine learning based approach using some computational tools to predict if the if this, you know, what worked in that big study would work for them based on their genetics, their environment, etcetera. So so now there are two layers involved. It's machine learning at the big, you know, the macros the macro and then down to the individual because if the individual is just gonna, hey. It worked in that study. That's what it they came up with, and they're just gonna take it based on faith. It could do more harm than good. Right? So Okay. Okay. So, I have two, I think, important but straightforward things to say about that. The first thing is people do this kind of machine learning interaction every day. When you use Google search, you are using a very carefully constructed set of machine learning tools that deal with vast amounts of complexity in in less than a second in order to address the individual concerns of individual people. Okay? So people, whether they realize it or not, are interfacing with gigantic databases and very powerful machine learning tools when you, you know, looking to buy an item on Amazon doing the same stuff. Okay? So whether people look under the hood or not, your lives are totally entangled with machine learning tools. So all we're doing is is extending them into the realm of biology even though the vast majority of professional biologists who got their PhDs before 2000 hate it. I mean, they're not neutral about it. They hate it because it's just not how they were trained in how biology should be done because, you know, frankly, they were never evolutionary geneticists or quantitative genes to begin with. Whereas a lot of the tools that, genomicists use are back end, quantitative genetics tools. So the GOS is a kind of quantitative genetics type of analytic. So the first thing is, you know, the future is of technologies, including biological technologies, will be dominated by machinery. That's just a fact, and people who can't accept it can't really be that effective in twenty first century. The second thing I would say is I'm not really fond of the idea of people sitting at home with their laptop googling a supplement and saying, well, gee, how much of this random supplement that somebody published in Japan based on the study of, using the supplement on 12 inbred mice, compared to, you know, eight inbred mice, 12 on the supplement, eight not on the supplement. And the 12 on the supplement lived, you know, three months longer. I'm not fond of that kind of, biomedical intervention. I have any number of friends and acquaintances who do that routinely. A number of them have died because I've known these people for more than thirty years. I have never seen any really obvious substantial benefits accruing to them. What the yeah. I was saying was the big the big, you know, even though machine learning is definitely gonna identify, supplements, you know, that can extend life lifespan in big cohorts Mhmm. And I get the idea that machine learning is ubiquitous in our lives. It's everywhere now. But if I wanna if I wanna, you know, if I have my own blood test data and I wanna use a machine learning approach to identify the best panel of supplement that will extend my health and vigor and all those things, it doesn't exist yet. I don't know when it will exist. I can only hope that it will exist sometime in the in the near future. But Okay. Okay. So I have a confession to make. So on the order of ten years ago, I proposed to the company that I then worked for, Genesee, that they create such an online interface for people exactly like you to use. And I no longer think that that's a good idea. Why? So so ten years ago, I was literally trying to create Utopia for my floss garden. You know? Because you're one of the few people you're sort of the dream client for that website, because of your experience and your dedication of use of data. Yep. I now know a lot more than I knew then. And, to be fairly candid with you, I think it takes the resources of a pharma company to do a good job of going from omic data to, recommendations for supplement use or pharmaceutical use for that matter. I think the use of pharmaceuticals for aging associated diseases right now is pretty much barbaric. The lack of appropriate use of relatively obtainable information about the genomes and transcriptomes of patients, is a travesty. I think that that is one of the most important growth areas in medicine. If if I may be very, like, if I may view the biomedical establishment from an altitude like the orbit of the moon, you have basic ohmic research which of course is going to depend more and more on machine learning because it's too damn complicated and they're part of the same way. You can't find a result for one site in a genome or one transcript and you transcript them and invent a verbal story and go from there to a phone super. It's ridiculous. But machine learning can take you through the omicron and guide you and that's the work of omicists aided by machine learning people. And of course that's a big, you know, activity right now in the world. More and more companies are doing exactly what I just described. You don't go from those companies to individuals in my opinion. You go from those companies to big pharma or a moderate sized pharma And then you go from them to, you know, you don't even go to individual physicians. You go to major health care providers like the NHS, Kaiser Permanente, and you have their biomedical scientists interacting with the pharma companies, interacting with the big omic databases and AI servers to knit a very big challenging arc of technologies together. That's how I now think ten years later because I have the benefit of ten additional years of very powerful online and machine learning research with my colleagues. So that that whole umbrella, you know, of of collaboration is gonna take time. That's not something that can develop, you know, quickly. And not just that. It's, you know, once with data, there becomes interpretation of the data. And even with machine learning, you know, you're gonna have an interpretation of your output. Right? So even there, you know, there may be three or four different roads that lead to the same health health or lifespan extension, and then it becomes I hear what you're saying in terms of the, you know, the different companies, you know, giving you the ability to use the machine learning the individual the ability to use the machine learning approach. But, not not to sound cynical, but when you look at the at least the American health care system and how literally, you know, f that is, I can now you're gonna have a a group of companies who won't let me do my own analysis, but I have to follow what their analysis is and hope that their methods, which may or may not be published, are gonna actually lead me on the right path. So separately separately from that, in terms of the, just along the Actually, I'll just comment, Mike, that I totally accept your concerns. Yeah. Like, I but I'm a like you said, I'm a different breed. You know? I wanna be able to run the analysis myself, do the interpretation myself so that I can actually then make, you know, this reasonable decision or not. Right? As opposed to leaving it in the hands of, well, you know, we know better than you, you know, and I don't know. So for many people, maybe that's the case. They'll they'll appreciate that, but I'm in a different boat. Okay. Caleb, let me just stop you there. Yep. Alright. So one of the reasons why I dropped the idea that I had ten years ago, which was, you know, Google for more frustrating people, not as good as you, but aspiring to be as good as you, was I came up with a a different short term bridge, which is, the age and ancestry appropriate tuning of diet and lifestyle. And in 2020 with Grant Rutledge, who I believe you've met and and know, it was his doctoral thesis. We showed, the relationship between evolutionary history both recent and long term and diet. And, speaking of somebody, you know, over 60, who started down this journey about ten years ago, I have had far better results from tuning ordinary foods in terms of my particular evolutionary history, than I have ever had in in in your vein of intervention. So I my ancestry is mostly from the Northwestern Periphery of Eurasia, which means I'm not as well adapted to agricultural foods as somebody who's ancestry is Middle Eastern or South Asian. And, fairly early on in my life, I started using adaptation to agricultural foods. And as I got older through middle age, it got worse and worse. And so for my ancestry, as you approach, as you get into middle age you have to eat fewer and fewer agricultural foods. If my ancestry were entirely from Australasia, like original Australasia before the Europeans showed up, I should never have consumed agricultural foods. You know, like, bread and milk are toxic for people with entirely indigenous Australasian ancestry. And, so there's a spectrum from the peoples who are wholly unadapted agricultural foods because they didn't eat them at all before two hundred years ago, which is like a an instant in evolutionary time, to people from, you know, places like Iraq or Pakistan would be very well adapted to grain based and milk based diets potentially to their fifties. But I think by the time every human reaches their sixties, they are no longer adapted to agricultural foods because of the ways in which the forces of natural selection d two with age and a response to a recent evolutionary change, which if if people go to my Google Scholar page and look up the most recent publications in 2020, we'll see two, in my opinion, fantastic publications from Grant Rutledge, r u t l e d g e, on how to tune your diet according to your ancestry. It's on the data. Evolutionary history. Besides your own personal personal anecdote in in how getting rid of the grains in your in your diet actually improved your intestinal health. But beyond that, what I guess you didn't mention was that, you actually switched, fruit flies who are raised on, in in lab diets. I guess it's on banana banana based and molasses. Mhmm. Yep. Yep. Closer to their ancestral diets, which is what more apple based or, like fruit fruit fly. Right? So and that extended their lifespan relative to the, lab based diet of molasses. Or was it banana? I can't can't remember. It's banana and molasses. And and the banana and molasses diet is, a diet which some of our populations have adapted to for a thousand generations. That's actually longer than a period of time since the European Revolution in Europe. Substantially longer. And nonetheless, they sometimes those flies perform better when young on their version their agricultural diet, meaning their recent evolutionary diet. But at later ages, like our sixties or late fifties, a diet they have not seen for a thousand generations is better for them, which is if somebody had told me about this experiment twenty years ago, I wouldn't believe it. But but that's what the math suggested, math done with my colleague Larry Muller. And that's what Grant's experiments have shown is that long abandoned diets, if you have if a species has recently changed its core dietary practices, and by recently clearly means, you know, less than 10,000 generations. So, and and with respect to agricultural diets, there's no human population which goes back more than a thousand generations on agricultural diet. So the principles are very general because the math is completely general. It's not there's not nothing specific about proof wise or humans in the math, and it's very solid. And Grant's strong inference experimentation has supported that mathematical result. So that turns out to be a pretty fantastic, multi supplement approach where those supplements are really foods. And you eliminate the toxic things, which for people 50 are grains, rice, corn, food derived from milk from any mammal, and, legumes. And your health will get a lot better. It should also be said that brand new industrial food products that are novel to the human diet since 1850, nobody's adapted to tifectric cancer. Nobody's adapted to processed seed oils. Nobody's adapted to trans fats. Those are nobody's adapted to nitrites as a preservative. Those are somewhere in the toxin to poison spectrum. Yep. So so then, when considering when considering alright. So I get I get that after a certain age, we're not evolutionarily adapted. You know, we we can get away with eating those foods at a younger age, but when you get to a certain age and then we're just not evolutionarily adapted because millions of years of evolution, we grew you know, we we existed on a certain diet. So but, you know, not that I'm trying to justify, including the the foods that we didn't evolve, eating, but, you know, just as there are, you know, about five percent of centenarians who can get there by smoking cigarettes, not that I would recommend smoking cigarettes, you know, because ninety five percent of the people get there are are not smoking cigarettes. But Exactly. I think at the end of the day, it's important to, you know, have some objective markers of health. Because if somebody can't this, you know, because if they enjoy eating in a certain way and they have biomarkers in health that suggests that overall, it's either net neutral or beneficial, then, you know, continue. But I hear what you're saying. For most people, that is not gonna be the case. But it it's region specific, right, as you mentioned. Okay. So so, Mike, I totally endorse your core idea. I just think it's an order of magnitude, maybe two orders of magnitude more complicated than people now want to think. I do think the transcriptomic and metabolomic markers of health are in play right now, and we will develop them this decade using gigantic omic databases and machine learning. And I predict that there will be hundreds of transcriptomic and metabolomic markers of health. And that your generic pharmaceutical statin, leukophage or whatever will change at least tens of percents of those. And some small fraction in positive ways and I predict a larger fraction in negative ways and if you don't then use machine learning itself to tune your own physiology with the resources of a pharma company behind you, you're in a fool's errand because I mean, I think you pushed the limit of what is now possible in person. And I I, you know, I certainly think you are identifying some of the biomarkers that have mattered. The only question in my mind is whether you're dealing with, you know, 1% or 3% Right. Of all the biomarkers that we need to get entered to. Yep. So Yeah. That goes into the, issue of, does aging stop? Because, obviously, your lab has has data that shows that aging does indeed stop, albeit towards the end of life. Most people would prefer it if that right? We shifted that to the left. Mhmm. So if you consider so if you consider that if you have a biochemical phenotype of youth and you know what that looks like, even if it's 3% or some percent more. We don't know what the whole picture is that I'm actually studying, but let's assume that it's more than 3% just for argument's sake. If you know what the biochemo type of youth looks like and you act actively intervene to maintain that for as long as you physically can before the point of natural selection are, you know, no longer driving you to live that long. Right? And now you Mhmm. Are on the okay. So in theory, you could identify using, you know, objective biomarkers of health and, you can identify a personal approach that could extend you, for as long as your genetics will allow. So what do you think? K. Let me just stop you. Let me just stop you. Yeah. Wait. Qualitatively, I totally notice what you just said. And I think in this century, we're doing exactly that. But do you know who Robert Goddard was? No. G o d a r d? The name sounds familiar, but no. He was the American pioneer of rocketry. And he never had the kind of resources that Verne von Braun had. A very good reason, you know, Adolf Hitler didn't go to The United States at the Arctic. And the Nazis were total futurists when it came to technology unlike The United States before, Manhattan Project. So Robert Goddard in the twenties and thirties was building rockets himself, personally. They were nice rockets. They they were I think some of them got up to 18 feet high. And you'd go, well, now what we need to do is build bigger and better rockets and, you know, we'll be able to travel to the moon. And, qualitatively, that's absolutely correct. Okay? But to actually do it required really effing big rockets, and it required a huge amount of technology, much of which is the foundation of our current era. Okay? From, you know, GPS to computer programming and more and more miniaturized circuits and silicon chips and everything else, precision, metallurgy, and so on. So to me, you're a figure like Robert Goddard. You are building rockets, but they're small relative to the task you set yourself. You are illustrating important principles of rocketry, and I guarantee you that Werner von Braun was reading Robert Goddard's publications and following his career with great interest. Remember, he, of course, was the man behind the v the v two rockets that the Nazis sent to England, and, of course, the man behind the Saturn five launchers that actually got Apollo missions to the moon in the nineteen sixties. So we'll get there. Yeah. We we need we need your kind of research program on a thousand fold scale. And the question is how long will that take? I can't I can't assume it's gonna happen in ten years. It could take longer. We have a paper under review, Mike, where we show pretty exactly how we're new this, in the sense of how you can use the machine learning to open up the yarmic hierarchy. We have a series of papers that can do this over the next three or four years. Yes, we're starting with fruit flies but we are starting with fruit fly aging. We are dealing with the genomics, transcriptomics, and metabolites of doubling lifespan. So we are directly asking in a very powerful strong inference way what omic retuning is required to retune lifespan physiology to double o span. And I can tell you right now that the answer is hundreds of genomic sites affecting hundreds of transcripts affecting hundreds of metabolites, which are in turn interconnected by thousands of pathways. Okay? Yeah. So whereas whereas the early work, was, you know, basically, experimental evolution ex experimental evolutionary approach to dramatically extend lifespan. Now then it's the right? It's the, characterization the multi OMA characterization of the Mhmm. Dramatically extended lifespan. But then I see the next step being machine learning slash AI based approach to, derive the best interventions. Right? So that's another layer, which also takes Exactly. Multigeneration, you know, or computational predictive, you know, Sprite. So it's you've you've got the machine learning that will come up with the prediction. You run the experiments to see if it will work based on that data. You retrain them. It well, the model retrains itself AI. Right? So, Yeah. Yeah. But, eventually, the model will get good enough where it, you know, will lead to the the doubling or more of lifespan that you saw just using the experimental evolutionary approach. Exactly. So so you've just described the next 10 of my work. Cool. Cool. Cool. Scientist. Okay. So, I mean, we feel that our publications over the next three years will show people we have all the tools through this. Okay? And I'm working with a pharmacological colleague, Matad Jafari. I've been working with her for years now, actually. So, you know, I've been interested in supplements and pharmaceuticals for a long time. And we, together with, Matad Jafari, we've studied a lot of them. And now we're going to put it all together, all the omics, the machine learning, and the the pharmacology to show, you know, among other people to big pharma, you know, what they should be doing instead of what they do now, which is, you know, beat the late twentieth century reduction as far as to death, trying to get it to come up with some return on investment Yep. Which is crashing through the zero line of Yeah. So but I think all this is going to happen in this decade. I I think I think ten years from now, Michael has started this gonna be happening. Yeah. I hope so. Well, ten years. Okay. We've got 75, so I'm 48. 75 and 48 is one twenty three. Break the human longevity record, which is an extremely unlikely event considering that, you know, nine out of ten centenarians are women. Right? So it's if I can science the, you know, the Okay. So so there there there's a misconception here. While maximum longevity and and longevity itself, the total amount of time limit, is a natural measure to focus on in aging research. And I spent the first, twenty years of my career focused on that number. More appropriate numbers are age specific mortality rates and age specific functional measures. Basically, longevity is a derivative of those things. You don't need to wait until the day of death to know whether or not you've done something that works. You I mean and and you do this yourself, Mike. You you can look at measures for, you know, on a very short time frame. Yeah. You know, so so we don't have to wait fifty years to find out whether that stuff works. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. And Not at all. You'll have the benefits of it before then because of all of the, you know, aging related phenotypes that will be improved as a result. Right? So I mean, your goal of having a really outstanding characterization of the biomarkers for human health, I think we're gonna do that in the next five or six years easily. Then the question would be, you know, figuring all the the hierarchy of that. We'll do that within two or three years of of that biomarker biomarker being achieved. And then, you know, within ten years, we'll be doing massive machine learning based interventions that go after the complete hierarchy omens hierarchy of human health. So we didn't we didn't, touch on it, but, Drosophila have a microbiome too. So Yes. Talk about when you talk about the machine learning, in terms of the genetics of Drosophila longevity, that's only maybe half of their equation. Just like, oh, approximately half of the human symbiont is human genes and microbial genes. Right? So, it so have you have you, have you looked into the coevolutionary, adaptation of microbes? My my my former doctoral student, professor at Pardeen Shavastani at, Cal State Fullerton is working on exactly that. Cool. And she has publications. She's writing on all those questions. And, you know, she's a valued colleague of mine. I look forward to continuing to work with her on these problems over this stuff. And that will indeed be part of the story. And, of course, the microbiome interacts with family. Right? In terms of the life in terms of lifespan extending effects? I mean, if you take those, if you take flies that have, you know, been, selected or, you know, to live twice or longer, twice as long or longer, take out their microbiome and transplant that into a short lived fly, would you get, you know, the twofold extension of lifespan? What magnitude of the lifespan extending effectively? Okay. So I can pretty much guarantee that wouldn't happen, because of other experiments we did that have not been published. But, trust me, you will have answers to these questions this decade. First in fruit flies and then in people. Because, you know, if you know the history of biology in the twentieth century, since 1910, We do the hard experiments first with fruit flies and then very quickly move on to people and other things. The fruit flies just get their first. Is there small, fast, cheap? Yeah. No. It's a great I think it's a great model. You can study, you know, thousands of generations in a much smaller period of time based on their life. Right? So Yeah. But in the layers of reductionism, you know, you've got the the, the the drug based, you know, barbaric. I'm gonna hit you with this one supplement and try to extend your lifespan by 3%. But then even, besides you guys, you guys, I'm sure, are farthest from that, the opposite extreme. But even just using the machine learning approach just based on human data and not considering the microbiome, which is ubiquitous everywhere, in every grant review, nobody's thinking it's only it's it's all mTOR and human aging genes, FOXO and APOE. Right. Nobody's thinking about the other half of the equation, and then we would need a machine learning based approach, you know, to see the inner interaction between those two in order to get the maximum effect. Right? So, Absolutely correct. Yeah. So Yes. Once again once again, Mike, you have qualitatively exactly the right insight. Which makes me skeptical that it's gonna take longer than it should. Maybe not from you guys. Definitely not from you guys. But for the rest of society who's working on this problem without thinking about it holistically, the whole organism Mhmm. Alright. Let me resort not to a metaphor, but to a parallel. Amazon is eating the world of retail. Amazon was started by Jeff Bezos out of a office and warehouse in Seattle more than twenty five years ago. When he started, you know, small operation, you know, with the bricks, with the wood planks, just doing works. Right? Only Jeff Bezos was heuristic enough to imagine what would come out of it. But that was always what he was thinking. Right? I mean, maybe he succeeded even more than Jeff Bezos could imagine, but but I think he he qualitatively got the idea. So you understand that everything I've been describing is about converting just so biological confabulation where somebody with a PhD who's mutated one or two pathways tells a story about sirtuins and aging. Right. Okay. And they say, this this is the aging gene, and this is how we can solve the problem. Yeah. Which if it weren't for the fact that hundreds of millions of lives were at stake, I would just break down laughing every time I heard that term. Most people don't know, though. They follow that like it's, you know, the god of gods. So Right. But most people have no idea of the machine learning Yeah. And logistics that underline what Amazon does. Right? Yep. They just know they search for something and it it shows up in in UPS or whatever two days later. Most people don't have to understand how the world works. How many people do you think understand all the stuff that had to be done to get Neil Armstrong on the moon, July 1969? Okay. So you can't worry about most people when you're engaged in a really difficult technological mission. So I have been saying for more than thirty years that the project radically extended lifespan, which is what we're talking about today. I've always made the parallel with the Manhattan Project and Apollo mission which was really the third phase of the three phase, NASA space program. Mercury, Gemini, or and, you know, I've been working in the agent field for forty five years now. Like, And I've always, bet that it was going to be complicated. And I think I've won that bet. And I think the Sichuan storytellers, however much journalists like their stories because the journalists don't have a quantitative genetics background, well, almost nobody does, and therefore lap up the stories that those people tell. I mean, you know. Can't control it. So along the along the Bezos, Bezos analogy, it got me thinking that, you know, p probably It's not analogy. It's a parallel. Parallel. I mean I mean, doing this will involve corporate resources on the scale of Amazon. Yeah. The whole goddamn company, including Amazon Web Services, AWS, which is the most profitable part of the big multi company corporate model. That's the scale of resources it will take to double human lifespan. But I think it's completely doable Yeah. Yeah. Given that it it's run by the people who actually have the vision and the tools to get the job done the way it needs to be done Yeah. Which is with the full appreciation of the omic complexity of the times. Not just that. I think there's a normal distribution. So you're gonna have the field flooded, the aging space flooded with and it it's I see it now. You know? It you know? Mhmm. Investment in longevity based companies, it's increasing. I wouldn't say exploding. But within that space, you're gonna have a normal distribution. Right? On average, probably half half will fail, half will be terrible, half will be above average. And then you'll have those few with the far right side of the normal distribution that, you know, just taking it back to, Bezos again, you know, you know, just using that example. He probably wasn't the only one with that idea. There were probably many that had that idea. And for whatever reason, whatever innovation that he had, whatever approach that he used, it was better. Right? He he it's it's evolution. He he he, you know, found a way to be better than his competitors. Right? So he survived and for a long period. I'll I'll say a couple of important things about Jeff Bezos. Number one, very smart guy. Yeah. Number two, very driven guy. I know lots of smart people who love Drive. Number three, made a point of going step by step and scaling up the rest of them. Okay? He knew that what he was doing would be really, really hard. And unlike the people who started some of the other online commerce businesses, he thought tenaciously to sustain the vision, to surmount the difficulties, and he just kept on going. Okay. And always pushing the frontier, all the technologies, multiple technologies that had to be combined to accomplish this mission. And that's what, you know, doubling human lifespan will take. Yeah. Okay. It will not be achieved by some flashy professor telling a cute story about one or two genes. Right. Right. Right. Right. That is exactly wrong. It will instead be accomplished by a gigantic, Consortium. Probably consortium. Yes. I think that's a good term. Consortium of very big companies doing very hard things very well on a very big scale. Yep. This is not, you know, a Nobel Prize type project. It is a, you know, Manhattan project leading to atomic bomb. It's, like the, NASA mission to space going from Mercury to Gemini to Apollo, which costs vast amount of money in present day hours. And it's like the building of Amazon. It's like those three kinds of things. Yeah. So so the point I was getting at with that is, let's say that there are four companies in that space. They're massively funded through the public governments, whatever. So Mhmm. Which approach is gonna end up being the dominant approach? Right? And they're all using machine learning. They're all using AI. Four companies, all in antiaging. Right? So the point I was just Sure. Gonna make was that, you know, probably the one that looks at it from the holistic. Right? Not it's not one one or two genes like that crowd. It's not gonna be one or two supplements like that crowd. It isn't gonna be just it isn't just gonna be AI on the human genome. I was just gonna make the point that it's it's gonna be on the whole the whole thing. It's gonna be on the my the combination of how the microbes interact with humans and the whole machine learning based approach on that. And, you know, I hate to say that I don't see that approach now. I don't see it I don't see any groups going at it holistically like that now. I hope that it will evolve eventually, but, Okay. So I I will just say I don't know if you've read my book for long tomorrow. But, there I describe The papers that were in it, though. I don't know if it was that book I read. One of the books you have, it's, with it's like stacked with papers. It's like a it's like That's Methuselah Flies. I'm desperate. But I I the companion book to that the the companion book to my collection of papers, which is called Methuselah Flies, the companion book that sort of tells the story just in words with no data and no math. Just the narrative is called The Long Tomorrow. And there toward the end, I talk about what happened as I tried to launch this really big enterprise, first with NIA, which was a complete fiasco Yeah. And then with a succession of companies. And I've never been in Jeff Bezos' position where I could marshal the resources to get things done my way, which is basically his way, which is to say, appreciating all the complexity and appreciating all the difficulty and not just telling huge stories that people find intuitively palatable, but instead building something big enough to do the hard work. The beauty of it is that the advent of the ohmic technologies and modern day machine learning makes dealing with complexity in any large scale enterprise easier and easier. So the whole world has been developing the tools to make the mission that I conceived of, you know, more than thirty years ago possible. So there's never been a better time to do things my way. Okay? And, you know, whether or not I get to actually be involved, I hope I do. It's it's like, you know, the geocentric model of the universe was eventually gonna fail. People like Hermanus Skelley and Newton, you know, made sure that it ended up dead and buried. Alright. And they got to have the fun doing that. I've spent forty five years trying to kill off reduction of simple minded stories about aging. And and frankly, one of my doctoral advisors had spent the preceding fifteen years doing that as well. So between the two of us, it's like sixty years of evolutionary genesis trying to kill off stupid gerontology. Stupid gerontology right now is flourishing because so many people want it to be true. And you must understand the heliocentric model of the solar system was not popular with the general population in 1642, the year that Galileo died and he was born, but it was going to win anyway because it was the truth. Okay? The complexity of aging is simply the reality of aging. The beauty of where we are now in 2021 is we now have tools for handling the complexity of aging, and for demonstrating the reality of the complexity. So I mean every year my lab publishes, with other labs, more evidence for the complexity of what's going on and how the complexity matters. And every year the reductionist will ignore that work and go on telling their stories about sirtuins or whatever pathway they're infatuated with, be it FOXO or you know, Tor, whatever. And, I'm not saying they're never white. I'm saying that they never have more than a piece of the story. Small pieces. Yeah. Probably less than 3% as you said on my approach, but they've got even smaller, you know, I I would say that that you're greatly ahead of them Yeah. For now. But, human minds cannot compete with machine learning when it comes to the omic hierarchy. Definitely. The omic hierarchy is too damn complicated for the human mind to tell stories about. You're talking about crunching huge amounts of numbers. So do you think it's gonna be possible that so I've seen some of the, omic based studies that have come out, whether it's, metabolomics associated with, you know, aging or, transcriptome. Pick the omic. Right? So, so usually, they there are metabolomic clock that are predictive of, say, biological age. And then there are other there are other blood based, composites that aim to do the same thing. So when comparing the correlations between the regularly measured, which is one reason why I focus on that now, the regularly measured things like albumin, creatinine, glucose, etcetera. Mhmm. The the predictive ability of even the well, granted, it's a small snapshot of the circulating, spectrum of metabolites anyway, because then you can make the argument you're only getting 10% or so of all of them tablet urine blood. Right? So yeah, what I was gonna say right now we have the right now we have the technology to detect millions of metabolites from the human metabolism. So right now, the e the best performing metabolomic I hear you. I hear you. But, yeah, the the best performing metabolomic clocks are as good as these blood based composites, bigger bigger, you know, biomarkers, quote, unquote, of biological. So do you think it's gonna be possible, and I know this sounds reductionist, but, you know, whereas there's great data and tremendous pathway information in the metabolome, wouldn't it be isn't it possible that even the best performing metabolomic clock as it relates to biological age could be reproduced with a panel of commercially available biomarkers that are already measured? But, you know, for for example, albumin is the predominant, you know, by concentration protein in blood. So, you know, these aren't small specks of proteins that are floating around and you're trying to make a picture of it. Right? So Yeah. By looking at these big picture, quote, unquote, biomarkers, you think it's possible that, you know, once all the omic stuff is mapped and the multi omic, stuff is mapped Mhmm. Isn't it also possible that some of these traditionally measured biomarkers could be as good or in the ballpark at least as good as the own multi omic based approach for, I actually did a calculation like that. I can't remember when I published it. It's about thirty years ago that I did the calculation. So we did experiments where we specifically tuned metabolites. In particular, we tuned triglyceride level glycogen, trehalose, and water. And, you know, three or four gross metabolic components of the blood. And, tuning them, predicted 30% of the early extension of lifespan of the gut. Here's the kicker, Mike. When you tune those metabolites still further, you then went downward on longevity. Yep. So it's a curvilinear relationship, with a negative second derivative. For for those pathways. But I guess what I'm getting at is internally, you know, you've got markers of liver health, kidney health, immune Right. Right. Okay. So so without so if you're if you're simultaneously optimizing or as close to optimizing as you can get multi as many organ systems as you can, Mhmm. In theory, the big picture biomarkers I I mean, I I'm probably gonna be wrong eventually because big you can't compete with big data. It's I'm throwing stones and somebody's firing rockets again. Right? So but Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. In theory, at least now based on on these multi on these omic clocks that, are in comparison with these other even epigenetic age, you know, which is another level above, you know. So far, the the omic based mark because you can only get, you know, correlation of one. Right? So if your correlation for the epigenetic clock is point nine seven and your metabolite So okay. Yeah. K. So I really appreciate this conversation. It's very high quality. There's something that a lot of people don't understand about what we can now do with machine learning that even a lot of people in the machine learning community don't fully understand. There are ways to use machine learning to get not just that correlates or predictors but to actually delineate pathways of causality. Even when you have the whole forest of correlates, there are ways to get a causality. Yeah. And, and and this is something that we're gonna be showing, I think, a year or two. I mean, to some extent, we've already published on that in our 2018 paper. So some of the hundreds of genomic changes and the hundreds of transgenic changes matter very, very little, and some of them matter a lot. Even though as category predictors they are working really well, these are all correlated with each other. You can fish out things that will give you 95 to 97% of the effect that are a small, like, more likes to say, sparse subset of all the things that are going on. And and that that's that's stuff we're gonna show you a little over the next ten years. Cool. So, a lot of the very appropriate riddles and conundrums you are surfacing, we're working on and we have been working on since actually 2012. And, you know, we started our publication stream in 2017. It will continue. And over the course of this decade, I hope that we do a a very powerful transition from demonstrating the real scientific principles underlying control of aging. And moving that into large private sector entities which start to develop Amazon scale resources for dealing with these problems because that's the scale that most successful interventions will be achieved. Cool. Cool. So if if you're not in that same sphere in terms of the Bezos Jeff Bezos of Amazon, Michael Rose in aging with this multi omic based, you know, machine learning based so many things to consider here. The AI based, omic driven path to extending health and lifespan. That's the road I hope that yeah. So you're it's good. So that's that's where I see, and hope that, you know, you'll be in the near future. Right? So That that that is my hope also. But, you know, taking a long term sort of history of science and technology perspective, that is what's going to happen in this century inevitably. It's just sort of on people like you and me to get it to happen sooner. You know? So ideally, I'm involved in a company, ten years from now that hires you. My my grants are up in the next, you know, near future, so maybe, sooner than later. So Yeah. You know, this has to be a very large enterprise that that brings in ultimately billions of dollars worth of capital and and people and resources that to do something that is very hard, but I would assert doable. Remember, I started out my career postponing nature. I mean, for me, doubled lifespans are troubled lifespans with great robustness and everything you would want. That's my everyday reality. I go to the lab and I see it right in front of my eyes. It's like, I know it's there to be done. K? I just need the reductions to get out of the goddamn line and say we can do it. Yep. Okay. Yep. We need to have journalists stop buying into their confabulations, which is the one polite word for something that's more agricultural, so that we can get the resources to actually do this for real. Yep. Alright. Michael Rose, doctor Michael Rose, UC Irvine, I greatly appreciate your time and, all of your thoughts and our conversation. So, with that, I say thank you, and I guess, talk to you next time. Total pleasure, man. Total pleasure.