Normal mitochondrial function generates reactive oxygen species, ROS, including hydrogen peroxide h two zero two. Now these reactive oxygen species then oxidatively damage protein lipids and nucleic acids, including DNA, and can induce mitochondrial DNA mutations. The net effect of this damage and increased mutation load is mitochondrial dysfunction. Unfortunately, mitochondrial dysfunction then imposes a vicious cycle on this process leading to the generation of more ROS, more damage and mutations, and further decreased mitochondrial function. Now the sum of this process contributes to aging. And to highlight this, mitochondrial dysfunction is one of the nine hallmarks of aging. So with this in mind, removing h two zero two or hydrogen peroxide is important for minimizing the vicious cycle. And notice I said removing, and actually removing the excess, not eliminating. It's impossible to completely eliminate reactive oxygen species as just as a byproduct of, oxygen based metabolism, we're gonna produce, superoxide, which is a reactive oxygen species which can be converted into H two zero two. Alright. So how is H two zero two degraded? Now one mechanism for degrading it involves glutathione as shown here, GSH. So two molecules of glutathione, are involved in the process that degrades H two zero two into water. And during that process, GSH becomes itself oxidized, thereby forming one molecule of glutathione disulfide, GSSG. Now this reaction whereby H two zero two is degraded into water is catalyzed by the enzyme glutathione peroxidase. And the activity of this enzyme depends upon the mineral selenium. So, if selenium intake is deficient, glutathione peroxidase will be suboptimal and hydrogen peroxide levels can accumulate. So with this in mind, how much is optimal for selenium in terms of health? So the RDA, the recommended dietary allowance for selenium, is fifty five micrograms per day. And what's shown here is the RDA for selenium intake for various life stages starting from infants all the way up through adults. And we can see that for adults, the recommendation is fifty five micrograms per day for adults older than 19. Now slightly higher amounts are are proposed for pregnant and breastfeeding women, sixty and seventy micrograms per day respectively. Now these recommendations were derived based on the amount of selenium that maximizes glutathione peroxidase as an h two zero two degrading enzyme, its activity. But selenium impacts more than just GPX or glutathione peroxidase activity, and that's what's shown here. So starting from dietary selenium intake, which influences circulating levels of selenium and then circulating levels of selenium, impact selenoproteins. So, proteins whose activity depends on the presence of selenium. And these proteins include not just Glutathione Peroxidase, but Thyredoxin reductase, TRXR, thyroid hormones that remove iodine groups, so D iodinases, D I o, and then, selenoprotein, P, and other selenium dependent proteins. The collective, effect of these selenium dependent proteins are involved in mechanisms that affect immune function, thyroid function, that protect against oxidative stress, and that influence inflammatory signaling pathways. And in some, these selenium dependent proteins are involved in mechanisms that reduce all cause mortality risk. So with that in mind, and we're considering that the RDA for selenium was only based on glutathione peroxidase activity, is fifty five micrograms per day optimal for health? So let's have a look at the data. So here we see, all cause mortality risk on the y axis plotted against, dietary selenium intake on the x axis. And this is in a study of about 18,000 people. And what we can see is that the lowest all cause mortality risk was present when the dietary selenium intake was a hundred and twenty five micrograms per day, which already were higher than that fifty five microgram per day RDA recommendation. Now studies data from other studies relating dietary or circulating levels of selenium with all cause mortality risk, ACM, supports the hypothesis that fifty five micrograms per day of selenium is not optimal. So let's look at that data. So, again, in this study of about 19,000 people, the group that, averaged, 71 of selenium per day had the highest all cause mortality risk. And groups that had higher levels of selenium intake, a hundred and a hundred and twenty six micrograms per day, had lower all cause mortality risk. And the group that had the lowest all cause mortality risk, averaged selenium intake of a hundred and eighty three micrograms per day. Now, dietary studies are are interesting, but they can, suffer from, under reporting or over reporting as people have to remember what they ate and how much of it. In contrast, circulating levels of selenium are a more objective measure of selenium intake because it, you know, people can say what they ate or what they didn't but what's in the blood is directly related to how much they ate, how much selenium, they they took in as we'll see in in a little bit. So, what about the data for circulating levels of selenium with all cause mortality risk? And that's what we can see here. Again, all cause mortality risk on the y axis plotted against the circulating selenium concentration on the x axis. And this is a meta analysis of six studies with, about 21,000 subjects. And what we can see is that the lowest all cause mortality risk was present when the circulating selenium concentration was 1.3 micromoles per liter. Now if we're gonna convert this into, a a form that can, be correlated with the, dietary selenium intake, we need to convert this first into micrograms per liter. So one mole of selenium is 79 grams, and when you multiply 1.3 micro moles per liter times 79 grams per mole, we get a 103 micrograms per liter. So with that in mind, what level of dietary selenium is correlated with a 103 micrograms per liter of selenium in blood? And that's what we can derive here. So here, we're looking at the correlation between serum selenium on the y axis versus the dietary selenium intake on the x axis in micrograms per day. And what we can see is first that the higher the selenium intake, the higher, that was correlated with a higher circulating level of selenium. Alright. So then the big question is what does a 103 micrograms per liter in the previous meta analysis data, what does that correlate to in terms of dietary intake? And based on extrapolation based on the trend line, we can see that that, amount, a 103 per liter, core corresponds to a 166 of selenium per day. Now note that these data for the circulating, levels of selenium that were associated with lowest all cause mortality risk are within that range, that was, identified in the dietary study. So a hundred and twenty five to a hundred eighty three micrograms per day in the dietary studies, a hundred and sixty six micrograms per day of selenium for the, circulating, selenium all cause mortality study. So then that also raises the question, is there an upper limit? So this is data from a five year randomized controlled trial, RCT, where people were supplemented with a placebo, a hundred, two hundred, or three hundred micrograms per day of selenium. And, as I mentioned, this was this study was done for five years, so people got these supplements for five years. So first, obviously, the baseline mortality data, we can see they're obviously starting from the the same risk of death from all from all causes. And then at the end of the five year period, when looking at the brown line, the three hundred micrograms per day of selenium group, we can see that there was some separation when compared with, both, all three of the other groups including the placebo, but that data wasn't, statistically significant. However, they followed these subjects for an additional ten years after the five year study. So now it's a fifteen year study. And we can see that the group that had three hundred microgram that was, consuming, that was supplemented with three hundred micrograms per day of selenium now had a significantly increased all cause mortality risk when compared with placebo. So the authors of this study rationalized that selenium toxicity may have been induced because of the three hundred microgram per day dose within the first five years and then that persisted for ten years after the study concluded. So, these data collectively, suggests that two hundred micrograms per day of selenium may be an upper limit but definitely or at least not three hundred micrograms per day as there may be some increased all cause mortality risk with that associated with that. So with this in mind, what's my data? Now I've been tracking my diet, including weighing all my food and, logging all of the macro and micronutrients into an Excel file since 2015. I've also been blood testing a lot since then. So I have up to 30 blood tests that correspond to dietary intake over the past six years. And when I look for correlations between my selenium intake with, biomarkers, you know, blood based biomarkers that are found found on the standard chemistry panel, and, CBC, the complete blood count, and also things like homocysteine, c reactive protein, and lipoprotein a, I we we can see that, when my selenium intake is higher than two hundred micrograms per day, it's correlated with many biomarkers going in the wrong direction. So I'm just going to illustrate a few of them, here. So first, uric acid versus my average daily selenium intake. We can see that the higher my average daily selenium intake, the higher my uric acid level. So what about this two hundred microgram cutoff? So we can see that as my selenium intake goes past that two hundred microgram cutoff, uric acid is, increasing. And note that this is a significant correlation based on the p value. Now I haven't made a video about this yet, but higher levels of, uric acid are found during aging. They increase during aging. And there's a u shaped association with all cause mortality. So very low levels of which my data is not in that range, but also higher relatively higher levels are associated with an increased, all cause mortality risk. So with the higher selenium intake, that's core correlated with uric acid going in the wrong direction. And I'll link to those studies for uric acid in the, video's description if you're interested. Now other biomarkers also are going in the wrong direction with higher selenium intakes greater than two hundred micrograms per day. And that's what we can see here. So when I put the black line up right at that two hundred microgram, cutoff, we can see that my RDW, so red blood cell distribution width, is, core it's correlated with an increase, for a the higher selenium intake. Now, I have a video on this too. And for the other next two or three biomarkers, if you're interested in that, in the the the data for how they change during aging and all cause mortality risk, I'll put them in the right corner so you can, check those out. But for this, RDW is going in the wrong direction. We lower values are found in youth and are associated with a lower all cause mortality risk. So with this, it looks like the higher mycelainium intake past two hundred micrograms per day, that's correlated with RDW going in the wrong direction. Similarly, for HDL, which is shown here. So as we get past as we get to that two hundred microgram cutoff, we can see that that's correlated with lower HDL. And I as I mentioned, I have a video on HDL. Values, in the 50 to 60 range are, proposed to be optimal for men. So, actually, that that the as I go towards one seventy or so for selenium, that seems to be correlated with relatively higher HDL. Whereas as I get past 200, it's going in the wrong direction towards lower HDL. Now I didn't put up, any pictures for this, but also alkaline phosphatase. We see a pa a positive correlation, which means that the higher the selenium intake, that's correlated with a higher alkaline phosphatase, which is also going in the wrong direction because higher, alkaline phosphatase increases during aging and higher levels are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So I've got four biomarkers that suggest higher, selenium intakes higher than two hundred micrograms per day may be bad for health. Now interestingly, there's one that seems to be going in the right direction, and that's glucose. So as we can see, as my selenium intake gets past about two hundred micrograms per day, my glucose levels are going down or correlated with going down. And glucose increases during aging and higher levels of glucose are associated with an increased more all cause mortality risk. So this was, this data would suggest that higher selenium, it may be, sending glucose in the right direction by whatever the mechanism. So I didn't only look at these five biomarkers. I also compared, the, other these other biomarkers that I've listed 23 other biomarkers. Most of them I have up to 30 blood tests, but some of them I have less. 14 data points including, c c reactive protein, homocysteine, lipoprotein a. But note that none of the these 23 biomarkers were significantly correlated with my selenium intake. So, so then this when considering that I've got data for four biomarkers going in the wrong direction and one going in the right direction and no effect on 23, then that's a net minus three. So it seems like very high levels of selenium, at least past 200 in my data, may not be optimal for health. So, last but not least, and many of you may already know this, which foods are selenium rich? So Brazil nuts are the, best source of selenium. One gram of Brazil nuts contains about, nineteen micrograms. So with that in mind, I eat, one large Brazil nut, about five grams per day, which gets me about ninety six micrograms per day from Brazil nuts. So that's about half of my current intake. And then I also get a significant amount of daily selenium from sardines as I eat sardines every day, eighty grams, one tin. So I get forty micrograms of selenium, from that. So between those two foods, I get about 70% of my daily selenium, about a hundred and eighty to a hundred ninety micrograms per day to stay under that two hundred microgram limit, in my intake. Alright. That's all I've got for now. If you made it to the end, I hope you enjoyed the video and, got value from it. Have a great day.