Earlier this week, I blood tested for the fifth time in 2021. So with that in mind, what's my biological age? So here's my data and I'm about to use Morgan Levine's Phenotypic Age Calculator as a blood based measure of biological age. And if you're interested in calculating your own biological age using this metric, I'll leave a link in the video's description. So after entering this data, I get a biological age score of 37.1 years, which is about twelve years younger than my chronological age. Now, this isn't the only free and easy to use tool that we can use to calculate our, blood based biological age. And the other tool that I'm gonna present data for is aging.ai3pointo. So after entering my data for its 19 biomarkers, we can see that my predicted biological age using aging.ai3pointo is 30 years old, which is about nineteen years younger than my chronological. Now note that I feel like I still have room for improvement including my glucose levels and c reactive protein. In future videos, I'll I'll address how I plan on getting those back to where I want them to be. But for this video, what may be contributing to my relatively youthful biological age? So I'm gonna go through some supplements, what I take in terms of supplements, a few fitness stats, and my overall diet composition that corresponds to this blood test. So first, in terms of supplements, all I took was levothyroxine as I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism more than twenty years ago. So nothing else. No NAD boosters. No rapamycin. Not even B12, which I took out for this blood test and I'll I'll have an update video on that in terms of its, correlation with homocysteine in a future video. Alright. So what about some average body composition and fitness stats, that correspond to the fifty nine day period which started when my last blood test was on September 2? So, that starts the period now for this blood test in terms of average fitness stats or average diet. So, in terms of body weight and note that I weigh myself every morning, so fasted and, usually before I, poop. So we can see that my body weight was, a hundred and fifty five point six pounds, which is, down when compared with my previous value of one hundred and fifty six point eight which corresponded to the last blood test. And as we'll see in a bit, I I'm purposely, on mild CR. So, that's an not an unexpected finding that my body weight is trending a little bit lower. So in terms of cardiovascular health related metrics including resting heart rate, RHR, and heart rate variability, and I wear a fitness tracker that automatically cal calculates that and I'm not sponsored by them so I'm not gonna shout them out. So if anyone's interested in what I wear, I'll just leave a comment and I'll, easily indicate what I'm wearing. So for my resting heart rate, my average during this fifty nine day period that went from my last blood test until this blood test on November 1 was 46.5 beats per minute and that's actually, up from my previous, for the previous blood test which was 46. So a small, increase in my resting heart rate. Conversely, in terms of heart rate variability, which was 53.5 milliseconds, that's actually down from my previous blood test which averaged 58.3 milliseconds. So both of those cardiovascular health related metrics went in the wrong direction for this blood test. Now similarly, my biological age score for the last blood test was 35.7 years. So when considering that my cardiovascular health related metrics got worse in conjunction with a biological age that went in the wrong direction, that raises the obvious question, are these cardiovascular health related metrics, resting heart rate and heart rate variability or and or heart rate variability, significantly correlated with biological age? Now, I should mention that I started tracking both resting heart rate and heart rate variability in August 2018. So I have more than eleven hundred days of data that correspond to 15 blood tests during that period. So let's take a look and see if, resting heart rate, and or heart rate variability are significantly correlated with biological age during this three plus year period. So first, I'm gonna start with the aging.ai data because I have more data for that. I have all 15 blood tests during that period, whereas for Levine's test, I have less. I have 13 blood tests. And note that each circle corresponds to the average resting heart rate or heart rate variability during a given period that corresponds to the next blood test. So for the first, measure, aging dot ai age versus resting heart rate, we can see that that they are not significantly correlated. Similarly, aging dot ai age over 15 blood tests is not significantly correlated with heart rate variability. So from this, we can conclude that at least for the aging.ai age, it's not significantly correlated with cardiovascular health related metrics. So what about for levine's phenotypic age? So first, we're looking at that in correlation with resting heart rate and this is 13 blood tests since September 2019. It wasn't until 2019 that I started tracking, C reactive protein, at every blood test so that's why that's why I have a couple, two less blood tests when compared to aging.ai which doesn't include C reactive protein. Nonetheless, we can see that, Levene's biological age score is not significantly correlated with resting heart rate. And similarly, it isn't correlate significantly correlated with heart rate variability. So from this, it seems that biological age is not significantly correlated with cardiovascular health related metrics, at least in my data. But as an interesting aside, you know, I didn't I I've always been relatively fit. So if I started out sedentary with potentially worse values for, biological age, and cardiovascular health related metrics and then improve those over time to my current values, would I then have seen significant correlations? And, you you know, one could argue, you know, stop if I stop stop exercising for the next few months and get a few blood tests during that period, that would test that hypothesis. But I'm not I'm not trying to make my health overall health worse for a few months, just to prove a point. So for now, it seems like at least in the data that I do have, biological age is not significantly correlated with resting heart rate or heart rate variability. So what about my diet? What's the diet that corresponds to this relatively youthful these relatively youthful biological ages? So this is my full diet diet composition, ranked by grams or ounces. Ounces in terms of, green tea, green tea amounts that I drink. So it's twenty twenty ounces per day. You can see it's ranked number 24. So, I've ranked them in terms of how many grams per day and and in order. And first, we can see that I eat a significant amount of carotenoids every day. And, again, I should mention if you haven't seen, previous videos where I detail this, I weigh all of my food every day and then I log it into an online, calculator. Again, I'm not gonna shout them out because I'm not not sponsored, but leave a comment and I'll indicate what I use. So we can see that number one in terms of grams per day of food that I eat are carrots and carrots are a rich source of the carotenoids alpha and beta, beta carotene, but I also get significant amounts of red bell pepper, which is a a good source of the carotenoid beta cryptoxanthin, watermelon and tomato for its lycopene content, also a carotenoid, and then lettuce and spinach for their lutein plazaxanthin, also carotenoids. And the importance of carotenoids, and I have this also in a previous video, I'll link to that right there in the right corner, a higher relatively higher blood levels of carotenoids are correlated with a relatively younger epigenetic age. So I try to enrich my diet in carotenoids every day. Now, also note that I eat a lot of strawberries. That's the second most, food in terms of grams per day that I eat. And strawberries are a rich source of fisetin which extends lifespan in mice. Now, strawberries aren't the only berries that I eat. You can see also that blueberries and blackberries also rank pretty high in terms of how much of them that I eat on a daily basis. Now, the importance of blackberry, is that it's a a good source of curaminin which is a CD thirty eight inhibitor and I also eat, decent amounts of raw parsley. We can see about forty nine grams per day which also contains a CD thirty eight inhibitor, Apigenin. Now by, enriching our diets with dietary CD thirty eight inhibitors, that raises the possibility that we can potentially slow the age related decline for NAD when considering that CD thirty eight, degrades NAD. So just to finish out the full list, so the remaining 19 foods but these are foods that I consume in far less, amounts each day. Less than 10 grams, for the for these 19 foods. Alright. So dietary intake is one component of diet composition. What about macros and micros? So, in terms of, calorie intake, for this dietary period, you know, so that fifty nine day period from the September blood test up until the blood test last week, I averaged twenty three ninety nine, so almost 2,400 calories per day. And note that that's a 7% calorie restriction relative to my average calorie intake which is twenty five eighty six calories per day since, April 2015 when I started tracking my, you know, weighing all my food every day and tracking it and logging it every day. I should also note that my highest average intake during that period has been about 2,800 calories per day. So if 2,800 is my ad lib intake, it's possible that I could be as much as, 15% calorie restricted when compared with the 20 about 2,800 calories per day. So what about, the macronutrients, fats, lipids, carbohydrates, and proteins? And in terms of percent calories, that I get for each of these macros, we can see that my fat intake, my average daily fat intake is about 44%. Carbohydrates 40, 40% and protein about 17%. Now, just to highlight a few, interesting, parts of these macros, we can see that my omega six intake was about seven grams per day and, note that this is one of my lowest intakes that I've had over this six plus year period since I started tracking my diet. So for this blood test, I purposefully limited omega six to see if it affects homocysteine. So stay tuned for that data when I when I make the video. Now, as an another interesting note, total fructose. So sucrose is half fructose. So dividing that by two and adding it to fructose, we get a total fructose intake. And we can see that I averaged for this fifty nine day period about sixty seven grams per day. Now that may seem like a lot but for but during the past six plus years, that's actually my lowest intake over that six year period with more than, you know, 30 blood tests. So, and I did that purposely because I've got significant correlations between fructose with lower LDL and actually higher HDL, sorry, with lower HDL and, HDL is actually significantly correlated with c reactive proteins. So, for this blood test, I purposely limited my fructose intake to as low as I could get it, for now at least, to see if it would impact HDL and CRP. So stay tuned for that video, in the in the upcoming future. Alright. And then full vitamin breakdown there. Note that I've got, at least RDA coverage for all of these vitamins, with the exception of vitamin D, which is about half of its RDA of eight hundred IUs per day. So in the summer, I get plenty of sunlight and then in the fall and winter, I supplement a thousand IUs per day and that combination So actually, I should note that I measured my blood levels of vitamin D, which is the twenty five hydroxy vitamin D measurement to see what my status was, to see if a thousand IUs per day would be, sufficient. And based on that, we can see that my 25 hydroxy d value in blood was about forty nanograms per milliliter. And just to know if that's good, you know, sufficient or or, deficient, in a meta analysis of 95 studies that was published in 2014, that included more than 880,000 subjects, having a 25 hydroxy d value greater than 30 was associated with lowest risk for all cause mortality when compared with less than 30. Now this meta analysis is from 2014. If anybody's got an updated meta analysis with more than 880,000 subjects, please leave a comment and, share share for all of us. I'd be interested to see that, to see if this data is still, is still is still valid based on, you know, the most current litter tribe. That's this is the biggest study that I could find. So if anybody's got, you know, a more recent study with more subjects, please share it. And then just to finish it out, my total mineral intake, again, full RDA coverage for all of these, minerals and then purposely higher, values for things like potassium and selenium. And I've addressed that in other videos. I'll also leave a link, at least for the selenium, explanation in the right corner. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, come check us out and maybe even join us on Patreon. So that's all for now. Thanks for watching. I hope you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.