Fibroblast growth factor 21, also known as FGF 21, impacts the health and or function of many organs and tissues. But what about longevity? So FGF 21 overexpression, so animals that are engineered to have more systemic levels of FGF 21, have a longer lifespan. So, first, before looking at that, how how much higher was FGF twenty one, in these transgenic mice? So whether comparing the fed or fasted state, we can see that the animals that were engineered to have more systemic levels of FGF twenty one had five to tenfold higher levels when compared with animals, normal animals, wild type, w t. Alright. So lifespan data. So here we're looking at, lifespan data in c 57 black six j mice, and that's the genetic background. And that's important because I'm gonna compare the lifespan extending effect of FGF twenty one versus other, interventions in mice. And, those interventions in mice are gonna be in the c c 57 black six j mice. So they're all performed on the same genetic background, and only the intervention is different. Alright. So first, starting with the data on the left, we're looking at survival. So, the black line is average survival, the the proportion where half the, animals are dead and half are still alive. And we can see that FGF 21 overexpression in the male mice significantly extended average lifespan, but not maximum lifespan. As we can see, both the controls, the wild type, and the FGF 21 transgenic mice live to, about forty two months. So in in terms of the average lifespan extending effect, the controls live twenty eight months, whereas the FGF 21 overexpressing mice live thirty six months, a significant increase in lifespan. What about the data in females? So, again, starting with the average survival, right at the fifty percent survival mark, we can see that the FGF 21 overexpression in the female mice extended both average and also maximal lifespan. And interestingly, they stopped the experiment when the animals got to forty three months. So it's unknown how much beyond forty three months that these, female overexpressing FGF 21 mice would have lived. So in terms of the average lifespan, increase, the controls live thirty months on average, and the FGF twenty one overexpressing mice, tg, live forty months. So a ten month extension, about a 30% increase in average lifespan. So these are pretty big, pretty large effects. How does the FGF twenty one mediated lifespan extension compare against other interventions? So I'm gonna show two that have been, popularized that because they're they've been they were recently published, alpha ketoglutarate and berberine. So first, starting with alpha ketoglutarate supplementation, this is based on data that was published, last year, And also notice, this data, again, as I mentioned, is in c 57 black six j mice. So same genetic background, different intervention, whether it's f g f twenty one overexpression or alpha ketoglutarate supplementation. So starting with the data on the left, this is pool data from two studies, and we can see based on the p value that alpha ketoglutarate, supplementation ex significantly extended both average and maximal lifespan. But note that all all of the mice were dead at thirty seven months. So how does that compare against the FGF 21, transgenic mice? So whereas the alpha ketoglutarate supplemented mice live thirty one months, FGF 21, overexpressing mice live forty months. Again, that's like a 30% increase when compared with alpha ketoglutarate. And then, in terms of maximum lifespan, we can see that the, the f g f 21 over expressing mice, and, again, this is the data in females, lived at least forty three months where the alpha ketoglutarate supplemented female mice lived thirty eight months. So, once again, FGF twenty one overexpression seems to be a better intervention for extending lifespan than alpha ketoglutarate. Now in the males, we can see that the p value for, lifespan extension was not significantly different versus the wild type versus the non supplemented controls. So, nonetheless, let's have a quick look at the comparison for the alpha ketoglutarate alpha ketoglutarate supplemented male mice versus, FGF 21, overexpressing male mice. And we can see that the alpha ketoglutarate supplemented male mice lived an average of thirty one months, whereas the FGF 21 transgenic mice lived thirty six months. So, from this, we can conclude that FGF, 21 overexpression increases lifespan more than alpha ketoglutarate, alpha ketoglutarate supplemented mice. So how does the lifespan extension in FGF 21 mice compare against berberine? And the reason I I I've highlighted these two studies is because they were just recently published. You know, I don't I don't have time to go through all of the lifespan, extension, the studies that have looked at lifespan extension, but I just wanted to cover a few. So once again, notice that these data for berberine supplementation is in c 57 black six j mice. So, again, same genetic background. The only thing that's different for comparing, FGF twenty one transgenic mice with alpha ketoglutarate and the berberine supplementation is the intervention, but the genetic background is the same. So, based on this data, we can see that the average, lifespan in Berberine supplemented mice was increased when compared with non berberine supplemented mice and also maximal lifespan was increased by a small amount. But notice that the, duration that the mice lived in both the berberine and the wild type, study is is that, none of these mice live past twenty six months. So, in contrast, FGF 21 transgenic mice live much longer than berberine supplemented mice. So just to have a look at that the numbers and notice that, in this study, they didn't report data for females. They only reported data for male mice that were supplemented with berberine. So we can see that berberine supplemented mice lived, on average, twenty three months, whereas the FGF 21 mice lived thirty six months. And all of the FGF 21 transgenic mice, they had a maximum lifespan of forty two months, whereas none of the, male mice in this study, whether controls or berberine supplemented, lived past, twenty five, twenty six months. So, from this data, we can we can, see that FGF twenty one, transgenic mice seems to be a better strategy when compared to, to extend lifespan when compared to alpha ketoglutarate or berberine supplementation. So with this in mind, and with this strong lifespan extending effect of FGF 21 overexpression, the the next question is how does FGF 21 compare against the gold standard for lifespan extension in mice CR, calorie restriction? And, let's have a look at that data. So here we have, survival data. And, again, this is in the same genetic background, c 57 black six j mice. And, we've got data for ad libs, so the animals ate, as much as they wanted, 20% CR. So, that's the blue line, and then 40% CR. So 40% CR didn't extend lifespan in this study, so I'm not gonna talk about it. I'm just gonna talk about the data comparing the ad lib mice versus the 20 CR mice. And looking at average survival, we can clearly see that both average survival and maximum lifespan are both extended by, 20% calorie restriction. And that's what the, numbers look like there. So the controls lived an average of twenty five and thirty three months for average and maximum lifespan, whereas 20% CR, that was thirty six and forty five months. So how does this data in the female mice for, 20% CR compare against FGF 21 transgenic mice? So, whereas the female 20% cow restricted mice lived an average of thirty six months, FGF 21 transgenic mice lived forty months. And then in terms of maximum lifespan, whereas the 20% CR mice live forty five months, it's hard to make the comparison here because the FGF 21 overexpressing female mice, that experiment was stopped at forty three months. So they lived at at least forty three months. So they're somewhere in the ballpark of the calorie restriction, forty five months for maximum lifespan. So male mice, that were exposed to twenty percent CR. That's what we can see here. And they have an average increased average and maximum lifespan as indicated by the vertical lines and the arrows. So, in terms of the numbers, it controls, not on CR, they have twenty six and thirty six months for average and maximum lifespan, but mice male mice that were on 20% CR, thirty three and forty two months. Obviously, significant increases for both average maximum lifespan. So to compare that against the males that were, FGF 21 overexpressing, we can see that their average lifespan was thirty six months, which is higher than the twenty percent CR where they only live thirty three months. And then the FGF 21 overexpressing male mice also had similar maximum lifespan to the, twenty percent CR mice, which was 42. So based on this data, it looks like there's a higher average lifespan for FGF overexpressing, TG transgenic, female and male mice when compared with CR. So it's a pretty good intervention, it seems, for extending lifespan. So with this in mind, how can FGF 21 expression be increased in people? And there are a, variety of studies that have, investigated this, including starvation and fasting. So these are all interventions that increase FGF 21 levels in people. Eating a low methionine, containing diet. So methionine restriction and eating a low protein diet have also been shown to increase FGF 21, levels. A high fat ketogenic diet increases it and also exercise. Now, while these, picking one of these interventions is relatively easy, however, the story gets more complicated because there are situations such as, obesity and aging that also increases. So first, in terms of the obesity story, here we can see, circulating FGF levels on the x axis plotted against BMI on the y axis. And this is data in healthy controls HC and in type two diabetics t, t two d. And we can clearly see that, there's a, as as BMI increases, there's a positive correlation and FGF one levels correspondingly increase. So higher BMI is correlated with a higher systemic level of FGF 21. And as I mentioned, aging also increases FGF 21. So that's what we can see here. So, the log of FGF circulating FGF, 21 levels on the y axis, and then, plotted against people who are young, younger than 40 years old, and old relatively older, old, older than 70 years old. And we can see that the older adults had about a twofold higher systemic level, circulating level, of FGF 21. So then that raises the question, you know, how can we tell if having higher levels of f g FGF 21 during aging is good or bad for health? So before we get to that, this was a relatively small study in terms of the aging effect. Let's have a look at a little bit, a bigger study that included a wider age range. And that's what we can see here. So in this study, they looked at FGF levels starting with children as young as five years old and all the way up to people who are 80 years old. And what we can see is a clear increase in, circulating FGF 21 levels from a 156 to, about double 358.5. So, again, how can we tell if having higher levels of FGF 21 during aging is good or bad for longevity? So to to get at that, question, we can, derive some insight from centenarian offspring, so the kids of people who live, the kids of people who live longer than 100 years old. So first, centenarian offspring have a, generally better health than age matched people that are not, kids of centenarians. And one way to, in support of that hypothesis, we can look at all cause mortality risk. So when looking at, the all cause mortality risk, for centenarians offspring versus controls, which is what what's plotted here, When looking at the odds ratio for all cause mortality or even death deaths related to cancer or cardiovascular disease, we can see significantly lower risk for all cause mortality, cancer, and cardiovascular disease in centenarian's offspring when compared with controls. So just looking at the odds ratio, we can see a sixty two percent, decreases for sixty two percent, seventy one percent, and eighty five percent for total mortality, cancer, and cardiovascular disease related mortality in centenarian's offspring versus controls. So what about FGF 21 in centenarian offspring? So that's what's shown here. FGF 21 plotted on the y axis, as found in different groups. So OFF is, centenarian offspring, HC, healthy controls. T two d and c is type two diabetic, patients without complications. T two d c are type two diabetic patients with complications. So, they had complications that are commonly associated with type two diabetes, like kidney disease, eye disease, nerve problems, etcetera. And then AD, Alzheimer's disease patients. And what we can see is that the offspring of centenarians had significantly higher levels of circulating levels of FGF 21 versus all of these groups. So that would suggest that it's a pro longevity, hormone as the animal data. So how can we gain more insight into, whether having higher levels of FGF 21 during aging would be good or bad for health? So, also in the centenarian offspring, when comparing the centenarian offspring versus their partners who were who did not have parents that were centenarians, we can see that the centenarian offspring also have significantly lower levels of fasting glucose and fasting insulin. Now this is important because FGF 21 transgenic mice, so the mice that were engineered to have more circulating, and systemic levels of of FGF 21, this pattern is also found in the old FGF 21 overexpressing mice, both in the male and the female mice. So when looking at that data starting at the male mice, we can see that the insulin levels in the old FGF 21 overexpressing transgenic mice are about half of what the, non FGF 21 overexpressing mice have. And then there's a significant reduction in glucose too in these f g f g f, 21 over expressing mice. So what about in the female, animals? So, insulin levels were close to statistical significance. You can see that p value is zero point o eight and the insulin levels were about half in the FGF, transgenic, female mice when compared with the wild type mice. But the glucose levels in the FGF 21 over express overexpressing mice were significantly lower when compared with the, normal levels of FGF 21. So when considering all these data, it would seem that having high FGF 21 levels, when combined with relatively lower glucose and insulin, may be a pro longevity strategy. Alright. That's all I've got for now. I hope you enjoyed, the video, and have a great day.