Aging and disease are biochemical processes that happen over many decades. So with that in mind, if we track well established biomarkers of organ and systemic health, can aging and disease risk be slowed? So with that in mind, last week, I blood tested for the third time in 2021 and using Morgan Levine's phenotypic age calculator, which is also a measure of biological age, we can see that my biological age was 35.2 years, which is thirteen point two years younger than my chronological age of 48. So a question that is often raised when I show this data is how good is Levine's, biological age calculator? So we can see, here its correlation with chronological age is very strong. So the combination of these nine biomarkers and, chronological age because that's what's included in the test, were strongly correlated with chronological age in two separate studies in NHANES three, which is the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. So NHANES three, a correlation of 0.94 for for the LEVINE's test with chronological age. And then in a separate study, NHANES four, correlation of 0.96 for these, nine variables with chronological age. So very strong correlations. A correlation coefficient of one is it is as good as it gets. And as you can see by the red line on the graph, it's an almost perfectly linear correlation for these biomarkers with chronological age. So another question that's often raised is how does Levene's test compare with the best epigenetic clocks for, its correlation with biological age? So the best performing, epigenetic clock in terms of its correlation with chronological age is the Horvath clock. And here we're looking at a multi tissue measure of epigenetic age, also known also which is also a measure of biological age. For Horwath's clock with these 16 different cell and organ and, blood, types. You know, so breast, cheek, cerebellum cells, so brain, colon, cord blood, skin, dermis, etcetera. So when looking at all 16 different cell types, we can see that the, composite of all of that, Horvath's clock is very strongly correlated with, Horvath's epigenetic, measurement is strongly correlated with chronological age in the composite of those 16 different cell types with a correlation coefficient of 0.94. Now, Levene's test, at worst, also has a correlation coefficient of 0.94 with chronological age. So one could argue that Levene's test is just as good as the best epigenetic clock for, its, correlation with chronological age. Now, Levene's test isn't just a good measure of, chronological age. It's also associated with all cause mortality risk. So for every one year increase in biological age, all cause mortality risk increases by nine percent and that's what's shown here. So first, when looking at the all cause mortality data, you can see that the hazard ratio is one point zero nine which means that that's a nine percent increase in risk of death for all causes for every one year increase in, the VINES biological age test. Now, that, that association is true whether it's young, middle aged, or older adults as indicated by the arrows. As you can see that there's a thirteen percent, ten percent, and eight percent, increase for all cause mortality risk if you're young, middle aged, or older for every one year increase in LaVine's biological age. Now what about disease specific mortality, not just death from all causes? And that's what's shown here. So having an older biological age by Levene's test is associated with an increased risk of death from heart disease, cancer, chronic lower respiratory disease, interestingly not cerebral cerebral vascular disease or stroke, diabetes related mortality, influenza or pneumonia. And as a side note, Levine's group published, last year that having an older biological age up to 14 years before, the coronavirus hit, was associated with an increased mortality risk in COVID-nineteen patients. And then last but not least, having an older biological age by Levene's test is associated with kidney related mortality including, from nephritis or nephrosis. Now, it's important to note that Levine's test isn't the only blood bed blood based bio sorry, blood based biomarker panel that can easily assess. And when I say easily assess, I mean it's, free to use online. You just put in your numbers and you get the result for your biological age. So it's not the only test that can easily assess biological age and potentially all cause mortality risk. And another test that is, freely free to use online is aging.ai which, has been shown to be strongly correlated with biological age. And what differentiates it from Levine's test is that chronological age is not included as a variable in its model. So the aging.aitest includes 19 different blood based biomarkers, which are found on the standard chemistry panel and a complete blood count CBC. And that test, those two tests combined, go for about, $35 or less in US dollars. Now for eight of the nine measures on Levene's test, the standard chemistry panel in CBC will also be cover will also cover that with the exception of, high sensitivity c reactive protein, which is an additional test that can go up to for up to about forty forty to $45 So for the beans test, it could cost at most about $80 for aging.ai, at most up to $35 at least in US dollars. Now as I mentioned, aging.ai is has been shown to be strongly correlated at least for the 19 biomarker panel for aging.ai. It's been shown to be strongly correlated with, chronological age and as you can see a correlation coefficient of, 0.8. So it's not quite as good as Levin's test, but, correlation coefficient of 0.8 is still very strong. And then it's also been shown to be, associated with, an increased all cause mortality risk. So in other words, biological ages that were younger than their corresponding chronological age were associated with a reduced all cause mortality risk. And we can see, that data here in two different data sets. So first, starting with the Canadian cohort, people that had a biological age by aging.ai that was more than five years older than their chronological age had a significantly increased all cause mortality risk as indicated there by the arrow with the hazard ratio closer, to to two. And then, conversely, for people who had aging.ai determined biological ages that were at least five years younger than their chronological age, we can see a significantly reduced all cause mortality risk. And similar data was also present in an American cohort, again using the, NHANES, where we can see, having a biological age that was more than five years older than the chronological, again, increased all cause mortality risk. And then conversely, younger, five years younger biological age compared with their chronological age, they, that was associated with reduced all cause mortality risk. So with all this in mind for aging.ai, what's my data? So here's my data for the blood test that I got got done last week. And, for anyone who wants to double check my numbers, my predicted age was, 29, which is close to twenty years younger than my chronological age. So I'm on the right track. Now, with this in mind, an obvious question is what's contributing to my relatively low biological age? Whether using the Levine's test or aging.ai. So, first in terms of supplements, I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in my, early to mid twenties. So I've been taking Levothyroxine for, about twenty years, daily. And and that's a hundred and thirty seven and a half micrograms per day. So and then from the last blood test in late April until this blood test, so it's an eighty four day period, I've been taking, a thousand micrograms of methyl b twelve every other day. So that's it for supplements. Everything else is is, diet, exercise, and body composition. So, in terms of fitness stats, what does that look like and how is that potentially impacting my biological age? So first, in terms of my body weight, I'm currently hundred and fifty six point seven pounds and I should mention that's my average body weight for the eighty four day period that goes from my last blood test to this blood test as I weigh myself every morning. So that's the average body weight over that, period that goes from my last blood test to this blood test. And the resulting BMI is twenty four and a half. So I'm within that quote unquote normal range up to about twenty five. And then my in terms of cardiovascular, in terms of fitness stats that are related to cardiovascular health, the resting heart rate, RHR, and heart rate variability, HRV are shown there. 47.1 beats per minute for resting heart rate and, 52.7 milliseconds for heart rate variability. Now I'm not gonna show any, data related to strength, flexibility, core function, etcetera. I'll I think it's easier to show that visually so people can visually see, you know, my strength and flexibility. But in terms of cardiovascular related metrics, those are easy relatively easier to, show. So that's what I'm showing here. And, again, that data is generated by my fitness tracker. I'm not sponsored by them, but I wear Whoop. You can get this data from many different fitness trackers. I'm not here to say which one is better or not. Now then the question is, is are these cardiovascular fitness metrics, resting heart rate, heart rate variability contributing to my relatively young biological age? So let's take it some take a look at some heart rate data. And this is WHOOP data so, that would be the appropriate measurement, right? If I have my own data from WHOOP, how would I compare to, to WHOOP members? And so we're looking at average resting heart rate on the y axis plotted against, age. And the age range here goes from 20 year olds up to 50. So we can see that youth is characterized by relatively lower resting heart rates. In men, for men in blue, we can see resting heart rates of about 53 ish, for 20 year olds and for women in red, we can see a little bit higher, resting heart rates of about 56. But for both men and women, we can see clearly see that resting heart rates increase from 20 to 50 year olds. So resting heart rate increases during aging at least up to 50. Now, my resting heart rate is 47.1. So based on extrapolation of the curve, one could argue argue that I've got a youthful, resting heart rate. But then, going further, is a low resting heart rate associated with health. So one way we can assess that is by looking at the, association for resting heart rate with all cause mortality risk. And I presented this data in in other videos. So if you've seen that, I apologize for those of you who haven't seen it. Here it is. So on the y axis, we're looking at the r r relative risk for all cause mortality. And on the x axis is resting heart rate and beats per minute. And this is a meta analysis of 46 studies that included almost, that included more than 1,200,000 subjects. And what we can see is that the lowest risk for all cause mortality was present for resting heart rates of forty five and then all cause mortality risk significantly increased as the, it went as the resting heart rate went past 45 and a towards higher values. So when, looking at both of these data, the, youthful resting heart rate of 47.1 when compared with the WHOOP data and then the all cause mortality data, one would one could argue that I'm on the right track and this may be a contributing factor for, my relatively youthful biological age. But there's a caveat here. A resting heart rate increases then decreases during aging. So at whereas the WHOOP data only goes up to 50, here we're looking at Fitbit data where, they included the age range up to, people who are 85 years. And in agreement with the WHOOP data, we can see that resting heart rate does indeed increase up until about 50 years. But then from 50 to 85, we can see that resting heart rate decreases during aging. So an obvious question then is how can we know if a low resting heart rate is indicative of health or is relatively low because of aging? And one way we can assess that is by, looking at the heart rate variability data and the combination of those two can can provide more insight about cardiovascular fitness. So, first, just to introduce heart rate variability. And, again, for those of you who have seen my video on this, I apologize. But for those of you who are new and who haven't seen it, let's go through it. So what is heart rate variability, HRV? It's the six variation in time, in between successive heartbeats. So that may not be intuitive, in terms of what it means. So, if your heart average heart rate is 60 beats per minute, you know, it's easy to think that your heart beats exactly one beat per second. But there is a variability for each beat, the time for each beat. You may have point nine seconds per beat, one point one seconds per beat, one second per beat, and then that three beat average would be, one beat per minute but there is variability in the time in between those beats. So that's what's illustrated here and and based on the the the the heart rate heart rate variability that's presented there, eight fifty nine, seven ninety three, seven twenty six milliseconds, for the time in between each beat, you would get a heart rate variability of 67 milliseconds. So, with this in mind, how does heart rate variability change during aging? So a higher heart rate variability is found in youth, but it declines during aging. And this again is WHOOP data. And if people are interested, I'll put the link where, all of this data. And for all the studies that I've presented here, it'll be in the video's description. And I should mention too, I'll put a link to Levine's test and aging.ai in the video's description. I'm not sponsored by either of them, so they're free to use, you know, tools. So we can see that the heart rate variability going from 20 years old to 65 years old, the clients are about 80 and 20 years old to about 35, 40, and 65 years old. Now my average heart rate variability over the eighty four day period from my last blood test in through this blood test where because I measure it every day was, fifty two point seven milliseconds. So first looking at the, my age group, So I'm currently 48. That would put me closer to the high end of or the highest end of the range for my age group at worst. But at best, I may be at the bottom of the, range for, you know, 23 year old or so. And it's impossible to know where exactly I I I fit on that graph in terms of, how much younger, you know, where I stand in terms of, my heart rate variability on this chart. You know, is it a 35 year old? Am I in the middle of the chart for a 35 year old? There's no way to know. But when considering that I'm above the median for my age and potentially younger, one could argue that my heart rate variability data is potentially contributing to a younger biological age. So as that summary, you know, as I mentioned in my case, relative heart wrestling heart rate is relatively low in conjunction with a heart rate variability that is higher than the median for my age at worst or at the low end of of the range for a 23 year old at best. Now, note that a relatively low resting heart rate and high heart rate variability are found in youth and conversely, relatively lower heart rate, resting heart rate and low heart rate variability are found in older adults. So to answer that question, is cardiovascular fitness contributing to a relatively young biological age? In my case, I'd argue that, my data would suggest that I'm closer to the low RHR and high HRV that are found in youth. Now in support of that, if my average heart rate variability was, you know, 30 or so towards the lower end of the range for at least my age group, one could make the argument that my relatively low resting heart rate in combination with this, low heart rate variability would be indicative of poor cardiovascular fitness. And then having a youthful, biological agent in that case would be in spite of having poor cardiovascular fitness, but that does not seem to be the case in my situation. So the next, issue would then be what about diet? And in the interest of time, I'm gonna stop here. This will be a part two of this series, and I'll go through full diet composition and macro, macro and micronutrients and and more in terms of looking at how I use diet to try to optimize each of these biomarkers. Now as a last note, I'm now on Patreon and, you there you'll find that, exclusive information that I don't post anywhere else including daily data and not just the average data over an eighty four day period for For my resting heart rate, heart rate heart rate variability, sleep stages, and then diet, daily diet data where I take screenshots of all the stuff that's in my diet, for food intake including my macro and micronutrients, and then sneak peeks at and spoilers for for new videos. I posted a couple of slides for this video, yesterday and the day before so you kind of get some insight into what my videos are gonna be and a lot more. So if you're not interested in that, you can find me lots of places online which I've posted here. And, I hope you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.