In previous videos, I've proposed optimal ranges for biomarkers related to various organ systems including eGFR in the kidney, resting heart rate and heart rate variability for the heart, immune cells including neutrophils, lymphocytes, and monocytes, red blood cells, and many other biomarkers. But one tissue that I haven't covered biomarkers for is the liver. So with that in mind, the focus of today's video is gonna be on aspartate aminotransferase, AST, And we're gonna see, we're gonna try to identify optimal ranges in terms of health and longevity. So first, AST, again, aspartate aminotransferase, is a protein that's produced within liver cells, but it's also produced within other tissues, including skeletal muscle, the kidney, and heart. Now, although AST isn't found exclusively within the liver, it's strongly associated with liver, disease and liver cancer as we'll see, in a minute. Now, so what does AST do? So, it converts aspartate and alpha ketoglutarate into glutamate plus oxaloacetate. And note that this is a reversible reaction. So in the presence of glutamate and oxaloacetate, it can then convert that into aspartate and alpha ketoglutarate. Now this is an intracellular protein. So if higher than normal levels are found, in the blood for AST, it's it reflects cellular damage. So the reference range for AST is zero to forty IUs, international units per liter, and that's LabCorp's, reference range. So is the reference range for AST optimal for health and longevity? So first, let's have a look at the aging data. So, AST is on the y axis plotted, against age starting from 20 year olds all the way up to 85, plus. And, when starting in youth, when looking at the males, in blue and the females in red, we can see that value somewhere around 20 are found in young adults. Now AST then increases for both men and women up to about six sixty years old and then is approximately flat, staying somewhere, closer to 30 up until about 85 years of age. But what happens older than 85? I'm interested in living longer than that, so I wanna know what happens to ASD at ASD at very older ages. So to investigate that, I look for centenarian studies, so people who live to a 100 years or older. And the largest study that I can find for that included more than 1,700 people who had an average age or actually a median age of 100 years. And for that group, their AST was 21.3. So I've extended the curve with a green line. And so then what we can see for the aging data is that AST increases then decreases during aging. So would an AST of 20 then be indicative of youth or old age since we've got basically an, upside down u in terms of its, aging curve? So the aging data can't answer that. So what about, what's optimal for AST in terms of all cause mortality risk? So, this is data from the same study, and I I should mention this is a a very large study, more than 416,000 subjects. And this is all cause mortality data. So the hazard ratio for all cause mortality on the y axis plotted against, different levels of AST on the x. So, they selected 15 to 24 for AST as the reference. And then what you can see is that there's a thirty nine percent increased risk for all cause mortality for AST less than 15, but then also an increase significantly increased all cause mortality risk for AST values that were 25 or higher. And note that these are are are not small increases, you know, ninety six percent increase for AST 40 to 69 and almost four fold higher increased all cause mortality risk for AST greater than 70. So, AST is commonly discussed as a marker of liver health. How does it compare with liver disease and liver cancer? So here we're looking at liver disease mortality risk, and this includes liver cancer, but other diseases related to liver including including cirrhosis. So again, when starting with 15 to 24 for AST as a reference, which is in that red, triangle, now we can see that people who had AST less than 15 actually had a significantly reduced risk of death from liver disease. So the hazard ratio there, there is zero point three six, which means that that's a sixty four percent decreased risk of death from liver disease for people who had, AST levels that were less than 15. Now, conversely, having AST levels higher than 24, so 25, up past 70, now we can see very high increase, increases for liver disease mortality risk. So almost a five fold increase increase liver disease mortality for people who had 25 to 39. And remember, this is within the reference range. So even within the reference range, there's a five fold increase for liver disease mortality. People who had 40 to 69 AST levels had a 27 fold increased risk for liver disease. And having AST greater than 70 was even worse with a 73 increased risk for liver disease mortality. Now if you remember, on the all cause mortality data, there was an increased all cause mortality for AST less than 15, but yet there's a decreased risk for liver disease mortality for AST 15. So what's contributing to the additional increase in in all cause mortality risk besides, liver disease? And it's cancer. So for people who had AST less than 15 in this study, there was an overall increase in cancer, and more specifically, in non liver cancer. Note that for people who, had ASD less than 15, in line with the overall liver disease data, we can see that, people who had ASD less than 15 rarely have liver cancer, at least in this study, with only two deaths out of nine hundred and twelve total deaths in the study. Whereas, non liver cancer, there was a significant, increase, increased risk for that, a thirty three percent increase for for having AST less than 15, thereby resulting in an overall increased cancer, risk of twenty seven percent for the people who had AST less than 15. Now also note that having higher, than the 15 to 24, reference interval in this study was also associated with an overall overall increase for cancer risk, but also now an increase for liver cancer risk. In fact, five point three fold higher risk for liver cancer when compared with 15 to 24. And then taking it further, we can see even greater risks for cancer risk and both liver cancer and non liver cancer risk for the 40 to 69 AST group and the greater than 70 AST group. Now, also interesting up in this study is that they looked at life expectancy. So the longest life expectancy in this study was it was for people who had AST levels that were between 15 to 24, IUs per liter. So starting with the data on the left, just to illustrate one example, for people that were, in the 30 year old age group, we can see that if if their AST was 15 24, they had an average expected life expectancy of 53. So someone who was 30 that had had those AST values would be expected to live to about 83. Now AST values higher than the fifteen to twenty four range then had lower, a lower life expectancy. So a small decrease in life expectancy for the twenty five to thirty nine group, so about one year shorter than the fifteen to twenty four group. But then we can see the forty to sixty nine group has a seven year, seven and a half year shorter life expectancy, and having AST greater than 70 had a up to a seventeen year decrease in life expectancy. And this is illustrated here in this graph. So years of life lost on the y axis plotted against the AST categories, and this is all when compared with the fifteen to twenty four group. So looking at the 30 year olds, we can again see that about one year decrease in life expectancy for the twenty five to thirty nine AST group. And then we can see about a seven year loss of life expectancy for people who had AST, between 40 and 69, about a 10 loss in life expectancy for people greater than 40 AST values. And then again, up to seventeen years of life expectancy, a shorter life expense expectancy for people who had AST that was greater than 70. Now, this was true at every for every age group. A shorter life expectancy when compared with, AST values between fifteen to twenty four, and this is data in men. Similar data were also observed in in women. So fifteen to twenty four was identified as a group that had the longest life expectancy when compared with all of the other AST groupings. So that data was in a study of 416,000 subjects. Even bigger studies could get closer to, if this is a real effect or not. So in the largest study that I was able to find on the association between ASD levels with all cause mortality risk, we can see, in this study, they included, data for up to 16 more than sixteen point six million people. So here, 20 a median value of of 20 was defined as the reference. And when compared with ASD values of 20, we can see that, the groups that had median values of twenty one and twenty three had significantly decreased all cause mortality risk, which, is in line with the data presented in the in the previous slide. Also note that, the group that had a median value of of 27 had a 1.3, hazard ratio, which means a thirty percent increased all cause mortality risk for people who had, AST values that were a median AST value of 27. So, again, as I mentioned, these are similar results to the 15 to 24 optimal weight for AST in the previous study. So with all this in mind, I've been tracking AST since, 2008. What's my data? So, starting with my preach pre diet tracking data, this is, from 2008 to 2013. I was just going to my doctor once a year for physical and then recording my blood test results, not really tracking diet that seriously. And based on these six measurements over that time span, we can see that my average AST value was 24.3, which isn't too far from the 15 to 24, quote, unquote optimal range. And then since, 2015, I've been, measuring AST more often, and I started diet tracking in 2015, including weighing all of my food, logging that in an online calculator, which gives me macro and micronutrients and obviously food amounts, and then putting all of that data into an Excel file, and then taking the average dietary intake that corresponds to each blood test. And with enough blood test and dietary periods, I can then look for correlations to try to see how my diet can impact my biomarkers. So as you can see from twenty fifteen to 20, twenty twenty one, I've measured AST, 30 times because it's included on the standard chemistry panel and CBC, which I get up to six times per year. And what we can see in the past six years is that my AST levels have significantly increased from the average of 24 to up to 30 and a half. And 30 and a half, although it's the average, early in 2017, we can see that my data was most definitely going in the wrong direction with values getting approaching 40. Now fortunately, I've been able to, again, look at the correlations in my data between my diet and blood test and try to make changes along the way to try to get my AST values closer to that 15 to 24 range and away from the forties that I was close to seeing. And as you can see by the arrow that's pointing down, I've had some success with that. And most recently, over my last seven measurements, it's it's relatively going in the right direction with an average AST of 27.1. Not perfect yet, but getting there. So the question is which dietary variables are then correlated with AST, at least for me. So, of all of my, macro and micronutrients that I track, and it's somewhere in the range of 40 different macro, macro and including the micronutrients, the strongest correlation with AST was for beta cryptoxanthin. Now that name may sound familiar because relatively higher levels of beta cryptoxanthin, which is one of the carotenoids, is associated with a younger epigenetic age. And if you missed that video on carotenoids, and a younger epigenetic age, it's right there in the right corner. So as we can see from the curve on, from the graph on the left, a significant correlation, and a relatively strong correlation with a correlation coefficient of 0.7. So the higher my beta cryptoxanthin intake is that's correlated with a higher AST and in fact, going in the wrong direction. So, early in 2017 or so, I was eating a lot of butternut squash. And one reason is because of its, carotenoid content. It's loaded with, carotenes and also beta cryptoxanthin. So one pound of, butternut squash has about 14,000 micrograms of beta cryptoxanthin. Now there isn't an RDA for for, beta cryptoxanthin. So I I had no idea how much I should eat of it or not, but clearly this data suggests that I may be eating too much of it. So after seeing that, this correlation, a few years ago, I started to reduce my butternut squash intake and I replaced it with a food that has a lower density of beta cryptoxanthin, in this case, red bell peppers, where one pound of Red Bell Peppers has significantly less, only about 2,200 of Beta Cryptaxanthin. So I don't wanna eliminate it when considering that a higher blood level of Beta Cryptaxanthin is associated with younger, epigenetic age. So more most recently, I've been eating more red bell peppers and almost no butternut squash or none for the past year or two in an effort to get some but not too much. So when looking at this data, if I aim for a lower intake of beta cryptoxanthin, about two thousand micrograms per day, it may improve my AST levels if correlation is indeed, causing these changes. But I don't wanna just improve one biomarker and make three or four others worse. I wanna see if the net effect on my biomarkers is, positive or negative. So to do that, I investigated associations that actually correlations with other biomarkers. So in this case, here we can see the correlation for beta cryptoxanthin with my homocysteine levels. And I've I've only measured homocysteine 12 times over the past six years. It's not included on the standard chemistry panel at CBC, so it's an extra test that I have to order. But nonetheless, we can see that strong correlation with a correlation coefficient of 0.79 for a higher beta cryptoxanthin intake being correlated with higher levels of homocysteine going in the wrong direction. So if I were to cut my beta cryptoxanthin intake, again, if correlation is indeed causation, then I would expect lower homocysteine levels, which would be going in the right direction. And and I have a homocysteine video too. If you're interested in that, that'll also be in the right corner. And, actually, for all of these biomarkers that I'm gonna show, if you're interested in the in the videos for aging and all cause mortality data, please click on the right corner and check them out. So, it isn't just homocysteine that's correlated with my beta cryptoxanthin data, also red blood cells, RBCs. And in this case, this is a significant negative correlation. So a higher beta cryptoxanthin intake is correlated with lower red blood cells going in the wrong direction. So if I were to cut my beta cryptoxanthin intake to about two thousand micrograms per day, that would, based on the trend line for the plot, that would be correlated with higher levels of red blood cells, which is going in the right direction. So so far so good. Beta cryptoxanthin, if I were to reduce it, potentially, favorable effects on three biomarkers. Now it isn't three biomarkers, but four. So here's the correlation between beta cryptoxanthin with the mean corpuscular volume, MCV, and I have 27 measurements for this over the past six years. And we can see a moderate correlation, 0.5, but statistically significant based on the p value. So here we it it it shows, a correlation for higher beta cryptoxanthin is correlated with a higher MCV, which is going in the wrong direction. Now, again, if I were to cut my beta cryptoxanthin intake based on the trend line, that will be correlated with a lower MCV, which is going in the right direction. And again, if you missed that video, please click in the right corner to check it out. So, so far, reducing my beta cryptoxanthin intake may be associated with favorable effects for four biomarkers. So, will that negative are there any biomarkers that will be negatively affected by reducing my beta cryptoxanthin intake? And the answer is maybe yes. So here we can see a negative correlation, significant negative correlation between beta cryptoxanthin with my glucose levels. So the higher my beta cryptoxanthin intake, that's correlated with lower glucose and glucose increases during aging. So, this is a, it, higher levels of beta cryptoxanthin would be seem to be favorable for my glucose levels. So if I were to cut my beta cryptoxanthin intake based on that trend line, that will be, potentially going in the wrong direction for glucose levels. Similarly, for triglycerides. So if I were to cut my beta cryptoxanthin intake for to about two thousand micrograms per day, that will be correlated with higher triglycerides up to about sixty milligrams per deciliter in my data, which is also going in the wrong direction, as triglycerides also increase during aging. So the net effect of reducing, but again, not eliminating because beta cryptoxanthin, at least in blood is correlated with a younger epigenetic age, I if I reduce it, I may have four biomarkers going in the right direction, but two in the wrong direction. So that's net positive. Four going well, two may be wrong. So overall plus two. Now note that I didn't just look at those six biomarkers. I also evaluated the other correlations for beta cryptoxanthin with all of the other variables on Levine's, a biological age calculator phenotypic age, including creatinine albumin, alkaline phosphatase, white blood cells, lymph lymphocyte percentage, red blood cell distribution with RDW, high sensitivity c r c reactive protein, overall phenotypic age, and then, HDL because I'm interested in getting my HDL into the fifties. So I wanted to see how it affected that. Now note that no significant correlations were identified for any of these biomarkers, with beta cryptoxanthin as they all had very weak correlation coefficient, coefficients less than 0.24. Now this is just one example of my approach for optimizing blood biomarkers through diet. There were other nutrients too, including Omega-six and Niacin that were significantly correlated with AST. So in the interest of time, I won't go through through that today, for my next blood test, which is gonna be next week. At some point, I'll do an AST update video, and I'll include only the data, the dietary data. We won't have to present the all cause mortality data because I've already shown that. Alright. That's all I've got for now. If you made it to the end, thanks for watching, and I hope you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.