Apigenin increases muscle mass and function. Let's have a look at that data. So first, we're looking at a study in very young, male mice. In this case, they were five weeks old, which is equivalent to a, toddler, four year old toddler. So, they supplemented the mice with, two different levels of epigenin. In this case, point 20.4% when compared with a normal diet that did not contain epigenin. And this was a seven week study and, it was a low fat diet. So five percent of the total calories came from fat, 16% came from protein. So, first when looking at the weight of the gap, quadriceps, which are muscles located on the front of the thigh, We can see that when compared with animals that were not supplemented with apigenin, apigenin supplementation, both low and high, increased muscle mass. So, when it when muscle mass is increased, it's important to look at the tissue weights, other than muscle, because of body size increases, is it a muscle specific effect? So in this, case, there was no difference in body weight or the weight of the heart, liver or fat depots. So interestingly, one could one could conclude that Apigenin selectively improved muscle mass in this study. So what about, physical function? So one measure of function is, treadmill running distance, so essentially running to exhaustion on a treadmill. So, for mice that were, not supplemented with epigenin, so NOR normal diet, compared with the two epigenin groups, we can see that epigenin supplementation, resulted in, longer running distances for the mice. So from this, we can conclude that epigenin improves muscle mass and, treadmill, run distance. Now, mouse studies are interesting, but what's the human equivalent dose that could potentially replicate these findings in people? So, the short answer is one point two grams. So how did we get there? Let's derive the human equivalent dose. So first, in just looking at the low dose epigenin group, point 2%, that translates into point two grams of epigenin per 100 grams of food. Now mice eat about three grams of food per day. So when you multiply these values, you get, six milligrams or point zero zero six grams of Apigenin were consumed per day. Now the mice weighed 28 grams at the end of the study, so then we can identify a a, dose, you know, in milligrams of, Apigenin consumed per kilogram body weight, by dividing. So, six millig six milligrams divided by 28, point zero two eight kilograms equals, point two one grams of Apigenin consumed per kilogram body weight, per day. So two hundred and ten milligrams of Apigenin per kilogram body weight. Now, we then need to use the body size conversion from mice to humans. So for that we divide by 12.3 as I've highlighted here on the right. So when we divide point two one grams of apigenin per kilogram body weight by 12.3, we get a, an equivalent dose of point zero one seven grams of apigenin per kilograms of body weight. So then taking my body weight, for example, seventy one kilograms, we multiply that by the point zero one seven grams of apigenin per kilogram body weight, and we get to the one point two grams of apigenin per day as the human equivalent dose for what was used in the mouse study on the previous slide. Now that's a lot. So are there any other studies that have demonstrated an, an impact for apigenin on muscle? So, in this study, epigenin once again positively affected, muscle cross sectional area. So essentially the size of each individual muscle fiber was increased and improved treadmill running distance. But in this case, it was young mice that weren't on a low fat diet, it was on a high fat diet. And that's, interesting and important because, it could be that, you know, macronutrient composition, impacts apigen and supplementation. So what this data shows is it doesn't matter if you're on a low fat or a high fat diet or at least for mice, that apigenic can improve muscle related measures independent of the diet composition. So let's look at let's have a look at their, these data. So what we're looking at on the left is, a muscle cross section. So it's essentially a two two dimensional representation of, individual muscle fibers. For the normal diet on the top, the high fat diet in the middle, and then high fat diet plus Apigenin. And in this case, they supplemented the mice with point 1%. So, half of the lowest dose of the previous study. So So when looking at the individual muscle fibers, which are the red areas, so I've, starred them, just a couple of them to highlight those are individual muscle fibers and the muscle that they looked at was the gastrocnemius. So essentially the calf muscle on the lower leg. So when comparing the cross sectional area, in the gastrocnemius on normal on the normal diet, high fat diet had a smaller muscle cross sectional area as indicated by the stars. But then when they supplemented the animals with epigenin on the high fat diet, we can see a small but, you know, a significant increase in, muscle cross sectional area. So they besides the visual representation of the individual muscle, cross sectional areas in response to epigenin or not, they quantify these data in a chart and that's what we see here. So, when compared to the cross sectional area CSA on the normal diet, NOR, we can see that the high fat diet fed mice had a, smaller muscle cross sectional area, so smaller individual muscle fibers. But then, epigenetic supplementation on the high fat diet resulted in an increased muscle cross sectional area. So, individual muscle fiber area is interesting, but, function may be more relevant. So to assess that, they ran mice on a treadmill to exhaustion, and then measured running distance. So that was that's that's what we're looking at here on the, on the right. And what we can see is that mice on a high fat diet ran a significantly shorter distance compared to the normal diet, which was not a high fat diet. But I should have mentioned in this case, this was a 60% fat diet, 20% protein, and it was an eight week study in, 22 old male mice. So once again, they didn't use females, which is a major limitation because then it's unknown if these data would apply to women since none of the studies looked at, female mice. And the, so these data in 22 old mice are equivalent to about a 17 year old in in human years. Alright. So treadmill running distance, we can see that the high fat diet, there's a lower, they they ran a shorter distance, but then epigenetic supplementation on the high fat diet, they ran a longer distance. So, what's the human equivalent dose based on these data? So, using a similar similar calculation before and, a little bit bigger mice because on a high fat diet, it's an obesogenic diet, meaning the animals gain more weight, more quickly. So the animals weren't 28 grams at the end of the study as in the previous, slide. In this case, they were 50 at the, end of the study. So when incorporating that data into the human equivalent dose, HED, we get 346 for a seventy one kilogram person. So, about a threefold reduction compared to the data on the previous slide in terms of how much apigenin may impact muscles. So we're getting pretty close to, a level of apigenin that potentially can be impacted through diet and or, supplementation. Alright. Now data in young mice is interesting, but what about during aging? So, that's what we're gonna see here in this study. And in this case, giving away, you know, the slide is, the slide's data is apigenetic increases muscle mass, strength, and treadmill running distance and and also reduces frailty in old mice. So first, they compared young and old. So what were the ages of those mice? So young was, were, six to nine month old animals, which is, equivalent to people that are in the twenty to thirty one year age range. And then old were 16 old mice or what they called old was 16 old mice, maximum lifespan in the animal. The mice that they use is, around 36. So 16 is closer to middle age than than old. But besides the, you know, the definition of their, their definition of old, it's a it's approximately middle middle age. Now once again, they also use data for males. They didn't look at these, epigenetic supplementation in females, which is, again, a major limitation because, you know, having data to, apply it to only one gender and not another, you know, it's half the population. So alright. So then what doses of Apigenin did they supplement? So they gave twenty five, fifty and a hundred milligrams per kilogram of Apigenin. Now in the first two slides, the epigenin was provided in the food or the drinking water, and that can induce variability in how much epigenin is consumed because if mice, individual mice consume more or less food, they're consuming more or less epigenin. And, you know, similarly, if you drink more or less water, you're gonna have some variability in the epigenin that you consume. So in this case, they provided the epigenin by, via, intragastric administration, which is essentially they're injecting it down their throat. So not pleasant, but that's what they did. Alright. So what was the impact of Apigenin on, muscle related measures in old mice? So first, we're looking at muscle weight divided by body weight. And again, it's important to divide by body weight because if, muscle weight and body size are both increased, it may not be a muscle specific effect, it's just an overall increase in body size. So first in looking at, so again, I should mention which muscles did they look at. They looked at the tibialis anterior, the extensor digitoris longum, EDL, and then the soleus sole. And I've I've highlighted in a little cartoon on the right, the little picture on the right, that these are lower, muscles, these are lower lower leg muscles. Alright. So, first, during aging, there was an age related decline in the muscle weight to body weight ratio, which is well known. I mean, that's been documented in very many, many studies. So each of these muscles saw an age related decline in this ratio, muscle weight divided by body weight. So what about the impact of Apigenin in the old mice? So we can see that the two highest doses for the tibialis anterior TA resulted in a higher muscle weight to body weight ratio. And then similarly, the middle dose is fifty milligrams per kilogram of Apigenin increased the muscle weight to body weight ratio for both the EDL and soleus. So what about muscle function? So to assess that, they looked at grip strength and, treadmill running distance. So first, when looking at grip strength, we can see that, again, there's an age related reduction in, muscle strength, which is well well documented. It's that's been shown, you know, lots of times before. But then OldMind supplemented with each dose of Abigenin, twenty five, fifty, and a hundred milligrams per kilogram of body weight, each, significantly improved their grip strength. So what about tread treadmill running distance? So again, age related decline, red line, and then the two highest, apigenin groups, fifty and a hundred milligrams per kilogram had increased, treadmill run run distance. So, apigenin improves muscle mass and aerobic capacity. Now what about frailty? So, to assess frailty, they use a a composite of 31 different measures, one of those measures being muscle muscle function, but there were other measures too, cognitive and and and other measures that were included in the, 31 31 assess 31 assessments of combined assessments for frailty. Sorry. So okay. First, when looking at the old mice, we can see that they had the highest frailty score with the black line. But then the the two, Apigenin at fifty and a hundred milligrams per kilogram, of body weight significantly reduced this frailty score. So important data, potentially for older adults. So, okay. So how does this translate into, a human equivalent dose? So for the just using the fifty milligrams per kilogram, dose as a reference, but mostly because that was the, the dose, the lowest dose that, displayed consistent effects for both muscle mass and, muscle function, the human equivalent dose would be, two hundred eighty eight milligrams per day for a seventy one kilogram person. Also factoring in the, body size, you know, the body size, accounting for body size from mice to humans divided by 12.3. So 50 divided by 12.3 multiplied by 71 gives you two hundred eighty eight milligrams per day. So can we get two hundred eighty eight milligrams per day of ApoGena from food? I mean, my preference is to get it all from food. Some may get it from supplements. So, but can we get it from food? So first, dried parsley has more than forty five hundred milligrams of apigenin per 100 grams of of dried parsley. So to get two hundred eighty eight milligrams using dried parsley, you would need six point four grams per day. Not too bad. So what about fresh parsley? So fresh parsley has two hundred and fifteen, and a half milligrams of apigenin per 100 of food. And to get to the two hundred eighty eight milligrams per day of apigenin that, was a human equivalent dose potentially, to get those muscle related effects in the last study, we would need about a hundred and thirty four grams per day. So about five ounces of fresh parsley a day. Now chamomile tea is pretty popular too, for, having epigenin. But I looked at the actual studies for, the tea, not necessarily the extract of the chamomile, you know, chamomile plant or leaves, which can be alcoholic extract, it can be water based extract, it can be other, you know, fat based extract. So when I looked at the actual tea, how much is in it within published studies, there's a a lot of variability in how much apigenin is in chamomile tea. In one study, ninety one milligrams of apigenin per five hundred mil mils was found. And, so that's about two six one sixteen ounce cup of, Chamomile tea would have ninety one milligrams of Apigenin. So you'd need about 1.6 liters to get to this two hundred eighty eight milligrams per day of Apigenin. However, in another study, there was significantly less apigenin found in the chamomile tea and it ranged, depending on the source, you know, which which version of chamomile tea, that they that they analyzed. So they analyzed, like, 13 different chamomile teas. So the range for apigenin in those teas was as low as one to as high as twenty four, twenty three and a half milligrams per five hundred mils. So using the median value for that, about twelve milligrams of apigenin per five hundred mils, you would need a lot of chamomile tea. I mean, 6,000 liters. So there's no way you can get that much epigenetics. So there's a lot of variability in the Apigenin data in terms of chamomile tea. So I wouldn't use that as the primary source, to try to boost epigenetic levels in the diet just when considering there's so much variability in how much chamomile tea can actually have. Now so as a last note, it's important to know that there are no active randomized controlled trials in people that have evaluated whether epigenetic supplementation can actually affect muscle, in in either young or older adult humans. So whether or not the mouse data will translate into people, for now that's unknown. Alright. That's all I've got for now. You made it to the end. Thanks a lot. I hope you enjoyed the video, and have a great day.