How many calories are optimal for health? One way to address that is by looking at correlations for average daily calorie intake with big picture biomarkers. So what's the approach? How can we do that? So since April 2015, I've weighed all of my food every day with a food scale, and those food amounts are then entered into Cronometer. Now note that I'm not sponsored by Cronometer. Any similar, app, you know, including MyFitnessPal or others will work. And then the output data from that, including macro and micronutrients and individual food amounts are in entered into a spreadsheet. Now during that period from April 2015 through November 2021, I have up to 33 blood tests. And then each blood test has a corresponding average dietary intake. In other words, if I blood test on day one and then blood test on day 60, for the fifty nine day period in between blood tests, the average dietary intake during that period corresponds to the second blood test. So with enough blood tests and enough tract dietary data, we can then look at correlations for blood biomarkers with calorie intake or other macronutrients or individual food amounts. And that can help us answer the question, is calorie intake correlated with big picture biomarkers? So what are the big picture biomarkers? And that's what's shown here. So they include things like glucose, homocysteine, three markers of kidney function, four markers of liver function, all the major lipoproteins, immune cells, red blood cell related measures, inflammation including high sensitivity c reactive protein, and then as a composite measure of many of these biomarkers, an overall biological age score using Morgan Levine's PhenoAge and aging.ai. Now first, note that, my average daily calorie intake is not significantly correlated with either of the two biological age scores, including phenoage and aging.ai. So in theory, we could stop here. You know, many may may say, well, look. Your correlate, your calorie intake is not significantly correlated with biological age, so who cares? Just eat your average intake or eat whatever you want as much as you want, and it doesn't matter. But I prefer greater specificity, and I think there's value in looking at each of the individual biomarkers and then seeing what is calorie intake significantly correlated both in a good direction and and potentially in a wrong direction. So which blood biomarkers are significantly correlated with calorie intake? And there are four. Blood urea nitrogen, BUN, VLDL, so very low density, lipoprotein, platelets, and, the red blood cell distribution with RDW. Now I should have noted that on this table, the little n is how many blood tests that I have for each measure. The little r is the correlation coefficient, and the p value is the, you know, measure of statistical significance or not with a p value less than zero point, 0.05 being statistically significant. Alright. So then the the next question is, are these correlations going in the right or wrong direction in terms of aging and all cause mortality risk? And then once we have that information, we'll be able to guide calorie intake until the next blood test. So, basically, using an evidence based approach for, calorie intake versus systemic biomarkers. So start let's start with the the correlation that was the strongest. So VLDL has a correlation coefficient of 0.55. So that's where we're where we'll start. So the VLDL reference range, and this is using Labcorp's data, is five to forty milligrams per deciliter. And the reference range doesn't tell us if we should be on the low end of the range, in the middle of the range, or the high end of the range in terms of what's optimal for health and potentially longevity. So let's have a look at the aging data. So VLDL increases during aging, and this is in a study of 3,100 men. I presented this data in another video. If you missed that, I'll link to the right corner, especially since that data also has, data that video also has data for women, which I won't present in this video because I'm only gonna compare my data against what's been published. So, again, if anybody's seen, or come across studies larger than this study of 3,100 men or VLDL changes during aging, please post it in the comments, and I'll give you a shout out in an upcoming video and probably use that data in in the video also. Alright. So during aging, starting from 15 year olds to 19 year olds and all the way up through 79 year olds, we can see that VLDL goes from about 16 to, in the mid thirties and 20 to values that are about 29, in 75 to 79 year olds. In other words, it approximately doubles during aging starting from 15 years old. So what about, all cause mortality risk? Well, there isn't any data for all cause mortality risk or at least I didn't come across any studies for VLDL's association with all all cause mortality risk, but there is data in relatively large studies for its risk, with, its associated risk for, acute myocardial myocardial infarction, so heart attack, sudden coronary death, and other coronary death. And as we can see by the title, VLDL greater than twenty is associated with an increased risk for all of these, cardiovascular related outcomes, which is what we can see here. So in people that had VLDL less than 20, we can see significantly higher risk for these coronary, heart disease related outcomes for people that had VLDL higher than 20. So when considering these data that lower is better, especially less than 20, the significant correlation for my calorie intake with VLDL, in other words, a higher calorie intake is significantly correlated with higher VLDL, this is going in the wrong direction. So we can change that black arrow to red with red indicating going in the wrong direction. Alright. So next up, in terms of statistical significance and its correlation is the RDW. So first, what is the red blood cell distribution with? So the easiest way to understand it is when there is a normal RDW, all red blood cells have approximately the same size and volume. But when there is a high RDW, there is a variability in red blood cell size and volume. As you can see, there are some red blood cells that are large in size and some that are small. Now the reference range, LabCorp's reference range for r d the RDW percentage is 11.6 to 15.4. But, again, that says nothing about should it be low, should it be in the middle, should it be high in terms of aging and minimizing risk of, all cause mortality risk. So let's have a look at the aging data. So, what we're looking at here is RDW on the y axis plotted against age, and this is in a relatively small study. Again, I I wasn't able to come across any larger studies for RDW. It's age for its age related changes. And if anyone has seen data for that, please post it in the comments. And, again, I'll give you a shout out. We'll put that data in another video in a future video. So what we can see is that there's a significant increase for RDW during aging all the way up through 95 years of age. So what about all cause mortality risk? So in this case, this is not a small study. This is data in 3,200,000 subjects. And when, compared with the hazard ratio of one, when we have the ninety five percent confidence interval that's completely below one, we have significantly reduced risk. Or a confidence interval that's, completely above one, we have significantly increased all cause mortality risk, ACM risk. So what we can see is with the data group for RDW in percentiles, we can see that the lowest risk was present for RDW values in the eight point one to twelve point five percent range. You can see all of those, colored dots and circles and and and the green triangles, are completely below one, indicating a lot of reduced risk. In contrast, significantly increased all cause mortality risk. So if you look at the percentile, so anything higher than the seventy fifth percentile, which translated into having an RDW greater than thirteen one percent, was associated with significantly increased all cause mortality risk. So when considering the aging data and the all cause mortality data for RDW, that suggests that lower is better. And then we can change that black arrow for RDW to red when considering that calorie intake, a higher calorie intake is associated with a higher RDW. So that's going in the wrong direction, hence the red arrow. Alright. So what about platelets? So, again, the, platelets reference range and, again, using lab course state lab course data is a 150 to 450 times 10 to the ninth platelets per liter. So platelets decline during aging, which is what we can see here. So starting from, 20 years old going all the way up to a 100 years old, we can see that people younger than 60 have platelet levels that are around two thirty five or less, whereas people older than 70 all the way up to a 100 years old have play platelets about two ten. So there's an age related decline for platelets. What about all cause mortality risk? So as you can see in the title, two to 200 to 300 platelets is associated with, maximally reduced all cause mortality risk. So when 200 to 300 is used as the referent, we can see that there is significantly increased risk both for lower values of platelets, so less than 200, and also higher values of platelets, so 300 and above. So when considering the aging data and and the all cause mortality data, it doesn't tell us though within the 200 to 300 range is lower or higher optimal for for platelets. And then knowing that will help determine if the correlation for calorie intake with platelets is going in the right or wrong direction. And I raised that issue because here's my platelet data in scatter plot form, not just in the correlation form. And we can see that, over the past six and a half years in 30 blood tests, that most of my data is in that 200 to 300 range with the exception of four blood tests out of the 30. But and the aging data suggests that higher, you know, so somewhere closer to two thirty or two thirty five is better for platelets when compared with the lower values two ten. So if I just follow the aging data, I I, it may be a right guess or a wrong guess. So how can we get some more specificity in terms of where should platelets be in that 200 to 300 range in terms of, optimal health? So we one way we can do that is by looking at correlations for platelets with the big picture biomarkers. So in contrast with looking at correlations for diet with the big picture biomarkers, we can also look at correlations for biomarkers versus other biomarkers, and that can provide more insight. So here we have correlations for platelets with the big picture biomarkers. Now there are a cup there are at least a couple of scenarios that can happen here. In the first scenario, platelets are significantly correlated with more bio biomarkers going in the wrong direction than the right direction. This would suggest that lower platelets in that 200 to 300 range, in my case, may be optimal. And then in another scenario, platelets would be significantly correlated with more biomarkers going in the right direction than the wrong direction which would suggest that higher platelets in that 200 to 300 range may be optimal. So what's significant? There were seven significant correlations for platelets with these big picture biomarkers. So now the we wanna know is the is are the correlations for platelets with these seven biomarkers, are there more going in the right direction than the wrong direction in order to assess if the correlation for calorie intake with platelets is going in the right direction or not? So three of these are relatively easy to, explain. I just presented the data for LDL sorry, for VLDL. So that's yeah. We have a significant, positive correlation, meaning higher platelets is correlated with higher VLDL. We know that lower VLDL is, optimal based on the aging and all cause mortality data. So this is clearly going in the wrong direction and, hence, the red arrow. Similarly, for the lymphocyte percentage and monocytes, I've presented that data in another video. And if you've missed that, it'll be in the right corner. But the percentage of lymphocytes declines during aging, and monocytes increase during aging. And based on their correlation with platelets, platelets, these are also going in the wrong direction. So so far, three out of these seven significant significant correlations for platelets are going in the wrong direction. So if one more of these, correlations are going in the wrong direction, then we can conclude that having relatively higher plate platelets in my range may be, not optimal for health, and we should aim for the lower end of the platelet range. So what about the correlation for platelets with bun? Is that going in the right direction or the wrong direction? So once again, the blood urea nitrogen BUN reference range is six to twenty four milligrams per deciliter. And, again, if you're only using the reference ranges, that doesn't tell you if it should be low, in the middle, or at the high end of of the range. So let's take a look at the aging and all cause mortality data. So first, in the aging data, when we're looking at blood urea nitrogen on the y axis plotted against age all the way up to a 100 years, we can see that the data for men in green and in women in purple, we can see that both of those, groups have significantly increased or they have increases for blood urea nitrogen during aging from values of around 11 for women and 13 for men that increased past 20 for women in 90 year olds and above and approaching 24 in people older men older than 90. So the aging data suggests that lower for bun is better. What about the all cause mortality data? So that we can in the all cause mortality data for blood marion nitrogen, which is what what we're looking at here, it's a u shaped curve, which means that, the lowest all cause mortality risk was present at about sixteen milligrams per deciliter. And then, to the left, so lower values and then higher values are both, significantly associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So when starting with the aging data for men, in other words, starting at a, blood urine nitrogen blood urine nitrogen of thirteen milligrams per deciliter, we can see that it then increased higher levels of blood urine nitrogen are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. And when considering that the platelets higher platelets are correlated significantly correlated with higher bun, that suggests that the core that correlation is going in the wrong direction. So somewhere in the thirteen to sixteen milligrams per deciliter range for bun may be optimal, but we don't wanna go too low, but we also don't wanna go higher than that. So if platelets are associated with higher BUN, that's, again, going in the wrong direction, and now we can put a red arrow there. Now don't think I've forgotten about, the liver enzymes AST and ALT and red blood cells, and I'm actually gonna use a similar approach. So those biomarkers, comparing them against other biomarkers and the published literature. And the story may not be how you expect in terms of following the published literature versus my own data, biomarker versus biomarkers in order to determine is lower in the middle or high optimal for health. But that'll be in another video. Stay tuned for that. So to return to our original question in terms of calorie intake and what's optimal for health, a relatively higher calorie intake is significantly correlated with four biomarkers going in the wrong direction and none going in the right direction. So then, again, how many calories may be optimal for me? So to address that, we need to take a look at my calorie intake over this six and a half plus year period. So that's what we're looking at here with average daily calorie intake on the y axis plotted against time. And note that each dot is the average daily calorie intake that corresponds to one of these blood tests. So my average calorie intake during this period is about 2,600 calories per day with, values as low as about twenty two forty down there. But then, also, I've had calorie intakes as high as about twenty eight twenty right there. Now when considering that calorie intake has a net negative correlation with these big picture biomarkers, this suggests that I should aim for a calorie intake that is below my average value. If calorie intake was associated with the same amount of biomarkers going the right in the wrong direction, I'd stay with my average intake. And if it was associated with more biomarkers going the right direction than the wrong, I'd actually shoot for a higher than my average intake. So since the net effect is negative, I'm gonna shoot for a calorie intake that's below my average intake. And for this blood test that's coming up in about a week and a half, I've been, averaging a little bit less than 2,400 calories per day. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, come check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.