The the 55 pieces, your website is a great segue coming going from the machine learning approach into actionable ways to, extend human lifespan now. Right? But then once once the machine learning, approach has characterized the omics of, you know, extreme longevity, at least in Drosophila Mhmm. And the challenge is gonna be, and even if even if slash when that's done in humans within the next few years, the challenge is gonna be, how do you positively impact that impact that with the goal of getting significant increases in lifespan. And, unfortunately, in the reductionist science era that we live in, most studies are gonna be one supplement at a time. And if you propose multi ingredient formulations, probably it'll get that or rejected in review. So there what do you think about the technical hurdles in terms of going from characterizing the phenotype of comprehensive characterization of the phenotype of aging into now using the similar machine learning approach to, get dramatic increases in in, health and lifespan. Okay. So there's an intermediate step that I think is available in this decade. You can use all the same tools in order to properly characterize what supplements of pharmaceuticals you're doing. As you know full well, the only real difference between supplement and the pharmaceutical is its legal status. Right? So, basically, any given supplement or pharmaceutical is going to have effects that are always complicated as the effects of experimental evolution. And evidence to to that effect has been accumulating over the last twenty years since we got good genomic and intrinsic tools. There is no simplicity to be found even if you are doing one substance limit interventions. All through the twentieth century, you know, biology was the science of the math phobic except for my fields, which are evolution and quantitative genetics, which is where those of us who like math. That's how we do our biology. We do it with math and serious math, not trivial math. Well, it turns out that in the twentieth century, this kind of, kindergarten for biology where biologists got away with doing the simplest experiments that could give you interpretable results which are great, you know, for genetic diseases, where you do have one or a few major pathways that are colossally screwed up. But as soon as you step away from that to most people's chronic aging associated disorders, thus aging itself, you're dealing with a whole world of painful complexity which only people with my background really enjoy. Unfortunately, genomics arrived, at the end of the twentieth century, start of the twenty first century, and qualitatively blew up the game for the reductionist who wanted to study anything more complicated than genetic diseases or, you know, the consequences of simple pathogens of viruses. So even though the reduction is still low to admit it and even though they dominate NIH in large swathes of NSF, they're dead. They're just scientifically and technologically dead in the water. They're floating. They stand. You know? Like William Holden at the start of Sunset Boulevard. It's over for them. And, you know, like the, heliocentric, ptole Ptolemaic astronomers, in the seventeenth century, the century of Galileo and Newton, they are not accepting their obsolescence with any great grace, magnanimity, or care for the welfare of their god, human. They're fighting tooth and nail against the destruction of reductionism. But reductionism is being destroyed with every good genomic transcriptomic and type of new publication because they all show complexity. And the beauty of it is people like myself, Alex Chavarenko, a whole bunch of other people are just, you know, we're not hanging around if you know the reductionist. We're just moving on. And we're using machine learning tools to try to parse that complexity and find ways forward. And and that that's where the action is going to be. So even with the machine learning based approach, and I'm a 100% on board. I've been thinking about that for the longest time too. So even with the machine learning based approach, let's say you've got a big study of thousands of hundreds of thousands of more people. And you use machine learning, AI based approach to come up with, a set of parameters that could potentially extend health and lifespan in that cohort. At the end of the day, though, for the average person, they still would have to use the machine learning based approach using some computational tools to predict if the if this, you know, what worked in that big study would work for them based on their genetics, their environment, etcetera. So so now there are two layers involved. It's machine learning at the big, you know, the macros the macro and then down to the individual because if the individual is just gonna, hey. It worked in that study. That's what it they came up with, and they're just gonna take it based on faith. It could do more harm than good. Right? So Okay. Okay. So, I have two, I think, important but straightforward things to say about that. The first thing is people do this kind of machine learning interaction every day. When you use Google search, you are using a very carefully constructed set of machine learning tools that deal with vast amounts of complexity in in less than a second in order to address the individual concerns of individual people. Okay? So people, whether they realize it or not, are interfacing with gigantic databases and very powerful machine learning tools when you, you know, looking to buy an item on Amazon doing the same stuff. Okay? So whether people look under the hood or not, your lives are totally entangled with machine learning tools. So all we're doing is is extending them into the realm of biology even though the vast majority of professional biologists who got their PhDs before 2000 hate it. I mean, they're not neutral about it. They hate it because it's just not how they were trained in how biology should be done because, you know, frankly, they were never evolutionary geneticists or quantitative genes to begin with. Whereas a lot of the tools that, genomicists use are back end, quantitative genetics tools. So the GWAS is a kind of quantitative genetics type of analytic. So the first thing is, you know, the future is of technologies, including biological technologies, will be dominated by machinery. That's just a fact. And people who can't accept it can't really be that effective in the twenty first century. The second thing I would say is I'm not really fond of the idea of people sitting at home with their laptop googling a supplement and saying, well, gee, how much of this random supplement that somebody published in Japan based on the study of, using the supplement on 12 inbred mice, compared to, you know, eight inbred mice, 12 on the supplement, eight not on the supplement, and the 12 on the supplement lived, you know, three months longer. I'm not fond of that kind of, biomedical intervention. I have any number of friends and acquaintances who do that routinely. A number of them have died, because I've known these people for more than thirty years. I have never seen any really obvious substantial benefits accruing to them. But the you know, I was saying was the big the big, you know, even though machine learning is definitely gonna identify, supplements, you know, that can extend life lifespan in big cohorts. Mhmm. And I get the idea that machine learning is ubiquitous in our lives. It's everywhere now. But if I wanna if I wanna, you know, if I have my own blood test data and I wanna use a machine learning approach to identify the best panel of supplement that will extend my health and vigor and all those things. It doesn't exist yet. I don't know when it will exist. I can only hope that it will exist sometime in the in the near future. But Okay. Okay. So I have a confession to make. So on the order of ten years ago, I proposed to the company that I then worked for, Gymassian, that they create such an online interface for people exactly like you to use. And I no longer think that that's a good idea. Why? So so ten years ago, I was literally trying to create Utopia for my Floss Garden. You know? Because you're one of the few people you're sort of the dream client for that website, because of your experience and your dedication to use the data. Yep. I now know a lot more than I knew then. And, to be fairly candid with you, I think it takes the resources of a former company to do a good job of going from omic data to, recommendations for supplement use or pharmaceutical use for that matter. I think the use of pharmaceuticals for aging associated diseases right now is pretty much barbaric. The lack of appropriate use of relatively obtainable information about the genomes and transcriptomes of patients, is a travesty. I think that that is one of the most important growth areas in medicine. If I may be very like, if I may view the biomedical establishment from an altitude like the orbit of the moon, you have basic omic research, which of course is going to depend more and more on machine learning because it's too damn complicated to make progress in the way. You can't find a result for one site in a genome or one transcript and transcript them and invent a rebel story and go from there to a pharmaceutical. It's ridiculous. But machine learning can take you through the nomenclature and guide you and that's the work of aided by machine learning people. And of course that's a big, you know, activity right now in the world. More and more companies are doing exactly what I just described. You don't go from those companies to individuals in my opinion. You go from those companies to big pharma or a moderate sized pharma and then you go from them to, you know, you don't even go to individual physicians, you go to major health care providers like the NHS, Kaiser Permanente, and you have their biomedical scientists interacting with the pharma companies, interacting with the big omic databases and AI servers to knit a very big challenging arc of technologies together. That's how I now think ten years later because I have the benefit of ten additional years of very powerful on my and machine learning research with my colleagues. So that that whole umbrella, you know, of of collaboration is gonna take time. That's not something that can develop, you know, quickly. And not just that. It's, you know, once with data, there becomes interpretation of the data. And even with machine learning, you know, you're gonna have an interpretation of your output. Right? So even there, you know, there may be three or four different roads that lead to the same health health or lifespan extension, and then it becomes I hear what you're saying in terms of the, you know, the different companies, you know, giving you the ability to use the machine learning, the individual the ability to use the machine learning approach. But, not not to sound cynical, but when you look at the at least the American health care system and how literally, you know, f that is, I can now you're gonna have a a group of companies who won't let me do my own analysis, but I have to follow what their analysis is and hope that their methods, which may or may not be published, are gonna actually lead me on the right path. So separately separately from that, in terms of the, just along the Actually, I'll just comment, Mike, that I totally accept your concerns. Yeah. Like, I but I'm a like you said, I'm a different breed. You know? I wanna be able to run the analysis myself, myself, do the interpretation myself so that I can actually then make, you know, this reasonable decision or not. Right? As opposed to leaving it in the hands of, well, you know, we know better than you, you know, and I don't know. So for many people, maybe that's the case. They'll they'll appreciate that, but I'm in a different boat. Okay. Caleb, let me just stop you there. Yep. Alright. So one of the reasons why I dropped the idea that I had ten years ago, which was, you know, Google for a month lost guardian people, not as good as you, but aspiring to be as good as you, was I came up with a a different short term bridge, which is, the age and ancestry appropriate tuning of diet and lifestyle.