Spermidine extends lifespan in mice and in people is associated with reduced all cause mortality risk and improves cognitive function in randomized controlled trials. Now the first study that suggested a role for spermidine on extension of mammalian lifespan was published in 2009, and that study is shown here. Now in that study, which was started at 24 of age in male JC one ICR mice, these mice were fed three different diets, either low, normal, or high levels of polyamines. So what are polyamines? Poly means many, and amine means the amino group, so n h two, nitrogen and hydrogen. Now three popular polyamines are putrescine, which contains two amino groups, spermidine, which contains three amino groups, and spermine, which contains four amino groups. Alright. So back to the study. So when looking at the average survival or the time when half the population was dead and half was still alive, so fifty percent survival, we can evaluate median lifespan. So first, we can see that there was no difference in survival for the low versus normal polyamine diets. But then we can see a significant extension of, median lifespan when comparing the high polyamine diet to the normal polyamine diet. So which polyamine may be responsible for the extended lifespan? And to answer that, let's take a look at the diet composition in terms of levels of the three polyamines, putrescine, spermidine, and spermine. And that's what's shown here. So starting from the left to the right, we've got data for, the low, normal, and high polyamine diets. Now first note, in terms of macronutrients, there were no significant differences in the amount of protein, fat, fiber, or calorie, content for these three different diets. But then we see differences for polyamine levels, obviously, between the three diets. So first, we can see that putrescine, when comparing the high with the normal polyamine diet, was 1.7 fold higher, in the high polyamine diet when compared with the normal polyamine diet. And then spermine was 2.3 fold higher in the high polyamine chow when compared with the normal polyamine chow. But then the biggest differences for polyamines was for spermidine. And we can see that first in terms of absolute content, the highest levels of all three of these polyamines was greatest for spermidine, which had fifteen forty nano nanomoles per gram in the high polyamine diet when compared with pew when compared with putrescine, which had a 75 nanomoles per gram. And then the fold difference when comparing the high versus the normal polyamine, diets was greatest for spermidine, which is 3.5 fold higher when comparing those two diets. So what about blood levels of, polyamines when comparing the, high polyamine diet with the normal polyamine diet? And that's what we can see here. So starting with the spermine concentration, after eight and sixteen weeks on the diet, there were no differences between the normal and high polyamine diets. And then although it it looks like there's a, doubling of the blood spermine concentration after twenty six weeks on the diet, you know, 10.1 versus 5.2, micromolar, that those differences were not statistically significant. We can see by the p value of 0.09. There was some variable the authors of the study reported that there was variability in the spermine concentration in the high polyamine group, which you can see by the standard deviation of 7.1 in the high polyamine, diet group for spermine. Alright. So what about blood levels of spermidine? So once again, after eight and sixteen weeks on the diet, there were no differences between the normal and high polyamine diets. But after twenty six weeks on the diet, we can see about a 50 or a close to a 50% increase in blood levels of spermidine on the high polyamine diet when compared with the normal polyamine diet. Now blood levels of putrescine were not measured. So, we can't rule out that, levels of putrescine, at least in in blood, may have contributed to the lifespan extending effect of the high polyamine child versus the normal. But when considering that spermidine dietary content and blood levels were significantly higher in the high polyamine diet when compared with the normal polyamine diet, this suggested that spermidine on its own may impact lifespan. And it does as we can see here. So this study was, seven years later in 2016. Female c 57 black six j mice were fed spermidine in the drinking water starting at four months of age. So starting very early in life, this is close to, about being a teenager in human years. And when looking at median survival, so again, the fifty percent survival, half the population is dead, half is still alive. We can see that significantly increased median lifespan as indicated by the green owl in the mice that were fed spermidine when compared with mice that were not fed spermidine the controls. Now what about, spermidine, supplementation initiated later in life? Can that extend lifespan? So the authors of this study also evaluated that, and that's what we can see here. So in this case, both male and female c 57 black six j mice were fed again spermidine in the drinking water. But this time, they started it at 18 of age, which is closer to middle age for a mouse, which has, a usual, maximal lifespan of about forty forty months. So once again, we can see that the spermidine supplemented group had an increased median lifespan. What about other studies? One study is nice for being able to extend lifespan with first, with spermidine, but what about have other studies replicated spermidine's lifespan extending effect? And they have. So in a study published in 2017, in this case, using 10 times the concentration of spermidine as in the previous study, three millimolar in the drinking water, and this time supplementing from birth. So, as soon as the mice were born, they were supplemented with spermidine in the drinking water, so essentially for the duration of their lifespan. And we, comparing median survival again, we can see that significant extension of median survival in the spermidine supplemented mice were compared with controls. Now, although it looks like maximum lifespan may have also been impacted, that wasn't evaluated or reported in the study. But interestingly, note that spermidine does not increase lifespan in rats. And, in this case, it was a, the study was initiated where spermidine was supplemented, later in life, in this case, at 18 of age. And again, it was supplemented in the drinking water. And although there was an approximate doubling of the spermidine concentration in blood, which showed that they were ingesting, the spermidine in the water as opposed to not drinking the water and not having an increase in blood levels of spermidine, we can see that there was no increase in median lifespan in the rats. So to summarize, polyamines and more specifically, spermidine extends lifespan in mice but not in rats. So what about, spermidine's effects on health in people? So in this study, which, was in people, a relatively small study of 829, 67 year olds or at least that had an average age of 67. We can see we can evaluate we can see the cumulative incidence of death, so all cause mortality on the y axis, plotted against follow-up, which in this case was twenty years after the baseline visit. So at the baseline visit, they assessed, spermidine intake by diet and then, evaluated how many people died, up to twenty years later. So when looking at this data, we can see that the lowest all cause mortality was present for the group that had the highest spermidine intake. In this case, greater than eleven point six milligrams per day. Significantly higher people died, in the group that had lower amounts of spermidine. So in this case, nine point one to eleven point six milligrams per day. And the highest all cause mortality was present for people who or or was associated, with, spermidine intakes that were less than nine point one milligrams per day. Now in data from the same study but reported a few years later, future risk for cognitive impairment was also assessed in relation to spermidine intake, which is shown there. So using those same cutoffs, so less than nine, nine point one, 9.1 to 11.6 and greater than 11.6 of spermidine, so low, medium, and high, we can see that the group that had high levels of spermid spermidine had about a seventy percent reduced risk for future cognitive impairment when compared with the group that had less than nine point one milligrams of spermidine per day. Now note that these data are associations and we can get, more direct, we can evaluate more potential direct effects of spermidine by evaluating it in randomized controlled trials. So does spermidine impact health in RCTs, randomized controlled trials. So to date, there are two studies, two two RCTs that have evaluated, spermidine's effects on cognitive function. And the first, it was on memory performance in older adults at risk for dementia. And this study was relatively small. It included 28 people with an average age of 70 years and it was a three month study. So to increase spermidine in the intervention group, the that group was given a spermidine supplement of one point two milligrams per day. Now note that blood spermidine or other polyamine levels were not different between the two groups. So the group getting a supplement and that got placebo. So no difference in blood levels of spermine or other polyamines. But nonetheless, in this study, they reported a positive impact for spermineine supplementation on memory performance in this older adult cohort in this older adult cohort that was at risk for dementia. Now, in the second RCT, whereas the first one was in older adults at risk for dementia, in this one, this was in older adults suffering from dementia and evaluating the effect on increasing spermidine intake. And this was a relatively larger study that included 92 subjects, a little bit older age, 83, and, again, a three month study. So to increase spermidine levels in the intervention group, wheat germ was added to bread and then the intervention group ate bread rolls. So in contrast, the control group ate bread rolls that were not enriched with wheat germ. And as we'll see in a minute, wheat germ is a, a very concentrated source of spermidine. Now that, the spermidine in the intervention group resulted in an average increase of about one milligram more spermidine per day when compared with controls. And that was sufficient to raise blood levels of spermidine from 42 to 58 nanograms per mil. So about a 40% increase in the intervention group when compared with controls who did not have a significant increase in their spermidine levels over the three month study. And as a result, there was a, an improvement in cognitive performance in the spermidine, supplement or a service the the group that had the higher spermidine intake when compared with controls who had consistent or declining cognitive performance over that three month study. So, collectively, when considering the lifespan data, the associate association data for all cause mortality and cognitive, function, and then these two RCTs, these d these data suggest an important role for spermine on health. So spermine can be, relatively easily obtained by a diet if we choose wisely. So which foods are rich in spermine? So I've, gathered a list here and note that this list is not comprehensive. You can see by the three papers that are below the table, this is where I, gathered this information from and, it's as I said, it's not a comprehensive list. If you're inter interested in the comprehensive list, I'll put the links to, those papers in the video's description and and, actually, again, all of the papers that are in this video will be in the video's description. So I've only highlighted the most concentrated sources of spermidine. And so atop the list is wheat germ. And, again, this is milligrams of spermidine in, per 100 grams of food. So we can see that by just eating about 30, grams of wheat germ per day, we can get to that about twelve milligram per day cutoff that was associated with lowest all cause mortality risk in the earlier study. Other good sources of spermidine are the fermented soybean product natto, green bell peppers, mushrooms, which is where I get the majority of my spermidine intake. So I get about ten milligrams of spermidine per day just from mushrooms. I eat a lot of mushrooms. But then also pretty good sources are found in animal products too including chicken liver and grilled chicken. So, by choosing wisely, we can, relatively easily get that twelve milligrams of spermine per day. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, come check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.