C reactive protein. What's optimal? In this video, I'm gonna comprehensively review the published literature for c reactive protein to derive an optimal range for health and potentially longevity. But first, it's important to note, how c reactive protein is produced in the body. So in in response to infection, pathogen associated molecular patterns, p a m p's, that are located on the surface of bacterial cells bind to TLR receptors on macrophages, which induces NF kappa b signaling within the macrophages, thereby leading to the release of pro inflammatory cytokines including IL six, IL eight, and TNF alpha. Now these pro inflammatory cytokines travel to the liver where they then induce the liver to produce c reactive protein. So, with this pathway, c reactive protein is known as an acute phase reactant which which is a which means that it's a protein produced in response to infection. Alternatively, in the absence of infection, which is known as sterile inflammation, where there's tissue injury, damage associated molecular patterns, d a m p s, bind to receptors on the macrophage which activate inflammasomes within the macrophages thereby leading to the release of proinflammatory cytokines including IL one beta and IL 18. These proinflammatory cytokines travel to fat cells adipose tissue where they induce adipose cells adipose tissue to release c reactive protein. Now as a brief note of clarification, there are two, measures of c c reactive protein, the less sensitive and the more sensitive test. So the less sensitive test is just a standard c reactive protein test that measures from 10 to a thousand milligrams per liter, whereas the high sensitive high sensitivity c reactive protein test measures from point two to 10 milligrams per liter. Alright. So first, how do c c reactive protein levels change during aging? So that's what we're looking at here, and it's a study of about 6,100 subjects. So first, when considering the reference range, and this is Labcorp's reference range of zero to three milligrams per liter, that doesn't really tell us or it doesn't tell us at all, what's optimal. It's just the range. So, having a look at the aging data and how c reactive protein changes with all cause mortality risk can, provide greater insight into in terms of what's optimal. So notice that youth, in in this case, people that are less than 40 years old, have high sensitivity c reactive protein values that are less than one. And then during aging throughout the various age groups, throughout the forties, fifties, sixties, and then older than 70, we can see that, high sensitivity c reactive protein increases during aging. Now because less than one milligram per liter is found in youth, is that optimal? Now before we get to that, though, notice that the data in this, slide only has, information on on c reactive protein, in its correlation with age up to around 70 years or over seven years, but not to extreme longevity. So what what do c reactive protein levels look like in people older than 70? And that's what we can see here. So let's break down the data. So first, we're looking at the family of centenarians, so their kids, offspring, and then their spouses, unrelated family. And in this group of, 70 year olds, we can see that c reactive protein was point seven milligrams per liter. Now, going older than that, in 85 to 99 year olds that had an average age of about 87, we can see the c reactive protein increased to point nine milligrams per liter. Now going even further to now in the centenarian group with an average age of about 101 years, c reactive protein increased to 1.6. And then going to semicentenarians that had an average age of about 107 years, c reactive protein levels were 2.5. And then also in supercentenarians, 110 years old or older, with an average age of 111 years, again, we can see c reactive protein levels that are, 2.1. So higher than two in the semi and the supercentenarians. So this is a threefold increase starting from the 70 year olds up to the 110 year, 100 10 year olds. Now when considering that c reactive protein increases during aging, are higher levels associated with an increased all cause mortality risk? And if so, that would make the argument that lower is better, more sustainable. So first, that, that's what we're looking at here is c reactive protein and its risk of death for all causes, all cause mortality, all deaths. And, I always look at the fully adjusted models, and that's what I've, read rectangled here. So adjusted for demographics and risk factors, that's a fully adjusted model where they included as many variables as possible in their models in addition to the correlation between c reactive protein and all cause mortality risk. So when compared with less than one milligrams per liter per for c reactive protein, we can see that people who had higher than three milligrams per liter had a fifty four percent risk of, increased fifty four percent increased risk of death for all causes when compared with the less than one milligram per liter group. So less than one milligram per liter is optimal so far. Now other studies have also shown that less than one milligram per liter is associated with lowest all cause mortality risk, ACM risk. So let's have a look at that data. So here, we're looking at a study of about 3,600 people that's that were 58 years old at, the study, onset and that were followed for up to thirteen years. And what we can see is when considering cumulative, when having a look at cumulative survival on the y axis, those that had c high high sensitivity c reactive protein levels that were less than one milligram per liter had the best survival, and significantly worse survival was found for people who had high high sensitivity c reactive protein levels that were higher than one. So the red one to three and, greater than three had, thirty five percent and eighty eight percent increased risk of death fall causes when compared with the lowest, high sensitivity c reactive protein group, less than one milligram per liter. Now other studies have also found similar findings for less than one milligrams per liter, and that's what we can see here. So low low risk was considered, less than one milligram per per liter, and then high risk was c reactive protein greater than three. And for that group, they had a forty one percent increased risk of death for all causes that was just at the border of statistical significance, 0.52, when compared with the group that had, lowest, c c reactive protein less than one. Now in the third study, this time including, more than 7,000 subjects, we can see that lowest all cause mortality risk was found for c reactive protein between point five and point nine milligrams per liter, whereas significantly increased risk was present for people who had higher than five milligrams per liter. So but based on these studies, when and and when considering that, zero point five to 0.9, was associated with lowest risk of death for all causes, can we go lower? Is there are there other studies that show even lower is better for c reactive protein in terms of all cause mortality risk? And that's what we're looking at here. So, again, total mortality, which is all cause mortality risk. Model three, which is the fully adjusted model. So those that had, high sensitivity c reactive protein levels that were less than or equal to 0.9 milligrams per liter had the lowest all cause mortality risk, whereas people who had higher than three point three nine milligrams per liter had a forty percent, higher risk of death for all causes and then a forty six percent increased risk of death for all causes for the very high, c reactive protein group. So how low can we go? Is there data for lower than point nine milligrams per liter for high sensitivity c reactive protein? And that's what we're looking at here. The study included, more than 14,000 subjects that were 52 years old at baseline and that were followed for up to ten years. And what we can see is that the lowest risk of death for all causes was found for the c reactive protein group, that had, with less than point seven milligrams per liter, and all values above point seven milligrams per liter was associated with significantly increased risk of death for all causes. So can we go lower than point seven? And in this study, this was a relatively small study, and it's only in men that were, 15 53 years old at at baseline and that were followed for up to fifteen years. We can see that the group that had an average c again, this is high sensitivity c reactive protein of point six milligrams per liter had the lowest risk of death for all causes, whereas the intermediate and the high c reactive protein group, so one to three and then higher than three, had significantly increased all cause mortality rates. So we've got we got down to point six. Is there data for less than point six milligrams related for c reactive protein? And there is. That's what we're looking at here. So when looking at survival probabilities plotted on the y axis for high sensitivity c reactive protein, in people who are 59 years old to start the study and then were followed for up to four years, we can see that the people that had, c reactive protein levels that were less than point five five milligrams per liter had the best survival. And then, the ink, worst survival, in this study was, c reactive protein levels that were higher than one, one point o four as indicated by the red line. So how low can we go? Less than point five milligrams per liter? So that's what they looked at in this study. Lowest risk was, 0.1 to 0.5 for c reactive protein and significantly increased all cause mortality risk was CRP greater than three point one. Now this data was only in men, about seventy five hundred men, and without showing the data, the the data was mostly similar for women. So c reactive protein greater than four was associated with an increased all cause mortality risk when compared with point one to point five. So, consider, continuing on this path of how low can you go? Can we get to less than point five and and or even point four milligrams per liter? So, that's we're gonna look at here. So first, starting with the data for men, about 5,000 subjects. And, again, we're looking at, cumulative mortality, so this is all cause mortality risk. The group that had c reactive protein within the point zero three to point three three three milligrams per liter range had the lowest mortality. And then significantly higher all cause mortality was found for CRP greater than point eight five milligrams per liter. The intermediate group in this case for the men was wasn't, statistically significant. Now similar data were, observed for the women. If you look at the curves, they look remarkably similar. However, the data for women was close to statistical significance. You can see the p value is 0.07. But nonetheless, here are the values, that were associated with all cause mortality risk for, the women for, for the data for the women. Now another study also identified point three three as, associated with lowest risk of death for all causes for c reactive protein. Now interestingly, the intermediate group, point three three to point eight five, was just at the border close to to, statistical significance. You can see the hazard ratio is it it would need to be at, one, or higher to be statistically significant. It was a point eight nine eight. So not not statistically significant, but close. Nonetheless, having c reactive protein levels higher than point eight six was associated with an increased all cause mortality risk when compared with the lowest group, point three three. Alright. So we've gotten down this far. Is there data for less than point three milligrams per liter for c reactive protein? And there is. So, again, in this, data, we're looking at, survival rates. And, the best survival with a in a study that included people that were 64 baseline 64 years old at baseline and then were followed for four years. So the best survival was found for the group that had c reactive protein, high sensitivity, that was less than point three milligrams per liter. And then significantly significantly worse survival rates over that those four years was found for people who had, high sensitivity c reactive protein levels that were greater than point eight milligrams per liter as indicated by the red bold. Now in another study and in in a much larger study, almost a 166,000 subjects, but in this case, starting at a much younger age, 40 years old, that were followed for up to nine years, we can see again that, having c high sensitivity c reactive protein levels that were point three milligrams per liter or lower had lowest risk of death for all cause mortality. And the group that had, c reactive protein levels that were greater than 1.1 was associated with a forty percent increased risk of death fall causes. So now we've got data that, less than point three may be optimal. So can we go lower? How low can we go? Point two milligrams per liter or less? And that's what we're looking at here. So, in a study of about 2,600 subjects, again, looking at total deaths, so this is all cause mortality risk. And then the fully adjusted model, multivariate adjusted hazard ratio, that's what I've rectangle there. When compared with the, c reactive protein, high sensitivity, that had values that was less than point two one milligrams per liter, subjects that had high sensitivity CRP that was greater than point 4.44 had significantly increased all cause mortality risk. So, point four four to one point o two for CRP had a forty one percent increased risk for all cause mortality, and then the greater than one point o two c reactive protein group had an 85% increased all cause mortality risk. Alright. So cumulatively, based on all the studies that I've shown, and if you're interested in having a look at these studies, I'll include them all in the description for the video. So, cumulatively, these data suggest that as low as possible may be optimal for for health for c high sensitivity c reactive protein. And, that's not the end of this, but wait. There's one more interesting finding. So higher c reactive protein is correlated with an older epigenetic age amongst clinically relevant biomarkers. So first, we're looking at the, epigenetic test PhenoAge, so DNA m PhenoAge. And, the PhenoAge acceleration, which is what what is rectangle, basically says, how is the correlation between an older epigenetic age? So when looking at the bicor column, that basically says that for a higher level of c reactive protein, there's an older epigenetic age. And what I also wanna point out is that, when comparing all of the rest of the clinically, relevant biomarkers that are on this list, insulin, glucose, triglycerides, total cholesterol, LDL and HDL cholesterol, creatinine, blood pressure including systolic and diastolic, and then the waist to hip ratio and BMI. The strongest correlation of this bunch, is c reactive protein. You can see with a point one eight, correlation with, the pheno age acceleration. Now this is one epigenetic test. In another study with another epigenetic test, in this case, GRIM age. And I have another video on GRIM age where I compared, it against telomere length as a metric for, assessing all cause mortality risk. So if you're interested in that video, I'll put the video in the link right in the corner right there. So using this epigenetic test, grim age, we see similar data. So, c reactive protein is positively correlated with an older epigenetic age. In other words, the higher your c reactive protein, the older the epigenetic age core the correlation that is. It's not causation. And, conversely, the lower the c reactive protein, that was correlated with a younger epigenetic age. And, again, when compared with all the other clinically relevant biomarkers that are on this list, insulin, glucose, glucose, triglyceride, etcetera, we can see that the strongest correlation with the, grim age epigenetic clock was found for c reactive protein. Alright. That's, all I've got. If you made it to the end, I hope you enjoyed the video, and thanks for watching, and have a great day.