If you had to guess the cell type that's the most abundant in the human body, which would you guess? There are approximately 30,000,000,000,000 human cells in the human body, not including the contribution from microbes. 25,000,000,000,000 of these cells come from red blood cells, also known as erythrocytes. So 84% of the total amount of cells in the human body are from red blood cells. Now red blood cell levels decline during aging. So first starting at, in youth, red blood cell levels are of about 4,800,000 red blood cells per microliter are found in men, whereas, four point, 3,000,000 red blood cells per microliter are found in women. That's, those are values for someone that's approximately 20 years old. Now superficially, these numbers don't seem to match, the data on the right, but let's do a quick math calculation to show that these are the same as what we see on the left. So rounding the 4.8, value for men up to five, there are 5,000,000 red blood cells per mic 5,000,000 red blood cells per microliter. There are 1,000,000 microliters per liter, and then there's approximately five liters of total blood volume in the average seventy kilogram men. So when we multiply these data together, we get a value of 25,000,000,000,000 red, red blood cells. So, a similar calculation for women can be obtained using the 4.3 value that's found in youth with about four liters of blood volume that's found in women. When you multiply those data together, you get about 17,000,000,000,000 red blood cells out of a total human, cell count of 21,000,000,000,000 in women. So 84% for both men and women, are red blood cells of all the all their cells. Now as shown on the graph, red blood cell levels decline during aging to values that are somewhere around 3,900,000 red blood cells per microliter. And as I'm gonna show in this video, the age related decrease for red blood cells can be reversed through diet. So let's have a look at the data. So, that's what we see here and, we're looking at red blood cells on the left plot, and then we're gonna, show on the right how it how it, blends into the age related changes, graph. So, I've got I've been tracking my own circulating biochemistry for, at least fifteen years. I don't have data for all of the variables for fifteen years. For some I have data starting a little later. So for red blood cells, the earliest data that I have starts in 2008. Now back then I was only tracking my, biomarkers about once a year every time I would go to the doctor. And what we can see over six measurements over a five year period was that my average red blood cell count was 4.96. And, so that would put me already off the chart, relative to someone, you know, that that was my chronological age. So relatively higher red blood cell counts are good because they carry oxygen. Your cells have oxygen to do, to do metabolic work, to produce energy, etcetera. Now, I started getting more serious about tracking, tracking more often, through blood tests and then weighing all my food, recording it into an Excel file, recording, you know, the data that I would get, after logging in online to get the macros and micros. So I started getting more serious about that in 2015. So over 16 measurements from, April about April 2015 to June 2019, my average red blood cell count was significantly lower based on a t test, at 4.62. And when we put that data on the graph, we can see that now I'm on the age related curve, almost identical for my age, chronological age at that time. So then, I was able to reverse this. So looking at, my blood blood test data for red blood cells starting in, September 2019 to December 2020, over eight measurements, my average red blood cell count went up to five point o eight. So now I'm relative both relative to my age and, you know, my earlier data, you know, from 2008, now I'm off the charts. So it from my perspective, higher red blood cell counts are good because as I mentioned, with less red blood cells circulating, you'll have less hemoglobin, less ability to carry oxygen, and then your cells will have to rely on, glycolysis, which is less efficient than, oxidative metabolism to generate ATP. So how was I able to do this? How was I able to reverse this age this, you know, the age related trend for, declining red blood cell red red blood cell counts? So, the primary reason I think that I was able to do that is because I I included yogurt into my diet. Now why why do I think, that's the major explaining factor? So here we're looking at my red blood cell count versus my average yogurt intake from 2015 to 2020. Now first, when you notice the data on the left, this is when I didn't eat any yogurt at all. So the you know, there's there's basically, three and a half years of data where there was no yogurt at all in my diet. And based on that, we can see that the highest I was able to get my red blood cells up to was 4.8 with values as low as somewhere around 4.45. Now once I started including yogurt into my diet, whether it's about 250 grams a day or more, about 450 grams a day, I've never been lower than 4.9. And we can see that the correlation between my red blood cells with my average daily yogurt intake is strong. So with a correlation coefficient of 0.91, correlation coefficient of one is perfect. So 0.91 is very strong. The, r squared, so 82 of the variability in red blood cells can be explained by my yogurt intake, and the p value for the correlation between my red blood cells with the yogurt is statistically significant as you can see by the p value. Now, notice that milk equals, whey plus cheese. So if you add vinegar or an acid to milk, if you add enough acid, the milk will separate into the, whey fraction and the cheese fraction. So can, looking at, other dairy products offer more insight about how or why, dairy or yogurt in this case may seem may may be affecting my red blood cell levels. So interestingly, when looking at my whey protein intake versus, my red blood cell counts, we can see that the higher my whey protein whey protein intake, the lower my red blood cell levels. And this is a significant correlation with a correlation coefficient of 0.61. 38% of the variability in red blood cells explained by whey, and then it's it's a statistically significant, correlation as shown by the p value. So this data goes in opposition to the yogurt intake. If the whey fraction of yogurt or milk was driving the association with red blood cells, we'd expect to see the correlation between whey with red blood cells going up. So clearly the whey fraction of milk may not be the driving effect for the red blood cell levels going up. Well, what about cheese? So here we can see cheese plotted against my average daily cheese intake plotted against my red blood cell levels, over the past two and a half years. And similarly the weight data is for the last two and a half years. So, the cheese association with red blood cells, it's not statistically significant. So even though the trend line looks up, the p value is not even nowhere close to statistical significance. Now notice that although milk equals weightless cheese, yogurt is fermented milk. Now, I measured my microbiome composition, three times from 2017 to February 2019, and this is before I started including yogurt in my diet in, I think, September, around September 2019. So I have microbiome measurements that are in the complete absence of yogurt. And for those three measurements, there was literally no lactobacillus, which is well known to be found in yogurt, you know, yogurt products. There's so there was no lactobacillus in my gut. So, I think it's possible that lactobacillus may be driving erythropoiesis, which is your body's, ability to make new, new red new red blood cells. Now there's no published data for that, link between lactobacillus with, making new red blood cells. So if anyone has data like that, leave a comment, leave the paper. Let's try to figure out why yogurt may be driving a higher level of red blood cells, in my data. Now alternatively, some may say that the increase in red blood cells is just due to dehydration. Because if you have the same amount of red red blood cells blood test to blood test, but the latter blood test has less water in it, it'll look like it's a higher red blood cell value even though the same amount of red blood cells would be in both, measures. So how can dehydration so can we address is this a dehydration related story? So first, how can dehydration be calculated from a blood test? So, the most common measurement is to measure the plasma osmolarity, and then this is by calculating two times the sodium concentration, plus glucose divided by 18, plus blood urea nitrogen, bun divided by 2.8, and that all all those data would then be in millimoles per liter. So a higher plasma osmolarity would be indicative of being more dehydrated. So in other words, again, if you have, the same amount of solute but less water in one situation, you'll have a higher osmolarity and that will be indicative of being more dehydrated. So on the left, we see my data for plasma osmolarity using my blood test results for sodium, glucose, and blood urea nitrogen, and on the right, we see my red blood cell counts that I just introduced in the slides before. So if the increase in red blood cells is related to dehydration, we'd expect to see a higher osmolarity. So when looking at the data on the left for plasma osmolarity, we can see that going from the twenty fifteen to the twenty September twenty nineteen measurements, my average osmolarity went from about 291 to two two hundred and eighty nine. Now this, when looking at those two groups of data with a t test, the p value is 0.06 with a trend for a lower osmolarity. So that would suggest that I'm, more hydrated in the yogurt containing, red blood cell related, measurements, not less hydrated. So, yeah. So that's all I've got. You can find me lots of places online, and, if you made it to the end, thanks a lot, and have a great day.