Insulin sensitivity is a hallmark of longevity. But before we get into that data, it's important to define terms, including insulin sensitivity and insulin resistance. So first, what is insulin sensitivity? So when looking at the fasting state and when the person is insulin sensitive, blood glucose levels are maintained by gluconeogenesis, which just simply means the, liver produces new glucose molecules. And that glucose is then taken up by target tissues, including the brain, adipose, tissue, or adipose cells, fat cells, and muscle. And note that insulin secretion is low in the fasting state when the person is insulin sensitive. So what happens after eating? Well, in the fed and insulin sensitive state, the rise in blood glucose that accompanies a meal, triggers the pancreas to release insulin. And then insulin then, triggers the the target tissues including the brain, adipose cells, and muscle to take up glucose. Now blood glucose levels then fall after this process, which removes the stem stimulus, the increase in blood glucose after eating for insulin secretion. So insulin levels correspondingly decrease, when in the insulin sensitive state after eating. Now note that, gluconeogenesis is a minor contributor to the blood glucose pool when aft in the fed state and when the person is insulin sensitive as insulin, suppresses gluconeogenesis. So in the insulin sensitive state, there should be minimal gluconeogenesis by the liver because insulin suppresses it. Alright. So what happens in the insulin resistance state? So where when in the condition where there is insulin resistance, target tissues effects of insulin, which leads to increased circulating levels of glucose. And also note that the liver, increases its production or there is increased production of, new sugar, new, new glucose, gluconeogenesis by the liver in the insulin resistant state because the liver is also resistant to the effects of insulin, so it continues to produce new glucose molecules. Now adding adding, fuel to the fire, the pancreas tries to compensate for the rise in blood glu blood glucose by releasing even more insulin as shown there, so compensatory hyperinsulinemia. And in in that case, blood glucose blood glucose levels would fall, but at the cost of having high insulin levels. So just to summarize, in the insulin resistance state, we can have normal levels of insulin, but high glucose, high levels of insulin, but normal levels of glucose, and then both high levels of insulin and high levels of glucose. And it's important to note that data for insulin and glucose rather than only glucose or only insulin, is more instructive for insulin sensitivity status than either of these, molecules' metabolites alone. So let's jump into the data. So first, calorie restricted mice have an increased lifespan. And if you're a frequent viewer to this channel, you should have, should already know that because I've already presented a lot of that data. But, nonetheless, we're gonna look at their insulin sensitivity status. So here we're looking at percent survival on the y axis plotted against, age or how long the animals lived. And when we go to average survival, so the 50% mark, this is when half of the population has died and half is still alive. We can see that calorie restricted mice, so this is n c r. So normal mice on a c r diet, the orange triangles when compared with the blue triangles, there's an increase in average lifespan. And and in this study, it was 30% calorie restriction. So the animals ate 30% less than the normal, mice who ate as much as they wanted. So what's the insulin sensitivity status of calorie restricted mice that had an increased average lifespan? And that's what's shown here. So glucose and insulin, levels for the normal mice that ate as much as they wanted, normal ad lib AL, and the normal mice that ate 30% less calories. So first note that glucose levels were not significantly different between those two groups. So you can see by the superscripts, the letters a and a. The same superscript means that there was no significant difference. But notice that the mice that were calorie restricted had a significantly lower had significantly lowers of lower levels of fasting insulin. In this case, there was a 60% reduction in the calorie restricted mice. Now as I mentioned in the previous, slide, combined data for glucose and insulin offers more insight about insulin sensitivity status than either of these two alone. And one method for, looking at the combined effect of glucose and insulin is with the homeostatic model assessment, also known as HOMA, which equals glucose in millimoles per liter times insulin in milli milliunits per liter and then divided by 22.5. So for anyone that's got glucose and insulin data by blood test, I'll post a link to, a HOMA calculator so you can get a sense of where your values are. Now a lower HOMA value HOMA value is reflective of insulin sensitivity, whereas a higher HOMA value would be, a a situation when there is less, less insulin sensitive. So with that in mind, how did the, CR mice compare with the mice that were, allowed to eat as much as they wanted, the ad lib? And this isn't a surprise because whereas the glucose levels were approximately the same, the HOMA, was 60% reduced. So point three seven in the normal mice that that were eating as much as they wanted versus point one five in the CR mice. And that effect is mostly driven by the 60% reduction for insulin levels in the CR mice. Now note that there are other lifespan curves on this chart. So, what were those animals and what's their insulin sensitivity status? So the green circles are animals where growth hormone releasing hormone hormone was knocked out. So the pro a protein that was, that is responsible for release of growth hormone was knocked out. So, there should be less, growth hormone being, in, systemic level there should be less systemic levels of growth hormone. So these are, k o, which means that the protein was knocked out. So growth hormone, releasing hormone, knockout mice. And we can see that their average lifespan is significantly, increased when compared with the wild type animals that were allowed to eat as much as they wanted. But no no diff no difference in maximum lifespan for the knockout mice or even the CR mice when compared to the, normal mice, wild type mice that were allowed to eat as much as they wanted. Alright. So the knockout mice, this growth hormone releasing hormone knockout mice, they had a an an extension of lifespan was their insulin sensitivity status. And that's what shown here. So, again, we're gonna look at the normal mice that were eating as much as they wanted, AL, the CR mice, and then the knockout mice that were eating as much as they wanted ad lib. And what we can see is first that the glucose levels in these knockout mice were lowest of the bunch, so about 20 lower. And although the insulin levels in these mice were similar to that found in CR, notice that the superscripts b and b are not different, the knockout mice had about, a more than 50% reduction in insulin when compared with the, wild type mice that were allowed to eat as much as they wanted and that had, normal levels of this growth hormone releasing hormone protein. So what about their homo status? And we can see that, they have, HOMA levels, the HOMA value that's, very similar to the CR mice even though they're not calorie restricted. And, again, more than, 60% reduced when compared with the normal mice that were allowed to eat as much as they wanted. So with this in mind, there's still, one curve left that we haven't talked about and that has the longest lifespan of them all. What's the insulin sensitivity status of those mice? So, for the red circles, they then calorie restricted the growth hormone releasing hormone knockout mice. And we can see that the average lifespan of those mice was the longest of them all. And also note that the maximum lifespan was also increased when compared with the other three groups. In fact, you can see that they reached 50 of age, which is a rarity in mouse studies. I mean, very few interventions get to 50 of age. So the obvious question then is what's the insulin sensitivity status of these knockout mice on CR? And that's what's shown here. So glucose levels were similar when compared with the knockout mice that were eating as much as they wanted, but lower than the mice that were on CR and lower than the mice that were allowed to eat as much as they wanted ad lib. And then interestingly, their insulin levels were the lowest of the bunch. So you can see point five versus point seven, and the knockout mice ate as much as they wanted, lower than the CR mice, point five versus point six, and then, you know, dramatically reduced when compared with the normal mice that were eating as much as they wanted ad lib point five versus 1.5. And when we look at their HOMA values, the knockout mice that were on CR, not only did they have an increase in average and maximum lifespan, their insulin sensitivity status when measured by HOMA was the lowest of the bunch, point one zero. So, just to summarize, growth hormone releasing hormone knockout mice on CR, they had the lowest glucose, the lowest insulin, and lowest HOMA value in conjunction with the longest average and maximum lifespan in this study. So note that other animal models of extended lifespan also have relatively low levels of insulin glu insulin and glucose, and one example of that is, FGF 21 transgenic mice. And I have a video for that. So if you're interested, it'll be in the right corner. So lifespan and insulin data in mice is interesting, but in is insulin sensitivity a hallmark of longevity in people? And one way we can assess that is by looking at the insulin sensitivity status in centenarians, when compared with younger age groups, and that's what we can see here. So we're looking at, insulin resistance, IR, as measured by HOMA on the y axis, and that's plotted against age starting from 20 to 40 years old as the youngest age group and going all the way past 100 on the far right. So first, notice that HOMA increases during age from the twenty to forty year olds all the way up to the eighty to ninety year olds. But interestingly, the HOMA values then decline such that for people who lived older than 90, which is longer than the average lifespan, their HOMA values are the lowest of them all even when compared with the younger youngest age groups. So old from 90 to 100 and over 100 seem to have better insulin sensitivity at least as measured by HOMA. Now another way we can assess this by look is by looking at the prevalence of type two die type two diabetes, which is defined as having a blood glucose level greater than a 126 milligrams per deciliter or seven millimolar, or a diabetes diagnosis in the past based on medical records. So, when looking at the prevalence of type two diabetes in centenarians as shown on the right, this is a study of a thousand and two centenarians that had an average age of 103 years. We can see that the prevalence of diabetes when looking at, people who were 100 to 104 years old in blue, 105 to one zero nine years old in orange, and then a 110 years old or older in gray, we can see that their prevalence is between nine point one to twelve point nine percent. In other words, eighty seven to ninety one, centenarians out of a hundred do not have type two diabetes, whereas, you know, nine to thirteen would have, type two diabetes. And I didn't post, show this data, but the average blood glucose levels fasted in the centenarians of the study was 92, which is within the optimal range that I've talked about in other videos. And I'll also link to that in the right corner. Now, how does so the obvious question is, although their rates of type two diabetes are seemingly low, how does it compare with the diabetes prevalence in younger age groups? And it's important to note that the thousand and two centenarians of this study was a Chinese cohort. So the appropriate comparison would be the prevalence of type two diabetes in the average non centenarian, Chinese population in in China. And And that's what we can see here. So this is a study of more than a 170,000 people divided by age groups. So younger than 40 that had an average age of 29, 40 to 59 that had an average age average age of 49, and older than 60 that had an average age of 70. And what we can see is as, the groups increase in age, the prevalence of diabetes, type two diabetes increases, with age two from five point nine percent in the youngest age group to twelve point nine percent in the, the group that had an average age of forty nine to twenty point two percent. So twenty out of every hundred people that were older than 60 in this study had, were diagnosed, with had been diagnosed with type two diabetes. Now note that at worst, the 100 and 10 year olds or older had a prevalence of twelve point nine percent of type two diabetes. And the group that that compares most similarly with is are the forty to fifty nine year olds. So one could argue that the prevalence of type two diabetes in centenarians is most similar to people that are fifty to sixty years younger. Now this isn't the only study that shown that. A reduced type two diabetes prevalence has been reported for centenarians in the New England Centenarian Study, NECS. So here we're looking at data for NECS, 90 100 year olds, nonagenarians and centenarians, and then NECS controls. And we can see that there were, 18, one thousand eight hundred and seven 90 and 100 year olds, so that there are a lot of people in that group. So their average age was 100, and then the controls was significantly younger at 72 years old. But then note that the diabetes percent, the percent that had been diagnosed with diabetes, was only seven percent in the ninety hundred hundred year olds where it was more than two times higher in the group that was significantly younger. So seventeen percent diabetes percent, diagnosed with type two diabetes in the younger controls. Now they then illustrated this, in a different way in the same study. They they they then determined the age when ten percent of their respect these respective groups, the ninety and hundred year olds or the controls, that ten percent had been diagnosed with type two diabetes. So for the controls at the bottom, you can see control f and control m on the left side. The average age when ten percent of the cohort had been diagnosed with type two diabetes was 73 years old. In contrast, the centenarians, for them, for that group of eighteen hundred and seven people, ten percent, the ten percent of that cohort was diagnosed with type two diabetes at an average age of 99 years old. So the age of ten percent diabetes onset, type two diabetes, was delayed by up to twenty six years in centenarians. So if the goal is longevity, making sure that glucose is optimal within the 80 to 94 range, milligrams per deciliter. And, again, I'll link to that in the right corner if you missed that missed that video. And making sure that insulin levels are relatively low may be an important approach. Alright. That's all I've got for now. If you made it to the end, thanks a lot, and I hope you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.