There are nine hallmarks of aging, and telomere attrition, also known as telomere shortening, is one of them. Now before we jump into that data, let's just do a quick review of telomere biology. So within the cell's nucleus, we find the chromosomes. And at the end of the chromosomes are telomeres. Now when cells divide and replicate, telomeres shorten such that when cells reach senescence, telomeres reach a critically short level. So one reason why that's important is because telomeres protect chromosomes from fusing together end to end fusion, and also, they protect against chromosomal instability. Now telomere length shortens during aging, and shorter telomeres are associated with an increased off all cause mortality risk. I'm gonna show that data in a minute. But also, how does telomere shortening compare against other metrics of biological age? So first, telomere length declines during aging, and that's what we're looking at here for data for, females on the left and males on the right. And on the y axis, we see LTL or leukocyte, also known as white blood cell. So this is telomere telomere length, TL, in white blood cells and as a function of age. So how does it change during aging? So what what we can clearly see in in both women and men is that telomere length declines during aging. And this I should mention that this data is from a cohort that included European countries, data from The US, but also from, Israel. So, with this in mind, are shorter telomeres also associated with an increased risk of death for all causes? So a meta analysis, that was published in 2018 was, performed for that, that included data for 23 studies that looked at the association for shorter t relatively shorter telomeres versus longer telomeres with all cause mortality risk risk of risk of death for all causes. And what what they found was that the shorter the telomeres, there was a significantly, increased risk of death, twenty six percent increased risk of death for all causes with shorter telomeres relative to the groups that had, for the people that had higher, longer telomeres. Now, again, this is, this included data for, more than a 120,000 subjects in 23 studies, but notice that in 13 of these studies, there wasn't a significant effect for telomere length with all cause mortality risk. So this made me think, well, how does telomere length compare against other biological age metrics? So first, and remember, I showed that telomere length declines during aging. This is a a fact. I mean, there are many studies that have shown this. And and and, here's also additional data. That's what I've put, put up here. So we're looking again at telomere length on the y axis plotted against chronological age, and we can see that in this in data in this study, which is different from the data that I presented a couple slides ago, we can once again see the telomere length declines during aging. Note the correlation coefficient, the lowercase r, is negative 0.42, which is a, about approximate, a moderate correlation. It's not strong. Strong would be anything greater than negative point five or greater than point five. Now in contrast, other metrics of biological age have stronger correlations with chronological age. In this situation, we're looking at the, chlamarel Dubois. I may be saying it wrong. Apologies if I am saying it incorrectly. So the k d n, chlamarel Dubois, biological age. And this includes 12 biomarkers, 11 of them being blood biomarkers and systolic blood pressure. And if you're familiar with my videos, you may have seen me, present data from the CALORI study where people underwent, calorie restriction for a two year period. And they, they exhibited a younger biological age. And the way they measured biological age in that, randomized controlled trial was with the chlamydaubal biological age method. Now, again, before showing the data, also note that eight of the 11 biomarkers, including albumin, alkaline phosphatase, creatinine, c reactive protein, but not high sensitivity c reactive protein, the percentage of lymphocytes, white blood cell count, the MCV, and RDW are also found on Levine's phenotypic age calculator. So, so, anyway, what we see when looking at the the correlation between these, this biomarker grouping with chronological age is a strong correlation with a correlation coefficient of 0.91 for their combined, correlation with chronological age. Now a correlate correlation coefficient of negative one or positive one as close to those extremes as possible in the is indicative of stronger correlation. So we can clearly see that the correlation for chronological age for KBM biological age is seems to be better than, the correlation for telomere length with chronological age. So what about all cause mortality risk? So in this study, I posted that data, and telomere length was, compared, against, well, not against, but, the association between telomere length and eight other biological age metrics with all cause mortality risk was compared in this study here. So first, we can see that telomere length was not significantly associated with all cause mortality risk. So how did the other biological age metrics compare in the study? So they looked at four different epigenetic age, clocks, DNA m, which stands for DNA methylation age. So, they used Horvath's initial, epigenetic clock. They used the Hahnemann epigenetic clock, DNA amphenoage, which is Morgan Levin's, epigenetic clock, or one of them, and then, DNA GrimAge, which I, talked about in my previous video. So, actually, GrimAge is also a Horvath clock. So three of these clocks were actually significantly associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. And in their cases, an older epigenetic age was associated with an increased all cause mortality risk, which, again, telomere length was not associated with all cause mortality risk in this study. Now but they also found other, biological age metrics including cognitive function. So better cognitive function was associated with a lowered hazard ratio, a a lowered lower risk of death for all causes. And then the FAI, which is the functional aging index, which included, vision, hearing, pulmonary function, grip strength, and gait speed, and then the frailty index, which included 42 different frailty frailty measures. So the FAI and the FI were also significantly associated with an all cause mortality risk. So, six of the nine measures were, significantly associated with all cause mortality risk, whereas telomere length was not. Now also note that, a measure of, physiological age, what they call physiological age, which included some blood biomarkers including hemoglobin, glucose, cholesterol, apo b, and triglycerides, and some clinical markers including BMI, body size metrics like waist to hip ratio, weight waist circumference, hip circumference, but then also systolic and diastolic blood pressure. Note that in addition to telomere length not being associated with all cause mortality risk, neither was this physiological age metric. Now at least in this study, metrics one could conclude that metrics other than telomere length were better for their associations with all cause mortality risk, which is similar data to the aging data that I showed for the KDM biological age versus, telomere length for their correlations. So, as a third bit of evidence for the argument that maybe telomere length is not a great measure of biological age when compared with other biological age metrics. In this study, they compared measures health health span related, metrics, including, physical function, balance, grip strength, motor coordination, and physical limitations, some measures of cognitive function, including cognitive function at 38 years, but then also cognitive decline, and then some measures of subjective aging, including self rated health and facial aging. And they looked at correlations between those measures with telomere shortness, with three different epigenetic clocks, including a 353 CpG site, epigenetic clock, 99, CpG epigenetic clock, and then a 71 CpG epigenetic clock. So that just means how many, sites they looked at methylation at. And then also they, looked at the KDM biologically. It's the same KDM or a similar KDM, measure, as to what they what I showed on a couple slides ago. In this for this KDM, they looked at 10 biomarkers, not 12. But it's they used a similar approach, Hence, it's under the KDM, umbrella. So what did they find? So we're looking at the, little r, which is the correlation coefficient, and the p value's statistical significance. And for telomere shortness, the only measure that was significantly correlated, health span related metric that was associated with telomere shortness, was facial aging. So how did the other measures compare? So interestingly, two of the epigenetic clocks, the 353 and the 99 CPG epigenetic clocks, none of the health span related measures, were associated with these two epigenetic clocks. So, again, that shows that not all epigenetic clocks are the same for their, correlations with, health and aging related measures. But the 71 CPG clock, with the exception of grip strength, was significantly correlated with all of the measures of physical function and cognitive function and subjective aging measures. So what about KTM biological age? Interestingly, it was significantly correlated with all of the physical function, cognitive function, and subjective aging measures. So when considering this data, one could say that some of the epigenetic clocks and KDM biological age may be better metrics for assessing health span related metrics when compared with telomere length. And that's what I've stated here. So that's all I've got for now. If you made it to the end, thanks a lot. And I hope, you enjoyed the video. And have a great day.