Do gut bacteria impact systemic levels of NAD? They do. And that was shown in this paper published, last year in 2020. Bacteria boost mammalian host NAD metabolism by engaging the deamidated biosynthesis pathway. So just to emphasize, bacteria boost or impact, host mammalian NAD levels and metabolism. So there are many pathways for producing NAD, and that's what's shown here. And as we all know, NAD levels decline during aging. Now a major reason for that is because of, age related increases for an NAD degrading protein called CD 38. And that's what's shown here. So CD 38 levels, which again degrade, specifically degrade NAD, increase during aging. And because c v 38 degrades NAD, we can see that correspondingly, NAD levels decline during aging. So, an obvious question should be, can NR or NMN supplementation converted into NMN, and then NMN is directly converted into NAD. However, CD 38 also degrades NMN, and that's what's shown here. So NMN levels are plotted on the y axis against time, and this is time after NMN infusion in mice. And the two different types of mice that they used were CD 38 knockout mice in red, animals that do do not have a a CD 38 protein versus a normal animal's WT wild type that had c d 38. And what we can see is that in the animals that didn't have c d 38, after NMN infusion, NMN levels were relatively stable. So no degradation of NMN in the animals that didn't have CD 38. However, in animals that have c CD 38, we can see about a 75% reduction in NMN, which suggests that any NMN taken as a supplement, about 75% of that would be degraded if CD level CD 38 levels are elevated. So what about, nicotinamide, NAM supplementation? Can that bypass the effects of CD 38? So first, notice that because nicotinamide, again, NAM, is directly converted into NMN, and we're considering CD thirty eight's effects on degrading NMN, we'd expect that, nicotinamide levels would not be able to maximally boost, NAD. Now, also, unfortunately, because, nicotinamide NAM is converted into NMN by the NAMPT protein, NAMPT protein levels decline during aging as shown here in, skeletal muscle. So so that would suggest that, trying to boost NAD levels through the amidated pathway as I've rectangle there, whether it's through, nicotinamide, NAM, NMN, or NR, may not be an optimal strategy for increasing NAD levels, which decline during aging. Now it would be great if we can convert, nicotinamide, NAM, into nicotinic acid, NA, and then go through the deamidated pathway for NAD synthesis. However, humans human cells don't have the enzyme that converts nicotinamide, N a m, into N a. But bacteria do, and that's that's what was shown in this paper. So let's go through that data. So gut bacteria convert nicotinamide, NAM, into nicotinic acid. So let let's see how they, determine that that was true. So what we're looking at are nicotinamide levels in the colonic luminal content. So, essentially, within the, colon, is poop. And so within the poop content, what's the, nicotinamide? What are the nicotinamide levels? So they force fed nicotinamide to mice and then looked at how much, nicotinamide was in the colonic lumen. And what we can see is that there's almost none of it there. So what happened to nicotinamide levels after feeding nicotinamide? Well, they then, examined how much nicotinic acid was in the colonic lumenal content. And what we can see is that it's dramatically increased, which suggests that within the colonic lumen, gut bacteria converted nicotinamide into nicotinic acid. So how could you, further explore that hypothesis? Well, you can give the mice antibiotics and then, force feed them nicotinamide. And if there's no conversion to nicotinic acid, that would again provide evidence that gut bacteria were converting nicotinamide into n a nicotinic acid. So, what what does the antibiotic treatment do? That's what's shown here. And we're looking at relative abundance of 16 s DNA. This is a gut bacterial specific marker, of DNA that's only present in bacteria. So after giving antibiotic, treatment, we can see that the gut bacterial DNA content, the total gut bacterial DNA content, was reduced by, more than 99%. So then when looking at antibiotic treated, nicotinamide four step mice, we can see that now nicotinamide levels are dramatically increased, whereas nicotinic acid is almost virtually absent, which provides additional evidence that nicotinamide is being converted into nicotinic acid by gut bacteria. So, that indicates that gut bacteria are converting nicotinamide into nicotinic acid, but which protein is involved? Which gut bacterial protein is converting nicotinamide into nicotinic acid? And they identified the nicotinamide nicotinamidease gene, protein, sorry, which is encoded by the PNCA gene. And then, in a series of elegant experiments, they took germ free mice, animals that don't have a microbiome and that are grown in a bubble to keep them microbiome free. And then they colonize them singly with e coli that had the its full complement of all of its genes or a knockout, a PNCA knockout e coli. So e coli that don't have the nicotinamidease. Sorry. I can't say it. Nicotinamidease gene in E. Coli. And then they looked at, nicotine, NAM levels, NA levels, and NAD levels in colonic cells on the top panel and in liver cells on the bottom panel. So first, what we can see is in the, animals that were colonized with mice that didn't have the nicotinamidease gene, we can see that, NA levels are virtually absent, which again provides evidence that NAM is converted by gut bacteria, into, NA. And then the the big question is, what's the effect on NAD levels? I mean, sure, it's great if NAM is converted into NA, but if it doesn't affect NAD, well, do we really care? And as we can see, that without the PNCA gene, without the gut bacterial nicotinamide nicotinamidease that converts NAM into NA, NAD levels are dramatically reduced. So no no PNCA, no nicotinamidease, less production of NAD from, from nicotinamide. So I've shown you that gut bacteria impact the conversion of NAM to NA and that the nicotinamidease gene is responsible for that conversion. But more specifically, which gut bacteria convert nicotinamide into nicotinic acid? And that's what's shown here. So PNCA distribution by, phyla. And as we can see, the blue, the blue shading is the are the gut are the gut bacteria that contain the majority of the nicotinamidease gene, and those are proteobacteria. In second place, are, bacteria that are unclassified so that they haven't been classified into a, bacterial phyla, which isn't helpful. And then in third place for the, having the most amount of PNCA are bacteroides. So, from this data, the obvious question is, can we increase NAD by targeting the gut microbiome? And, unfortunately, no studies, have explored that yet. But, stay to I'd say stay tuned for that data. I'm sure there'll be a bunch of studies coming out in the future that will investigate optimizing gut microbiome composition to optimize systemic levels of NAD. And it'll be even more interesting to do it in aged animals when considering the age related decline and the alterations in the amidated pathway to see if they can increase NAD by optimizing it through the gut bacterial mediated deamidated pathway. So also the big picture too is what percentage of the systemic NAD is produced by this gut bacteria mediated pathway. So, to assess that, they looked at a high dose of nicotinamide, eighty milligrams per kilogram in mice, and then they, force fed nicotinamide. And then three hours after that, they looked at NAD levels in the small intestine, in the colon, in liver cells, and in kidney cells. So how much of the NAD that was in those tissues was derived from nicotinamide and, accordingly, the gut bacteria mediated pathway? So when looking at the black and gray, bars, that's the fraction of NAD that was derived from the infusion, or the force feeding of nicotinamide, and we can see that the smallest amount was converted in the small intestine cells, about 30%. And then, the majority of NAD that was found in the colon, 70%, 85% in the liver, and 59% in the kidney were of the NAD that was found in those tissues was derived from the gut bacteria mediated pathway. Now eighty milligrams per kilogram is a very high dose of, nicotinamide. So then they used a smaller dose, four milligrams per kilogram, which the authors of this study, said that, was approximately equal to the amount of nicotinamide that's found in a two hundred gram steak. Alright. So to for a more physiologically relevant dose of nicotinamide, how did that impact, tissue levels of NAD by the gut via the gut bacterial mediated pathway? So in this situation, they looked at, again, small intestine cells, colon, and liver cells, and we can see relatively similar results. About 40%, 42% of the NAD that was found in the small intestine was derived from the gut bacterial, deamidated pathway, and then 60% in both the colon and liver of the NAD that was present in those cells was derived from the gut bacterial mediated pathway. So from this, we conclude that, in the presence of nicotinamide, the majority of tissue derived NAD is formed by this gut bacterial deamidated pathway with the exception of the small intestinal cells, which had less than 50%, in both cases for the low dose or high dose nicotinamide. So then just as a quick summary, so, nicotinamide, NAM, that reaches the colonic lumen, so inside the tomb tube that carries poop, is converted by gut bacteria via the deamidated pathway into nicotinic acid. That nicotinic acid is then absorbed or enters, by other mechanisms into colonic, epithelial cells where it then, increases, NAD levels. And, actually, the majority of NAD levels that are found in colonic cells are derived from this gut bacterial deamidated pathway. And then, NAD levels in colonic epithelial cells can, be absorbed into the blood or can be degraded into n a and its related precursors or n a m and its related precursors where it then can go, on to impact positively impact systemic NAD metabolism including increasing NAD levels in, non, intestinal cells like the liver and kidneys. Up to 60% of the NAD found in those cells can be, is derived based on these data from the gut bacterial deamidated pathway. Alright. That's, all I've got for now. If you made it to the end, thanks a lot, and I hope you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.