NAD is involved in mechanisms that impact health and function, and its levels depend on a balance between factors that increase it or decrease it. Factors that increase NAD include physical activity, supplementation with NMN or NR, calorie restriction, CR, and then inhibitors of CD thirty eight. Now factors that decrease NAD include aging, physical inactivity or sedentary behavior, and eating too many calories, caloric excess. So, how does NAD impact health and function? Well, one mechanism involves sirtuins. So sirtuins are NAD dependent proteins that can extend lifespan. More specifically, sirtuins remove acetyl groups from histones and proteins. And there are seven sirtuins as shown in this, picture of the cell. Some are found in the nucleus, the cytosol, and others like sirtuins three, four, and five are found in mitochondria. So, my interest is lifespan. Which sirtuins extend lifespan? And in this video, I'm gonna talk about the data and show the data for SIRTI one and SIRTI six. And then, SIRTI one is the most popular sirtuin, but is it the best for extending lifespan? And, also, which interventions increase sirtuins? So let's have a look at the data. So first, brain specific, SIRT1 overexpression, so higher levels of SIRT1 only in the brain, extends lifespan. So we're looking what we're looking at here are is the survival probability on the y axis plotted against age in days. And this is combined data for both males and females with, wild type, with the black bar, the dark line, and the, mice that have higher levels of SIRT1 in the brain, tg, transgenic. So, when putting up the average, survival, this is the point where half of the colony has died and half is still alive. We can see that there's a significant extension, in lifespan, average lifespan for brain specific SIRT one overexpression, but not an increase in maximal lifespan. Now, with this in mind, what's you know, it some may have, you you may have an animal model that's got higher levels of SIRT1, but how can we apply this to people? So one way we we can do that is with SIRT-one activators. And the most popular SIRT-one activator is resveratrol. So resveratrol was initially shown to extend, average lifespan, fifteen years ago and that's what we can see here. So when looking at average survival for mice that were fed a high calorie diet, the red line, when compared with mice that were fed the standard diet, the black line, and when compared with, animals that were fed the high calorie diet plus resveratrol, the blue line, we can see that having resveratrol, in the diet on a high calorie diet, extended lifespan when compared with animals that did did not have, resveratrol in their diet. So, the obvious question should be, sure, resveratrol was given an extended average lifespan span in this mouse model of diet induced obesity, but how do we know that SIRT1 is involved? So, sirtuins remove acetyl groups and a well, known marker of SIRT1 activity is by looking at, acetylation of the PGC one alpha protein, which is shown on the y axis here. So, in the situation where the high calorie diet was fed, we can see the black bar is very high, which suggests lower Serti one activity, especially when considering that sertin is removed acetyl groups. However, in the condition where the high calorie diet, HC, was, fed with resveratrol, the gray bars, we can see that there's a significant reduction in PGC one alpha acetylation, which suggests that there's higher SIRT1 activity. In this case, it's about 60 to 70% higher SIRT1 activity in the, mice that were fed resveratrol on that high calorie diet. Alright. So, SIRT1 overexpression in brain and SIRT1 activation via resveratrol increased lifespan, but both low and high dose resveratrol have been shown to not extend lifespan. And that's what we're looking at here with data from males on the left, females on the right. And the red arrow in both of these, pictures is when they started resveratrol supplementation. So first, notice that a the low dose was resveratrol at a concentration of three hundred parts per parts per million PPM and then they supplemented the mice with a four fold higher concentration 1,200. So, as you can see by the p values for both the males on the left and the females for the right, these values are higher than 0.05, which shows that, both low and high dose resveratrol did not significantly extend lifespan in this study. Similarly, SIRT1 overexpression has been shown to not ex affect lifespan in other studies, and that's what's shown here. So again, we're looking at survival, percentage on the y axis plotted against, time in months. And in this study, they had two separate lines of SIRT1 overexpressing mice, defined as TG, transgenic, a and b, the two different lines. And then they comb combined that data. So we're looking at combined data for males and females on the left, males in the middle, and females on the right. And what we can see based on the p values is that, SIRT1 overexpression did not extend lifespan for males and females, males alone, or females alone. So with this in mind, how does SIRT1 compare against SIRT6 for lifespan extension? And interestingly, a study was just published, last week that compared, these two sirtuins head to head for lifespan. And that's what we can see here. So, again, we're looking at survival on the y axis, plotted against age in days, how long the mice live. So, looking at the different lines, we can see that the wild type, the normal animals that don't have higher levels of, sirtuins are the blue lines. Mice that have higher levels of sirtu, sirtuin one are in red, higher SIRT6 in green, and then, they over express both SIRT1 and SIRT6, and that's the purple line. So first, starting with SIRT1, the red line, when looking at average survival, we can see that there was no significant significant increase in lifespan, average or maximal for SIRT1 overexpressing mice when compared with wild type. But what about SIRT6? And we can see that shift in the lifespan curves to the right. So having higher levels of SIRT6 significantly increased both both average lifespan and maximal lifespan, and this is in the pool data for males and females. So how does the data look separately in males and females? Is is this effect driven by one one gender or the other? Well, we can see that the, this effect is found in both males and females for the SIRT six, over expressing mice. So average lifespan and maximal lifespan were increased in both the males and in the female mice that had higher levels of SIRT SIRTI six. So based on this data, we could, conclude that, having higher levels of SIRTI six may be better than SIRTI one for extending lifespan. Now, also also as an interesting aside, note that the purple curves where they overexpress both one SIRTI one and SIRTI six did not extend lifespan, longer, than SIRTI six alone, which suggests that these, having higher levels of SIRTI one and SIRTI six is not additive, that having higher SIRTI six alone, is required for that lifespan extending effect. Now other studies have shown SIRTI six, can improve lifespan, and that's what that's what's, shown here. And in this and in this study, they engineered mice to have higher levels of SIRT six in two separate groups of mice defined as line 55 on the on the left and line one zero eight on the right. So starting with the, line 55, we can see that, there was an increased average and maximum lifespan in these male mice that had higher levels were engineered to have higher levels of SIRT six and then for the line one zero eight, there was an increase in average but not maximum lifespan. But, this isn't a perfect story because for whatever reason, lifespan in these SIRT six transgenic female mice was not extended. So with this in mind, how does SIRT6 extend lifespan? Well, SIRT6 has been shown to positively affect many hallmarks of aging. So starting from SIRT6, we can see that it's involved in mechanisms that, maintain telomere length. And that's important because telomere length, isn't maintained during aging. It shortens. Now, SIRTI having relatively higher levels of SIRTI six also are involved in mechanisms that reduce oxidative stress. Oxidative stress increases during aging. So, by, SIRTI six being able to, be involved in mechanisms that reduce oxidative stress, that's potentially important for aging. Now, SIRTI six is also involved in mechanisms that promote DNA damage repair. And this is whether, this, is whether, the, SIRT six is involved in mechanisms that repair single strand DNA breaks and double strand DNA breaks. SIRT six is also involved in mechanisms that reduce inflammation including, reducing pro inflammatory cytokines such as IL one beta, IL six, and TNF alpha while increasing expression of the anti inflammatory cytokine IL 10. And finally, SIRT six is involved in mechanisms that promote autophagy, which also declines during aging. So can SIRT six then be increased through diet, exercise, or supplements? You know, having transgenic animals that are engineered to have that is nice, but can we activate SIRT six to gain some of these benefits on aging and potentially lifespan? So first, SIRT six is increased by calorie restriction and this is a study done in male mice. If anybody's come across calorie restriction studies in female mice, please leave a comment. I wasn't able to find that. So we're looking at levels of SIRT six protein levels, of SIRT six on the y axis divided by, a load and control, gap DH. So when compared with mice that were able, allowed to eat as much as they want, AL ad lib, we can see that the mice that were fed 30% less calories. And in this case, these were old mice, 20 24 old mice which is equivalent to about a 73 year old person we can see that there was about a 50% increase in protein levels of SIRTI six in the mice that were 30% CR. Now this implicates, a role for diet or at least calories on, in serti six levels. Are there more specific dietary components that can increase, dietary components that can increase serti six? And one of them is ergothioneine. Now ergothioneine has been dubbed a longevity vitamin and if you and I have a video on it so if you missed that, I'm gonna link to it in the right corner. So in this study, they looked at SIRT6 protein expression and this was an in vitro study in endothelial cells. So starting with cells that, did not have high glucose, this is, the control cell, so CTR. Adding a relatively high amount of glucose to these cells, to endothelial cells, resulted in lower levels of SIRT6 protein. Now adding ergothionine to the control cells didn't impact SIRT6 levels, but in the cells that had high glucose and ergothioneine, we can see that SIRT6 levels were significantly increased when compared to high glucose alone. So why is this important? What does it have to do with aging? Well, glucose levels, systemic levels, circulating levels of glucose increase during aging, which raises the question, can ergothione increase SIRT six in older adults? As glucose levels increase during aging, older adults more often than not have higher levels of plasma, higher plasma levels of glucose. So there aren't any randomized controlled trials, RCTs, that have tested this yet, but I'd stay tuned. Hopefully, those studies will get done. Now there are many other SIRTI six activators, and I've listed them here. And, there are so many of them that I'll probably make another video, in terms of which foods are rich, you know, are rich for each of these metabolites. But, notice that two of them right off the top, quercetin and luteolin, are known CD thirty eight inhibitors. So they're involved in mechanisms that increase NAD. So not only may do they increase involve not only are they involved in mechanism that mechanisms that increase NAD, that they're known SIRT six activators, they're also involved in mechanisms that activate, SIRT six. So you're getting a double whammy of higher NAD, which is potentially good for health and lifespan and also higher SIRT six. So what about exercise? So in this data, we can see that, an acute bout of exercise, in this case, this was, thirty minutes of running at 80% of VO two max, and this is a relatively small study done in twenty four 24 year old men. So acute, acute exercise resulted in about twofold higher expression of SIRT six levels in white blood cells. So, blood samples were obtained before exercise, immediately after exercise, so post exercise, and then one hour after exercise. And what we can see when compared with both pre exercise and post exercise is that the SIRTI levels were approximately doubled as a result of thirty minutes of running at 80% of the VO two max on the treadmill. Now it isn't just, aerobic exercise and acute exercise, so one bout of exercise. SIRTI six has also been shown to be increased after twelve weeks of resistance exercise training, so strength training, in 66 year old men and also a relatively small study, 30 subjects. But nonetheless, it shows an important role for exercise whether it's cardiovascular training or strength training to, potentially increase SRT levels in people. Alright. That's, all I've got for now. If you made it to the end, I hope you enjoyed the video and have a great day.