Microbes affect the hallmarks of aging, in particular, mitochondrial dysfunction. So this is part two. And if you missed part one of this series, you can click on the video in the right corner. So SARS CoV two, the virus that corresponds to the COVID nineteen disease, when that virus enters cells, that causes, an increase in viral RNA, non coding RNA, and RNA transcripts to manipulate the mitochondria, which causes the mitochondria to be hijacked. And as a as a consequence, mitochondria eject their DNA, some of their DNA into out of the mitochondria into the cytosol. Now, to look at some of that data, here we're looking at, mitochondrial DNA for the cytochrome b gene, MT, CYTB on the y axis, in blood. And, we're comparing how much of that mitochondrial DNA is in patients that were alive at the end of an eighty seven day follow-up in patients that were diagnosed with the SARS CoV two infection or that died. So, what we can see is for people that were alive at the end of the '87, or an up to eighty seven day follow-up, levels of mitochondrial DNA in blood were less when compared with people who died, after the up to eighty seven day follow-up. So this suggests that the SARS CoV two infection is causing, mitochondrial stress, mitochondria ejects some of their DNA, and we see an increase in that mitochondrial DNA in in their blood. Now plasma levels of mitochondrial DNA increase during aging is aging characterized by an increased viral burden. So let's have a look at that data. So here we're looking at, again, plasma levels of mitochondrial DNA. So, mitochondrial DNA is supposed to be in mitochondria within cells. It's not supposed to be, out in the blood, you know, freely floating around. So that's on the y axis and it's plotted against age all the way up to about a 100 years old. And what we can see is that starting in the thirties, there's a significant increase in the amount of mitochondrial DNA that's in the blood going all the way up, up to a 100 years, of age. So, when considering the data from the previous slide, does viral burden increase during aging as a potential explanation for why mitochondrial DNA would be found at an increased amount, during aging. So, one potential candidate, for an increased viral burden during aging is herpes simplex virus one, HSV one, also known as human herpesvirus one, HHV one, and the seroprevalence, so the presence of HSV one in blood increases during aging. So let's have a look at this data. So this is, data from NHANES two, two different studies, NHANES two and NHANES three. And, when looking at the sample sizes of these studies, we're looking at about 3,600 in NHANES two and, about 12,000 in NHANES three. So about 16 data for about 16,000 subjects. And what we can see is as a function of age, starting from the 12 to 19 year olds, all the way up to 70 to 74 year olds, we can see that the presence of HSV in blood increases from forty to forty four percent all the way up to more than ninety percent. So a significant increase in the presence of HSV in blood during aging. Now this data is for, people in The United States. NHANES two and NHANES three were US based, studies. To to support this hypothesis, what about data in other countries? Is there an increase in age related increase in HSV in the blood during aging? So here's data from, two of those countries, the top being Poland and the bottom, Greece. So first, let's have a look at the, Poland data. And on the y axis, we're looking at the preval seroprevalence of HSV in blood, as a function of age on the x axis. And what we can see is that seventy about seventy five percent of the people who are 15 to 19 years old had, HSV in their blood, whereas people who are older than 50 had, more than ninety nine percent, HSV in their blood. Now similarly in Greece, we can see that when, starting at less than one years old, so babies that had thirty to forty percent HSV in blood, when compared with, people 60 or 50, sorry, the presence of HSV in blood HSV one was, almost ninety percent. So, again, significant increases in the blood of HSV one during aging. Now although I showed the data that, people who are infected with, coronavirus coronavirus have an increase, of, plasma levels of mitochondrial DNA, that doesn't mean that every virus is gonna trigger that same effect. So is there evidence that HSV one, leads to an increase in, mitochondrial DNA being ejected from mitochondria as a potential, explanation for, why mitochondrial DNA increases in the blood during aging. So, there is data that that that shows that to be true. So, when looking at, herpes virus one, HSV one, when that infects cells that causes mitochondrial stress, Mitochondria in, as a as a response to that release some of their DNA. That mitochondrial DNA that's now in the cytosol that was supposed to be in mitochondria triggers a, an intracellular, signaling cascade that reaches the nucleus of the cell, which then turns on antiviral gene expression. And because of that, the, proteins are produced that lead to the inhibition of viral replication. Now as a further explanation, this is just one example or two examples of viruses that, impair mitochondrial function through, ejecting, levels of mitochondrial DNA from mitochondria. But as a further explanation for the age related, increase for mitochondrial DNA are other viruses or or microbes involved. And this is an emerging field. We need more data. So that's all I've got for now. You can find me lots of places online. Have a great day.