The gut microbiome affects the health and function of many organ systems. Positive effects include a basic role in digestion, providing nutrients to the host including vitamin production, and then degrading foreign metabolites, which is known as xenobiotic degradation. Now the gut microbiome also, impacts the immune system, immune system maturation, and function. And then interestingly, note there's a picture of muscle there, so it also impacts the gut muscle axis. So if you're interested in that, I'll leave a link to that in the right corner. So positive effects for the gut microbiome also include brain development and behavior and then protection and clearance from pathogen invasion. However, the gut microbiome can negatively, affect us, including the obvious, which would be, intestinal related issues, including colon cancer development and gastrointestinal disorders. But then note, there are extra intestinal, so outside of the intestinal effects on health, including, metabolic syndrome, diabetes, and obesity, and it can contribute to chronic kidney disease. So with all of this in mind, which gut bacteria are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk? And when we know that with the goal of optimizing health and potent potentially longevity, how can we limit levels of those bacteria? So getting right into it, higher gut microbiome levels of enterobacteria, CA, and I'll call them enterobacteria for short, are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk, and that's what we can see here. So, just to dissect this data, so we've got cause of death on the left, the number of deaths, the hazard ratio, and then the FDR, which is the false discovery rate as the measure of statistical significance. So first, when looking at all cause mortality, we can see that relatively higher levels of enterobacteria are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So when looking at the data on the right for the hazard ratio, where the horizontal lines, which is the confidence interval, if they're both greater than one, then that's a statistically significant effect, which is what we see here. Now, obviously, because enterobacteria are located in the intestine, we can see an increased, risk of death for gastrointestinal or, yeah, an increased risk of death related to gastrointestinal issues, as shown there. But then also notice there's, an increase in cancer. So relatively higher levels of enterobacteria, higher risk of death from cancer. Now they didn't specify in the paper if that was gastrointestinal only cancer, but this is total cancer. And then interestingly, and suggestive of a gut lung axis, higher levels of gut levels of enterobacteria were associated with an increased risk of death from respiratory related issues. And I also have a video related to that, and more specifically, pneumonia and, viral infection and the link between the gut microbiome for that. So if you're interested in that, I'll leave a link also in the right corner. Now, outcomes that were not associated with all cause mortality risk in terms of enterobacteria levels were cardiovascular deaths, neurological deaths, and other. Now as a double whammy here, not only are enterobacteria relatively higher levels are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk, they increase during aging. And there weren't any pretty pictures to show from this, from this study so I just, you know, took a screenshot of the, main finding from this paper and they found that enterobacteria were 1.7 fold higher in older adults that were about, an average age of 75 years when compared with, younger subjects, so 35 years. So the increase during aging and having higher levels, relatively higher levels, is associated with an all cause mortality risk. So now that we know that, how can we limit gut microbiome levels of enterobacteria? So, as as I as the title gives away the, the, main point, enterobacteria levels are limited in the presence of short chain fatty acids, SCFAs. SCFAs. So what are short chain fatty acids? So, dietary fiber and, dietary fiber is comprised of insoluble, which is mostly not fermented by gut bacteria, and soluble fiber which is converted by gut microbiota or gut bacteria into the short chain fatty acids, acetate, propionate, and butyrate as shown there. Now, as the title says, enterobacteria levels are limited in the presence of SCFAs, so let's see that data. And that's that's what's shown here, and there's a lot to unpack here. So I'm gonna dissect it bit by bit so that we can all, have a proper understanding of it. So the, young mice, so these were about two months old, so that's very young for a mice, were treated with antibiotics and then colonized with three different bacterial species, Klebsiella pneumoniae, E. Coli, or Proteus mirabilis. And that's what the blue, circles, triangles, and diamonds are showing. So why did they pick these bacteria? So, Klebsiella pneumoniae and E. Coli are enterobacteria. They are bacterial species in the enterobacteria family and that's what's, shown here. So you can see that the family for both, the Klavsia pneumoniae and E. Coli are enterobacteria. So what about Proteus mirabilis? So you can see that the family is not enterobacteria, but they were previously classified as enterobacteria at the time of publication for the data on the previous slide. Proteus mirabilis, were enterobacteria, classified as enterobacteria, but that bacterial family, that the Proteus mirabilis are found in was reclassified to, and I may butcher the name, but, Morgan morganella CA. So probably butchered the name but anyway, so that's a sister family, that is closely related to enterobacteria. So, okay. Going back to our data here. So, as a metric of how much of, of these enterobacteria were found in the mice after colonization, they looked at CFU which are colony forming units per gram. And then, they measured, levels of short chain fatty acids in the cecum. So I just wanna take another side step here. So why the cecum? So the cecum is, the beginning of the large intestine and it's where the small intestine ends. So why why did they pick, why did they look at short chain fatty acid content in the cecum versus other parts of the colon, the ascending colon, transverse colon, the ascending colon, the the sigmoid colon, and or the rectum? So the cecum contains the highest amounts of the short chain fatty acids in the large intestine. So just looking at just looking at the small intestine, the jejunum and ileum, we can see that there are very low levels of short chain fatty acids, which is indicated on the y axis. But, then when we look at the short chain fatty acid levels in the sequence, we could see relatively, high levels or actually the highest levels on this on this chart. And then as we progress through the colon, we can see that the short chain fatty acid levels decrease as we go all the way through. So ascending to transverse, the descending sigmoid colon and then through the rectum, the short chain fatty acid levels decrease along each length relative to the levels in the cecum. So they were looking to maximize short chain fatty acid production because these are very hard, short chain fatty acids to measure, they are metabolized very quickly so you wanna go after where they're found in the highest amounts which is in the cecum. Alright. So back to our data. So first, we can see that those mice that were colonized with enterobacteria had had, very high levels, or the highest levels of, enterobacteria, you know, 10 to the tenth colony forming units per gram. Alright. And then half of those half of those mice were, divided into Well, the mice were divided into two groups. So one group was, then, force fed, PBS which is phosphate buffer buffered saline, which may have had the effect of washing away some of these bacteria and also, by doing that, it may have allowed for the growth of short chain fatty acid producing bacteria because we can see that now there's there's, there's a reduction in these, enterobacteria relative to the blue, and short chain fatty acid levels are higher, almost almost doubled. Now the other half of those mice that were colonized with enterobacteria, initially were then force fed or, gavaged, with, feces. So the, this is a fecal transplant, fecal microbiota transplant, FMT, from using feces from normal mice that were not treated with antibiotics. And that effect, ended up reducing levels of the enterobacteria to almost close to the limit of detection, LOD. And then we can see all of the green, the circles, the triangles, and diamonds, we can see that short chain fatty acid levels are now close to 30 and as high as 70 millimolar. So, also last but not least on this on this, graph in the in these data, we can see a correlation. So that strong correlation of negative 0.81 is for the correlation between the levels of enterobacteria in the mice that were treated with, PBS or that had the fecal transplant versus short chain fatty acid levels. So what we can see is there's a strong inverse correlation. The higher the short chain fatty acid levels, the lower the levels of these enterobacteria. So just taking it back to the title of the slide, from that, we can con conclude that enterobacteria levels are limited in the presence of short chain fatty acids. And there's a caveat to this. But short chain fatty acid levels decrease during aging and that's what's shown here and this is human data. So when looking at four different age groups, younger than 50 years old, 50 to 65 years old, 66 to 80 years old, and older than 80, for each of the short chain fatty acids, acetate, propionate, and butyrate, we can see at least or close to a 50% reduction looking at the youngest group, younger than 50, versus older than 80. So acetate, 49 millimolar to about 19 millimolar, so, more than 50% reduction. Propionate, 16 millimolar in the younger youngest group to eight millimolar in the older than 80, so 50% reduction there. And then, approaching a 50% reduction for butyrate, the youngest versus the oldest group. And then the total short chain fatty acids, there's clearly, more than half short chain fatty acid levels in the older adult more older than 80 compared to the younger than 50, year olds. So, aging from this, we can conclude that aging is characterized by lower levels of short chain fatty acids and higher enter enterobacteria. So with the goal of reducing enterobacteria and all cause mortality risk, the main focus should be how can we increase short chain fatty acid levels. Now, I've already gone through that and a major reason a major way to do that is by having a high soluble fiber diet. So that should maximize gut bacteria short chain fatty acid production and, that would then be expected to potentially limit enterobacteria levels. Now, however, there are no randomized controlled trials, RCTs, in older adults that have tested this hypothesis. And and if anybody's come across studies where a high soluble fiber diet was given to older adults, so older than 60 years, and they looked at changes for short chain fatty acids or enterobacteria, please leave a comment in the, in in, you know, leave a comment below because I haven't come across it. So what about other interventions? Is just, is it just a high soluble fiber diet that can, affect short chain fatty acids and potentially enterobacteria and all cause mortality risk or are there other interventions? So another way to increase short chain fatty acids is with exercise training. So in this study, and it's a relatively small study of 32 people, that were previously sedentary. So they were, relatively young, so twenty to forty five year olds. This was a six week study that used three times a week of endurance exercise. And so they looked at before, before training and after training. So e zero versus e six. And what we can see for each of these short chain fatty acids, acetate, propionate, and butyrate, we can see significant increases for the circles which were lean subjects that had a BMI less than twenty five. However, people that were obese in this study, so that had a BMI greater than thirty, they did not see exercise training did not impact short chain fatty acid levels, and that's potentially a topic for another video. The actually, the why behind that, I mean, it's a big mystery, in in the gut microbiome field. So, if anybody's got some ideas why that would be true or some papers, please also leave a comment. You know, let's get a good discussion going around that. Alright. So related to this, you know, this this data in terms of exercise training increasing short chain fatty acids, similarly, professional athletes and in this case, it was, professional rugby players, they have higher levels of fecal short chain fatty acids. So higher levels of the short chain fatty acids in poop versus non athletes. And we can see that for each of these short chain fatty acids, acetate, propene, and butyrate, the gray bars for the rugby players versus the non rugby players in green. So, with this in mind then, are there exercise training RCTs that have measured the effect on, short chain fatty acids and levels of enterobacteria in older adults? Again, older than 60. And, unfortunately, that there are no studies yet. I haven't come across any. A study was just recently published that they they looked at, short chain fatty acid levels in exercise training, but this was in a, a group that was approaching 60. But in terms of using exercise training, or even a high soluble fiber diet in people older than 60, as far as I know, there are no studies that have, investigated yet, especially with the goal of reducing enterobacteria levels. Alright. That's all I've all I've got for now. If you made it to the end, thanks for watching, and I hope you enjoyed the video. As you can see on this slide, there are lots of ways to, find, find me online. Have a great day.