On Tuesday, I got my blood tested for the first time in 2021. So what's my data? What's my biological age? So that's what we can see here, the nine variables and chronological age of Levine's, phenotypic age calculator, which is a measure of biological age. And based on these data, we can see that my phenotypic age, again, also known as biological age, is 32.6 years, which is fifteen point four years younger than my chronological age of 48. Also note that this is my lowest biological age over 10 measurements since 2018, so I'm on the right track. So let's compare these data against a few blood tests. So first, my previous blood test. How did these data compare with my last blood test? So my last blood blood test was in December 2020, so just two months ago. And based on those data, my, biological age was 33.8 years. So I've improved in the two month period since then. So also, interesting to note are, well, I should also mention what what was the major change. So what we can what I boxed is, I was able to reduce my c reactive protein, which is a measure of, inflammation by about 40%, and I'll get more into that in the upcoming slides slides about what I think is driving those, that that reduction. So how did these data compare year over year? So I also measured in March 2020, and there may be seasonal effects, to some of these data. So, how did the data compare year over year? So that data is here. This is, the second blood test that I did in 2020, and from in March, and we're gonna compare it against the, blood test that I just did earlier, on Tuesday. And we can see that my phenotypic age is 33.4 years. And, even though my chronological age went up by one year, my biological age was, reduced by, point eight years. So in the right on in the right direction and on the right track. Also note that my c reactive protein in that measurement was 0.37 milligrams per liter, whereas I I was able to reduce it by about 30% for this just recent blood test. So the, obvious question should be or I think is, what's my approach? How am I doing this? How am I able to maintain maintain this youthful biological age? So what's my fitness? What supplements am I taking? And what's my diet composition? So first, in terms of average fitness stats and for those who are interested in, I I posted a picture on my YouTube community page, shirtless shirtless picture where, you can see that I'm relatively lean. I'm working on getting leaner. Got you know, I've gotten a little bit, I've added about five pounds of fat over the past six months or so, so I'm working towards getting back to that. So, stay tuned. But, what about other, fitness related stats? So and and these are my average stats. So this is, for example, starting with body weight. I weigh myself every day in the morning, and, so, with all of those data, what's my average, body weight during the sixty two day period that went from my last blood test to this blood test? So, my average, body weight was a hundred and fifty seven point six pounds and a five foot seven, which gives me a BMI of 24 points, twenty four point seven kilograms per meter, which is at the upper end of the, lean category. And then my resting heart rate, RHR, is 49 beats per minute. My heart rate variability, HRV, is, about 49 milliseconds. Now for those who've seen my resting heart rate and heart rate variability, video, my heart rate variability is actually about 10 milliseconds, lower than it than it's been at its peak on average. So, one reason for that is because of the of the weight gain that I put on some of the muscles, some of the fat over the past six months or so. You know, being calorie restricted is not easy for me. So I don't I'm not always successful. I go through periodic swings with a little bit up in weight and then a little bit down in weight. So what supplements am I taking? So all I take, is here, and, I I take levothyroxine, for hypothyroidism. I've taken that for the past twenty five years or so since I was diagnosed with it. Vitamin d in the winter, a thousand IUs a day, and only in the winter, not in the sun, summer when I get sunlight, regularly, daily. And then I take a stack of methylfolate, methyl b twelve, and b six to try to keep my homocysteine, which likes to get into the 15 range, which is about two times as high as it should be. And taking this, methyl, folate, methyl b twelve, and b six supplement seems to help reduce that down to less than 10. So what about my average daily dietary intake? Now for those who are familiar with my videos, I weigh all of my food. I then enter that, data into an online nutrition app, which I'm not gonna say their name. I'm not sponsored. So I'm not gonna, you know, give give free shout outs. But if anybody's interested, I'll leave a comment, and I'll indicate which one that I use. And then from there, I take all of that data and put it in Excel files in terms of macros and micros and food quantities so that it can track each of those variables against my blood test data and look for correlations between my diet and the blood test, and then try to optimize the blood test variables based on changing, things in my diet. So the average daily dietary intake is what's shown here. And for the two month period that went from my last blood test until this blood test, my average calorie intake was twenty six fifteen. Protein intake was a 123 grams per day, which is 19% of my total calorie intake. Fat intake was 95 grams per day, which corresponds to 32% of my total calorie intake. Carbs were 335 grams, which results in 51% of my total calories were from carbohydrates. Now that may seem like a lot, but then, I I I eat, about a 100 gram well, a 100.5 grams of fiber per day. And when that, when considering that's, counted as carbohydrate, we can subtract the fiber from the carbs to result in a net carb intake of 200 and, about 235 grams, which my percentage of carbohydrate after subtracting fiber is about 36%, carbs. And then also my average cholesterol intake daily, dietary cholesterol intake is about a 178, and that'll become more, interesting slash important in, the next, upcoming slides. So let's take a little bit look deeper look at my CRP values, because I wanna focus on those changes since, that's one of the greatest changes that I've been able to make over the past, few blood tests. Granted, there are other improvements for lymphocyte percentage and white blood cells, but those will be topics for another video. So we can see that in 2020, the six, measurements for c reactive protein, I range from relatively lower to 0.3 to as high as one point o one. And, over the past three blood tests, I've been able to reduce that back down to 0.27 on on this blood test, which is, about half of what my average 2012 2020 value was. Now when considering that c r c reactive protein increases during aging, and higher levels are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk, and if you're interested in that data, click on the link in the right corner. I've made a I I made a video about that before. So it's important to keep it low and to make sure it stays low over the duration of, you know, the decades to come. So which variables are impacting CRP? What do I think is, is what's impacting it so that I'm able to keep it at a relatively low level? And I think dietary cholesterol may be a a key player in the story. So let's have a look at that data. So first, this is data for, blood cholesterol. So total cholesterol is correlated with lower CRP. So we have CRP on the y axis, and then my blood levels of total cholesterol on the x axis. And what we can see is that the higher my total cholesterol, in blood, the lower my levels of CRP, and that's a significant correlation. But I should mention that's within the range my range of a 133 to a 185. And and, you know, others may have different data from me, but I think we can all replicate the approach to try to identify the best food pattern that optimizes our our biomarkers with the goal of, minimizing disease risk and maximizing longevity. So the obvious question when considering this association between my blood cholesterol levels with c reactive protein is which dietary variables can impact total cholesterol. If I can use diet to increase cholesterol, then potentially I can reduce CRP. And as I mentioned in the last slide, dietary cholesterol may be involved in this process. So a higher dietary cholesterol intake is correlated with higher TCE, and this again is in my data. And we can see that here. So the higher my the average dietary cholesterol intake is, the higher my blood levels of cholesterol are, and that that again is a significant correlation as as seen by the, p value. So then the obvious question is, is dietary cholesterol correlated with CRP? Is there a direct effect there or potential direct effect there? And interestingly, dietary cholesterol is not significantly correlated with CRP. So this suggests to me that this is maybe an indirect effect where more dietary cholesterol, more total cholesterol, and then for whatever reason, through whatever mechanism, higher levels of blood cholesterol are involved in mechanisms that are reducing CRP. Now total cholesterol, TC, equals the sum of HDL plus LDL and VLDL. So which of these are correlated with c reactive protein? So I've got those correlations here, and, we can see that VLDL is not correlated to CRP. The p value is higher than 0.05. LDL is relatively close to significance with the p value 0.1, 0.1. But then HDL, a higher HDL is inversely correlated with c c reactive protein. So higher HDL is correlated with lower c reactive protein, and based on the p p value, that's a significant correlation. So we can see that here visually. The higher my HDL, the lower the the CRP. So then the obvious question is, okay. How can I impact HDL? How can I use my diet to optimize HDL? And then the next obvious question is when considering that dietary cholesterol is, correlated with my total blood, levels of blood cholesterol, is dietary cholesterol, impacting HDL? And based on the data, no. Dietary cholesterol is not significantly correlated with HDL, at least based on, the stats here. So what is correlated with HDL? So in my data, in looking at all of the macros and micros, a higher sodium intake and a lower fructose intake, total fructose, including, the amount that comes from sucrose. Sucrose is half fructose and glucose. So sucrose divided by two equals, fructose and then adding that to the, pure fructose that would be in my diet. So higher sodium but lower fructose are individually correlated with, HDL. So first on the left, we can see that the higher my salt intake, and this is within the range of 1,400 about fourteen hundred, milligrams of salt per day to about twenty six, twenty five, twenty six hundred milligrams per day. The higher my salt intake is correlated with, a higher HDL. And then conversely, the higher my total fructose intake, the lower my HDL. So with that in mind, I try to keep my fructose intake closer to the 70 to 80 gram or less if I can. I mean, I I I love eating fruit out of sweet tooth. It's it's really tough for me to try to get it lower than that, but I I try because as you can see on the graph, I've got, average daily fructose intakes of more than a 110 grams per day on average. So, getting it to 70 to 80 around there is a is actually a win for me. Alright. And it whereas univariate correlations are interesting, I combine those two and put them in a model to see how much of the variability in HDL that that, a multivariate model that included fructose and sodium, could explain. And we can see here based on the adjusted r squared that 40% of the variability in HDL can be explained by, the, the data for sodium and fructose. So, now that also begs the question, what's the other 60% that can explain the variability, for HDL? So, I'll look further in further in further into that and stay tuned, in later videos for that data. So then the next obvious question is if sodium and fructose are impacting HDL, are they directly impacting c reactive protein or can they, or are they correlated with changes in CRP? So, first, a higher sodium intake is correlated with a lower CRP, And this is, sick this is statistically significant, sorry, with a p value of 0.05. And, again, this is within the range of about fifteen hundred to twenty five hundred milligrams of salt per day. Now I'm, for my next blood test, I'm gonna experiment with a little bit higher, maybe somewhere in the 2,700, milligrams of sodium per, per day. I don't wanna go too high because it could potentially, increase my blood pressure, and I've noticed some correlations between higher creatinine and higher glucose, which is going in the wrong direction. So trying to find the amount of salt that potentially optimize HDL while not affecting the other biomarkers, is is the goal. Now interestingly, my average daily fructose intake was not correlated with CRP. So with all of these data in mind for the next blood test, will increasing dietary cholesterol, and sodium, but limiting fructose, further reduce CRP while increasing HDL. And I should mention too, when I when I'm talking about an increase for dietary cholesterol, I'll probably, put this in another video, but there's data that, dietary cholesterol intakes up to, two hundred fifty milligrams per day are associated with lowest risk of death for all cause, all causes. So lowest all cause mortality risk. Going higher than two hundred fifty milligrams per day of dietary cholesterol is associated with a higher all cause mortality risk. If you remember from the earlier slide, my average, daily dietary, cholesterol intake was a hundred and seventy eight milligrams per day. So I'm gonna experiment getting, closer to about two fifty, see if that raises my, total cholesterol, potentially LDL, and, increase my salt a little bit to try to get the HDL up. And let's see if all of all those changes bring my c reactive protein further down. I've had values as low as zero point two milligrams per liter, so it's it's possible to get it lower than where it is at 0.27. Alright. If you made it to the end, thanks a lot. You can find me lots of places online. Have a have a great day.