Glutathione restoration reduces oxidative damage and inflammation while improving mitochondrial function and insulin sensitivity in older adults. So first, what is glutathione? So, glutathione is a tripeptide which means that it's comprised of three amino acids including glutamate, cysteine, and glycine and it's the major it's the most abundant intracellular, antioxidant in terms of, intracellular concentration. Now, glutathione has important roles in, maintaining mitochondrial function in, g, affecting gene expression in the nucleus and affecting protein folding in the endoplasm, reticulum, ER, just as a few examples of its, importance. Now, I mentioned that it's the most abundant intracellular ox, antioxidant. How does it do that? So, just as an example, glutathione is used to degrade reactive oxygen species and in this case hydrogen peroxide. So, in the presence of glutathione GSH, glutathione peroxidase and hydrogen peroxide H2O2 the hydrogen peroxide is degraded into water, and correspondingly, glutathione becomes oxidized thereby forming GSSG which is glutathione disulfide. So essentially, two molecules of glutathione become bonded together. And then, oxidized glutathione, gssg, can be reduced back to glutathione by gssg reductase and also in the presence of reduced n a d phosphate, n a d p h. So while these data illustrate glutathione's importance, however, glutathione declines during aging. And that's what we can see here. So glutathione levels are on the y axis plotted against age. And what we can see is a steady decline for glutathione levels during aging, a significant decline. Now, the obvious question is can the age related decline for glutathione be reversed? So first, let's take a look at a study that that tried to, do that. So, here we're looking at, again, glutathione levels on the y axis and this is glutathione levels in red blood cells and what we can see is when comparing young adults versus older adults so the young adults were 31 to 40 years and the older adults were 60 to 75 years and this is a very small study with 16 total subjects. We can once again see that glutathione levels are lower in older adults when compared with young subjects. Now, when considering that glutathione is comprised of those three amino acids, glutamate, cysteine, and and glycine, are there age related changes for these amino acids as a potential explanation for why total glutathione declines during aging? So that's what they measured and, that's what we see here. So, levels of glycine, cysteine, and glutamate in red blood cells in young subjects and in the older adults. So, first, we can see that there were well, I should say there were no significant differences for glutamate four sixty three versus four sixty four between the two groups, but there were significant declines for glycine and cysteine in the older adults. So 55%, lower levels of glycine in old, 24% lower levels of cysteine in old when compared with young. So then the obvious question is can restoring glycine and cysteine increase glutathione? So to try to do that, the authors of this study, performed a two week study in which they supplemented, zero point one grams per kilogram of body weight per day for glycine, point one three grams per kilogram body weight per day for n acetylcysteine as a cysteine donor. And then for a seventy kilogram person, those, those doses, equate to a a significant amount, you know, a lot. This isn't the amount, amount these aren't amounts that you can get from a normal diet. Seven grams per day of glycine and nine point three grams per day of n acetylcysteine. So what happened to glycine, cysteine, and glutamate levels in older adults that were supplemented with glycine and n acetylcysteine? And what we can see is that they were restored to relatively youthful levels. So, it went from two eighteen up to five twenty nine for glycine, and then for cysteine up from about 20 to, about 31. So, okay. The individual amino acid levels were were restored. So what was the, impact on glutathione levels? And that's what we can see here. So for older adults that were supplemented with glycine plus n acetylcysteine, glutathione levels were restored to youthful levels. Now these data were in a two week study and, although they reported, reduced, lipid oxidative damage as a result of glycine and n acetylcysteine, supplementation, which I haven't shown you here. If you're interested in that data, I'll post a link to this study in the description. So the authors of this study then last year posted a longer study, a twenty four week study, where they attempt, where they attempted to restore g, glutathione levels by, again, supplementing with glycine and n acetylcysteine and then looking at the impact of, the that supplementation on various health related parameters. So just as a a quick overview of what they saw, in what they saw in part because there are many findings that they saw, changes to. I'm not I'm not gonna go through all of them. There's just not enough time. But, I'll also link to that study. If you're interested, it it'll be in the description. So just, shortly, they, briefly, they they reduced, they saw reductions in lipid and DNA oxidative damage and reductions in inflammation, and then they saw improvements for mitochondrial function, insulin insulin sensitivity, and a few other measures. So let's go through that data. So first, I mentioned they, performed a twenty four week study with the same doses of glycine and n acetylcysteine in the previous shorter two week study. So first, what was the impact on, levels of glutathione, in this case, levels of glutathione in red blood cells? So first, looking at young adults versus older adults. And, again, they this is data in a very small study. Whether this would apply to the, general population in larger cohorts is unknown, but it's encouraging data as we'll see. So first, notice that, once again, older adults have lower levels of glutathione, more than half. So 0.8 versus 1.8 in young adults. And then, they looked at two time points. So, 12 of supplementation and then twenty four weeks of supplementation, which is what we can see here and then, they only supplemented the older adults. They didn't supplement the younger young adults in this study. So what they saw was after twelve and twenty four weeks, levels of glutathione were increased relative to baseline. So 0.8 went to one and one point six for levels of glutathione so they essentially doubled glutathione levels in this twenty four week study. Now, if supplementation is actually making an impact when we remove supplementation we'd expect to see a reversion back to baseline and to assess that they looked at data, twelve weeks after supplementation so no supplementation for twelve weeks after twenty four weeks of supplementation and then that's what they saw so glutathione levels fell essentially back to where around baseline was so 0.9 and these data are visualized here so we're looking at, red blood cell levels of glutathione on the y axis and then zero, twelve, twenty four, and thirty six weeks after, after that and, we can see first that red blood cell levels are lower, red blood cell levels of glutathione are lower in older adults. And then after twelve and twenty four weeks of supplementation, we see significant increases in glutathione levels in the older adults. And then after stopping supplementation, we see glutathione going back to where it was without supplementation. So when considering glutathione's role as an antioxidant, what's the effect of increasing glutathione on oxidative damage to lipids and DNA in older adults? And that's what we see here. So first, we're looking at genomic damage as, measured by eight hydroxydeoxyguanosine, and this is a, DNA oxidation, biomarker. And then they also looked at lipid ox lipid oxidative damage, in this case measured by plasma levels of f two isoprostanes. So first, looking at young versus old, we can see that both DNA damage, DNA and lipid oxidative damage were at least four fold higher in the older adults when compared with the younger adults. So what impact did supplement supplementation have on, oxidative damage to DNA and lipids? And we can see significant reductions for both, oxidative damage to DNA and lipids as a result of cysteine, n acetylcysteine and glycine supplementation. So about one zero seven for DNA oxidative damage to about sixty to then about forty. Each of those, changes are statistically significant. And then for lipid oxidative damage, we see values from about one eighty six to sixty four and even lower to about forty eight, after twenty four weeks of supplementation. So once again, if if the supplementation is, is causing these effects, when we remove supplementation, we'd expect to see a reversion back to baseline levels or in that direction. And that's what we see here. After the twenty four week time point, when compared with twelve weeks of not supplementing with, glycine and n acetylcysteine, we see levels of, DNA oxidative damage and lipid oxidative damage now increasing in the absence of glycine, and n acetylcysteine. So inflammation was also reduced and that's we can see here. So for inflammation, I'm showing you levels of, IL-six, TNF alpha, and high sensitivity c reactive protein which I've talked talked about in a lot of videos. So, first, we can see that, older adults have, much higher levels of each of these inflammatory markers when compared with young. For IL six, it's more than nine fold elevated. TNF alpha is about twice as high or actually TNF alpha and high sensitive c c reactive protein are about twice as high in older adults when compared with young. So what impact did supplementation have on these inflammatory parameters? And in every case, inflammation is reduced. So IL six went from 4.8 to 2.7 to 1.1. I mean, that's a 75% reduction. TNF alpha went from 98 to 80 to 59. Again, about a 30% reduction. And then, high sensitivity c reactive protein, also about a 30% reduction, 4.9 to 3.5 to 3.2. So So once again, if supplementation is causing these reductions for inflammation, when we remove supplementation, we'd expect to see increases in inflammation, and that's that's what they saw. So, inflammation, for, IL six went from 1.1 to two. TNF alpha 59 to 73, and high sensitivity c reactive protein from 3.2 up to 3.9. So significant increases in inflammation in the absence of, glycine and n acetylcysteine and significant reductions in the presence of these amino acids, as so reductions in inflammation as a result of supplementation with these amino acids. Excuse me. It stuttered there for a second. Alright. So I've shown you what was reduced. So what was, increased or improved? And, in this in n acetylcysteine supplemented older adults. So first, we're looking at the fasting respiratory quotient. Now, the r q is, an index of, substrate oxidation, which means are you burning fat for fuel, systemically? Are you burning mostly fat? Are you burning protein? Are you burning carbohydrate? So as the RQ gets closer to 0.7, you're burning mostly fat for fuel, and that's systemically. So, first, we can see that older adults have higher r r q values when compared with younger adults, which suggests that younger adults have, a greater predominance of fat oxidation systemically when compared with older adults who have a little bit less, systemic fat oxidation. So what effect did glycine and n acetylcysteine supplementation have on systemic fat oxidation using RQ as that measure? And what what we can see is that RQ measures started to fall in the supplemented older adults from 0.84 to to 0.79 to 0.77. Each of these differences are statistically significant which suggests that in older adults, supplementation with glycine and n acetylcysteine improves systemic fat oxidation. Now, again, if supplementation is causing these effects, when we remove supplementation, do we see the opposite and and these effects, being lost? And that's what they, saw. So when looking at twelve weeks of stopping supplementation compared with the twenty four week, time point, we can see that the RQ values without supplementation start to go back to where they were at baseline. So the obvious question is, when considering that RQ going closer to point point seven is a measure of systemic fat oxidation, is mitochondrial fat, oxidation involved in this process? So that's what we can see here, represented visually. So first, mitochondrial fat oxidation in old was worse when compared with young. And then after supplementing with, glycine and n acetylcysteine, we can see improvements of both the twelve and twenty four week time points. Now if older adults are are are spending less, if less if there's less mitochondrial fat oxidation in older adults at baseline, to to meet the energy demands of the cell, it would make sense that the that they're also, having an increase in sugar oxidation with glucose oxidation as that measure. And that's what we see here. So older adults, when compared with younger adults, have higher levels of mitochondrial sugar oxidation. But after supplementing, we can see that sugar oxidation levels are reduced in the older adults, in in fact, down to levels that are similar to that found in younger adults. So what was also improved as a result of, supplementation with glycine and n acetylcysteine, high doses of both of those, is insulin sensitivity. So that's what we're looking at here. So plasma levels of glucose, plasma levels of insulin, and then, the multi the multi multi sorry. Again, multiplying both of these measures, can be used to calculate, insulin resistance, using HOMA IR as the metric. So, first, we can see that older adults have, higher levels of glucose insulin and HOMA IR, when compared with the younger adults. And then after supplementing for twelve and twenty four weeks, with the exception of glucose at the twelve week time point, each of these measures were improved. So for glucose, 5.4 to 4.9, and this is in millimoles. That's about a nine milligrams per deciliter change for going from zero weeks to twenty four weeks of supplementation. And then insulin levels were cut by more than half after twenty four weeks of supplementation. And then, also insulin resistance was cut by more home IR was cut by more than half as a result of glycine and n acetyl system supplementation. So, again, if if supplementation is causing is causing these effects when we remove supplementation, we'd expect to see these changes going in the opposite direction because the the the initiating factor for these changes is being removed and that's what we see here. So plasma levels of glucose, insulin, and insulin resistance as measured by HOMA IR all reverted, back towards baseline, which suggests that supplementation with glycine and n acetylcysteine was causing these changes. So just as a brief summary, so adding high dose glycine and n acetylcysteine restored levels of glutathione to those found in, younger adults but in older adults, and that improved four hallmarks of aging. At least that's the data that they looked at. They didn't look at the others. I wonder if those other hallmarks would have been improved. So the hallmarks that they improved were genomic, instability using DNA oxidative damage as one measure of that. Nutrient sensing, in terms of, insulin sensitivity, mitochondrial function was improved as a result of glutathione restoration, and then inflammation was reduced. So also improved that I didn't show in this video were was, physical and cognitive function, measures of both of those, and then plasma markers of endothelial and kidney function. Well, actually, in addition, also, triglycerides were reduced. So, for more info, as I mentioned, that this paper and all of the other papers that I mentioned in the video will be in the description. So that's all I've got for now. If you made it to the end, thanks for thanks for watching and listening, and have a great day.