With the goal of optimizing biological age, last week, I got my blood tested for the sixth time in 2020. So what's my data? What's my biological age? So we can see that here, using Morgan Levin's, phenotypic age calculator, which is, also a measure of biological age, we can see that my biological age, was 33.8 years. Now when considering that my chronological age is 47, that puts me, based on this blood test, at third more than thirteen years younger than my chronological age. Now if you're interested in what's optimal for each of these nine biomarkers in terms of how they change during aging and what's their association for all cause mortality risk, you can click on the link in the right corner. I've discussed that in a previous video, so I'm not gonna go over that again for this video. So, let's get further into my data. So for the first five blood tests, in 2020, we can see that my range of values from 33 all the way up to 39 years, for, biological age. Now interestingly, note that that 39 measurement, and this will come up in a in a later slide, I decreased my fat intake and increased my carb intake, and that may be what was related to that higher biological age compared to the other measurements. Now when looking at all six, biological age, data for the blood test, my average biological age in 2020 over six tests is 35.2 years, which is, eleven point eight years younger than my chronological age. Not bad. Now, I, how does that compare to twenty nineteen? You know, year to year change of biological age. Now I only measured twice in 2019, with biological age, biological ages of 37.3 years and 33.09 years, but the average of those two measurements is 35.2. So based on that, one chronological year passed, but there technically are zero years of biological aging. Now whether that's actually, completely true is unknown because, you know, are two blood test results enough to represent a full year of a biological age. I'd argue I needed more data, but from my perspective, it's encouraging that it didn't get worse. And, yeah. So, how how does this, you know, basically flattening of aging at least for a two year period, how does this compare with other interventions? So, I've had it I made a video on this, in terms of calorie restriction impacting biological age. And they didn't look at Levine's phenotypic age calculator. They used a different biological age calculator that was mostly derived from, clinical biomarkers, that are in the blood. So it's just they use a similar approach. So, starting from baseline, there was no difference in biological age for the two groups, Ad Lib, where they ate whatever they, you know, their normal diet, and then CR calorie restriction. So, and this was a twelve month, and twenty four month up to twenty four months, people were on calorie restriction. So what I wanna highlight is after one year, of the study, the ad lib group who was eating their normal diet had an increase in biological age of 0.7 years. So one chronological year passed, they had point seven years of, biological aging. In contrast, the CR group, and this was a 14.5% calorie restriction compared to their baseline diet. They only saw a, point one year increase in their biological age. Now note that the shaded blue, region on the bottom is, where the triangles are. That's the confidence interval for the, range of the effect of CR on biological age. So in other words, most people well, the average was a a point one year decrease in biological age, but some were a little bit higher than that and some were little a little bit lower. So it's within the realm of possibilities that some people on CR after one year had zero biological aging based on the the, you know, clinical biomarkers in blood as the metric. So similarly, that's that's essentially what happened to my data over that one year period. So was I on the obvious question would be is, was I on calorie restriction, during 2020 when compared with 2019? So here's my daily calorie intake. And in in addition to regular blood testing, I, weigh all of my food every day. I've been doing this for five years, five plus years since April 2015, and I track macros and micros. I have data, you know, in an Excel file for, more than two thousand days with macros and micros. And and, it wasn't until about two years ago that I thought, hey, I should start tracking actual food intake as an additional measure above and beyond macros and micros because breaking down food into, hey, it's got the these macros and micros may not represent the whole impact that food can have on health. So here we see, daily calorie intake. And again, I weigh everything with a food scale, for twenty nineteen in black and twenty twenty in red. So each dot corresponds to one day of data. So this is full data for two years, daily calorie intake. And what we can see is that in 2019, my average daily calorie intake was 27 hun 2,703 calories a day, whereas in 2020, it was, 2,500 2,587 calories per day. Now using a t test, we can see if these two groups of data are, different statistically, different or the same. And, based on the t test, we can see that there was a small but significant reduction in calorie intake from 2019 to 2020, 4.3% with a, statistically significant p value of 0.003. So there was a very mild calorie restriction. I I basically had a very mild calorie restriction from, 2021 compared with 2019. So the obvious question is, is a relatively small CR enough to slow or stop year to year biological aging? So, based on this data, I'd argue that is possible and it's actually encouraging because, the CR study that I posted on the previous slide where they had something like 14% CR to see basically a very low increase in biological age, one year into that study. My data would argue that it it doesn't have to be a 14% or so reduction in calories to see an improvement of biological age. It could be as low as 4.4%. But I'd argue that many variables may be able to impact biological age. So what could those be? So were there fitness improvements? Now, besides things like muscle strength, which are essentially the same, and I'll probably post some, you know, fitness updates, pull ups, etcetera, over the next few weeks, two metrics of of my fitness are, related to cardiovascular health, resting heart rate and heart rate variability. So I also wear a fitness tracker that tracks those measures. So did I, dramatically improve in fitness, for RHR, resting heart rate, and HRV, or was it about the same? How does that impact biological age? So here's again, two years of data. I've been tracking, these variables for more than two years. So this is, two full years of data, 2019 and 2020 for resting heart rate, RHR on the top, and heart rate variability, HRV on the bottom. So first, I'm looking at, resting heart rate on the in the top. My average resting heart rate in 2019 was 48.8 beats per minute BPM, and I slightly improved that in 2020, reducing it down, which is going in the right direction, to 48.1 beats per minute. And then using a t test, we can see that those those two groups of data are actually significantly different. Now I said that go going, reducing a resting heart rate is going in the right direction, but it's also important to note that a resting heart rate decreases during aging. So one way we can, ascertain if that's a, fitness improvement related improvement for resting heart rate or an aging related, a decrement for, you know, so going in the wrong direction is basically a a weaker heart now, is by assessing heart rate variability. And I actually made a video about this, the looking at the combination of resting heart rate and heart rate variability for, the assessing cardiovascular, health in a separate video. And if you're interested, you know, click on the right corner, you can you can, access that video. So, how did my heart rate variability change during this two year period? So we can see here, purple 2019 and orange 2020. And, although it wasn't significantly different, the two these two groups of data, my heart rate variability slightly went up from about 56, to about 58, in 2020. And it this, the that small improvement was close to statistical significance at with a p value of point zero seven, but, you know, that's not below the 0.05 threshold. So one could argue it's not it's not, significantly different. But, when considering that, you know, I had a very small reduction in the resting heart rate and the heart rate variability was actually going up and not down, one could argue that my, metrics of cardiovascular, health, didn't get worse. At at best, they stayed approximately the same, which is interesting because biological age stay stayed approximately the same. So I'd argue that one reason for why my biological age essentially stayed the same year over year from 2019 to twenty twenty is because I was able to main maintain my, CV related to my cardiovascular, related health in terms of RHR and HRV at approximately the same levels 2019 into 2020. Now there's a third component, going further into the diet side of this is my, is my drive towards precision nutrition. And what I mean by precision nutrition is, you know, within a whole food diet, it's easy to say eat real food and exercise. But within a whole food diet, what pattern actually translates into having the best metrics of of health and and actually minimizing disease risk and potentially maximizing longevity? That's one of my goals. So I'm just gonna use c reactive protein here, as an example. So my range for CRP in 2020 over six measurements was from 0.3 to 1.01 milligrams per liter. So going forward with the goal of keeping my biological age as youthful as possible, How can I get get lower is better for CRP? So how can I get consistently closer to 0.3 on all of my measurements and, you know, avoid the zero point eight four and zero point five three, the higher measurements? So as I mentioned, using a an attempt at, getting closer to a precision nutrition approach can altering my diet composition impact c reactive protein. So one way I can assess that is by looking at, correlations between parts of my diet with CRP. So, let's start with total calories and carbohydrates. So how do how does CRP correlate with those variables? So CRP in my data, over, about 12 measurements, is not I've only I've only started measuring CRP in the past two years or so since, Morgan Levine's biological age calculator came out, and I wanted to use that data to calculate biological age. I wish I had measured it more often earlier. So, CRP in my data not is not significantly correlated with total calorie or carbohydrate intake, but not all carbohydrates are the same. Carbohydrates include fiber, which are polysaccharides, starch, which are disaccharides, and simple sugars, which are monosaccharides. And I raise this point because, because all carbohydrates are not the same, each of these, you know, may impact c reactive protein in different ways. But yet they're lost in looking, you know, their their effects may be blunted if you're gonna combine them all into just one measure as carbohydrate. So let's have a look at those data. So how does CRP correlate with fiber, total fructose, and then remaining carbohydrates, which are simple sugars but also could be disaccharides. So CRP in my in my data is not significantly associated with fiber, with total fructose intake, which is fructose but also the sum, of of, sucrose divided by two since sucrose is, contains fructose as half of it. So CRP not associated with fiber or fructose. But what about the remaining carbohydrates? So carbohydrates minus fiber and minus fructose. And interestingly in this situation, we see that the higher my simple carbohydrate intake that's not fiber or fructose, the higher my CRP. So if my goal is to reduce CRP, if I keep my simple sugar and potentially disaccharide intake at the lower end of this range, I should see, if that's playing a causative role on impacting CRP, I should expect to see lower CRP levels, consistently lower CRP levels. And I should mention that the correlation coefficient for my simple carbon intake with CRP was very strong, at 0.85. So, and I'm this that I'll raise that up. That'll become important again in in another in a few slides. So keep that in mind that very strong correlation between my simple carbon intake with c reactive protein. So if I cut my simple carbon intake, will calories from protein or fat make up the difference? So first, I'm looking at the correlation for CRP with protein. Protein is not significantly correlated. So what about fat? So just looking at total fat intake, we can see that a significant correlation and inverse correlation. So the higher my fat intake, that that's correlated with a lower c reactive protein. So if my goal is to keep CRP closer to 0.3, I should shoot for, at least based on extrapolation of this data, I should shoot for, you know, somewhere in a 110 grams of fat per day. But note that also all fat is not the same. So what's the fat is comprised of monounsaturated fats, MUFA, polyunsaturated fats, which again, all polyunsaturated fats are not the same. They include omega three and omega six, which are different fatty acids, structures, and also saturated fatty acids. So all fat is not the same. So, first, MUFA, monounsaturated fatty acids, are not significantly correlated with CRP. What about omega three and omega six? Those two are not significantly correlated with c reactive protein. But then interestingly, right at that border of statistical significance, zero, p equals 0.05, we see that, what's likely driving the correlation with CRP is my saturated fat intake. Now going further, all saturated fats are not the same. Now my main sources of saturated fats are mostly from, cocoa beans. I make my own chocolate. I mix cocoa beans. I grind them up and mix them with dates. It's delicious. It's like the best chocolate I've ever had. So cocoa beans, full fat yogurt, which the two of them are mainly long chain saturated fatty acids, 16 carbon and 18 carbon fatty acids, but also coconut butter, which contains mostly medium chain fatty, saturated fatty acids from eight to 12 carbons, in length for for their those fatty acids. So what's the correlation for CRP with those foods? So for cocoa beans, there that there is not there isn't a significant correlation with c reactive protein. What about full fat yogurt? Again, no significant correlation with c reactive protein. What about coconut butter? So here, actually, we can see a close to significant correlation for coconut butter with with c reactive protein in ex exactly the same direction as what we saw for total saturated fatty acids and for total fat intake. So that would suggest that by trying to get my coconut butter intake to somewhere around 50 grams per day, I may consistently see low c reactive protein, levels, at least based on the data on that on that graph. So the this data that I've shown may optimize c reactive protein, but it's also important to, yeah, to see if making these changes or if these correlations are associated with changes in the other biomarkers on Levine's biological age calculator. Because if I improve c reactive protein by cutting my simple carb intake or increasing coconut butter, if that alters levels of other things that collectively make my biological age worse while we're going in the wrong direction. So will cutting fruit intake or including, the fifty grams of coconut butter a day, affect the other biomarkers? So, first in looking at coconut butter, CB, I've abbreviated it here. Correlations for coconut butter with with each of the other variables on Levine's biological age calculator, we can see that none of them are significantly, different. In other words, increasing coconut butter based on the correlations, is not significantly correlated with the other biomarkers. So it's possible that I may increase my coconut butter and see changes in CRP without changes in any of the other, eight biomarkers that are on the test. Now it's important to keep an eye on RDW because, higher coconut butter is correlated with a higher RDW in my data, and it's not significantly different. The p value is higher than 0.05, but it's close to significance. So if I improve or if I'm able to keep my c reactive protein somewhere around 0.3 or less with these changes that I've I've, I've indicated, but my RDW goes up, I may wanna think about making some other, interventions to keep RDW low, while also keeping CRP low. So what about my correlations with simple sugar intake with the other, variables on the biological age calculator? So this actually gets a little bit more complicated. Now remember, lower a lower simple sugar intake was correlated with a lower c reactive protein, which is where you would want it. Lower is better for c reactive protein. And I should mention I have a video for that too. If you're interested in the CRP video, click on, in the right corner. So, here we can see that, having a higher simple sugar intake is actually correlated with lower glucose, lower creatinine, and lower white blood cells, which are going in the actually the right direction in terms of aging and disease risk. So it's possible that if I cut my simple sugar intake, that may lead to increases in glucose, creatinine and white blood cells, which would then go in the wrong direction. Now conversely, it seems that cutting my simple sugar intake would lead to lower levels of MCV since there's a positive correlation between MCV with my simple sugar intake. So, but note that the correlations for each of these components with simple sugar intake is less than 0.5 or negative 0.5, which is, considered a moderate or weak correlations. And the reason I raised that issue is because if you remember, the correlation for my simple sugar intake with c reactive protein was very strong at 0.85. So it's possible that by keeping my simple sugar intake, low and again, this is from Whole Foods. This is not junk food. I rarely eat junk food units. A few times a year that I'm eating something like pizza or cookies or something like that. It's possible that by keeping that low, I'll keep my c reactive protein low and because of the weaker correlations with simple sugar with the other variables on the biological age calculator that they may not end up becoming affected. Now that's my hope. Stay tuned in 2021 for further updates on my biological age and see if this actually ends up being true. So that's all I've got for now. Thanks thanks. If you made it to the end, thanks. And, have a great day.