Homocysteine levels increase during aging and relatively higher levels are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. Now, I've been tracking homocysteine since 2005 and as shown on the left side of this image, we can see that my average value was 7.1 micromolar over six measurements from 2005 to 2009. Now, that was before I started a daily dietary tracking in 2015. And from 2015 until now, I've been weighing my food every day, entering that, data into an, online tracking software, and then downloading that data, into an Excel file, and then taking the average of that data for every blood test, and then looking at correlations between my diet with the blood test data. So, since then, since 2015, we can see that my average homocysteine value has actually increased, significantly increased to 10.2 micromolar. So, this is going in the wrong direction. As I mentioned, homocysteine levels increase during aging, but there is a silver lining, for this story. As during the last six measurements, I've been able to keep my homocysteine levels towards the lower end of my range as, all of them have been 9.2 micromolar or less, including my, data for my, last blood test, which I got at the July, which was right at the corner of that 9.2 micromolar. Now the big, question then is what's impacting homocysteine? And I covered some of this in my, last video on homocysteine, so I'm gonna go through an update for that and then go a little bit further. So, here we're looking at, three pathways that converge on homocysteine metabolism. The remethylation pathway on the left, the trans methylation pathway on the right, and below that, the transsulfuration pathway of which homocysteine is at the center of this. Now, I mentioned in my previous video that I already tried high dose betaine to reduce, homocysteine, four grams of trimethylglycine, otherwise known as betaine per day, a couple years ago and that didn't affect my homocysteine levels at all. Now, also notice that vitamin b six can, help reduce homocysteine as when, adequate amounts of b six are present, homocysteine can then be converted into cystathionine. So, is vitamin b six intake correlated with homocysteine in my data? Now prior to the July, twenty first, blood test, this is what my data looked like. So, essentially, a flat correlation with a co correlation coefficient very close to zero, zero point zero five, and a p value that's very far away from statistical significance, 0.87. Now, what happened for my last blood test? Now before going into that, it's important to mention that if the correlations are real effect, we'd expect that correlation to stay the same or get stronger, meaning the correlation coefficient little r gets closer to one, which is a positive, correlation, increasing or negative one closer to negative one, which is an inverse correlation. If not, if it's not a real effect, we'd expect the correlation to get closer to zero. So as you can see, the b six correlation with homocysteine is pretty close to zero, and it's not significantly correlated with homocysteine. So, after the the the July blood, blood test result, we can see, essentially, the, correlation is the same. It hasn't strengthened. It hasn't weakened. It's essentially flat, and the correlation coefficient is very close to zero, zero point zero seven. So from this, we can conclude, and that's the data for my last measurement, 9.2. So from this, we can conclude that, vitamin b six intake is not significantly correlated with homocysteine at least for me. And it's important to also mention that I was supplementing with b six prior to, the last blood test, and I stopped it completely for the blood test that I got done in July. So this would indicate that, I can continue to not supplement with b six. So, another factor in the homocysteine metabolism in terms of reducing it is dietary intake of folic acid, which is then converted into sam folate. And then in combination with vitamin b twelve, they help to, convert homocysteine into methionine thereby reducing homocysteine levels. So then the next question is, are folate and or b twelve intake correlated with homocysteine? So this is what my data looked like prior to the blood test. Although the correlation isn't bad, it's zero negative 0.47. So higher levels of dietary folate are correlated with lower levels of homocysteine in my data. That p value is not statistically significant, but it isn't that far away with a p value of 0.13. Remember, we get to less than 0.05. That's that's statistically significant. So what happened after my latest blood test result? So we can see that there that my value of 9.2 where where it stands with all the other data. Now, again, if it's a real effect, the correlation stays the same or gets closer to one or negative one. And if not, it weakens. It gets closer to zero. So in this case, we can see that it actually got closer to zero from negative point four seven to negative point three eight going closer towards zero, which suggests that dietary folate intake is not, correlated or does not impact my homocysteine levels. And just as a, just to note that the p value is 0.2, which is going away from 0.05, which, again, suggests that folate is not significantly correlated with homocysteine. So it may not be impacting homocysteine at least for me. Now, what about vitamin b twelve intake? So in com in comparison with b six and folate, in contrast, b twelve does seem to have some impact or at least it's correlated with my homocysteine levels. As you can see, this is what my data looked like prior to the last blood test in July. A significant a highly significant, strong correlation, so higher levels of b twelve are correlated with lower levels of homocysteine. So what happened after my latest blood test? And, again, if it's a real effect, the correlation stays the same or gets closer to negative one or one. And if not, it weakens. It gets closer to zero. So as we can see, the correlation basically stayed about the same, with the correlation coefficient of negative point, 77, which is pretty close to where it was before and the p value being exactly the same. And then, you can notice that, that's what my, my my homocysteine value was 9.2. But notice that I actually reduced my intake from a thousand micrograms per day of vitamin b twelve to five hundred micrograms micrograms, and we'll I'll get into why I did that, in a second. So from this, we see that vitamin b twelve in my data is significantly correlated with homocysteine. But then, as I mentioned, why did I cut my b twelve intake from a thousand to five hundred micrograms per day? So, it was largely based on this study here, that looked at all cause mortality data on the, all cause mortality risk on the y axis plotted against blood levels of vitamin b twelve on the x axis. So, note that at about four hundred, picograms per mil for blood levels of vitamin b twelve, when you go above that as indicated by the arrow going in both directions, the shaded region is the confidence interval. And the significance of a confidence interval is when it's completely above one in terms of risk or completely below one, as we'll see in a second, that indicates statistical significance. So as you can see above four hundred picograms per mil for blood levels of vitamin b twelve, we can see that higher blood levels of vitamin b twelve are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. And then, conversely, blood levels of b twelve that are, below four hundred picograms per mil are associated with reduced all cause mortality risk as shown there. So I haven't measured my blood b twelve, levels yet. That's on my to do list, but I do have dietary, data. So how does dietary b twelve intake affect blood levels of b twelve? And that's what's shown here. So we've got, serum or plasma, concentration of vitamin b twelve on the y axis plotted against vitamin b twelve intake in micrograms per day on the x axis. And note that this is a meta analysis of 56 studies. 39 of those were RCTs, randomized controlled trials in the dashed line. So I said 39 RCTs, and then there were 17 observational studies, so the so the dotted line. And then they did a meta analysis on all of these data in terms of how, dietary intake of vitamin b b twelve correlates with blood levels of b twelve. So based on my thousand micrograms per day b twelve intake, we can see that I did I I should expect to see blood levels of b twelve that are somewhere around 720 picomoles per liter. Now, I had to do some converting because picomoles per liter do not equal picograms per mil. But when you convert those data, we can see that based on what my expected blood levels of b twelve would be, I'm at a significantly increased all cause mortality risk. However, note that reducing my b twelve intake to five hundred micrograms per day isn't much better. And based on the plot, I'd expect to see somewhere around six hundred fifty picomoles per liter of blood levels of b twelve, which still puts me at a lower risk, but still a significantly increased all cause mortality risk for blood levels of b twelve. Now, cutting b 12 intake may still so so to summarize that, cutting b 12 intake may result in blood b 12 levels that are still too high. Now, if I reduce my b twelve, intake to achieve less than 400 picograms per mil for the data on the left, it may not be enough to reduce homocysteine. And if you note that, on the, image on the right, you know, it's essentially very little, a vitamin a very small vitamin b twelve intake that would be enough to get to about 300, picomoles per liter, which would be which would correspond to less than 400 picograms per liter on the left side. So if I reduce my b twelve intake too much, it may not be enough to reduce homocysteine. Now in contrast to that data that I just presented that potentially shows my higher intake of b twelve being associated with an increased all cause mortality risk, there's another study that showed b twelve supplementation is not associated with an increased all cause mortality risk, and that's what's shown here. So on the y axis, we've got varying levels of b twelve supplementation plotted against the hazard ratio for all cause mortality, but then also including cardiovascular and cancer mortality. So first note that when compared to no supplementation, none of the higher levels of b12 supplementation as indicated by the red arrows and the blue circles for all cause mortality risk. So all cause mortality risk was not increased for any of the higher levels of b twelve supplementation. Now for the thousand micrograms per day that I've been supplementing with, I've highlighted that there, that we also don't see any increase, not just for all cause mortality risk, but for also cardiovascular or cancer related mortality, which would suggest its potential safety up to at least a thousand micrograms per day. Now interestingly, note that, a hundred to nine hundred ninety nine micrograms of b twelve per day, we see a significantly reduced risk for cancer related mortality. And, also, that same association is also present for relatively low amounts of b twelve supplementation up to five micrograms per day. So based on these data, it would seem that high dose b twelve supplementation may not be bad for health at worst based on the all cause mortality data. And at best, cancer mortality risk can be reduced. So how can we reconcile these data? On the one hand, we've got, a study showing that relatively high blood levels of b twelve are associated with increased all cause mortality risk, and my dietary data would expect to put me into that group. Conversely, we've got a separate study showing that, b twelve supplementation is not associated with all cause mortality risk. How can we reconcile that? So as I've mentioned many times, aging and disease are biochemical processes that happen over many decades. And if b twelve intake is too high, I'd expect to see a negative impact on systemic biomarkers. Now older ages for Levine's biological age calculator, which is known as phenotypic age, and I have many videos on that. And if you're interested in seeing, some of that data, I'll put the link to the video in the right corner. But older ages for, that biological age test and, the biological age test aging.ai are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So older age for those biological age calculators increased all cause mortality risk. So the big question then could be, is die is my dietary b twelve intake significantly co correlated with an older biological age? And if so, that could potentially indicate that I'm at an increased all cause mortality risk. So first, I'm gonna go use the data that I have the most of, which is aging.ai. I have 23 blood tests for that that correspond with my, daily b twelve intake, from twenty sixteen to 2021. And although we can see that the correlation is increasing, that correlation coefficient of 0.25, the p value is not, lower than 0.05. So there's this it's not, statistically significant. It's not a significant, correlation. Similarly, Levine's phenotypic age calculator, I have less data for that. I have 12 blood tests, since 2018. But we can see that based on the correlation, it's almost completely flat. So phenotypic age is not significantly correlated with my b twelve b 12 intake. But, also, note that I don't have data less than for b 12 intakes, less than five hundred micrograms per day. So although I have 12 data points, I'd say that I'd need a little bit more data to come to more, conclusive conclusions for the association with, Levine's, biological age calculator with, its association with b twelve. Alright. So, collectively, does this mean that a b twelve intake is up to a hundred micrograms per day is safe for me? At least based on the biological age data, based on these metrics of biological age that b twelve is not correlated with an older biological age, that would suggest that, b twelve intakes up to a thousand micrograms per day may be safe for me. Alternatively, to play it safe, it I'm interested to know what's the minimal dose of b twelve that can maximally reduce homocysteine while not increasing my, biological age, based on these metrics of biological age. So I'm currently at five hundred micrograms per day. I may experiment with lower doses, maybe taking a thousand, micrograms once every three days instead of every other day. So stay tuned for that data. Alright. That's all I've got for now. I've made it to the end. Thanks for watching, and I hope you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.