In my last video, when using Morgan Levine's phenotypic gauge calculator, we saw that my biological age was twelve years younger than my chronological. Similarly, using aging.ai, I was twenty years younger than my chronological age. So how am I doing it? Well, first in terms of supplements, and I'm I've mentioned this in other videos, I've been taking levothyroxine, a hundred and thirty seven and a half micrograms per day, for more than twenty years as I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in my twenties. Now although I took it out from my last blood test, I included methyl b twelve for this blood test, once every three days, a thousand micrograms. So about three hundred micrograms per day with the goal of reducing my homocysteine. And that'll potentially be a topic for another video. What about average fitness stats? Now note that this is from my last blood test on November 1 through, my 12/12, the day before this, blood test number six. So that's a forty two day period, and these are my average stats over those that forty two day period. So I weigh myself every day. My average body weight was a hundred and fifty five pounds, so about seventy kilograms. Resting heart rate, RHR, 42, about 42 beats per minute BPM. Heart rate variability, HRV, about 50 milliseconds. So, those are cardiovascular health related metrics. Now for the previous blood test, blood test number five in 2021, and that for that period, it was from September 2 through 10/31, October 31 year. My previous data there was a hundred and fifty five point six pounds for body weight, so a small decrease. And then resting heart rate was a little bit lower in the previous test, and heart rate variability was a little bit higher on that previous test. So for this test, those data actually went in the wrong directions. Now because I have a forty two day period for this blood test and a fifty nine day period for the last blood test, I can compare those two groups of data using an, two sample t test, and then I can evaluate statistical significance. So these two groups of data are statistically significant. So I had a small but sick, statistically significant decrease in body weight, and then also small but sick, statistically significant, increases for resting heart rate and a reduction for heart rate variability. But note that these small alterations for body weight and cardiovascular health related metrics weren't enough to affect biological age. As on my last test for using Levine's test, it was about the same, so thirty seven point one years. And for aging dot ai, the previous value was thirty years, whereas on this test, it was twenty nine. So with that in mind, what about my diet? So here's my average dietary intake. And then again, it's that forty two forty two day period from the last blood test up until the day before this blood test. And this is my average daily intake in grams per day with the exception of green tea, which is an ounce and ounces. So that's, ranked number 24. So it's ranked in terms of amount with the highest amount at the top and lowering, you know, lesser amounts, as we go down the list. Now I'm not gonna go over why the the foods at the top top of the list are, have that abundance. I've covered that in other videos. I'm gonna focus on the foods that were, different for this period versus the last and why I made those changes. So at number five, we can see mushrooms. And if you follow my, video series on quantifying biological age and my diet, breakdowns, that correspond to those biological ages, this will be the first time you've seen mushrooms. Now I I've had mushrooms in the in the past, just not, before I started this video series in 2020. So a 166, grams of mushrooms per day, and that amount of mushrooms gets, yields about eleven point eight milligrams per day of spermidine. So why is spermidine important? And I have a video on this. If you're interested in that and missed it, it'll be in the right corner. So maybe you can check it out. So spermidine increases lifespan in mice, and that's what's shown here just as one example of the data for spermidine impacting, health and potentially lifespan. So when compared with the control fed animals in black, the spermidine fed animals in red had a significant increase in median lifespan. So what about data in people? So in terms of all cause mortality risk, that's what we're looking at here, or the cumulative incidence of death on the y axis. And this is, when starting with a baseline spermidine intake and then twenty years afterwards, so a twenty year follow-up. And in that study, people that had a spermidine intake greater than eleven point six milligrams per day, they had the lowest all cause mortality risk. And then values lower than eleven point six, milligrams per day of spermidine had an increased significantly significantly increased all cause mortality risk. So that's one reason why I shoot for at least eleven point six milligrams of spermidine per day, which just for mushrooms, I'm getting that. I'm getting that from other foods too, but I get at least that just for mushrooms. Now other notable changes were, my cumulative intake of corn, oats, steel cut oats, and barley. And when those three are combined, I, my intake, my average daily intake was a hundred and fifty four grams per day. In comparison with the previous blood test, blood test number five in 2021, it was only thirty two grams per day and only from corn. Oats and barley were not in, were not in in the in the diet composition that corresponded to blood test number five. So I five x the intake of corn, oats, and barley cumulatively relative to the, my my last blood test. So the obvious question then then is why did I increase whole grain intake for this blood test? So to start to answer that, we let's take a look at my glucose levels over the past six plus years since I started tracking both, my diet with, weighing weighing all my food with a food scale, logging it into Cronometer, and then putting that data into an Excel sheet. And then also in 2015, I started blood testing up to six times per year. So over that six plus year period, I have 32 blood tests. And as we can clearly see, my blood glucose levels have been increasing over that six and a half year period. And in fact, for the last 15 blood tests, my glucose levels have been greater than 90 milligrams per deciliter. Again, for 15 blood tests in a row. This is definitely going in the wrong direction because glucose increases during aging and higher levels, relatively higher levels, are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So what may be impacting glucose? So to begin to, address that, I looked at correlations for my macronutrient intake that corresponds to each of these blood tests with glucose levels. And that's what's shown here. So the little r is the correlation coefficient, and then the p value is, the measure of statistical significance with a value less than 0.05 indicating statistically the the the correlation being statistically significant. So let's start with what's not statistically significantly correlated with, glucose levels. And that's my total calorie intake as shown there, the p value at 0.88. That's not a significant, correlation. Now the strongest correlation for my, glucose levels is for total fat intake. The higher my total fat intake, that's significantly correlated with a higher glucose, level. And, conversely, a higher average daily carbohydrate intake is significantly correlated with lower glucose. Now then that means may seem paradoxical to some, but note that my carbohydrate intake is not from processed junk, which would be expected to raise fasting glucose. And in support of that idea, we can also see a significant inverse correlation. So in other words, a relatively higher fiber intake is significantly correlated with lower glucose. So most of my carbohydrate intake comes from fruits, vegetables, nuts, and seeds, and some legumes, and which those are fiber rich foods, which may explain why carbohydrates, in my case, are significantly correlated with lower glucose. Now note that it isn't just fat. A higher fat intake that's correlated with higher glucose, also protein intake as shown there. So for the let for my highest average daily protein intake that corresponds to the, to a single blood test during the six plus year period was a 147 grams per day. For this blood test, though, I consumed less than that, so about a 108 grams per day. So if I was consuming closer to one forty seven, I would try to cut my protein intake with the goal of cutting glucose you know, reducing my glucose levels. But, since I've already made that cut for protein, that, that suggests that the emphasis should be on reducing my total fat intake. So let's look a little bit more into into this total fat story and how it may be impacting my biomarkers, not just glucose. So my fat intake, my average daily, total fat intake has been increasing since 2015 as shown there. So average daily fat intake on the y axis plotted against time. And we can the the two plots, the plot for glucose on the left and the plot for fat intake. So each dot course is the fat intake that corresponds to a blood test on the left. They look virtually identical. So note that, this isn't accidental. As I mentioned, I've been tracking my diet, every day since 2015. So I've done this purposely. In order to have enough data at a low fit fat intake, at an intermediate fat intake, and at a high fat intake so that I can properly evaluate, whether, you know, what fat amount is optimal for me, at least based on glucose right now. I'm gonna get a little bit more into that with the big picture biomarkers in a minute. Now for the most recent blood test, as indicated by the green arrow, I cut my total fat intake from the last, blood test from a 116 grams per day, which was close to my highest intake that I've had over the past six and a half years, to 94 grams per day. And correspondingly, glucose went down. Now, again, that's just a correlation. Correlation does not imply causation. But for the next blood test, I'm working on reducing my, total fat intake to in the 80 to 85 gram range, so at least another 10 gram cut. And if correlation does, there is some causation for total fat on glucose, in my case, we'd expect to see glucose levels drop and potentially too to somewhere in the eighties for the first time, in the past 16 tests. Now note that for, this to happen and for fat to be fat to be implicated in, a potential, you know, reduction in my glucose levels, because my protein intake, is also correlated with higher glucose, I I should keep that approximately the same as where it was for the last test at about a 108 grams per day. And that's that's the goal. So keep protein the same as the last test, reduce fat intake, and correspondingly increase carbohydrate intake to follow the correlations. And that's one reason why increased intake of oats, barley, and and corn because those are mostly carbohydrate rich foods. But note, if this is kind of a reductionist approach, only focusing on glucose. If I reduce total fat intake, will it improve glucose but make other biomarkers worse? So what's the correlative effect of total fat intake on the big picture biomarkers? And, so what are the big picture biomarkers? And if you've missed this data, in previous videos, I'm just gonna go through it relatively quickly. So the big picture biomarkers are 23 blood based biomarkers, that, are indicative of multiple organ systems and things like insulin sensitivity, like, fasting glucose. But also, I've got a homocysteine on the list there as an index of, you know, a rough index of methylation, three markers of kidney function, three markers of liver function, all the major lipoproteins, HDL, LDL, VLDL, liprotein a, all the major immune cells and including platelets, red blood cell, related metrics, a measure of inflammation, high sensitivity c reactive protein, and then the overall biological age scores indicated by Lamine's phenoage and aging.ai. So note that if significantly correlated with more biomarkers going in the right direction than the wrong direction, then a higher daily fat intake may be optimal for me. And note, this may not apply to everyone else, but we can all replicate this approach, you know, looking at correlations between diet with biomarkers to get at the personalized approach that can potentially optimize health. So in terms of what's significantly correlated, there are 11 significant correlations with a p value less than 0.05 for total fat intake with, these, 23 blood biomarkers. So again, 11 significant correlations for total fat with these big picture biomarkers. So then the next issue is to address whether these 11 biomarkers are going in the right direction or the wrong direction in terms of how they change during aging and their associations with all cause mortality risk. So seven of these are relatively straightforward, and I've presented, pretty much all of these data in other videos. And if you're interested in that, just leave a comment, and I'll direct you to where you can find, the aging and all cause mortality data for these given biomarkers. So, a higher total fat intake is significantly correlated with seven biomarkers going the wrong direction, and that includes glucose, blood blood urine nitrogen, BUN, the LDL, neutrophils, a lower lymphocyte percentage, higher monocytes, and higher platelets. So, right off the bat, we've got seven of of the 11 going in the wrong direction. With a biomarker going in the right direction, a higher total fat intake is significantly correlated with a lower MCV. So lower MCV is found in youth and a lower relatively lower MCV is significantly associated with lower all cause mortality risk. So that's going in the right direction. So then we've got three left, aspartate, amino transport, aminotransportase, AST, LDL, and red blood cells. Now those I've I've tagged those as debatable based on the published literature because if we go by just the published literature, having lower AST is, optimal based on all cause mortality risk. And then conversely, higher red blood cells is, a good thing because they decline during aging and having lower amounts is also associated associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. LDL is debatable. There are studies showing lower is better and higher is better. But when I do a biomarker versus a biomarker analysis, so AST versus all of these big picture biomarkers, in my data, actually relatively higher is better. And then conversely too, red blood cells, when I do biomarker versus biomarker analysis, having lower red blood red blood cells is actually sing significantly correlated with more biomarkers going in the right direction than wrong. So that's why I put three of these in the debatable column. LDL follows a similar pattern. But for sure, we've got these seven that are going in the wrong direction, seven of the 11. So from that, I conclude that having a higher average daily fat intake is significantly correlated with more big picture biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. And note that beyond just the correlations with glucose, this explains why I reduced fat intake for this most recent blood test and then correspondingly why I increased my carbohydrate, intake, predominantly from corn, oats, and barley. So what does the rest of the diet look like? I've read I've already shown, my protein intake and the first 26 foods. What about the rest of the diet? So here's the macro and micronutrient mac micronutrient composition that corresponds to blood test number six. So in terms of calorie intake, twenty three seventy three calories per day. I've already shown the protein intake. In terms of total fat, we can see I averaged 94 grams per day. And if you're interested in the full breakdown in ter in terms of MUFA, PUFA, saturated, trans fatty acids, etcetera, that's there. And then in terms of carbohydrates, you can see all the full breakdown there including fiber, total fructose and sucrose intake, and then net carbs after subtracting fiber from total total carbohydrate intake. Full vitamin breakdown, full mineral breakdown. I'm kinda doing a data dump here. I've discussed why I have higher than the RDA for many of these. If you're interested in why a certain, macro or micronutrient is much higher than the RDA, just leave a comment, and I'll, explain away. And then last but not least, whereas I showed the first 26 foods, here are the remaining lesser amounts of the remaining 26 foods. So 52 foods were consumed during this forty two day period, and foods 27 to 52 are shown there. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more, about my biohacking attempts to, hack aging, check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.