Carotenoids are associated with a younger epigenetic age and a reduced all cause mortality risk. So let's have a look at that data. So first, we can see that blood levels of carotenoids, the total level of carotenoids in blood is negatively correlated with DNA and GRIMH, which stands for, DNA methylation, and it's the GRIMH epigenetic clock. And in the bicore column, we can see that that correlation is negative, which means that the higher the blood levels of carotenoids, the younger the epigenetic age. And that data is in a study of about 2,300 subjects in the n column, and it's a statistically significant correlation as indicated by the p or p value. Now carotenoids, isn't just one metabolite. It contains a group of five metabolites. So how does the data look for the five individual carotenoids with, epigenetic age as indicated by GRIM age? So the carotenoids lycopene, alpha carotene, beta carotene, lutein, plus zeaxanthin, and beta cryptoxanthin, each of them and all of them were significantly negatively correlated with epigenetic age, which means that the higher the blood levels of each of these, carotenoids, the younger the epigenetic age. Now there currently aren't any, randomized controlled trials that have looked at, any of these, carotenoids or all of them, for their ability to cause decreases, in epigenetic age. For now, it's just the correlation. But when considering that these, metabolites are found in foods, it seems like a low risk, potentially high reward, system to optimize, epigenetic age as one aspect of biological age. So with the goal of slowing epigenetic aging, which foods contain these carotenoids? And that's what we can see here. So let's go through them, one by one. So first, alpha carotene is found, primarily in carrots, pumpkin, winter squash, plantains, and collard greens. And for me, I get the majority of my daily, alpha carotene about fifteen milligrams per day from, four hundred sixteen, an average of four hundred sixteen, grams per day for carrots. And that's the, average value for the about the two month period that corresponded to my latest blood test that I took in early March. Similarly, carrots are my predominant source of getting beta carotene as beta carotene also are rich in carrots, green, green, leafy greens. It says leafy greens there, which, tripped me up a bit. Sweet potato, cantaloupe, or actually orange sweet potato, cantaloupe, and pumpkin. Lycopene, as we probably all know, is is popularized in tomatoes, but it's also rich in watermelon and other foods like papaya and grapefruit. So as we can see, I get the majority of my lycopene from watermelon. A hundred and thirty four grams per day gives me about five to seven milligrams of lycopene per day. Lutein and zeaxanthin is found primarily in leafy greens, summer and winter squash, brussel sprouts, and also yellow corn, and I get the majority of my lutein plus aaxanthin, with spinach and broccoli. And that's about somewhere, about twenty five to thirty milligrams, per day of lutein plus aaxanthin. And then beta cryptoxanthin is found primarily in, pumpkin, papaya, red bell peppers, sweet peppers, orange, and carrots, and I get the majority of my beta cryptoxanthin, about two milligrams per day from my red bell pepper intake. Now is is GrimAge a good epigenetic clock? I mean, seeing a correlation between carotenoids with GrimAge is interesting, but if GrimAge isn't actually a good epigenetic clock, then who cares? Right? So, as we can see in the title though, a younger GrimAge is a the epigenetic age for GrimAge is associated with a reduced all cause mortality risk, and the title of this paper says it all. So the title is grim age outperforms other epigenetic clocks in the prediction of age related clinical phenotypes and all cause mortality. And we can see the data under the title where the, authors of the study compared various epigenetic clocks. In this case, Horvath's, epigenetic clock, which is the best of the bunch for predicting chronological age. But based on this data, it's not the best for predicting all cause mortality risk. And then they looked at other epigenetic clocks, the Hanum clock, Levin's, pheno age, methylation clock, and then GrimAge. And so of these four, methylation, epigenetic clocks, GrimAge was the only one that, identified a significant association between an older epigenetic age through GrimAge with an increased all cause mortality, mortality risk, which is what we can see by the 1.91, hazard ratio. So a ninety one percent increased risk with an older, epigenetic age is indicated by GRIM age. So what I've shown you so far is that, cumulatively, these data, suggest that higher blood levels of carotenoids may reduce, epigenetic age, lead to a younger epigenetic age. And and then a younger epigenetic age, as indicated by grim age, is associated with a reduced all cause mortality risk. Now the links in this chain that, I haven't shown you yet, are the you know, are higher blood levels of carotenoids associated with reduced all cause mortality risk just by themselves. So let's have a look at that data. And, actually, that is true. So higher blood levels of carotenoids had been shown to be associated with a lower all cause mortality risk. So first, I'm looking at the data for total carotenoids and blood. In a meta analysis of seven studies, and all the data I'm gonna show on this slide are based on a meta analysis, with a variety of studies from two studies up to, seven or eight studies. So first looking at the total amount of carotenoids in blood, we can see that the higher the levels of blood carotenoids, the lower the risk for all cause mortality. In this case, it looks very linear. So the higher your, blood levels of the carotenoids, you you should see a continued reduction in all cause mortality risk all the way up to about a hundred and eighty milligrams per deciliter for blood carotenoids. And that's compared with lower intakes, you know, say, twenty milligrams per deciliter in blood. Now what about the individual carotenoids? So first looking at, beta carotene in blood, again, meta analysis of eight studies, we can see that there's a significant, decrease in all cause mortality risk, for higher levels blood levels of beta carotene, and that's when compared with lower intake, say, at about ten milligrams per deciliter. So what about the other carotenoids? So alpha carotene, similar story. Higher blood levels of alpha carotene, lower all cause mortality risk. And, also, that's true for beta cryptoxanthin as we can see there, and then, lycopene too. Now of all the carotenoids, the only two that were not significantly associated with all cause mortality risk, and one reason may be because of, a limited amount of studies were was lutein and zeaxanthin. So in two studies, these carotenoids were not associated with all cause mortality risk. Now, unfortunately, DNA GrimAge is not commercially available. That's not the, epigenetic test that you see that's all over the, Internet, all over the interwebs, that people are are measuring their epigenetic age. So, is there a link between carotenoids with the clinical biomarkers, which, as if you watch this channel, I spend a lot of time on, Levin's phenotypic age calculator, which is based on clinical biomarkers or more, easily available clinic sorry, clinical biomarkers that you get when you go to the, you you know, to the doctor, once a year or more. So, is there a link between the carotenoids with clinical biomarkers? So, this is my data in my blood test data. So this is, 28 blood tests from 2015 to 2021. So the past six years, 28 blood tests. And, we can see, it's the association between albumin, serum levels of albumin on the y axis with my average daily beta carotene intake on the x axis. And what we can see is that the higher my average daily beta carotene intake is, the higher my levels of albumin are, and that's a significant correlation, with a p value of point, zero zero eight with a correlation coefficient, moderate strength of, 0.6. Now why is why albumin? Why is albumin important as a biomarker? Well, it's present in four separate predictors of biological age. And I should mention that in each of these studies, the the, authors of the of the study, the scientists didn't go and say, alright. I'm gonna put albumin in my, biological age predictor. They let the stats identify the composite of biomarkers that best explain biological age. And in each of these four different studies, albumin was picked by the stats. So, those studies are Levine's phenotypic age. Albumin is found in that. It's found in aging.ai. There was a calorie restriction, randomized controlled trial, RCT, that I did a video on. I'll link to that in the right corner if you're interested in that. And then there was a fourth, study, Waziri, in 2039 that included albumin as a a predictor of biological age. So in terms of biological age, it's it's an important biomarker. Now higher higher levels of albumin are associated with youth, and that's what we can see here. In a study of more than 1,000,000 subjects, we can see that higher levels of albumin were found in youth, whereas relatively lower levels were found at advanced, ages, and it declines during aging. Now not only does, albumin decline during aging, which illustrates its importance, but higher levels of albumin, which are found in youth, are also associated with a reduced all cause mortality risk in the oldest old, and that's what we can see here. So, just to break down this data, it it was, groups of older adults from 85 to older than 105 years old. And in the three different, brackets that you've got here, it's 85 to 99 years, 100 to 104 years old, and then, people who are older than a hundred and five years. And what they did is they looked at, clinically relevant biomarkers, in this situation, HDL, LDL, hemoglobin a one c, creatinine, eGFR, but using creatinine, to determine eGFR, not cystatin c, c reactive protein, but not high sensitivity c reactive protein, and then albumin. So they compared each of these clinically relevant biomarkers for their association with all cause mortality risk for each of these age groups at advanced stages. And of these biomarkers, the only one that was consistently, significantly associated with all cause mortality risk at every age, all of these ages, was albumin. So higher levels of albumin were associated with a lower all cause mortality risk for each of the age groups. Now not only that, the magnitude of the, of this effect was most pronounced for albumin at all of the age groups too. So starting from the 85 to 99 year olds, we see a twenty seven percent reduction, for all cause mortality risk with higher albumin, twenty six, percent reduction for the hundred to hundred and four year olds, and then a thirty four percent reduction in all cause mortality risk for, the, people who are older than 105. So in other words, the higher your albumin, the lower your risk of mortality even at the extremes of of lifespan. So just as a quick summary, I showed you that, well, I didn't show you, but carotenoids rich carotenoid rich foods would be expected to, increase blood levels of carotenoids. Higher blood levels of carotenoids are correlated with a younger epigenetic age, and younger epigenetic age as as measured by, DNA m grim age is associated with reduced all cause mortality risk. Separately, carotenoid rich foods, including, beta carotene in my data, is, correlated with increased, serum levels of albumin, and higher levels of albumin are, associated with a reduced all cause mortality. So when considering all of these data, it it seems like a wise strategy to include carotenoids, carotenoid rich foods into our diet. Alright. That's all I've got for now. If you made it to the end, thanks a lot. Hope you enjoyed the video, and have a great day.