Earlier this month, I blood tested for the fourth time in 2021. And using Morgan Levin's phenotypic age calculator as an index of biological age, we can see that my biological age is 35.7, which is about thirteen years younger than my chronological age. But there is room for improvement and one way to improve may be by reducing levels of high sensitivity c reactive protein or CRP for short. So that'll be the focus of today's video, attempting to further reduce biological age by reducing levels of high sensitivity c reactive protein. So first, how does my recent value for CRP compare with the general population? And that's what's shown here. This is a study of about 6,000 people. And if anybody's come across larger studies that looked at age related changes for CRP, please post it in the comments and I'll likely include it in the next CRP video. So we're looking at median values of CRP for the various age groups starting from 18 to 30 years old on the left all the way up past seven year olds on the right. And for my age group, I'm doing, I guess, pretty well, compared to the median value for my age group, which is somewhere around one. So I'm about half that for now. But I think I can do even better, not just compared with the general population, but within my own data. So how does this recent value for CRP compare with my compare with my previous data? Now I've only been tracking CRP for the past three years, and I have 16 blood tests over that, time period. I wish I had been tracking it in conjunction with diet for longer than that, but that's what I've got. So when looking at 16 blood tests for CRP over the past three years, we can see that my average is about the same as what my recent value was. So point five three for the average, whereas point five seven for the data about three weeks ago. So why do I think I can do better then if it's pretty close to my average value? Well, I've had CRP values as low as point two milligrams per liter. So that gives me hope that I can get back to that, but I just need to identify what consistently impacts CRP so that I can consistently stay at that relatively low level of inflammation. Conversely, I've also had CRP levels in the past three plus years as high as about one. So when considering that range is is somewhat wide for CRP, it's important to identify the dietary factors that may impact it so I can get it consistently closer to lower than where it is now. And that's important because levels of high sensitivity c reactive protein increase during aging. And though although I haven't included it in this video, relatively higher levels are also associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So by identifying the variables that can impact high sensitivity c reactive protein, not only can I potentially slow the age related increase but also potentially reduce all cause mortality risk? So first, in terms of diet, I decided to look at dietary macronutrients since that's the major composition relative to vitamins and minerals in terms of things that could potentially be correlated, significantly correlated with high sensitivity c reactive protein. So that's what we're looking at here. In terms of macronutrients, we're looking at calories, total carbohydrate intake, total fructose intake, and we'll see why that's important in a minute. Fiber intake, total fat intake, monounsaturated fatty acid intake, MUFA, omega three, omega six, saturated fat intake, and protein. Now, for those who are new to the channel, I've been tracking my diet since 2015, weighing all my food and then logging all of that data and entering all of that data into an Excel file. When I say logging all that data using online, tool, and then logging all of that data into an Excel file and then look looking at correlations between my diet with with each corresponding blood test. So when looking at the mac macronutrients, none of them are significantly correlated with c reactive protein. So for more insight, I then investigated correlations for CRP with big picture, quote, unquote, big picture biomarkers, biomarkers of, organ and systemic health. And that's what's shown here. So, it you know, we've got glucose, which should be obvious for anyone interested in in a pro longevity strategy. We've got markers of kidney function, liver function, all of the various lipoproteins, immune cells, red blood red blood cell RBC related, so red blood cells, MCV and the RDW, so mean corpuscular volume, MCV, and the red blood cell distribution distribution. Sorry, distribution with RDW, and then the overall biological age score. So how do how do how does high sensitivity c reactive protein correlate with these big picture biomarkers? So it's not significantly correlated with glucose or kidney function or any of the liver function markers. But now we can see something interesting going on with lipoproteins and more specifically, relatively higher levels of total cholesterol. And, again, this is over 16 blood tests. You can see the little n. That's how many blood tests that I have data for, the correlation with CRP with each, biomarker. So relatively higher levels of total cholesterol in my data is correlated with lower levels of high sensitivity c reactive protein. And one factor that may be driving that correlation is HDL. As we can see, that's also significantly correlated with lower levels of CRP. So, LDL is relatively close to statistical significance, and going in the same direction. So relatively higher levels of LDL, lower levels of CRP, but that's not statistically significant, yet. It's close to it. And if it becomes statistically significant, I'll include it in future videos. So just, going further, c reactive protein versus immune cells, surprisingly, not significantly correlated. It wasn't also significantly correlated with any of the red blood cell related measures. Not surprisingly, it's significantly correlated with an older pheno age, and that's not surprising because c reactive protein is a component of of of pheno age. So higher CRP, higher pheno age, not a surprise. And then it's not significantly correlated with, the agent dot ai, biological So let's take a closer look at the significant correlation for high sensitivity c reactive protein with HDL, and that's what's shown here. So 16 blood tests for CRP versus HDL from June 2018 through '9 or the September 2021 blood test. And first note that whereas my CRP range was also very wide, my range for HDL is also somewhat somewhat wide. So, my HDL ranges from as low as 34 milligrams per deciliter all the way up to 56. And note that the sweet spot for having relatively lower levels of CRP, so below 0.5 or around my average, seem to be, at around higher than 50 milligrams per deciliter for HDL. So if I can more consistently increase HDL to greater than 51 would expect if correlation can, you know, actually impose causation, we would expect that CRP should also be consistently reduced below 0.53. And with that in mind, what can impact it's more specifically, which dietary factors can impact, HDL? So for that, I go straight to, back to the correlations. Dietary macronutrients, correlations for that with HDL. And in first, starting with what's not significant. So total calories, total fiber intake, monounsaturated fatty acids, omega three, omega six, and total protein intake are not significantly correlated with HDL. And note that, I've been studying HDL or tracking it for a much longer time than CRP, so I have 32 blood tests, and I have dietary data for all of that period starting from August 2015 through September 2021. So what is significantly correlated with HDL here? And again, we can see now that, total carbohydrate intake and total fructose intake, higher levels for that, are correlated with lower levels of HDL, significantly correlated. And also, closest significantly correlated are total fat intake and more specifically saturated fat intake. But because they aren't statistically significant yet, I won't focus the rest of this video on fat and saturated fat. That if they become statistically significant, I may include them in a future video. Now note that, this may be, this to to me suggests an indirect effect of carbohydrate and total fructose on HDL and then HDL potentially impacting CRP. And the reason I think that is because total carbohydrate and total fructose intake was not significantly correlated with, c reactive protein although it was relatively close with the p value of of about 0.09. Similarly, higher total and saturated fat were, somewhat close to being significantly correlated with CRP having p values less than 0.15. So to me, that suggests, an indirect effect whereas, diet can impact HDL and HDL can impact c reactive protein rather than diet impacting c reactive protein directly, at least in my data. Now also last but not least, there is some data that dietary cholesterol can impact lipoproteins including, HDL. So I looked at that correlation and as we can see, there isn't a significant correlation between how much dietary cholesterol that I eat with my circulating levels of HDL. So let's take a closer look at the correlation for total fructose with my HDL. And that's what's shown here. So, again, I have a lot more data for HDL since I've been tracking that since 2015 whereas CRP have only been tracking it since 2018. So this is data for 32 blood tests. And again, I've been tracking my diet since 2015 so I can correlate, stuff in my diet with, biomarkers, and that's what we're doing here for HDL versus fructose. So, again, notice the the variability for CRP, and I've also got variability for HDL. And one reason for that may be the variability in my fructose intake, which there is a relatively wide range. 71 per day to up to a 128 per day for my average daily fructose intake. And again, note that a higher average daily fructose intake is correlated with lower HDL which is going in the wrong direction. But if we extrapolate to the left, we can see that if I'm aiming for higher than fifty milligrams per deciliter for HDL, I would need to have, an average daily fructose intake of less than about 70 and even better, getting closer towards sixty grams per day. So if I limit fructose intake, will it increase HDL and potentially reduce c reactive protein but mess up other biomarkers? And for that, we go back to the big picture biomarkers. And for this, I've included homocysteine because I'm also paying attention to that. And if anyone, is familiar with the channel, they've seen my homocysteine videos. So, how does how is fructose correlated with these big picture around 20 biomarkers? So first, notice that a higher intake of fructose, again, in my data, is correlated with lower levels of glucose. And, that's somewhat surprising, but the majority of my fructose intake is not coming from or actually exclusively the my fructose intake is exclusively coming from fruits and vegetables. It's not coming from sugary drinks or, processed foods. So, this could just be a marker of berry intake, higher levels of berries being correlated with lower glucose. Now conversely though, a higher fructose intake is correlated with higher levels of uric acid. And that's important because as shown here, this is the hazard ratio for all cause mortality risk on the y axis plotted against uric acid, concentration, on the x axis. And this is a study of more than 425,000 people. And what we can see is that relatively higher levels of uric acid are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So this correlation for fructose with uric acid is going in the wrong direction. Also going in the wrong direction are red blood cells. So higher and higher average daily fructose intake being correlated with lower levels of red blood cells, which decline during aging. So we don't want lower levels of them of them. They're going in the wrong direction based on that correlation. And also going in the wrong direction is the red blood cell distribution width, RBW. So higher fructose intake is correlated with a higher RDW, which is also going in the wrong direction because RDW increases during aging and relatively higher levels for RDW are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. And, again, I have videos for that. If you're interested, just, just do a search on my channel and it'll come up. Now, what fructose isn't significantly correlated with is, all of the NS is not significant. So, homocysteine, creatinine is a marker of kidney function, none of the liver function markers, none of the remaining lipoproteins, total cholesterol, LDL, VLDL, and lipoprotein a, none of the immune cells or immune related cells. MCV, it's not significantly correlated. It's not, significantly correlated with high sensitivity c reactive protein, which again goes back to that hypothesis of fructose impacting HDL, HDL then potentially impacting CRP. And fructose my fructose intake is not significantly correlated with the overall biological ape score as indicated by Labien's Fenuage or aging.ai. So with this in mind, the net core correlative effect of dietary fructose my dietary fructose intake, it may be different for everybody else, on these big big picture biomarkers, is one going in the right direction, glucose, but four going in the wrong direction, including HDL, uric acid, red blood cells, and the RDW. So the net effect for, fructose would be a net of negative three. So that suggests that if I limit my fructose intake, not only may I see improvements for HDL and potentially reduce CRP, but improve other biomarkers too. So, with that in mind, since the last blood test early in September, it's been twenty four days, and my average daily fructose intake since that test is about 69 per day, which isn't 60 grams yet. But that would, if if I blood test it today, that would be the lowest amount average amount of fructose that I've eaten in this six year six year span. So, you know, progress as a means towards, getting closer to perfection. So for for the next blood test then, when considering that I'm on the road for reducing my fructose intake, will HDL be increased and high sensitivity, CRP be decreased? Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in, more info about my biohacking approach, my attempts to biohack aging, come join us on Patreon. And, thanks for watching. I hope you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.