Kidney function declines during aging, but does it have to? Let's take a look at the data. So first, what we're looking at is a graph of kidney function, plotted against age. And what we can see is that, kidney function starts off very high with the, with an average, estimated glomerular filtration rate, eGFR, of about a 125 in, youth in 20 year olds, and then it decreases to values around 50 in people, that are 90 years old or older. So, what does that let let's just break it down a little bit. What does that even mean? The GFR estimate or the eGFR. So, starting from, good kidney function, eGFR is at least 90, more than 90. But as, we age, kidney function can decline. In this case, I've, pointed out stage two kidney disease, which is a mild loss of kidney function, which is defined as an eGFR between sixty and eighty nine. Now kidney function further declines during aging to, moderate to severe loss of function with e g eGFR values from 30 to 59. And for some, kidney function can continue, to decline with eGFR values of 15 to 29 being stage four kidney disease where there's a severe loss of function or stage five kidney disease where eGFR is zero to 15. In that case, people would need treatment to live, such as, hemodialysis. So what about all cause mortality risk? Well, an eGFR less than 45 is associated with an increased risk of death for all causes in a meta analysis of 46 studies that included more than 2,000,000 subjects. That's what we can see here. So when compared with subjects who had eGFR values of 95, having an eGFR less than 45 was associated with a significantly risk of death, a significant increased risk of death for all causes. So can kidney function be improved during aging? And, what's my data? So, here we're looking at, my blood test data starting in 2006 through 2013, and I've been tracking my own circulating biomarkers for about fifteen years. Now back then, I was only tracking about once a year. When I'd go to the doctor, I would just record all my data in an Excel file. So what we can see is, over eight measurements over that seven year period, my average eGFR was, 86. So how does that, how does that rank when we when looking at the, age related graph on the right? So, on the x axis, I've, arrowed my age and then on the y axis, we can see my, 86, eGFR. Now before my age during that period, we could have expected my, eGFR to be somewhere around 90. So one could say that I was, my kidneys were aging at an average rate. So what about since then? I'm currently 48. So what about over the past, eight years? So starting in 2015, I started measuring, my circulating biomarkers more often, up to six times a year. Now based on the aging, the age related decrease for kidney function graph, one could expect that my eGFR should have been further reduced, relative to the 86, somewhere around 78. So how's my data? So that's what we're looking at here. So the 2015 to 2020 data for my eGFR, and what we can see is my average eGFR has increased to somewhere around 97. So, and I should say that these two groups of data are significantly different based on a t test. So I've actually, reversed the age related decline in kidney function and improved my kidney function closer towards youth. And, when extrapolating based on the curve, these are, average, kidney function values that are found in someone about fifteen years younger than my actual my chronological age. So how have I improved, my kidney function? So, in 2015, I started tracking, weighing all my food and tracking macro and micronutrients. So I have more than five years, five and a half more actually, it's up to six six years now. We're in a 2021. Almost six years of dietary data for macros and micros. And then in July 2018, I started, logging the actual food intakes. So I had 880 of of, tracked food intake that correspond to 13 eGFR measurements. So, let's start off with that data. Which food groups are strong strongly correlated with my eGFR? So, of all the food groups, my average total vegetable, daily sorry, my average daily vegetable intake in sum is correlated with a high GFR, and that's what we're looking at here. EGFR plotted on the y axis against the my average daily vegetable intake in grams per day on the x axis. And what we can see is that, the correlation coefficient between my average vegetable intake with eGFR is strong with a correlation coefficient of 0.79. Now, the r square for that then corresponds to 63% of the variability in eGFR being explained by the sum of my vegetable intake every day. And this correlation for eGFR with my total vegetable intake is statistically significant based on the p value. Now note that, this isn't the recommended five servings of vegetables per day. This is, almost, at the high end up to 2,000 grams of vegetables a day, which corresponds to about 25 servings of vegetables a day using 80 grams as a standard serving size. Now, included in that average vegetable intake are, you know, carrots, pep red bell peppers, lots of broccoli and cauliflower, in addition to other other vegetables too. So, 63% of the variability in eGFR being explained by my total vegetable intake is pretty good, but can the inclusion of other foods explain more of the variance for kidney function? So to examine that, I then looked at, food groups. So, that's what I've listed here. So, the sum of all my dairy intake, which includes yogurt, whey protein and, cheese, and then nuts and seeds. Now not all nuts and seeds are not the same. They have different chemical composition including different fatty acid compositions. So I separated my nuts and seeds into, into groupings. So, saturated fat, containing, nuts and seeds. For example, cocoa beans and coconut butter, which are, mostly saturated fat. MUFA, mostly monounsaturated fatty acid containing nuts and seeds. So So in that situation, it would be, almonds, pecans and peanuts, which are rich in in monounsaturated fatty acids. And then not all PUFA, polyunsaturated fatty acids are the same as they have different, saturate, fatty acid, concentrations. For example, flaxseed is rich in omega three, whereas nuts like walnuts, sesame seeds, and sunflower seeds are rich in omega six. So I grouped my, nuts and seeds based on their primary, fatty acid compositions. So then total vegetables, fruit, which, which was my total sum of my berry intake, sardines, beef and eggs. So all of those food groups, those 10 variables, I entered them into a backward elimination regression model. And what does that mean? So with that type of a regression model, variables are sequentially removed, until the best performing regression model remains. So all 10 variables go in the model to start, and then when you get the output data, say one of the variables has a p value of 0.9, which is high, that's then removed from the, regression model. So now you have nine variables in the model, and that continues until you're left with the best performing model. So what model, was, was able to best explain, more of the variance in eGFR? And that's what we're looking at here. So the combination of sardines, my sardine intake, my beef intake, and my total vegetable intake was able to explain 70% of the adjusted r squared of the variability in eGFR. So higher intake of sardines and vegetables and a lower intake of beef is correlated with a higher GFR. And again, higher g GFR being found in youth, obviously being a good thing. And we can see the significance of that model. The significance f has a p value lower than 0.05, which means that the combination of these three foods or food groups is significantly correlated with eGFR. Now, interestingly, for fish, fish has been and there's there aren't very many studies on this. If anybody's got some studies on fish, the, the correlation between fish intake and kidney function, please send them over because, I scoured literature looking for that data and, there are very few studies that have investigated it. Nonetheless, I did find one of these studies where a higher fish intake was correlated with a higher eGFR and that's what we see here in the, plot. So in, investigating further, I mentioned that I also have, macronutrient data starting from 2015. So I have a lot more data for that, with more blood tests. So which vegetable, fish or beef components are, affecting kidney function or at least correlated with kidney function? So, that's what we see here. And, my fiber intake, my daily fiber intake, my average, daily intake of omega three fatty acids and protein are significantly correlated with eGFR. And note, first that I've got, you know, the observations column, is arrowed. So I have this is data for 28 blood tests. And what we can see is that a higher intake of fiber and omega three, but a lower intake of, protein is correlated with a higher eGFR. But also note that the adjusted r squared is obviously lower. In this case, it's, 40% of the variability in eGFR can be explained by my protein intake fiber and omega threes, which isn't surprising because, you know, I'm I'm attempting to reduce my food intake to macronutrients, whereas foods, you know, have way more than, you know, just these nutrients. Nonetheless, 40% of the variability in eGFR with just these three macronutrients is a significant amount. Alright. So how how could fiber be related to eGFR? So fiber is fermented by gut bacteria to produce short chain fatty acids, SCFAs, and that's what we see here, in the left, picture. So, carbohydrates that escape absorption in the small intestine pass into the large intestine where they're then fermented by, gut bacteria into the short chain fatty acids, acetate, propionate, and butyrate, which I've got boxed direct rectangle. So why is butyrate important? Well, as shown here, the higher the levels of butyrate in stool samples, which would be produced by gut bacteria because gut bacteria are in stool, the higher the concentration of, butyrate or butyric acid, the higher, the eGFR. So with this in mind, this suggests that a higher fiber intake, there would be an increased gut bacterial production of butyrate and better kidney function. So that's all I've got for now. Thanks for thanks for watching if you made it to the end, and have a great day.