Aging and disease are biochemical processes that happen over many decades. So if we track and optimize well established biomarkers of organ and systemic health, can aging and disease risk be slowed? So with that in mind, earlier this week, I blood tested for the sixth time in 2021. And using Morgan Levin's phenotypic age calculator, which is a metric of biological age, we can see that my biological age is 36.9 years, which is twelve years younger than my chronological age. Now for more context, because this is only one blood test, let's have a look at the other five biological age results using Morgan Levin's test in 2021. And that's what's shown here. So Morgan Levin's biological age on the y axis plotted against time. And so starting with my most recent data, thirty six point nine years, that's approximately the same as my last test a couple months ago, 37.1, but nowhere near as good as my first test, earlier this year of thirty two point seven years. So for those six tests, my average biological age using Levine's test is 35.6 years. So how do these data compare with 2020 data? So year over year comparison. And that's what's shown here. So starting, with my lowest value, which was thirty three point five years, I also had a higher value of thirty nine point eight years. And the average for those six tests in 2020 was also 35.6. So even though the averages of 2020 and 2021 are similar or the same, we can evaluate whether they're statistically significantly, the same or different using a two sample t test. And when I did that, these two groups of data, so 2020 versus 2021 are not significantly different. So one could, say that my biological age has been stable over these 12 blood tests at thirty five point six years. Now note that I have three blood tests, from 2018 to 2019. And over those three tests, my average levine biological age is 36.1 years. Now three tests is probably not enough to get an overall assessment for, biological age. I think you need more data and I trust that the the data for 12 blood tests more than I trust the data for three blood tests. Now note that even if all nine biomarkers on Levine's test stay the same year over year, biological age increases by point nine years for every one year increase for chronological age. In contrast, aging.ai does not include chronological age in its model, so greater reductions for biological age are possible. So with that in mind, what's my biological age using aging.ai? So using aging.ai, three point o and note that, if you wanna calculate your own Levine's biological age, I will include a link from my website in the video's description. So it's a it obviously, it's a free link and so it's free to use and so is aging.ai. Hopefully, it stays that way, for both well, at least for aging.ai. The Excel spreadsheet is free. We can use that anytime. So using aging.ai3pointo and its 19 blood biomarkers as shown here, data for those biomarkers, my biological age is 29, which is 19.9, almost twenty years younger than my chronological age. So just like we did for Levine's data, for more context, let's have a look at previous aging.ai data, that I have over the past few years. And that's what's shown here. So aging.ai age on the y axis, and it's gonna be plotted against time. So I have data for aging.ai starting in 2009. And note that c reactive protein is not found on a typical, chemistry, standard blood chemistry, and, CBC that you get at a yearly physical. It's an extra test that I've had to order, and I it wasn't until 2018 and 2019 that I started measuring it and then measuring it at every test in 2020 and beyond. In contrast, aging.ai, you don't need CRP. So, all these blood tests are found on the, the blood test that you get when you go to a yearly physical. So I have more of that data. So from 2009 to 2013 shown in purple, I have three blood test measurements for aging dot ai. And we can see that my average, age is 32 years. My average biological age using a aging.ai. Now note that I wasn't tracking my diet. And what I mean by that is if you haven't seen other videos, in 2015, I started tracking my diet by weighing all my food, logging it using a chronometer, and then, looking for correlations between my diet with the biomarkers in an attempt to optimize the biomarkers. So I started diet tracking as I mentioned in 2015 going forward. And starting in 2016, I have data for aging.ai using that approach. So when looking at the number of blood tests and my average for each year since 2016, let's have a look at that data. So in 2016, over two blood tests using aging.ai, got an age of 28 for for the average. 29.3 average over four blood tests in 2017. And although it's hard to see over six blood tests in, 2018, it was twenty nine point five. 30.3 average over three tests in 2019, and then six blood tests in 2020 with an average, aging dot ai age of 31.3. Now it should be obvious that there's an increasing biological age here from twenty sixteen to twenty twenty. And fortunately, for the six tests in 2021, my aging.ai age was 29.8, which is definitely going in the right direction. And as I mentioned, when I get my blood test data, I, look for correlations between diet with the with the blood biomarkers and then try different interventions to try to optimize all of these blood biomarkers and more. So my average over these 27 tests since I started tracking my diet and using regular interventions based on that data is twenty nine point nine years. So, as a summary of my aging.ai data, since I started tracking diet and attempting these various interventions, I've been able to keep my aging.ai range in the 28 to 31 year old range. Alright, that's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.