Which diet is optimal for health? And more specifically, which diet is optimal for health from the evolutionary perspective? So in part three of our conversation with doctor Michael Rose, we're gonna go go through data from his lab that compares health span for fruit flies that were raised on an evolutionary recent diet versus their ancestral diet. So first, before jumping into the data, it's important to define some terms. So on the y axis, we're looking at, p subscript x, m subscript x, which is defined as age dependent fitness, which more specifically is equal to the product of the survival probability, and fecundity, which is the ability to produce large amounts of offspring. And that's important because you don't wanna have a a longer lifespan and better health span but produce less offspring so this metric incorporates the ability to live longer and healthier and also produce lots of, children so this, is a health span metric So when looking at this health span metric on the y axis plotted against the age on the x axis, we can see that on the evolutionarily recent diet, which is banana, these flies have been raised on banana for about a thousand generations over thirty years, about thirty years. Now that may seem like a lot of generations. But in comparison, the ancestral diet, for the ancestral diet, these flies have eaten apples. And the exact number of generations is unknown, but it is known that, fruit flies, Drosophila, have consumed apple for at least hundreds of years. So with that in mind, what does it look like, in terms of differences for health span on the recent diet versus the ancestral diet? So first, we can see that there is a better age dependent fitness at younger ages on the banana diet, the blue circles, when compared with the, apple diet, the red circles at younger ages. So, 15 old or younger. However, at older ages, the flu the flies that were raised on the evolutionarily recent diet, banana, had a worse health span when compared with the ancestral diet, the apple, as you can see by the stars and the black arrows. So with that in mind, it seems like there's better health span on an evolutionary evolutionary recent diet in youth, but a worth health worse health span at older ages when compared with the ancestral diet. So what does this mean for human diets in terms of, the optimal diet for human health at older ages? And, also, what's what's the importance of measuring systemic biomarkers to help identify the diet that is truly best for health span in people? So with these issues in mind, let's return to our conversation with doctor Michael Rose. And in 2020 with Grant Rutledge, who I believe you've met and and know, it was his doctoral thesis. We showed, the relationship between evolutionary history both recent and long term and diet. And, speaking of somebody, you know, over 60 who started down this journey about ten years ago, I have had far better results from tuning ordinary foods in terms of my particular evolutionary history, than I have ever had in in your vein of intervention. So I my ancestry is mostly from the Northwestern Periphery of Eurasia, which means I'm not as well adapted to agricultural foods as somebody whose ancestry was Middle Eastern or South Asian. And, fairly early on in my life, I started using adaptation to agricultural foods. And as I got older through middle age, it got worse and worse. And so for my ancestry, as you approach, as you get into middle age you have to eat fewer and fewer agricultural foods. If my ancestry were entirely from Australasia, like original Australasia before the Europeans showed up, I should never have consumed agricultural foods. You know, like bread and milk are toxic for people with entirely indigenous Australasian ancestry. And, so there's a spectrum from the peoples who are wholly unadapted agricultural foods because they didn't eat them at all before two hundred years ago, which is like an instant in evolutionary time, to people from, you know, places like Iraq or Pakistan would be very well adapted to grain based and milk based diets potentially to their fifties. But I think by the time every human reaches their sixties, they are no longer adapted to agricultural foods because of the ways in which the forces of natural selection d two with age and a response to a recent evolutionary change, which if if people go to my Google Scholar page and look up the most recent publications in 2020, they'll see two, in my opinion, fantastic publications from Grant Rutledge, r u t l e d t e, on how to tune your diet according to your ancestry. It's all of the data. That we show on screen. Besides your own personal anecdote in in how getting rid of the grains in your in your diet actually improved your intestinal health. But beyond that, what I guess you didn't mention was that, you actually switched, fruit flies who are raised on, in lab diets. I guess it's on banana banana based and molasses. Mhmm. Mhmm. Yep. Yep. Closer to their ancestral diets, which is what more apple based or, fruit fruit fly. Right? So and that extended their lifespan relative to the, lab based diet of molasses. Or was it banana? I can't can't remember. It's banana and molasses. And and the banana and molasses diet is, a diet which some of our populations have adapted to for a thousand generations. That's actually longer than a period of time since the nuclear revolution in Europe. Substantially longer. And nonetheless they sometimes those flies perform better when young on their version their agricultural diet, meaning their recent evolutionary diet. But at later ages, like our sixties or late fifties, a diet they have not seen for a thousand generations is better for them, which is if somebody had told me about this experiment twenty years ago, I wouldn't believe it. But but that's what the math suggested, math done with my colleague Larry Mueller. And that's what Grant's experiments have shown is that long abandoned diets, if you have if a species has recently changed its core dietary practices, and by recently clearly means, you know, less than 10,000 generations. So, and with respect to agricultural diets, there's no human population which goes back more than a thousand generations on agricultural diet. So the principles are very general because the math is completely general. It's not there's not nothing specific about pre plots or humans in the math, and it's very solid. And Grant's strong inference experimentation has supported that mathematical result. So that turns out to be a pretty fantastic, multi supplement approach where those supplements are in foods. And you eliminate the toxic things, which for people 50 are grains, rice, corn, food derived from milk from any animal and, legumes. And your health will get a lot better. It should also be said that brand new industrial food products that are novel to the human diet since 1850. Nobody's adapted to diaphragm cancer. Nobody's adapted to processed seed oils. Nobody's adapted to trans fats. Those are nobody's adapted to nitrites as a preservative. Those are somewhere in the toxin to poison spectrum. Yep. So so then, when considering when considering alright. So I get I get that after a certain age, we're not evolutionarily adapted. You know, we we can get away with eating those foods at a younger age, but when you get to a certain age and then we're just not evolutionarily adapted because millions of years of evolution, we grew you know, we we existed on a certain diet. So but, you know, not that I'm trying to justify, including the the foods that we didn't evolve, eating, but, you know, just as there are, you know, about five percent of centenarians who can get there by smoking cigarettes, not that I would recommend smoking cigarettes, at you know, because ninety five percent of the people get there are are not smoking cigarettes. But Exactly. I think at the end of the day, it's important to, you know, have some objective markers of health. Because if somebody can't this, you know, because if they enjoy eating in a certain way and they have biomarkers in health that suggests that overall it's either net neutral or beneficial, then, you know, continue. But I hear what you're saying. For most people, that is not gonna be the case. But it it's region specific, right, as you mentioned.