Aging and disease are biochemical processes that happen over many decades. So with that in mind, if we track if we track well established biomarkers of organ and systemic health, can aging and disease risk be slowed? So with that in mind, I, measured my biological age, or I got blood tested for the third time in 2021. And I've got those, nine biomarkers, listed right there. And this is, using using Morgan Levine's phenotypic age calculator, which is a measure of biological age. So just to run through it really quickly for people who haven't, seen this before, it includes albumin, creatinine, glucose, c reactive protein, the percentage of lymphocytes, mean red blood cell volume, red cell red blood cell distribution with alkaline phosphatase, white blood cells, and chronological age. So when entering into, entering in all of that data, my biological age comes up as 35.2. So when considering my chronological age is 48, that puts me at, 13.2 years, younger than my chronological age. So an obvious question that should arise is how good is this biological age calculator? So here we're looking at the correlation for, phenotypic age again as a metric of biological age versus chronological age. And by the red line in the in the figure, you can see that it's almost perfectly linear, which means as close as you can get or getting as close to one, a correlation of one, or negative one, but that's not applicable in this situation. So, anyway, it's it's pretty close to one as it's as you can see on the left in two separate study cohorts in, NHANES three. The correlation for, this, biological age calculator with chronological age was 0.94. And in a separate study in NHANES four, it was 0.96. So very strong correlations for this biological age calculator with chronological age. So another question that, often arises is how does this compare with the best epigenetic clocks? And, the epigenetic clock that consistently, is shown to have the strongest correlation with, biological age is, the Horvath clock or a couple of different, Horvath clocks, which is what's shown here. So we're looking at, epigenetic age on the y axis plotted against chronological age on the x axis. And this is a composite of, epigenetic age against chronological age for, 16 different cell types. So, we're looking at that on the right. So breast cells, cheek cells, cerebellum, so brain, colon, blood, skin, etcetera. So when looking at the composite measure for epigenetic age of those cell types with against chronological age, we can see also a very strong correlation of 0.94. So in other words, when considering Levine's correlations with chronological age and the best performing epigenetic clock, from the Horvath group, we can see that they're pretty close to similar for their ability to predict chronological age. So, aging is, aging data and being able to predict chronological age is interesting, but, how does it associate with disease risk or risk of death for all causes all cause mortality risk? So what's shown here is all cause mortality data, sorry, all cause mortality data. And for every one year increase in biological age using Levine's phenotypic age, calculator, we can see a 9% increase all cause mortality risk. Now that, association is true whether looking at young, middle age, or older adults is shown there. So again, so older, bio biological ages based on Levine's test significantly increased risk for all cause mortality. Now, more specifically, it's also associated with disease specific mortality, including, an increased risk for heart disease, cancer, chronic lower respiratory disease, interestingly not, cerebrovascular disease or stroke, an increased mortality related to diabetes, influenza or pneumonia related death. And as a side note, in a paper that, Morgan Levine's group published last year, an older biological age up to thirteen years before the, onset of the pandemic, was associated with an increased mortality risk in COVID nineteen patients. And then last but not least, having an older biological age by, LaVine's test is associated with an increased risk of death for kidney related issues including, nephritis and nephrosis. So LaVine's it's important to note that, LaVine's test isn't the only, blood based biomarker panel that can easily assess biological age and all cause mortality risk. And, I'm sure this crowd, already knows about it, but, just to run through it, the other one that I'm gonna show some data for is aging.ai. In particular, aging.ai3pointoo. And that includes, in contrast with the nine parameters on Levine says, this includes 19 different blood blood based, variables. And, you can, obtain them by, getting the standard chemistry panel and complete blood count CBC. So in in The US, that's relatively cheap. It's about a $35 test. And also note that the standard chemistry panel at CBC can also be used to to measure eight of the nine components on the veins test with the exception of high sensitivity c reactive protein, which is usually a separate separately ordered test, which can cost up to about $45. So for, $80 USD or less depending on where you get it, you can do Levine's test. And for $35 USD, you can get, or you can do the blood test to calculate your own aging.ai age. Alright. So, aging.ai.ai isn't as strong, for its correlation with chronological age as Levene's test with a correlation coefficient there of 0.8. What about, all cause mortality risk? So, in a study that was published a few years ago by, the aging.ai group, they found that biological ages that were younger that the than their corresponding chronological age were associated with reduced all cause mortality risk. And, that's what's shown here. So first, they looked at a Canadian cohort. So for for people who had a five year older biological age relative to to their chronicle chronological age, you can see they had about a two fold increased all cause mortality risk. And on the on the other side of that, for people who had a, greater than five year reduction in their biological age relative to their chronological age, there was, about a fifty percent or rep approaching a fifty percent decrease for all cause mortality risk. And these findings were also, replicated in a US based cohort. So, again, NHANES where we can see the same pattern. So, with this in mind, what's my data? And I've put all my data up here so anybody can double check my my numbers. And based on my numbers for my for my test that, I got done at the July, we can see that my predictive biological age with agent.ai is 29. Now note that I'm close to 49. So this is about twenty years, twenty year difference for my biological age relative to the chronological age. Now results for one blood test are interesting, but data from many more tests can tell the full story. And with that in mind, I've been measuring, for blood testing for, up to six times a year for a few years now. And, so I have data for 12 blood tests since 2018 where I can calculate, Levine's biological age. And that's what's shown here. So when looking at the different dates, we can see my chronological age CA, my biological age or pheno age, and then the the difference for my chronological age minus the biological age. And as we can see when taking that average, I'm about twelve years younger than consistently, twelve years younger over that the last three year period. So, what about aging.ai? So, for aging.ai, I have many more blood tests, mostly because I just started measuring, c reactive protein just a few years ago. So I wasn't measuring c c reactive protein, you know, early on, so more than ten years ago. So, in looking at 27 blood tests since 2009 as as shown here on the left, so there were too too many blood tests to to put up all that data. So I just took the average for, every year going past, 2016 to 2021. And then from 2009 to 2013, I had three tests. So I was testing about once a year. And nonetheless, we can see on the right my aging dot a I average age, and then the, average difference for my chronological minus my biological age. So notice that from, 2009 to 2013, I had my lowest, difference for CA minus BA around seven years. But then in 2015, I started, getting more serious about optimizing my biomarkers and optimizing my health in general. So I started dietary tracking, entering all of my, you know, weighing all my food, entering all that data into, an online tool that then gave me macro micronutrients data that I logged in an Excel file. And then I started to look at correlations between my diet and my blood biomarkers with the goal of optimizing the blood biomarkers. So my diet is completely driven by what I see in my blood. So since 2013, when after which I started dietary tracking, we can see that my average, difference between my chronologically and biological age, now I I was consistently fifteen years younger. And, in three blood tests so far in 2021, I'm almost 19 years younger. So I'm I've been able to, get close to what, biochemical youthfulness looks like. So the obvious question should be what's contributing to this relatively low biological age? So in terms of supplements, I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in my twenties. So I have to take that. So I've been taking levothyroxine for more than twenty years. And then for the last blood test that I took in April, until, my previous blood test in July. I was supplementing with, methyl b twelve to help reduce, homocysteine. And if anybody's interested in, the why behind that, I've got a video on my YouTube channel, so, check it out. So, what about fitness? So, I I should mention that I take the average value in between blood tests because that will be expected to correlate to the subsequent blood test. So in in between blood test number two and number three of this year, that eighty four day period, I weigh myself every day too in the morning. My average body weight was one fifty six, point seven pounds, which results in a BMI in the quote unquote normal range, twenty four and a half. So nothing too spectacular there. But then my resting heart rate, RHR, was 47 around 47 beats per minute and heart rate variability, HRV, was about 53 milliseconds. So these are cardio cardiovascular based, health related metrics. And, so then the next question should be is, are these cardiovascular fitness metrics contributing to my relatively young biological age? So, I should mention this is, I wear a fitness tracker and I'm not sponsored to to to promote them, but I wear Whoop. And the reason that's important is because, this is Whoop data. So instead of comparing my data against the general population where I likely see, much larger changes, I'm comparing myself against people who are already fitness minded. So it's a more, relevant comparison. So here we're looking at average resting heart rate in beats per minute on the y axis plotted against age, so 20 up to about 50 years old. And what we can see is that, resting heart rate increases for both women and men. Women in red, men in blue. So, resting heart rate increases from the 20 50 years old, age range. So what about my resting heart rate, which was 47? So I'd be off the chart. I mean, if lower is indicative of youth, I'd be this would be indicative of a relatively youthful resting heart rate. So what about, a low resting heart rate being associated with health or, risk of disease, you know, all cause mortality risk? So that's what shown here. This is a meta analysis of 46 studies that included more than 1,200,000 subjects, and we're looking at the, relative risk for all cause mortality on the y axis plotted against resting heart rate on the x. And what we can see is that, starting at 45, which was the lowest all cause mortality risk, as you go above 45 beats per minute, there's an increased all cause mortality risk. So I'm at 47 right now. So based on the aging data and based on the all cause mortality data, that would suggest suggest that, this may be contributing to my relatively youthful biological age, and there's a button there. So why is there a button there? So, this is Fitbit data. And, in agreement with the WHOOP data, we can see that average resting heart rate does indeed increase, from 20 up until about 50 years of age. Then notice that resting heart rate then also decreases and, data for the women in green, men in blue. So resting heart rate decreases during aging. So is my relatively low resting heart rate, indicative of youth and health, or is it low because of aging? So that's where another metric for cardiovascular health can come in, which is known as heart rate variability. So, heart rate variability is the, defined as the variation in time in between successive heartbeats. So, what that verbiage means is, you know, when your heart, heart rate is 60 beats per minute, the assumption is it beats exactly one beat per second, but that's not exactly true. It may be it may be, you know, point nine seconds per beat, one second per beat, 1.1. So the average would be one second per per, per beat, but there there is a variability, in terms of the time, that it takes for each beat. And that variability is the heart rate variability. So in this case, for these, you know, three examples here, heart rate variability HRV would be sixty seven milliseconds. So, how does in order to get more context into the resting heart rate story in terms of it being good or bad in my situation and potentially contributing to a relatively young biological age, it's important to see how heart rate variability changes during aging. And, again, this is WHOOP data. So, comparing myself again against other fitness minded, people. So, what we can clearly see looking at heart rate variability on the y axis plotted against age and in this case, it's up to 65 years as the maximum for the age range, 20 to 65. So we can clearly see by the black line that heart rate variability decreases during aging. Now my average heart rate variability from my second blood test until my third for that, period was about fifty three milliseconds. So that would put me, close to the top of the range for my chronological age category. Or at or at best, it it it would put me at the low end of the range for for a 20, 20 year old. So as a as a relatively quick, quick review for my, resting heart rate and heart rate, variability. So, my resting heart rate is relatively low in conjunction with a heart rate variability that is higher than the median for my age at worst or at the low end of the range for a 23 year old at best. So when considering, that a low resting heart rate and a high heart rate variability are found in youth and, in contrast, low resting heart rate but also a low heart rate variability are found in older adults. To answer the question, is cardiovascular fitness contributing to a relatively young biological age? I posit that my data suggests that it's indicative of youth. And, you know, if if my heart rate variability was, say, thirty milliseconds as indicated there, which we which would be below the median for my age range or chronological age, then one can make the argument that a relatively low resting heart rate plus a low heart rate variability would, be indicative of poor cardiovascular fitness. But that doesn't seem to be the case, at least for me right now. And I should mention, since my last blood test, I've actually my heart rate variability for this, for the past month or so since my last blood test is around 58. So I'm even better than I was, going into my last blood test. Alright. So what I haven't mentioned yet is diet. How's diet contributing to my relatively low biological age? So, NAD is involved in the health and function of virtually every organ system in the body. And, unfortunately for us, it declines during aging. Now one reason for that is because of the age related increase, in a protein that degrades, NAD, which is known as CD 38. Now, there are CD thirty eight inhibitors, fortunately, for example, apigenin, quercetin, luteolin, and curaminin is shown there, which can inhibit CD 38, increase NAD, or, slow the age rated age related NAD decline. Now note that these metabolites are found in food. So by eating an abundance of foods that contain CD thirty eight inhibitors, potentially, we can maximize NAD thereby keeping us youthful for longer. So with that in mind, I'm gonna take a look at some of my own data in terms of, dietary c b thirty eight inhibitors and whether or not they're correlated with my biological age. Now as I mentioned, I've been weighing all of my food since, 2015, but it was on it was it wasn't until more recently that I I started quantifying food intake. So in 2015, I was I was tracking macro and micronutrients, but then I had the thought, well, I'm I'm reducing food to its components, but the fact is I should be tracking actual food amounts that I'm that I'm taking in. So I've been doing that since July 2018. So, you know, since then, I have more than eleven hundred days of food intake that correspond to 16 blood tests, during that time. And that's what's shown here on the left. So, just to run through this approach real quick. And if anybody wants more info, I have a video on this too on my YouTube channel. Lots of these videos on my YouTube channel, so check it out. But notice the date. So, on July 10 starting at the top twenty eighteen, I got a blood test on that day. So since I was fasted, that day starts day one for the for the period that corresponds to my next blood test, which was then on 08/2138. So from July 10 to August 20, I have an average dietary intake since I'm recording all of my food during that period that corresponds to blood test data. And because I have enough dietary periods that correspond with blood test, I can then look at correlations between my diet with blood biomarkers. So, just going across the list for each of the four dietary c d thirty eight inhibitors, I calculated how much I was taking in on average every day for each of the four inhibitors and then sum them. And then note that, you know, I you know, it's not all the same for my dietary c d thirty eight, intake, you know, in terms of my average daily intake. I have a range of that, you know, one sixty to about three hundred ninety milligrams of of these dietary CD thirty eight inhibitors per day, which should allow for some decent correlations if they exist. Now whereas Apigenin and Quercetin are kind of the more pop culture way to inhibit CD thirty eight and potentially raise NAD, In contrast, about 7070% of my dietary c d, thirty eight, inhibitor intake comes from curaminin. And the major reason for that is because I eat a lot of blackberries and curaminin is enriched in blackberries. So, with all this in mind, is the sum of these dietary, dietary c thirty eight inhibitors significantly correlated with biological age and or its component biomarkers? So first looking at, Levin's test, and I've got how many blood tests that correspond to dietary intake, with the little n next to each variable. So I have between eleven and sixteen blood tests, that correspond to the dietary c b 38, data. So first note that, for the sum of the dietary c b thirty eight, inhibitor intake, that's not significantly correlated with the overall, biologically aged, score. So pheno age, you can see the p value is not even close to statistically significant. But, interestingly, we can see that the higher my dietary c d thirty eight inhibitor intake is, the lower my glucose levels are. So that's a significant correlation. But for whatever reason, that correlation isn't enough to drive an overall reduction for a biological age, at least using Levine's test. Alright. So what about aging.ai? So, at least it's going in the right direction. We can see an inverse correlation, meaning the higher my dietary, c d thirty inhibitor intake, that's correlated with a younger aging dot a I age. But note that the p value is not statistically significant. So there's no significant, correlation for my dietary c v thirty eight inhibitor intake with aging dot a I age. And note that glucose, as glucose is also included in aging dot a I, we see the same correlation. But then also note that the higher that my dietary c v thirty eight inhibitor intake is, that's correlated with lower levels of platelets and blood cells, which is probably a bad thing because levels of platelets and red blood cells both decline during aging, so that would be sending them in the wrong direction. So one biomarker going in the right direction, two going in the wrong direction, but, again, this the net effect of those three, biomarkers is not enough to affect the overall aging dot a I aging dot a I age, in terms of its correlation with dietary c d thirty eight inhibitor intake. So when considering this data for the dietary c d thirty eight inhibitor, inhibitors, that may not I I posit that's not, impacting my overall reduction for biological age. So, that's all I've got for now. I've just got posted here everywhere, you know, that I'm online. So, with that, I'm ready for questions.