In a study that was published more than twenty years ago, lifespan was extended from 65 to more than a 100% in fruit flies, otherwise known as Drosophila. So before getting into how they did that, let's take a look at the lifespan data. So on the top, we're looking at the percent survival for male flies and on the bottom for female flies. And we're looking at average survival, the point where, half of the colony is alive and half is dead. We can see that average survival for the male flies was about 38 whereas for female flies, it's in the ballpark somewhere around thirty five days, but then notice the significant, extension in average lifespan, so the shift in the survival curves to the right for both the male and the female flies. So the lifespan average lifespan in the male flies was increased by about 68% and similarly by about 65% in the female flies but also interestingly, note the increase in maximal lifespan for both the male and female flies. For the male flies, there was an approximate doubling of maximal lifespan from somewhere around sixty days to more than a about a hundred and thirty days, and although the magnitude of the lifespan extending, effect wasn't as great in the female flies as in the male flies, nonetheless, the female flies also had about a 65% increase in maximum lifespan. So how was lifespan extended? Did they use calorie restriction, rapamycin, nicotinamide riboside, n r, or something else. So what they used is, an experimental evolutionary approach. So what does that entail? So here we're looking at the force of natural selection on survival on the y axis plotted against biological age on the x x axis. And what we can see is that during childhood, the force of natural selection on survival is very strong such as survival is about a hundred percent. So basically no mortality rate. But once we hit the first age of reproduction, we can see that the force of natural selection on survival starts to fall all the way up until the last age of reproduction and at some point in the near future after that, death. So, with this in mind, if you delay reproduction as they did in this study for both the male and the female mice, until the last possible, point in these curves, you can extend lifespan and and that's exactly what they saw. So, and by doing this for many generations and actually for thousands of generations in the fruit flies, that led to this significant lifespan extension. Now the lab that was responsible for this, these studies is of doctor Michael Rose, who is a distinguished professor of ecology and evolutionary biology at the University of California Irvine, and he's also the director of NEAR, the network for experimental research on evolution. I recently had the honor of, having a conversation with him and asking about asking him about, these, findings and how we can potentially translate them, translate them into human longevity and, a whole lot more. So this is the first part of that conversation. So let's get into the conversation. Enjoy. I wanna jump right in and, I think I think a lot a lot more people in the aging space know about you. You know, man, it wasn't like that ten years ago, which is crazy. I'm you know, I knew about you, but most people didn't still. So, I think it's important that we, start from, your lab being one of the few, if the only, that's extended lifespan without using drugs or, you know, any pharmaceuticals you can think of or, calorie restriction. So I think I I think a good place to start would be the experimental evolution approach explaining that and then going into the magnitude of the lifespan extension that you saw as a result. Okay. Well, thank you for this opportunity, Mike. And it's it's it's great to be interacting with you like this. Cool. I've been admired your stuff for some time. Oh, oh my. So in 1977 at the University of Sussex Library, I was reading an article by a very early, gerontology person called Watteau, a Belgian, who actually had worked in the lab of Yudasz Zdajanski. But Watteau was a neo Lamarckian and he was looking for Neo Lamarckian effects on lifespan. And he did a experiment where he bred flies exclusively from older adults. He did this in two different Drosophila species, subobscura and pseudoobscura. And in both cases, he got an increase in lifespan which he interpreted in terms of a lancing effect or an an inverse lancing effect because when lancing did it, it flagged and he he was staffed and died out for completely different reasons. I I read the article and I thought, oh, Yi modified the first stage of reproduction which according to Hamilton's forces of natural selection means that given enough time, these populations should evolve to late aging. And, which which was not Watteo's interpretation of his own experiment whatsoever. So I thought, well, why don't I do a a cleaner version of this experiment using nicely upright fruit flies, which I did during my doctorate at Sussex in the 1970s. And it worked just as well for me in my one population pilot experiment as it had for Watteau and I wrote up that experiment and a few others that I've been doing during my doctorate. I sent them off to an obscure journal called Nature which published the article in 1980. It's called A Test of Evolutionary Theories of Senescence. And, I was so enamored with this very simple experimental evolution project where you just change the early stage at which you allow organisms to reproduce and then you take advantage of evolutionary genetic theory, the most hardcore theory in biology, and it does the work for you. Only, second time I did the experiment starting in 1980, I did it with five populations, with with delayed reproduction and five controlled populations. And off we went starting in February 1980, and, those populations still exist. They I sold them to, an antiaging company, called Nasus with Flies, which still owns them. And, I still work with them intermittently as a consultant to to various companies that are interested in working with those. Since then in my lab, University of California in Irvine, we have taken lifespan up using experimental evolution, taking it down, using experimental evolution, taking it back up again. We have also modified lifespan using diet, using drugs as have other people. So I have been manipulating aging since 1977 as well as studying this underlying genetics, genomics, and transcriptomics in partnership with many other people, ever since the nineteen seventies. And all of the work suggests that, aging is not, an uncontrollable process of molecular damage. It is instead the tuning of adaptation of the two age, which is easily done by natural selection, usually, through its dereliction of doing that job engenders aging. And, the genomic means by which natural selection tunes aging involves hundreds of sites in the genome. Not one, not two, not seven, hundreds as I said in dozens of interviews over the last decade. And that in turn tunes hundreds of transcript levels both qualitatively and quantitatively and it in turn tunes hundreds of metabolites of all different kinds and then it retunes all the organ systems in the flies. The hard thing is to find something that is not connected to aging. Almost everything is connected to aging even in a very simple organism like a very far And I would say very confidently by way of extrapolation, I think it means also. So you So So you started from the same founder group of flies, and then you separated them into the long live versus the short short live? Or, yeah. Is is that's basically the Well, the the the the the material protocol is to tune the life cycle. If you tune the life cycle so that there's a long period of time between when an egg becomes or is given, adult that is produced by the egg is given the opportunity to reproduce. The longer that life cycle is the greater the lifespan that that population will evolve and it does so at considerable speed and then if you then reverse the procedure and take long life cycles wise and even shorter life cycles, they will rapidly evolve shorter life spans. And so going up, going down, going up, going down, that's something I've now been doing for forty four years. Yeah. So that so that approach is clearly showing that you can use evolution to extend lifespan and not extend it by a little bit by 10 or 15 or 20%, you know, by by, two times, three times, five times. Yeah. So the question is how many generations did it take before you saw, say, a doubling of lifespan in in Drosophila? The doubling of lifespan took about 80 generations. 80 generations. So twenty five years if we're gonna extrapolate that into human years. Right? Twenty five years per generation. So we're looking at, what, two thousand years? 80 times 25? Right. So so, together with my very good colleague, Larry Mueller, we published a paper in around 1990, somewhere between '89 and '91, about thirty years ago, on how long it would take if you wanted to use this approach with human lifespan. And it's not worth doing. So actually since '84 at the instigation at first a journalist and then by more and more people that I've met over the last, thirty seven years, I've I've been working on coming up with faster and faster ways of doing this that don't involve experimental evolution. So okay. Can you can you tell us more about that or is that, Sure. So so we published an article in, what was it, early two let me try to get the year. Circa 2010, in a book called The Future of Aging. It was edited by Greg Faye and Steve Gools and a couple of other people where, we outlined, one idea that, a company called Chinesse was founded on and that company still exists. And, that was basically a layered supplementation approach, very Michael Uskard, I might say, except instead of experimenting on Michael Westgardens himself, the idea was to experiment with fruit flies and see what we could get to work there and, look at the omics of how it was done in fruit flies and then use an omic bridge to to humans because so much of our genomes are transcriptomes and metabolomes over that. So it would have been an omic, guided, bridging to human intervention. So that was the technology I was very enamored with fifteen years ago when that company was founded. Then I founded another company with a man called Larry Cabral about six years ago. It's called Lyceum, and that was based on another strategy. And I don't know if you know, the company is mostly still in student business but the website might still be up. And, so I've gone through a whole succession of technological ideas for how to intervene in the human aging process that do not involve experimental evaluation, and I'm still, interested in that project. So wouldn't so, I guess the idea would be to come up with a cocktail of as many different or, you know, supplements, drugs, etcetera, as possible to kinda replicate the, omic multi omic, signature that you see in the extended lifespan dramatically extended lifespan in the food flies. But I'm guessing that that's gonna fall short because, I mean, you're you know, as you mentioned, you're dealing with hundreds of genes and then hundreds of transcriptomic sites and then, you know, maybe more than that in terms of metabolites. So how close were you able to get using the multi, multi supplement, you know, drug based approach in terms of, extending lifespan in flies? So Genescient made a good start in that project, and that research actually led to a supplement which is available right now. It's marketed by a company called Chenaire, g e n a I r e. And I can't remember the name of the product, but you can look up the company name on Amazon. I was not directly involved in developing that that product or testing it, but it eased some of my ideas. And and, I guess, I think they called it rebuilder or something like that. And, right now it's being marketed as a cognitive health product. Since I left Genescient in 2010, For the last eleven years I've been very interested in using AI more precise than machine learning to, master the intricacies of going from fruit fly genomes to human genomes, of going from, omic effects to clinical efficacy in humans. We are now engaged in a series of publications which started in 2017 with a massive, genomics paper. And, then in 2018, we published our AI methodology, which is called FLAM, f l I e m. Look, we didn't develop the machine learning tool. In that article, first author is is Moore, m e l r e r, l d Moore, my last author. That presents some of the machine learning we use. Then in 2019, we published a transcriptomics paper. We are working on the tableomic stuff. Haven't submitted the manuscript yet. So, you know, in parallel with my aging career, I've just generally worked on quantitative genetics of adaptation. And and aging is just in a sense an aspect of adaptation. And, you know, right from my earliest work on this stuff in the late seventies, it was quite apparent that the genetic foundations of adaptation and aging complex. So one of the things I have worked on very hard over the last forty one years is strategies for unpacking complexity and making our way through complexity both from the standpoint of scientific inference and from the standpoint of technological intervention. So, as some of your listeners or viewers may already know, I did a website called 55 theses, t h e s e s, modeled after Martin Luther's 95 theses, but shorter, and earlier, where I I try to outline the insights that I had as of ten years ago. But over the last ten years, we've made a lot of additional progress, which we're trying to publish. I mean, we are publishing it in this sort of sequence of papers that started in 2017. You can find them on my Google Scholar page, Michael Argo's, and most of our publications since, 2017 and so and there'll be more to come over the next three years. We have one, under review, under endless revision of the journal. I will not yet to protect the guilty. So I think by 2023, People interested in genomics, people interested in adaptation, people interested in aging should all have a pretty clear understanding of how complicated the core omics foundations of all this stuff are and also how machine learning can sort through all these things and, thus potentially furthermore how we can bounce back around going from, you know, fruit flies to humans, humans back to fruit flies and make all the connections thanks to Mologie. Because it turns out that the Metazoan toolkit for adaptation and for aging has huge overlaps. You're not when you do experiments with Drosophila or for that matter humans, you're not just studying Drosophila or humans. You're studying basic features of aging, adaptation, and genomics that are in common between the the majority of the time, the clear majority of the time. And, you know, we're gonna be making that quite clear. First with Christophila, then we'll be doing some projects with humanomic data and the same machine learning tools and using