NAD impacts the health and function of many organ systems but it declines during aging. So how can we increase NAD? One strategy involves diet and more specifically by including foods that contain CD38 inhibitors. So why CD thirty eight inhibitors? CD thirty eight increases during aging as shown by the red line. And when considering that it's a NADase, which means that it's, degrades NAD, that's one contributing factor to why NAD levels decline aging. So, CD thirty eight inhibitors include apigenin and quercetin, and I've covered, them in a previous video. If you're interested in that, you can click on the link in the right corner. But there are others, including lute luteolin, luteolinidin, and couramanin. So then the obvious question should be, how do these flavonoids compare against apigenin and quercetin SCD thirty eight inhibitors? And that's what was explored in this study. So, what we're looking at as the metric for, CD eight human CD 38 activity is the IC 50. And the IC 50 is how much of a substance is needed to inhibit CD 38, in this example, by 50%. So it's the half maximal inhibitory concentration. And in this case, a lower concentration would be better because that shows that you need less of a substance to inhibit half of its activity, and higher values would be worse because you need more of that substance to inhibit half of its activity. And what we can see is that the three, flavonoids on this list that have the lowest I c 50 values for inhibiting CD 38 are luteolinidin, coulmanin, and luteolin at six to eight, micromolar. Now, interestingly, they looked at all they also looked at quercetin on this list and that's what we can see here that the IC 54 quercetin was about 38 micromolar. So just when looking at luteolinidin and curaminin, those two flavonoids are about six times more effective at inhibiting CD 38 than quercetin and luteolin is about four to five times better. Now, another study looked at CD 38 activity, versus, the quercetin concentration and we can see that from the half maximal concentration there that the IC 54 quercetin's ability to inhibit CD 38 in this study was about was significantly lower, about 13 micromolar. Nonetheless, each of those three flavonoids, luteolinidin, couluraminin, and luteolin had IC 50 values that were lower than 13 micromolar. So based on these two studies, a lower concentration of these three flavonoids would be needed when compared with quercetin to inhibit c d 38. So what about Apigenin? How do these flavonoids compare against Apigenin, for their I c 50 values to inhibit c d 38? So, in this study or or in this data, we're looking at c d 38 activity again on the y axis axis plotted against the apigenin concentration. And when looking at the I c 50 value, we can see that apigenins I c 50 for inhibiting c d 38 in this data was about 12 micromolar. So again, the three flavonoids on the list have lower levels, lower I c 50 values for inhibiting c c v 38 when compared with, apigenin's 12 micromolar in this study. So from this, we can conclude that luteolinidin, coulmanin, and luteolin are better inhibitors of c v thirty eight than apigenin and quercetin. So which foods contain these three different flavonoids? So I'm gonna start with curmenin and luteolin because, the ability to get them through food may be, more easily obtained, based on foods that are more, commercially available. So we'll see why that's the case in a second. So first, curramanin. So it's most abundant in black elderberry black elderberries at, 700 about seven hundred forty milligrams per 100 grams of fresh weight. But it's also found in, lower amounts but still relatively high amounts in blackberries. A hundred and forty milligrams of curaminin per 100 grams of fresh, blackberries. So, does curaminin, although it impact it it inhibits c v 38, does that inhibition lead to higher levels of NAD? And as far as I can see, there there's only one study that's looked at that. If anybody's, come across other studies, please leave a comment, below and and, we can all share the knowledge. So, in this study, this is a in in an in vitro study that they looked at cells, and on the y axis is the intracellular NAD concentration. And, so starting at, time zero, zero hours, they then induce these cells to differentiate and we can see that the NAD levels declined after six hours, of differentiation. However, in the cells that were treated with curaminin, there was no decrease in NAD as shown there and in fact, you know, a small increase in NAD levels likely because of curaminin's role as a CD thirty eight inhibitor. Now, luteolin is found in these foods here. So it's found most abundantly in dried Mexican oregano, about eleven milligrams of luteolin per gram. It's found in celery seeds, seven point six milligrams of luteolin per gram, and then also in lower amounts in radicchio. Now, although radicchio has, you know, significantly lower amounts on a per gram basis, zero point three eight milligrams per gram, one can eat, you know, more of that, to get the similar amounts that are found in celery seeds or dried Mexican oregano. So if you eat twenty grams of radicchio, which isn't much, you get to, seven point six milligrams per gram, the amount that's found in celery seeds. And if you eat about an ounce of radicchio, you get to the amounts that are found in one gram of, dried Mexican oregano. Now, does luteolin impact levels of of NAD? And there are no studies, that have yet explored that. If there are, please, again, leave a comment and let's share that knowledge. But I did a pretty extensive search and I didn't find any studies for that. Now, last but not least, luteolinidin is found in black sorghum. And in this study, they looked at, eight different varieties of black sorghum, which is a grain, and they found that the, average, luteolinidin concentration was a 167 per gram. Now, red sorghum is also, sold and, it's important to note that it has, significantly lower amounts of luteolinidin. And in some case, some varieties don't have any luteolinidin. So if your goal is to get luteolinidin into your diet and you're gonna use red sorghum to do that, you may be buying a a a variety that doesn't have any luteolinidin in it. And I should also mention that luteolinidin is relatively hard to find oh, sorry. Black sorghum is relatively hard to find, at least online. I can only find one store that sold it and, it was sold out when I when I, you know, looked into buying some. So, does luteolinidin impact levels of NAD? So, that's what we're gonna look at here. So so we we we've got levels of NAD or NADH on the y axis against three different experimental conditions, the controls. And I should mention this is in rat heart. So so controls, rat hearts that were, exposed to ischemia plus reperfusion, IR, IR, and then ischemia plus reperfusion in the presence of luteolinidin. So first, when starting, at the control condition for NAD, which are the black bars, we can see that rat hearts exposed to ischemia plus reperfusion had a significant decline of NAD, you know, up to more, about 50% or a little bit more. However, rat hearts that were exposed to ischemia plus reperfusion but also supplemented in the media with luteolinidin, had increased NAD when compared to just, ischemia reperfusion in the absence of luteolinidin. So from this, we can conclude that NAD levels are increased after exposure to luteolinidin. Now, the big question is how much of these foods should we eat to inhibit CD 38 and maximize NAD in people? Now, that's unknown. There are no human RCTs that have explored these foods, to be able to, impact NAD levels in people. And it also depends on many factors including absorption. You know, we can calculate based on the amounts of these flavonoids that can inhibit CD 38, to, come up with a a a predicted amount of food that could get you enough to be able to maximally inhibit c d thirty eight. But then again, absorption, whether or not all of these flavonoids would be absorbed, and how much of it would be absorbed will likely, vary depending on, the individual. So, but I'd argue that a strategy that contains foods, attenuating the age related decline for NAD. So in other words, it doesn't have to be just dried parsley, parsley, chamomile, and, you know, onions and dill, apigenin, and quercetin. Based on these studies, there are other, foods that contain CD thirty eight inhibitors that may be able to help us, increase our NAD levels, or at least fight the age related decline for NAD levels. Alright. That's all I've got for now. Thanks for watching. I hope you enjoyed the video, and have a great day.