NAD levels decline during aging, and one strategy for reversing that is supplementation with niacinamide, NAM. NAM is converted into NMN, which is then converted into NAD. But, potentially, we fix one problem but make another worse. And that's because, homocysteine increases in response to niacinamide supplementation, and we can see that here. So plasma levels of homocysteine on the y axis are plotted against time after supplementation with, nicotinic acid, n a, or niacinamide. In this case, it was three hundred milligrams of niacinamide. So when compared to controls, that so people who consumed water, people that, were supplemented with three hundred milligrams of niacinamide, one and a half hours after supplementation, we can see plasma homocysteine increase from 11 micromolar to 16. And then three hours after supplementation, homocysteine went up from 11 to 18 micromolar. So why is homocysteine important? So first, homocysteine increases during aging, and that's what we can see here. So starting with the data on the left, in the study of about 16,000 subjects, when looking at the data for the men with the white bars and the women for the dark gray or or black bars, we can see that homocysteine increases for both men and women. Now in a relatively small study, but that included, ages that went beyond the study on the left up to 67 years, we can see that over the age of 67, starting with the group that was 65 to 69 years old, we can see that homocysteine continues to increase from the 65 to 69 year old age range all the way up past 80. So from this, we can conclude that homocysteine increases during aging at least from the 40 to, 80 year, age group. So what's the systemic impact for higher levels of homocysteine? Well, homocysteine is associated with or directly impacts the health of many organ systems, and that's what we can see here. So for the cardiovascular system, it's been linked with atherosclerosis, so, fatty streaks in the arteries. It's been linked with cardiovascular diseases, heart attack, and stroke. For the kidney, it's been associated with kidney dysfunction, reduced kidney function, with bone fractures in osteoporotic, patients, with diabetes, with, reproductive issues including, menopause, sexual dysfunction, and pregnancy, deficits in sight and hearing. And then in the nervous system, it's been linked with epilepsy, Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, and dementia. So let's take a look at some of the Alzheimer's, and dementia related, data. So that's what we can see here. Relative risk for Alzheimer's related dementia on the y axis plotted against the blood level of homocysteine on the x axis. And when looking at the, the trend line for, relative risk being one or higher, that's where the, levels of homocysteine would be significantly associated with the incidence of Alzheimer's related dementia, we can see that blood homocysteine levels in the 14 to 35 micromolar range are associated with an increased risk for the presence of Alzheimer's disease related dementia. Now also notice that lowest risk for Alzheimer's disease related dementia is, present for, values homocysteine values that are around five micromolars. So it would appear that, lower is better at least for, Alzheimer's disease related dementia risk. So what about all cause mortality risk? So risk of death for all causes. And this is a meta analysis of six studies that included, more than 18,000 subjects. And once again, we can see that, lower may be better and that as the, blood levels of homocysteine increase, there's a significantly increased risk for all cause mortality. So, again, as low as possible may be optimal for homocysteine in terms of all cause mortality risk. So what's my data? I've been tracking homocysteine since, 2005. So how am I doing in resisting the age related increase at the very least? So that's what we we're starting to look at here. So this is my homocysteine data from 2005 to 2021, and I've measured it 18 times over that time period. Now I started dietary tracking, so weighing all my food and then logging all of that data for macro and micronutrients, in 2015. But before then, I I measured more sporadically from 2005 to 2009, and we can see six data points during that, time period for homocysteine levels. And, my average homocysteine during that time was 7.1 micromolar, which isn't too bad. It's pretty close to the five that, you know, lowest risk, for Alzheimer's disease related dementia, of five micromolar. Now I mentioned I started dietary tracking in, 2015. So since then, I've measured 12 times, and we can see a much wider range including, a a data point as high as 15, which is definitely going in the wrong direction. So my average over the last, six years is 10.3 micromolar, which is definitely going in the wrong direction. So, and when looking at these two groups of data, the before dietary tracking, February 2009, and since I've been dietary tracking, 2015 to the present, these two groups of data are significantly different. So one can conclude that I've definitely succumbed to the age related increase for homocysteine. Now there is a silver lining to this, data. As we can see in my last five measurements, my homocysteine has been less than 9.1 in five consecutive measurements, and my average homocysteine over that period is 8.2, which when compared with the before dietary tracking data is not significantly different. So the big question then is how have I recently kept homocysteine relatively low? So to, assess that, we need to take a look at homocysteine metabolism, and that's what's shown here. So starting with homocysteine right in the center, if there's a b six, vitamin b six deficiency, homocysteine will accumulate because homocysteine requires, b six as a cofactor to be converted into cystathionine. And then, it's b six is also required to convert cystathionine into cysteine. And if you take it further, you can see that cysteine can then be incorporated into GSH, glutathione. So if you have a b six deficiency, not only will homocysteine potentially accumulate, but you will also have potential decreases in, glutathione, synthesis. So, also b twelve can contribute to a homocysteine accumulation. So, b twelve is required as a required cofactor for homocysteine to be converted back into methionine. But it's not just b 12 that's involved in that conversion. Dietary folic acid, which is, converted into, blood levels of folate is also required for the reaction that converts homocysteine into, methionine. And last but not least, a betaine deficiency. So betaine is also known as trimethylglycine. So, betaine plus homocysteine is converted into methionine and dimethylglycine. So if you're betaine deficient, you can also have a potential accumulation for homocysteine. Now interestingly, for, seven weeks in 2020, I tried high dose betaine, trimethylglycine, so four grams, of betaine per day. And, the resulting homocysteine, in my data was 11.8 micromolar, which although it's not my highest level around 15, it's certainly not in that nine range over my last five measurements. So I ditched it because it didn't seem to have, a major impact on my data. However, I've been supplementing, for the past three years with a, daily stack of four hundred micrograms per day of methylfolate, a thousand micrograms per day of methyl, b twelve, and up to fifty, milligrams per day of vitamin b six. So, when considering I've been tracking my diet for the past, six years, and logging all that data into an Excel file, we can see if, which which or all of these, vitamins may be, most important for keeping homocysteine low. So, is homocysteine is homocysteine correlated with my dietary intake of folate b six and or b twelve? So first looking at the data for plasma levels of homocysteine on the y axis against my average daily folate intake, and that's also including from supplements, we can see that although that there's a, negative correlation, meaning higher levels of correlate, of folate are correlated with lower levels of homocysteine, that correlation is not statistically significant as indicated by the p value of 0.13. Also not significant is the correlation for my average daily b six intake with plasma levels of homocysteine. You can see the trend line for that data is approximately flat, and this and the correlation is not, it's not a significant correlation as indicated by the p value of 0.87. So from this, we can conclude that homocysteine may not be significantly correlated with my dietary intake of folate or b six. What about b twelve? And, actually, we do see a significant correlation here. So first, starting with, the data where I wasn't supplementing with vitamin b twelve, and I have four data points for that on the left. My average homocysteine was 12.7 micromolar. And then with, vitamin b twelve supplementation, I have eight, plasma homocysteine measurements, and we can see that my average, homocysteine level there is 9.1. So about a 30% reduction, with vitamin b twelve. Now, when comparing without b twelve supplementation, four data points with the eight data points for with by vitamin b supplementation. These two groups of data are significantly different, which suggests that, vitamin b twelve is contributing to the lower levels of homocysteine. But b twelve may not be the only factor contributing to this reduction. And inter interestingly, an even stronger correlation for lower homocysteine is, with my average daily protein intake. That's what we can see here. So the correlation coefficient is negative 0.86. And, a correlation, when it's a negative correlation, the closer you get to negative one, that's as strong as it gets. It's perfectly linear. So, that's a better correlation with protein versus homocysteine versus my b 12, correlation with homocysteine. So this suggests higher protein intake, lower homocysteine. So, I actually have we can take a deeper look at that data to investigate how much b twelve is contributing and how much my protein intake, may be contributing to the lower homocysteine. So let's have a look at that. So here I've got listed each date that I measured, homocysteine and the corresponding average protein intake that corresponded to that homocysteine, measurement and then my average b twelve intake, that corresponds to each homocysteine measurement. So first, when I wasn't supplementing with b twelve, my average protein intake based on those four measurements was about, 99 grams per day, and my average homocysteine level was 12.7. Now note that I'm not deficient for b twelve here. The RDA for, vitamin b twelve is two point four micrograms per day. So even just for these four data points, I'm at least, you know, around five fold higher than the RDA, but still my homocysteine is going in the wrong direction. Now for the next three data points, I was supplementing now with, a thousand micrograms per day of vitamin b twelve. And if you notice the 03/19/2018 data, it's nine hundred thirty six micrograms per day on average that corresponds to that 10.8 homocysteine measurement. So I I wasn't obviously, taking my b twelve, you know, the the stack of the three vitamins every day. That's why it's a little bit less than a thousand micrograms on average for that for that, measurement. But, nonetheless, I have three data points where I've supplemented with, vitamin b twelve. My protein intake, although it's, five grams higher with an average of a 104 in those three measurements, it's not significantly different from the ninety nine grams per day in the previous four measurements. And my average homocysteine over those three measurements is 10.5 micromolar. So this is about a 20% reduction that one can infer may be related completely to vitamin b twelve. Now in the last group of data, my b twelve intake is the same. It's a it's, a a little bit more than a thousand micrograms per day, but my protein intake is higher. It's, on average, 24 grams per day higher, than the previous, periods with an average protein, intake, average dietary protein intake of a 128 grams per day. And based on that, my homocysteine levels are 8.2, so a further 20% reduction. So it looks like b twelve on its own, without changing protein, 20% reduction in homocysteine, but then b twelve with the combination of higher protein, a further additional 20% reduction in homocysteine. So the big question is high how is higher, protein contributing to lower homocysteine? And superficially, one could say, well, you've got 24 more grams per day of protein. You may be getting more b twelve that may be contributing. But I'd argue that may not be the case because at best, maybe I'll get one to two micrograms of extra b twelve, assuming that's from animal an increase in animal protein for those extra 24 grams. Is a thousand and nine micrograms of b twelve really different from a 11? I'm not so sure about that. So if anyone's got any ideas how higher protein could be contributing to lower homocysteine, please leave a comment up below. And that's all I've got for now. Thanks for watching. If you made it to the end, thanks a lot, and I hope you, enjoyed the video. Have a great day.