With the goal of living past 100, it's important to know what centenarians die from so that we can minimize that risk. So what's the number one cause of death in centenarians? Let's have a look at some data. So, that's what we can see here. Death for for all causes for people old people older than 100 years old, and this is a sample size of about thirty thirty six thousand centenarians. So, first, the, major cause of death in centenarians was old age. About twenty eight percent of all deaths in in the group that was older than 100 years died from what they what was classified as old age, which can be literally anything. So what about cause specific mortality like heart disease and cancer? This would be the obvious choice. So we can see that, for heart disease, eight point six percent of all people who died that were older than 100, died from heart disease, and, about four out of a hundred, died from cancer. So these aren't the primary cause of death in people older than 100 years. What is? So we can see that eighteen about eighteen percent of the deaths for centenarians was related to pneumonia. So if we're gonna live past the 100 years, we need to account for, pneumonia and optimize strategies to reduce risk of pneumonia at older ages. So is this, an effect specific to centenarians, or is this, also occurring at relatively younger ages? So in this case, I've rectangle starting at 80 years old all the way up to a 100 years old. And what we can see is that, pneumonia, the, the incidence of deaths for pneumonia increases during aging. So for the 80 year old group, pneumonia, the percentage of deaths from pneumonia are only about six percent of all deaths, and then they increase in each five year increment all the way up to a hundred years. So six percent to eight point three percent, eleven and a half to fourteen percent point fourteen point six percent, and then finally, the centenarians at that about eighteen percent of all deaths related to pneumonia. So, interestingly also during that time from eighty to a hundred plus, there's a reduction in both, deaths from heart disease and cancer. So we can see, deaths from heart disease go from nineteen percent down to that nine percent, around nine percent in centenarians. And similarly for cancer, deaths decreased from about twenty four and a half percent in the 80 year olds to four point four percent in the centenarians. So it looks like centenarians escaped death from heart disease and cancer, but then died at an increased rate from pneumonia. So what is pneumonia? So just as a brief overview, it's simply an infection of the, lung or lungs, which leads to inflammation, difficulty breathing, and then all the complications that come with that. Now in this study, the, pneumonia was designated, with the ICD 10 codes, j 12 through j one eighteen, which includes both viral and bacterial pneumonia. So in today's video, I'm gonna talk about strategies to optimize against viral, pneumonia, in this case, caused by influenza the influenza a virus and bacterial pneumonia, in this case, klebsiella pneumoniae, bacteria. So what interventions, can we use to improve survival following viral or bacterial lung So first, as we can see by the title, there's improved survival following viral lung infection in mice on a high soluble fiber diet. So what's what's what does that even mean? What's a high soluble fiber diet? So dietary fiber is comprised of insoluble fiber, which is not fermented by gut bacteria, and soluble fiber, which is fermented by gut bacteria to form the short chain fatty acids, acetate, propionate, and butyrate. So why are they called short chain fatty acids? So acetate is a two carbon fatty acid, c h three c o o h. Propionate a three carbon fatty acid, and butyrate a four carbon fatty acid. So relative to other fatty acids in terms of carbon chain length, they are short. So okay. So improved survival, after, consumption of a high soluble fiber diet, after influenza a lung infection. So that's what we're looking at here. And this data is in young female mice. For whatever reason, they didn't, look at, survival in male mice. They only use female mice. So we're looking at survival plotted against time after infection, and comparing, control fed animals versus a high fiber diet. So in this case, the controls consume, 30% of their diet from cellulose, which is a poorly fermentable fiber. It's not fermented by gut bacteria, and, 30% inulin, which is a soluble fiber, which is fermented by gut bacteria to produce the short chain fatty acids. So what happened for both these groups? So we're looking at, average survival. That's the, time when half the cohort is alive and half has died, so fifty percent survival is indicative of that, and we can see that for the animals on the control diet, fifty percent survival, average survival was at about nine days. So, in contrast, mice that were on the high soluble fiber diet live significantly longer, fourteen days, which suggests an important role for soluble fiber on, improving defense against viral lung infection. So when considering that soluble fiber is fermented by gut bacteria to make short chain fatty acids, is the improved survival mediated by these short chain fatty acids? So first, we have to see if the short chain fatty acids were actually elevated as a result of the high soluble fiber diet. So that's what we're looking at here. Fecal, so levels of, these short chain fatty acids in, stool samples on the left, and then plasma levels of the short chain fatty acids on the right. So the the gut bacteria are located in the colon or large intestine, and then they would be, absorbed into the intestinal epithelial cells where they then can pass into the blood. That's how they would get into the plasma. So first, on the left, notice that in in the fecal samples, short chain the short chain fatty acids acetate was two fold higher in the inulin, soluble fiber fed mice compared to controls, but then butyrate noticed the increase of about a 150 fold relative to the control fed animals. So a similar trend is found for the plasma short chain fatty acids. So again, acetate in plasma was about two fold elevated, as a result of the high soluble fiber diet. Propionate was now significantly increased in in plasma, but then again butyrate was increased almost a 150 fold compared to the, control diet. And again, this is in the influenza a, infected mice. So when considering that butyrate was, tremendously increased on the high soluble fiber diet and, and the high soluble fiber fed mice had an increased survival after a viral lung infection. This led the authors of this study to ask, can individual short chain fatty acids impact survival following infection with influenza? And to do that, they looked at butyrate. So what we're looking at here is survival after, again, influenza a infection, lung infection with, influenza virus, and again in young female mice, and we're looking at survival. So in one group, the mice were just given water, and in the other group, they were given butyrate in the water. So they were drinking water that was that had butyrate in it. And when we look at average survival, we can see that for the mice that only had water, average survival after influenza viral lung infection was about eight days. So in in contrast, average survival for butyrate treated mice was double, you know, seventeen or more than double seventeen days after being infected with influenza a. So that suggests that high soluble high soluble fiber diet increased in the gut bacteria production of the short chain fatty acids fatty acids, sorry, which can then improve our, our ability to survive after a viral lung infection. So what about survival after a bacterial lung infection? And as I mentioned, I'm gonna show data for, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and that's what we can see here. So survival after bacterial infection with, Klebsiella bacteria. And first when looking at the, vehicle treated mice, so, mice that were not treated with any of the short chain fatty acids, we can see that average survival after bacterial lung infection was at about eighty hours. So what about the butyrate treated mice? And that's the green line, and we can see that all of the butyrate treated mice were still alive after eighty hours after infection with cleaves yellow bacteria, which strongly suggests a protective role for these short chain fatty acids in, the lung, you know, the lungs defense against, infection. So, is there a link? But now these data are in mice. Is there a link between fiber intake with pneumonia in people? So a relatively higher fiber diet is associated with a reduced risk of breath, death from respiratory diseases. Now it's important to note that death from respiratory diseases, which I've, rectangle here, the ICD codes include included J10 through j 18 and also J40 to J47, which includes viral and bacterial pneumonia, but also rest other respiratory diseases too like COPD. So this these data from death from respiratory diseases isn't specific to pneumonia, but, from all respiratory related deaths. So was there a protective role for fiber or association for a protective role for fiber in these studies? So first in looking at the data for men and looking at the fully adjusted model, we can see that men that consumed, the highest amount of fiber in the study, 29 grams, had a thirty one percent a significantly reduced risk of death from respiratory diseases of thirty one percent when compared with men that compared, consumed the lowest amount of fiber, twelve point six percent it's 12.6 grams. Sorry. So, and actually, starting from quintile four of fiber intake, so somewhere above 19 per day was associated with a twenty six percent reduced risk of death from respiratory diseases when compared with the lower fiber group. So a similar effect is present for women. Only in this case, women that consumed above the twelve point six grams, sorry, ten point eight grams. So that was considered low fiber, in quintile one. So quintile two for fiber consumption slightly higher than quintile one, had a nineteen percent reduced risk of death from respiratory diseases, and then every quintile above that had a further reduction in risk of death from respiratory diseases. So quintile 27% down. Quintile 42% down. Quintile 46% down. So the highest fiber group of 25 grams, about about twenty five grams per day versus about eleven grams per day in women significantly reduced risk of death from respiratory diseases. Now based on all the data that I've shown you, this suggests that a high fiber diet and more specifically soluble fiber may be an important approach for reducing risk of death from respiratory diseases including pneumonia. Now it's also important to note that there are no RCTs, randomized controlled trials, that have directly tested this hypothesis in older adults. So, the data is yet to be seen if this will actually be, proven in in studies of older adults that have pneumonia. Alright. That's all I've got for now. If you made it to the end, thanks for for watching and listening, and have a great day.