An adequate intake for vitamin k for adults 19 years and older for women is ninety micrograms per day, and for men, it's a hundred and twenty micrograms per day. But is this range, ninety to a hundred and twenty micrograms per day for vitamin k, optimal for health? So with that in mind, I'm going to present data for a paper that was just published, earlier this month that looked at the association for vitamin k intake with, risk for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease related hospitalization. Now, as a quick note, note this, this was a relatively large study that had more than 53,000 subjects that had a median age of 56 years and that had a twenty one year follow-up. Now, note that vitamin k consists of two main isoforms, vitamin k one and vitamin k two. So with that in mind, are vitamins k one and or k two associated with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, ASCVD, related So, that's what we're looking at here in, as a first start. So we're looking at the hazard ratio for the total amount of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease related hospitalizations on the y axis plotted against the vitamin k1 intake on the x axis. Now, note that when the, shaded regions are completely below the black line, the hazard ratio of one or completely above the black line, that indicates, statistically significant effect. And what we can see is that for, people who ate, up to two hundred and eighty micrograms of vitamin k one per day, we see about a thirty percent decreased risk for the total presence of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease disease related hospitalizations. Now, conversely, people who ate less than fifty micrograms per day of vitamin k one had had a significantly increased risk for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease disease related hospitalizations. Now, note that these models were adjusted for factors that can impact these associations including age, sex, BMI, smoking status, income, physical activity, alcohol intake, and education. Now, also note that, the total atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease amount can be subdivided into, ischemic stroke, ischemic heart disease, and peripheral artery disease, which essentially is, are measures of atherosclerosis in arteries that go to the brain. So ischemic stroke, ischemic heart disease, which is coronary artery atherosclerosis, so the plaque build up and narrowing of arteries that supply the heart which limits, blood and oxygen supply, thereby leading to cell death. And peripheral artery disease, which is atherosclerosis in arteries that go to the limb, so arms and legs. And similarly, we can see that for people who ate, relatively higher amounts of vitamin k one, two two hundred and eighty micrograms per day, there was a significantly decreased risk for atherosclerosis in arteries that go to the brain, heart, and limbs, for each of these measures. Now also, we can also see that for people who ate relatively lower amounts of vitamin k one, less than fifty micrograms per day, they had an increased risk for athero hospitalizations related to atherosclerosis, for arteries that go to the brain, heart or limbs. So from that, we can conclude that, two hundred and eighty micrograms per day of vitamin k one, may be optimal for decreasing risk for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease related hospitalization. Alright. So what about what about, vitamin k two? So, here we're looking at the same, measures, hazard ratio for total atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease on the y axis plotted against the vitamin k, intake, vitamin k two intake on the x axis. And, first note for the total amount of atherosclerotic cardiovascular cardiovascular disease related hospitalizations and ischemic heart disease related hospitalizations, we can see that, k k two intakes in the sixty to around 70, 75 range are associated with mass maximally decreased hospitalization risk. Ischemic stroke is in a similar ballpark, not sixty to seventy five but somewhere in the seventy to eighty five micrograms per day of vitamin k two is associated with reduced risk of hospitalizations related to ischemic stroke. However, for peripheral artery disease, note that the shaded region overlaps at all parts of of the graph, so vitamin k2 intake is not significantly associated with peripheral artery disease hospitalization risk. Now, also note that relatively lower intake, so closer to zero, and higher than, about a hundred micrograms of vitamin k k two per day were not significantly associated with hospitalization for any of these atherosclerosis related hospitalizations. So from these data, we can conclude that somewhere in the sixty to eighty micrograms per day, for vitamin k two range, may be optimal for decreasing risk for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease related hospitalizations. So based on the data that I've just presented in this paper, this suggests that the ninety to a hundred and twenty micrograms per day recommendation that I mentioned on the first slide, as an adequate intake for vitamin k may be too low especially when considering that two hundred and eighty eight eight two hundred and eighty micrograms of vitamin k one and somewhere in the sixty to eighty range for vitamin k two, that's about three hundred and fifty micrograms of vitamin k per day in terms of reducing risk for, hospitalizations related to atherosclerosis. So, that suggests that that adequate intake of ninety to a hundred and twenty grams may be too low for reducing this hospitalization, atherosclerosis related hospitalization risk. Now, last but not least, what I haven't shown yet is which food sources provided vitamins k one and k two in this study. So that's what's shown here. And for vitamin k one, the primary sources in this study, were margarine and lettuce, and then relatively smaller amounts of vitamin k one were derived from broccoli, whole wheat bread, and spinach intake. Now it's important to note that margarine and whole wheat bread are relatively poor sources of vitamin k one as shown in this small chart here. And conversely, spinach is the all star of the foods that are on this list with more than 2,000 of vitamin k one per 100 calories. So just taking in fifteen grams or half an ounce a day of spinach, one can reach that three hundred microgram or two hundred and eighty micrograms of vitamin k one that was associated with maximally reduced risk of hospitalization related to atherosclerosis. Now, so for vitamin k two, we can see that, four of the vitamin k two isoforms, so menaquinones, m k, so m k four, m k eight, and nine, accounted for about 85 or 86% of the total vitamin k two intake, which was derived from eggs, butter, cheese, including hard and soft cheeses, the soft cheeses including brie and blue cheese. Now, in terms of their vitamin k two, vitamin k two content per 100 calories and note that most, studies reported on a per gram basis but I like to report it on a per calorie basis because if you eat based on grams, one can be fooled into thinking they're not eating a lot of calories because they may not be eating a lot of grams. So, I count everything by calories so that's why I normalize the, microgram of k two data and k one data per calorie. So what we can see on that list is that egg yolk, the foods that, accounted for most of the k two intake, egg yolk, blue cheese, brie cheese, and butter, contained relatively low amounts of vitamin k two, less than twenty micrograms per 100 calories. And although the people in this study didn't eat these foods, other more rich sources of vitamin k two include, hard cheddar cheese, seventy micrograms per 100 calories, cottage cheese, 4% cottage cheese, 4% fat, fifty two micrograms per 100 calories, and full fat Greek Greek yogurt, which has, twenty eight, micrograms of vitamin k two per one hundred calories. And I'll put the links to the studies that have that data for vitamin k2 in the video's description. Alright. That's all I've got for now. If you made it to the end, thanks for watching and I hope you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.