Resting heart rate and heart rate variability. How are they impacted by physical activity, body weight, and diet? So first, let's define a few terms. So the resting heart rate or RHR is the heart rate in beats per minute BPM while at rest. And the heart rate variability, h r v, is the variability for the time in between heartbeats. So if your heart rate is 60 beats per minute, the assumption is that it beats once every second, but there's variability in how often the heart beats. It may be once every point nine seconds, every one second, one point one seconds, etcetera. So that variability is the heart rate variability. Alright. So how does the resting heart rate change during aging? So this is a study of 90,000 plus people. We've got average resting heart rate on the y axis plotted against age from 20 to 85 years. And what we can see is that for both women in green and men in blue, the resting heart rate increases up until about fifty years after which it then decreases all the way up to 85. What about HRV? How does that change during aging? So this is from a much larger study of 8,200,000 plus subjects. And here, we're looking at the RMSSD. That's the root mean squared of successive differences. That's one metric for measuring heart rate variability plotted against age. And in this case, it's going from 20 to 60 years. And what we can see is when, delineating the line for men in blue, but the data for women is similar, we can see that heart rate variability is somewhere in the seventies, in for a 20 year old, and then it declines to about half that in 60 year olds for both men and women. And note that's for heart rate variability measured in the morning at six in the morning. For people that measured, at 06:00 at night, we can see a similar trend in the dashed blue and, red lines. So, in advanced age for both on both of these graphs, we can see that, that's characterized by relatively low resting heart rate and also a low heart rate variability. In contrast, youth is characterized by relatively low resting heart rate at least when compared with 50 year olds, but also a high heart rate variability. So with the goal of being chronologically old but biologically young, which factors can impact resting heart rate and heart rate variability? And as mentioned in the opening, today, today, I'm gonna go through data for physical activity, body weight, and diet. So, in terms of a measure of daily physical activity, the fitness tracker that I use, also gives me data not just for resting heart rate and heart rate variability, but the average daily heart rate. So the heart rate for the whole day, not just at rest, while I'm sleeping in the morning. So, is the average daily heart rate significantly correlated with resting heart rate or heart rate variability? And that's what we can see here. So the resting heart rate on the y axis plotted against my average daily heart rate, for each day on the x. And what we can see is that the more active that I am on each day, that's significantly correlated with a higher next day resting heart rate, significantly correlated. Conversely, the more active that I am as indicated by the average daily heart rate, we can see that heart rate variability is significantly lower. Now this raises the interesting, idea, you know, about the optimal physical activity dose that can minimize next day variations in heart rate variability in resting heart rate while also maximizing fitness. And that's beyond the scope of this video. I'll probably adjust that in a future video. Actually, I'll investigate it in my data first and then present it in a future video. Alright. So what about body weight? Is that correlated with heart rate variability and resting heart rate? So that data is here. And I should mention that the data for physical activity, I only had the idea to measure or to start tracking recording and tracking my average daily heart rate in March 2020. Although my fitness tracker has provided that since I started tracking in, August 2018, I didn't have the idea to record that. I didn't see the usefulness of it, until, unfortunately, March. But I've been tracking and recording my resting heart rate and heart rate variability since August 2018. So I have almost twelve hundred days of data that correspond to my body weight, my morning body weight, which I've been measuring every day in the morning since, 2015. So again, I've got about twelve hundred days of data for correlate, correlations between resting heart rate on the y axis against body weight on the x. And what we can see is that the higher my body weight, that's significantly correlated with a higher resting heart rate. And remember, youth is characterized by relatively lower resting heart rates but also higher heart rate variability. Conversely, we can see now that my the higher my, my body weight, the lower my heart rate variability, significantly lower as shown there by the p value and the, correlation coefficient, little r. So this also raises a question, you know, what body weight optimizes both resting heart rate and heart rate variability? And as we can see for both data, somewhere around a hundred and fifty one pounds results or is correlated with my lowest resting heart rate but also my highest heart rate variability. So I'm currently around one fifty five and slowly working towards getting back towards one fifty, one fifty one, and even, you know, lower if I can I can, get there and sustain it? Now note that for a given average daily heart rate, having a higher body weight on that day would result in a more daily exertional strain. In other words, if my average daily heart rate is 60 beats per minute and I weigh a hundred and fifty pounds versus weighing a hundred and sixty pounds because I'm carrying 10 pounds more weight, that's an overall greater daily exertion or daily strain when, when compared with only using the average daily heart rate. So we can combine both both those metrics, body weight and the average daily heart rate into a daily strain or a daily exertion metric by multiplying them both and then comparing them against resting heart rate and heart rate variability. So that's what's shown here. So on the y axis, we've got resting heart rate plotted against this metric of daily exertion or daily strain. And we can see that the higher my daily strain, that's significantly correlated with a higher next day resting heart rate. Again, going in the wrong direction. And also going in the wrong direction with a higher daily exertion or a higher daily strain is my heart rate variability where we can also see significantly lower HRV for a higher daily, strain or daily exertion. So, let's put that data aside for now. We'll come back to it in a minute. I'm gonna show some data where we adjust our models for, this exertion metric and but also, with some dietary variables. So shifting over to diet, how does diet correlate with resting heart rate and heart rate variability? So the first obvious measure or, metric for, diet would be calorie intake. And that's what's plotted here. So we've got, resting heart rate on the y axis, plotting as my daily calorie intake. And for those who don't know, I've been weighing all my food since twenty fifteen and then tracking it and logging it into, an Excel file so I have lots of dietary data, over the past three plus years that I've been tracking my, fitness metrics as we can see by almost twelve hundred days of data. So now, we can see the strongest data of all the data I presented so far. The higher my calorie intake, that's significantly correlated with correlated with a higher resting heart rate. And, also, conversely, a higher calorie intake is significantly correlated with a lower heart rate variability. So, when considering all the data I just presented, this suggests that physical activity, body weight, and calorie intake can be specifically titrated to optimize both resting heart rate and heart rate variability. And I'll go more into depth in future videos, to actually see what may be optimal for me. Now, more specifically, what in terms of diet, what about diet composition? Just calorie intake says nothing about whether it's higher fat, higher carbs, higher fiber, etcetera. So what about correlations and associations for diet composition with these metrics? So first, I'm gonna present the data for heart rate variability with dietary macronutrients because the strongest associations, were present for that with lesser but still significant association for resting heart rate, which I'll show next. Now, note that in previous videos, although I've shown unadjusted correlations between diet with blood based biomarkers, in this case, when considering that we know that physical activity, body weight, and also calorie intake are significantly associated with resting heart rate and heart rate variability. They should be in any model that looks at potential associations, or significant associations for macronutrients with these with these metrics. So in this case, I, created linear regression models that were adjusted for or that included daily exertion so that body weight times average daily heart rate and also calorie intake and then also, each individual macronutrients. So there are eight different models. Each of them have these daily exertion and calorie intake, variables, but then each of the respective macronutrients. And note that, daily exertion and calorie intake on their own, when, associated with heart rate variability account for a small but significant amount of the variance in HRV. So 5.7%. Now that may not seem like much especially when we look at how that relates to, resting heart rate. We'll see that daily exertion and calorie intake actually explain more of the variance in resting heart rate, but it's 6%, you know, and that's that it the data is what it is. Alright. So what's the data for macronutrients and how they relate to heart rate variability after adjusting for daily exertion and calorie intake? That's what's shown here. The end starting on the left is, five date it's five hundred ninety three days of data. So let's there's a lot to unpack here. Let's just walk through it step by step. So in terms of macronutrients, I looked at, carbohydrates, and I split carbohydrates into two different fractions, non fructose carbohydrates and fructose. So I've been tracking both of those, you know, since 2015 so I have data for that. Each of the fatty acids, so monounsaturated MUFA, omega three, omega six, saturated fatty acids, SFA, and then also protein and fiber intake. And then we've got the beta coefficient plus or minus the standard error. So that's, you know, are these macronutrients associated with higher or lower HRV? The p value for whether those associations are statistically significant. The significance f. So whether on, or not, in this case, they are, whether each of these, linear regression models, the eight different models for the eight different macronutrients after adjusting for exertion and calorie intake are significantly associated with HRV. And as we can see, they're all less than 0.05, so they're all statistically significant. The adjusted r squared, how much of the variance is explained in total by the three variables. The percent explained relative to the base model. So how much additional variance in HRV is explained by the addition of each of the respective macronutrients. And then average daily intake which we can use which we can use to guide how much or how little of these foods may be, able to optimize heart rate variability and in the next slide, resting heart rate. So what's significantly associated with higher HRV? And in this case, we can see monounsaturated fatty acids, omega six, and protein intake. Now how much, additional variance in HRV do they explain? Now it may not seem like much as protein, for example, seems to contribute or contributes the most, explanatory, you know, 2.5%. In addition it explains an additional 2.5% in addition to the 5.7% that daily exertion and calorie intake explained in HRV. And then relatively smaller amounts is explained by the addition of by the association for omega six and monounsaturated fatty acids. Alright. So then in terms of nutrients that were associated with lower HRV, fructose, higher fructose, lower HRV. Saturated fatty acids, higher saturated fatty acids, lower HRV. And then also higher fiber, lower HRV. And in terms of how much additional, a percentage of the variance in HRV that they explained, the strongest negative, you know, strongest contributor was fiber, explaining an additional 2.1, bringing the total for that model up to 7.8%. And then with lesser amounts for saturated fatty acids, 1.10.1% and fructose of point 8%. And also note that although non fructose carbohydrates were very close statistical significance, 0.06, it's technically not statistically significant. And then omega three intake is not statistically, significantly associated with HRV. So that that summarizes the data that I just presented with which then raises the interesting question, can diet be personalized? Can this diet be personalized to optimize next day heart rate variability after workout? So when considering my average daily intake data, assuming for a typical amount of calories on a workout day, and looking at my average daily intake for each of these blue and, sorry, green and red macronutrients, this suggests that eating more than 20 grams per day of monounsaturated fatty acids, more than 11 grams per day of omega six, more than a 120 grams of protein, but then correspondingly less than 79 grams per day for fructose, less than 38 grams per day for saturated fatty acids, and less than 91 per day for fiber may optimize my next day HRV. And I intend on, you know, following this path and then reevaluating my data at a future point to see if it actually, is still strongly or significantly correlated with HRV. Alright. So what about the data for resting heart rate? And as you can see by the title, there are weaker but statistically significant associations for these dietary components with resting heart rate. So note that whereas the combination of daily exertion and calorie intake accounted for 5.7 of the variants explained in heart rate variability, which is relatively small, now those two variables explain a much larger amount of the variance in resting heart rate, 44.4%. Alright. So what's significantly associated with, lower resting heart rates? So going in the right direction. And, again, we can see, higher monounsaturated fatty acids and higher omega six, is correlated, associated after adjusting for daily exertion and calorie intake are associated with lower HRV. And they were also associated with high sorry, lower resting heart rate, and they were also associated with higher HRV. And then in terms of the percentage, that is explained by these, macronutrients relative to the base model, note that these are relatively smaller effects with the exception of monounsaturated fatty acids as it as it explains an additional 1.3% of the variance in resting heart rate, but then relatively smaller effects for omega 0.3%, compared to the macronutrient associations for heart rate variability. These are relatively smaller, explanations, additional explanations in resting resting heart rate. Alright. So in terms of the nutrients that are associated with higher resting heart rates, so, carbohydrate intake, whether non fructose or fructose and then also higher fiber associated with rest, higher resting heart rate. And in terms of how much they explained, the the additional, amount of the variance explained in resting heart rate, again, we can see relatively small amounts, 0.4% for, either of the two divisions and only zero point, 2% additionally explained for fiber. Now, also note that omega three, saturated fatty acids, and protein were not significantly associated with resting heart rate. Now, this this diet, you know, having relatively higher levels of a MUFA and omega six but lower carbohydrate and potential and and fiber intake, this would suggest that I could potentially increase my heart rate variability and resting heart rate to a much lesser degree, but it will optimizing or getting as much bang for my buck through diet and its impact on cardiovascular related metrics, is that good for the my overall systemic health in terms of, big picture biomarkers that I presented in other videos? In other words, do I optimize CV metrics but then make the net effect, worse on my overall health? So I haven't investigated that. Once I do that analysis, I'll present that data in another video. So stay tuned for that data. Alright. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging including daily data for resting heart rate and heart rate variability and my daily dietary data, come check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.