NAD is involved in the health and or function of virtually every organ or tissue system in the body. However, NAD levels decline during aging. And one reason for that is because of the age related increase for a protein that degrades NAD which is known as CD 38. Now, CD38 inhibitors including Apigenin, Quercetin, Luteolin, Kerimannan, and others can inhibit CD38, raise NAD, or slow the age related decline for NAD. Now, note that one doesn't have to only supplement with these inhibitors to potentially gain this effect. These, metabolites are found in food. And with that in mind, by eating an abundance of foods that contain CD38 inhibitors, can we maximize NAD levels thereby keep keeping us youthful for longer? So with that in mind, the focus of today's video is gonna be dietary c d thirty eight inhibitors and whether or not they're correlated with my biological age. Now I've weighed all of my food since twenty fifteen, logged that into, an online software that tells me macro and micronutrient data, and I've recorded all that in an Excel file since 2015. But it was only more recently in July 2018 that I started, recording actual food amounts and intake. So since then, I have more than eleven hundred days of food intake that corresponds to data in 16 blood tests. So, to answer the question, is dietary c d thirty inhibitor intake significantly correlated with biological age? What's the approach? So in step one, it's how much epigenin is in the foods that I'm eating. So, I, used the data that's in the link at the bottom of this slide, for epigenin, quercetin, and luteolin. And that's what's shown here in milligrams of apigenin per gram food for each of, these foods in the left column, peppermint, parsley, oregano, etcetera. And then in step two, we wanna know what is the average daily intake in grams for these foods during each dietary period that corresponds to a blood test. So what does that mean? So here we can see, dietary periods including let's start at the left side. So we see a dietary period that goes from 07/10/2018 to August 20, 2018. And what what that means is on on July 10, I blood tested. So since I was fasted when I blood tested, that now starts a dietary period that's gonna correspond to the next blood test, which happened to be 08/21/2018. So from 07/1038 to 08/2038, the average daily intake during that period corresponds to the blood test that I got on 08/21/2018. So, that's what we can see there. So, for example, I ate about an average of 11 grams 11.2 grams of parsley during that first dietary period, from July 10 to 08/20/2018. Now, with that in mind, we then go to step three. And we multiply the apigenin content. So the the the columns on the left, milligrams of apigenin per gram food, with the average intake for each food in grams per day. And then that will yield the average epigenin content for each food during that dietary period. So taking two point one five four six milligrams of apigenin per gram food, we then multiply every value down, you know, where you see the arrow going down. And that, will lead to, the calculation to give us how much epigenin is in each food during each dietary period. And then we can sum the epigenin content for every food to get the total epigenin content for all of these 16, dietary periods, and then we're gonna correlate that with all of the blood test data. And, so that's what we're starting, starting to see here. So here we're looking at the average daily epigenetic content in milligrams per day for each food within each dietary period that corresponds to a blood test data. So, you know, so see so going across, you can see that my, epigenetic content from parsley, for example, from in that first dietary period for July 10 to 08/20/2018, I got twenty four milligrams per day from epigenin. And then going across the column, you can see most of my apigenin came almost exclusively from parsley. And then as I mentioned, we summed that data for each column going across to get the apigenin sum for each of these dietary periods. So now I have one column at the far right with an epigenome. And then, we investigate correlate, correlations for the average daily epigenome intake, again, that column on the right, with blood test data. And that will help us answer the question, is my daily apigenin intake correlated with biological age or any of its component biomarkers? So this is the setup here. So, we've got apigenin, the sum on the left, and then, all nine of the biomarkers that are on Levine's, Morgan Levine's phenotypic age, which is a metric of biological age calculator. And then at the far right, the actual, biological age number. Now if you notice, there are some missing values here, which had nothing to do with, me, not putting them in. For alkaline phosphatase, alc phos, I got my blood tested at the doctor that year, which I don't usually do. I usually order my tests online, and they forgot to measure it. For high sensitivity CRP, for those two measurements that are missing, I didn't start to consistently measure it until the 0.34 measurement, four measurements down, and then I've measured it in every blood test since. And then you can see RBC, y, WBC, red blood cells, white blood cells, MCV, RDW. At that time, I was shipping my blood overnight to Florida in order to get it, measured by, the company that I use, and it didn't get there overnight. So that that data was unreliable. They couldn't send it to me because it supposed to get there overnight. It got there like two days later or or longer after that. So I didn't have data for for those variables. But for other variables, they can, I guess, be, quantified if it doesn't exactly get there overnight? Now because I had missing data for those variables, I you'll see I have missing, phenotypic age data on the far right for five, spots because you can't calculate, phenotypic age. You can't calculate your biological age without having actually all of the data for each measurement. So then going down to the bottom of this, of these columns, we can see I have the n, which is how many, blood tests corresponding to dietary data do I have. So you can see for glucose, creatinine, etcetera, I have 16 each. But then going all the way to the far right, I have 11 blood test measurements or biological age measures that correlate with 11 dietary periods. And then looking at the correlation coefficient, little r, so we're looking for correlations to be as close to one or as close to negative one, which would be an inverse correlation as possible. And the closer you get to those, the stronger the correlation, is. And then, the p value, which is in, gonna indicate statistical significance. So we want a p value that's less than 0.05, and that would tell us if the correlation that we've identified is statistically significant or not. And what you can see is that for the p value, for the correlation with the sum of epigenin against all nine of the biomarkers that are on Levene's test and the overall biological age score, there are no significant correlations. If you go across the the, the columns, you'll see none are have a p value less than 0.05. So from this, we can conclude that daily epigenetic intake is not significantly correlated with Levine's biological age test or any of its component component biomarkers. Now, with this in mind, if you look at the range for my apigenin intake for all of these different dietary periods, the range is twenty four to about seventy eight milligrams of apigenin per day. Maybe that's just not enough. Maybe I need to take in more apigenin in order to see effects on, biological age or its component biomarkers. Now I had a different idea. Apigenin isn't the only CD thirty eight inhibitor that I regularly eat. And so what then the obvious question is what about the other dietary CD thirty eight inhibitors? So is the sum of dietary CD thirty eight inhibitors correlated with biological age and or its component biomarkers? And just to reinforce that point, I'm not only eating Apigenin. I'm getting a multitude of CD thirty eight inhibitors in my diet. So let's try to get to, the sum, you know, the the total quantity of the of the CD thirty eight inhibitors that I'm that I'm taking in and whether or not they're correlated with biological age and its component biomarkers. So to address that question, first, I need to go through all the steps like I did before, and I'm not gonna go through all of them. I'm gonna kinda I'm gonna kinda run through them relatively quickly, because we already went through that process. But first, it's it's necessary to identify the content of quercetin, curaminin, and luteolin in the foods that I eat. So I've listed these amounts here. And again, they're based on, the data from the slide earlier. I'll put that link that has all of the foods, in terms of how much, apigenin, luteolin, quercetin, are contained in them. And then for Curramanin, I used a different link, so I'll I'll also put that in the, video's description. So if anybody's interested, there these are now charts that you you can actually quantify this on your own to determine your own, intake of c d dietary c d thirty inhibitors. So So now that we have these lists, the next step would be to determine the average daily intake for each of these c d thirty eight inhibitors. And I did that without going through that process. I calculated that just as I described for epigenin. And then the next step is to, is to calculate the total amount of each of these CD thirty eight inhibitors before starting to correlate them with the blood test data. So that's what I've done here. And we can see my average, daily intake for apigenin, for quercetin, for luteolin, kuramanin. And then at the far right side, for all of these CD thirty eight inhibitors, on the far right. And that's my average intake of all four of these CD thirty eight inhibitors per day. And each each value corresponds to a dietary period that corresponds to a blood test. Now note that, the range, my range for, dietary CD thirty eight inhibitors goes from, or went from, in the past three years, a 160 to about, three hundred eighty seven milligrams per day. And note that the majority of my CD thirty eight inhibitor intake is not coming from a Epigenin. In contrast, 69% of, of that total of the total amount of the CD thirty eight inhibitors is coming from curaminin because I eat a ton of berries and curaminin is, is enriched in strawberries, blueberries, and, raspberries. So with this in mind, now that we've got all this data for the sum of these four CD38 inhibitors, we can then go forward and start to investigate correlations for that column with biological age and its component biomarkers. And that's what I've done here. So, this these are correlations for the sum of the four dietary CD thirty eight inhibitors with blood based metrics of biological age. And starting with Levine's biological age test here, PhenoAge, we can see that the correlation, coefficient little r is very weak and its p value isn't anywhere close to statistical significance. So what that means is that the sum of these four dietary CD38 inhibitors is not significantly correlated with the overall biological age, biological age score that's generated by Levene's test. So what about the component biomarkers? Maybe, there's some data that suggests that it has positive effects on some of the nine biomarkers on that test, but that's not enough to impact the overall biological age score. So of the nine biomarkers that are on this test, the only one that reached statistical significance was glucose. And here we can see a negative correlation, which means that the higher my dietary CD thirty eight inhibitor intake, the lower my levels of fasting glucose. And that's going in the right direction because glucose levels increase during aging. However, it's, it's clear that this correlation between dietary c d thirty eight, intake with lower glucose levels wasn't enough to, impact overall biological age because the overall biological age score wasn't, significantly correlated with the dietary cv38, intake. Alright. So that's one measure of, blood based biological age. What about aging.ai? So here we've got the correlation for the dietary the sum of the four dietary cv38, inhibitors with the overall aging .ai score and all 19 of its component biomarkers. So first, we can see that with its correlation coefficient, it's inverse, which means that the higher my dietary c d c d thirty eight inhibitor intake, that's correlated with a younger aging.ai age, and that's going in the right direction. But note that the p value is not statistically significant. We would need a p value less than 0.05 for it to be statistically significant. It's not close. So from that, we would conclude that the sum of these, four dietary CD thirty eight inhibitors, at least for me, is not correlate significantly correlated with the Levine's biological age test or aging.ai's biological age score. Oh, so just taking a step further, what about the 19 biomarkers that are on aging.ai? And I've already gone through the, glucose data, which should is the same as what the Levine's data was, but then note at the bottom, there are also inverse correlations between the dietary the sum of the dietary CD 38 intake with platelets and red blood cells. So in other words, the higher my dietary CD38, inhibitor intake from those four sources, the lower my platelets and the lower red blood cells. Now, unfortunately, platelets and red blood cells decline during aging. So that they're correlated with them being lower is actually going in the wrong direction. So one could argue that I've got one biomarker going in the right direction and two in the wrong direction with having higher levels of these, CD, you know, these four dietary CD thirty eight inhibitors. But nonetheless note that the overall biological age score is not impacted by the changes in glucose platelets and red blood cells. So from this, we can conclude that, the 160 to three eighty seven range for my dietary CD thirty eight inhibitor intake of apigenin, quercetin, luteolin, and kurimanin looks like it's not enough to impact blood based, blood biomarker based metrics of biological age. Some potential effects on its component biomarkers, but those weren't enough to impact the overall biological age score. Alright. As a last note, I just wanted to mention I'm now on Patreon. There you'll find exclusive info that I don't post anywhere else on social media, including my daily data, not just average data over a dietary period, but daily data, of for resting heart rate, heart rate variability, sleep stages, daily data for my food intake. So I take screenshots of what I'm eating, how much of it, and then also my macro and micronutrient, intakes for every day. And then, early sneak peeks and spoilers for new videos. I posted some of that, yesterday and then a whole lot more. Alternatively, I'm all over social media too. So if you wanna find me other places, reach out. And, I hope you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.