With the goal of evaluating my biological age, on Wednesday, I blood tested for the second time in 2021. So based on that data and using Levine's phenotypic age, which is also known as biological age calculator, we can see that my biological age is 36, which is twelve point two years younger than my chronological age of 48. So which biomarkers are useful? So, I've highlighted that albumin, the percentage of lymphocytes, the average red blood cell volume, red blood cell distribution width, alkaline phosphatase, and white blood cells are all found are are all, youthful or associated with, a reduced all cause mortality risk. And if you're interested in that data, I explained it in the video, that I you can link to in the right corner. Alternatively, which biomarkers can be improved? So I've had lower levels of creatinine and glucose, which is going in the right direction. And also note that my c high sensitivity c reactive protein is 1.01 milligrams per liter. So for CRP, lower is better. I just made a video on that last week. And on my last blood test, it was point two seven milligrams per liter. So this is up almost fourfold. So more on that in a minute. Now LaVine's test includes age, chronological age. So the maximal biological age reduction is only about twenty years. So in contrast, aging.ai does not include include age. So larger biological age, b a, reductions are possible. So with that in mind, what's my age biological age with aging.ai? So, this is aging.ai3pointo, and that, version includes 19 biomarkers that are found on the standard chem panel and complete blood count CBC. And if anyone's interested in in double checking my numbers, you can just plug in these data and, verify. So based on the data that I presented there, my, biological age with aging.ai is 27 years. So twenty one years younger than my chronological age. Now beyond these tools being biological age metrics, having a younger biological age both by Levene's test and aging.ai is associated with a reduced all cause mortality risk. So I'll link to that on the last slide if you're interested in that data. Now for this blood test, going back to c c reactive protein, I tried to reduce, CRP by increasing my HDL. And I tried a a variety of interventions, and I, that's in my quantifying, biological age video number one. Again, you can check that out if you're interested. So, my HDL was 49 previously. And because of a correlation with HDL, with c reactive protein, I expected a higher HDL and correspondingly, lower, high sensitivity c reactive protein. But as we can see by the red hour, my HDL actually went down a little bit while eight c c reactive protein went up again almost fourfold. So that clearly didn't work. So what's gonna be the plan for improving, CRP going forward into my next blood test? So first, are there correlations between my diet with CRP? So in the first step, I investigate macronutrient correlations with CRP. So this means, looking at correlations for, total calorie intake, total fat, but then also individual amounts of fat including monounsaturated fats, omega three and omega six, fat intake as, measures of polyunsaturated fats, my saturated fat intake, fiber intake, and protein intake. And I look for correlations between that with, given biomarker, in this case, being c reactive protein. Now in step two, I then investigate correlations for individual foods and micronutrients with CRP and or other variables. Now I'm not gonna go through that data in this video because I just got, you know, the blood test data on Thursday. So that that actually takes, a significant amount of time, that I didn't have over the past three days. But, I that I may put that in in a in an upcoming video. So of the macronutrients that I mentioned, the reactive protein, high sensitivity c reactive protein, was my MUFA, monounsaturated fatty acid intake. And that's what we can see here with a high sensitivity c reactive protein pro plotted on the y axis against my average daily MOFA intake in grams per day on the, x axis. And what we can see is that, a higher intake of, monounsaturated fatty acids is correlated significantly correlated with a correlation coefficient of negative 0.61 with lower high sensitivity c reactive protein. And this correlation is statistically significant as you can see by the p value. Now if I improve c reactive protein, assuming correlation can impact causation, assuming that, will I make one thing better c reactive protein but make other biomarkers worse thereby negatively impacting my overall biological age score? So will increasing move intake negatively affect the other eight biomarkers on Levene's test? So to assess that, we can see we can evaluate the correlation. So first, you can see the correlation, with monounsaturated fatty acids with high sensitivity c reactive protein. That correlation, again, being significant. And then the correlation for MUFA my day average daily MOFA intake with the eight other eight biomarkers on Levene's test. And what we can see is that for the other eight biomarkers, the correlation with monounsat the average daily monounsaturated fatty add fatty acid intake, there are weak correlations with correlation coefficients of less than 0.3 or greater than negative 0.3. So to answer the question, will increasing, monounsaturated fatty acid intake negatively affect the other eight biomarkers on the beans test? Based on this data, maybe not. So with that in mind, my goal for the next blood test is to aim for, a monounsaturated fatty acid intake of about twenty grams per day, which is the, the far end of of the, linear line. And if this is a true, if this is a correlation that can impact causation, we'd expect that by, increasing my MOFA intake based on the plot, that I should see correspondingly a reduction in high sensitivity c reactive protein. And two of my main sources that I prefer to, get my monounsaturated fats from are almonds and cashews, so I'm gonna increase my intake of those nuts. Alright. That's all I've got for now. Thanks for watching. Hope you enjoyed the video, and have a great day.