How many steps per day is associated with the reduced risk of death for all causes or all cause mortality risk? Let's have a look at some data from a meta analysis that was just published yesterday. So in that meta analysis, it included 10 studies of about 30,000 subjects. The youngest age group was 45 years and the oldest age group in these studies was 79 years. And there was a median follow-up of about nine years. So starting from the baseline step counts, how many people died about nine years later? Now note that step counts were obtained by devices, in this case, Actigraph, so this wasn't self reported data. Alright. Let's see the actual data, and that's what's shown here. So we've got the hazard ratio for all cause mortality on the y axis plotted against steps per day on the x axis. And note that the steps per day go from zero up to 15,000 steps per day. So note that for statistical significance, that's when the dash lines or the 95% confidence interval, CI are completely below or completely above the hazard ratio of one, which I just delineated. So starting from the referent, which in this case was defined at about 3,300 steps per day, we can see that for people who had lower than 3,300 steps per day, there was a significantly increased all cause mortality risk. As you can see by the red dash lines, those are both the confidence interval. Those are both completely above that hazard ratio of one. Now when starting at zero steps per day though, we can see that any number of steps above zero is significantly better than none as risk starts to starts to decrease as there are more steps per day. So what about reduced risk, for all cause mortality? How many steps was associated with that? And that's what we can see here by the green, green arrows and green dashed lines. So we can see that the going from 3,300 steps per day up to about 11,000 steps per day, there was a significantly decreased all cause mortality risk. Now note that all cause mortality risk begins to plateau at about 7,500 steps per day. And then above 7,500 steps per day, from 7,500 to 11,000, there was a marginal all cause mortality risk reduction, It, meaning that there was about a two percent further risk reduction for every additional thousand steps. So most of the reduction in all cause mortality was up to seventy five hundred steps per day with smaller amounts from 7,500 to 11,000. Alright. What about more than 11,000 steps per day? And that's we can see here. And note that that the dash lines, the black dash lines, go above one. So, we from that, we can conclude that more than 11,000 steps per day is not significantly associated with all cause mortality risk. So to answer the question that was posed in the paper's title, how many steps per day to reduce the risk for all cause mortality, most of the all cause mortality risk reduction is up to about 7,500 steps per day. But then also note that there was a significantly decreased all cause mortality risk between 3,311 steps per day. Alright. That's all for now. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.