Ergotionine extends lifespan. So let's have a look at that data. So here we have survival plotted on the y axis against days elapsed or lifespan on the x. And this is data in fruit flies, more specifically the Canton s strain. So when looking at fifty percent survival, this is the time when half of the fruit fly colony has died and half is still alive. We can assess median lifespan. So when compared with the control diet CK in dark blue, there was an extension of lifespan for e intermediate doses of ergothioneine from ten micromolar to a hundred micromolar and one millimolar with median lifespan increases of 11 to fifteen percent. Also, relatively smaller, doses of ergothioneine including including a hundred nanomolar and relatively higher doses of ergothioneine, ten millimolar significantly increased lifespan one and two percent. Now note that this is the first study to evaluate the impact of ergothioneine in lifespan. There are no studies in mammals yet, so I thought that this was an interesting study to cover. Alright. What about, lifespan in male flies? So again, this is the Canton s, strain of fruit fly. And again, we're looking at survival. So when looking at fifty percent survival and when compared with the, lifespan of the control diet, c k, ergothione supplemented flies that had one millimolar and a 100 micromolar of ergothione in their in their diet lived 912% longer, for a median lifespan when compared with the control diet. But interestingly, there was also a decrease in lifespan for a relatively lower intake of ergothenine, one micromolar, so a 6% decreased lifespan when compared with the control diet. Now, note that we've got a lifespan extension, but now we also have lifespan shortening. So, interestingly, the authors of the study decided to look at Erbuthionine's potential effect on lifespan in a different, fruit fly strain, the y y w strain, and that's what we can see here. So did ergothioneine affect lifespan in a separate, fly strain? So in other words, a different genetic background when compared with the Cantonese strain. So again, we're looking at the YW strain for fruit flies and we're looking at the fifty percent survival when compared with the control diet in dark purple, c k. We can see now, again, there's a significant increase in lifespan for the intermediate doses of erythionine, one millimolar and a hundred micromolar. But also again, we have a significant decrease in lifespan too for relatively lower, a hundred nanomolar and relatively higher, ten millimolar for ergothyamine. So again, we've got this lifespan extension but also lifespan shortening. So what about in the male, YW strain of fruit flies? So again, going right to fifty percent survival when compared with the control diet, dark purple or dark blue, c k. Again, we have that increased lifespan for the intermediate doses of vergothyonine, a hundred micromolar and ten micromolar, so seven and six percent increase in median lifespan. But again, we have a small but significant decrease in median lifespan for the rel for a relatively higher dose of vergathionine, ten millimolar. And actually, if you look at the light blue and brown, there are two curves to the left, meaning there, there's decreased lifespan decreased median lifespan for the lowest doses one micromolar and one hundred nanomolar but these weren't statistically significant ergothionine reduced lifespan. But what also happened in this study is that consistently, a 100 micromolar, as I've put in this green rectangle, for each of the fly strains, Canton S and the YW. And in both male and female flies, a 100 micromolar of erythionine significantly extended lifespan in in both fly strains and in both genders. So the big question is how is it doing that? So is it a mild calorie restriction, CR? So to assess that, the authors of this study looked at, food intake, which is what's on the y axis, and then they, looked at flies at two different ages, so 10 old flies and 30 old flies. And note that the maximum life span for the flies in this study was somewhere around a hundred and ten days, so these are still, very young flies. And then they recorded food intake after one hour feeding and forty eight hours of feeding. So in the very young flies at 10 old, we can see that there was no difference when comparing the control diet with the erithionine supplemented flies. So young young flies had no difference in food intake whether feeding for an hour or for forty eight hours. And similarly, there was no difference in food intake for the flies that are a little bit older, 30 old, whether feeding for an hour or feeding for forty eight hours. So from this, we can conclude there is no difference in food intake, and that kind of rules out that rules out that calorie restriction is not responsible for ergothioneine's lifespan extending effect. And note that this study that they did for the feeding was, with ergothioneine at a hundred micromolar in in their food. So, that's the dose that was shown to extend lifespan in both fly strains and in both male and female flies. So, for all the experiments, the data that I'm gonna show, it was at that one hundred micromolar, dose that extended lifespan for basically all of, the fly data that I just showed. Alright. So what about the gut microbiome? So to assess whether the gut microbiome was involved in the lifespan extending effect of ergothyline, they treated the flies both to control CK and ergothyline supplemented with antibiotics. So azenic flies means that the flies are treated with antibiotics in order to, deplete the gut microbiome. And what we can see by looking at fifty percent survival is that, there was no increase in either median or even in the maximal, even though I didn't put an arrow there, in terms of comparing the ergothyamine antibiotic treated versus the control diet antibiotic treat, treatment. So that suggests that because the, lifespan data is the same for the ergothyamine now versus the controls when treated both with antibiotics, that suggests that the gut microbiome is responsible for this for this, lifespan extending effect of ergothione because the lifespan extending effect goes away when the flies are treated with antibiotics. Now the authors of the study didn't go further into how that may be, the case. So I'm looking forward to future studies that can, help tease that data out. How is the microbiome, affecting ergothionine's effects on lifespan, at least in flies? So what they did find is that there was also there was reduced oxidative stress. So in addition to the, effect of the gut microbiome on lifespan, ergothione supplemented flies had reduced oxidative stress. So how did they measure oxidative stress? Well, they used the GSH to GSSG ratio. GSH being glutathione, GSSG being, glutathione disulfide which is, basically oxidized two two, two molecules of glutathione get oxidized and they basically stick together to form one molecule of GSSG. So that ratio, the GSSG GSH to GSSG ratio is a measure of oxidative stress. So why is it a measure of oxidative stress? So here we can see that starting with GSH, glutathione, in the presence of a mild oxidant, in this case, a hydrogen peroxide, h two zero two, glutathione becomes oxidized thereby thereby forming a GSSG. So we can see that in very young flies that were 10 old, there was no difference in the GSH to GSSG ratio, for the very young flies. But then it, for 30 old flies, we can see first that, the GSH GSSG ratio is dramatically reduced when compared with the very young flies, for both the, control diet and the ergothioneine supplemented in blue. But then the ergothioneine supplement that had less oxidative stress as indicated by this ratio when compared with the flies that were on the control control diet. So how is this happening? Why is the GSH to GSSG ratio increased in ergothioneine supplemented flies? One reason is because the flies that were fed ergothioneine had increased antioxidant levels which is what we can see here. So first, we're looking at, SOD and CAT. So what what is that? So, in the presence of superoxide, which is, delineated there, superoxide dismutase converts it, well, the enzyme superoxide dismutase, otherwise known as SOD, converts that superoxide into the less toxic hydrogen peroxide, and then catalase can degrade that hydrogen peroxide into water and oxygen. So sup, SOD and CAT are very important for antioxidant defense, especially against superoxide radicals and hydrogen peroxide. So first, looking at the data in the very young flies that were ten days old, we can see that there was no difference in SOD or cat. So no difference in these antioxidant enzymes at very young ages. But then for both the 30 old and the 50 old flies, we can see significant increases for both SOD and cat in the ergothioneine fed flies when compared with the control diet. So we've got increased antioxidant levels that makes explain this, improvement in the GSH GSSG ratio that in the ergothioneine supplemented flies when compared with controls. Alright. So which foods are rich in ergothioneine? As a means for getting this into our diet, where can we get it from from food? And I I already have a an ergothioneine video. If you missed that, I'll put that in the right corner. So I've covered some of this before, but, let's just go through it. So here we're looking at ergothionine content in milligrams of ergothionine per kilogram of food in dry weight, DW. So oats, kidney beans, and oat bran have very small amounts of ergothione, and then we can see higher amounts for garlic, chicken liver, Mexican asparagus, and then the soy product tempeh. But far and above the all star for ergothione content is mushrooms. As we can see, white button mushrooms and gray oyster mushrooms have far more ergothioneine content when compared with the all all the other foods on this list. So mushrooms are a concentrated source of ergothioneine, but then also note they also contain spermidine, which has also been shown to extend lifespan. And I'm not a fan of the term superfoods, but can when considering that mushrooms have both ergothioneine and spermidine, metabolites now that are both shown to increase increase lifespan, you know, I'd be tempted to call it a superfood. Now note that for my most recent blood test for the forty two day period that, went from my blood test number five to blood test number six, that forty two forty two day period, I averaged a hundred and sixty six and a half grams of mushrooms mushrooms per day. Now, when considering that ergothioneine can increase but also decrease lifespan, is my mushroom intake too much, just right or not enough? So by tracking food intake and blood biomarkers, in other words, the big picture biomarkers that I presented in many recent videos, by looking at correlations between that, between food intake, in this case mushrooms, with the big picture biomarkers, that can help identify the mushroom dose that may be optimal for health and potentially longevity. We won't know longevity because we'd have to live out, you know, the remainders of our lives. So now I I only have one dietary period that corresponds to one blood test, so I'll need many more blood tests with tracked dietary data in order to start look start looking at correlations for mushroom intake on the big picture biomarkers. But I fully intend to make a video on that at some point in the, upcoming future. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoy the video. Have a great day.