Levine's biological age calculator, also known as phenotypic age, isn't the only biological age calculator that can be used. So today, I'm gonna talk about quantifying biological age with aging.ai. So first, let's have a look at some data. So what we're looking at is the, data from my latest, from my latest blood test on, 12/29/2020, just a few weeks ago. And based on the data for the nine clinical biomarkers and my, chronological age of 47, the, biological age calculator phenotypic age gives me a value of 30 three point eight years. Now, that's pretty good because it's thirteen years younger than my chronological age, which I've I've boxed there. Now by, age is included. Chronological age is included in the phenotypic age measurement of biological age. So, because of that, it it it allows for greater correlation with these nine biomarkers with chronological age. Now that's great because we wanna have a calculator that is, as close to perfectly linearly correlated with chronological age as possible so that it can be the most accurate. Now there but there's a limitation to that story. So first, by including age chronological age in the calculation, the maximum biological age reduction is up to about twenty years. So with my chronological age of 47, the the most that, the the greatest reduction that I could potentially experience would be seeing a biological age or a phenotypic age of around 27. Now taking this further, let's assume that my, biomarker data doesn't change for one full year, but chronological age increases by one year. Now using this calculator, my biological age then increases as shown here, to 34.7. So one chronological year passes and my biological age goes up by zero 0.9 years. But this in this situation, my biomarker data is exactly the same as the year before. So to me, this seems like a problem. You know, if, if my biomarker data is the same, but I age one year in chronological age, it doesn't make sense that my, biological age should increase. So, taking this even further, if I'm 80 years old and all of my biomarkers are indicative of youth, am I really 60 years old at best or younger? So although including chronological age in the calculation for, the biological age calculator is important for getting as close as possible to being linearly perfect almost perfectly linearly correlated with chronological age, it also may have a limitation in that it doesn't allow for, greater than twenty year reductions in biological age. So with that in mind, are there other biological age calculators that don't include chronological age as a variable? And I should say I'm still a big fan of Levine's, phenotypic age calculator. I'm still gonna continue to use it. I just think it's important to use, a a variety of tools so that we can get closest to the to the actual picture. So, aging.ai is is one such tool, and it's strongly correlated with biological age without including chronological age in its model. So you can find it at aging.ai, and it's, free to use. You just enter your, blood test data, and it it'll give you a readout of, your biological age. So what is what does it include? It includes 19 input parameters that are, found on the standard chemistry panel in complete blood count CBC. And, these are tests that are commonly performed, usually at a yearly physical with your with your doctor, with your general practitioner, and their cost is relatively cheap at about $35, in The US. Also note that c reactive protein is not included in on this list, which is kind of an extra measurement, when you go to the doctor. So thereby, you know, potentially it's an easier measurement to just get the standard chem panel and CBC. So how do the, 19 blood biomarkers correlate with chronological age? And that's without age, chronological age being in the calculation. So it's pretty strong with a correlation coefficient of 0.8. Now for comparison, note that that's not as strong as the, Levine's phenotypic age calculator, which in, for the combination of the nine clinical bar biomarkers in that biological age calculator and chronological age. So the sum of those 10 were almost perfectly linearly correlated with chronological age in two different studies, NHANES three with a correlation of 0.94 and NHANES four zero point nine six. Now for a quick comparison, with the best epigenetic clock for, its correlation with chronological age, that would be Steve Horvath's, epigenetic clock from 2013, which has a correlation coefficient of 0.97 with chronological age. So Levine's, biological age calculator is almost identical to that. And although, aging.ai is not as good, again, it doesn't include age. So, it offers a slightly different perspective on biological age while still being strongly correlated with chronological age. So, having a relatively youthful, biological age is important, but, is it actually associated would having a younger biological age actually be associated with a reduced risk of death for all causes? And that's true for Levine's phenotypic age. So younger biological age in that situation, a lower risk of death for all all causes. So how about for aging. Ai? And in fact, that is what they found. So people that had younger biological ages than their chronological, that was associated with a reduced all cause mortality risk. So, so far so good in terms of, relatively strong correlation with chronological age and having a younger biological age being associated with a reduced risk of death for all causes. Alright. So I have data for nine blood tests for Levine's biological age calculator, starting in 2018. That's just when I started including c r c reactive protein for all my blood test measurements, but I have data for aging.ai for 24 blood tests since 2009 that can be used to calculate biological age. So let's have a look at that data. So, starting around 2005, I was only measuring about once a year, just at a yearly physical and then recording whatever data they gave me, with blood tests, in an Excel file. Now in some cases from 2005, I have all 19 variables, but in many other cases I don't because I honestly, I was just going by what they told me to measure. I wasn't asking for measurements, or certain blood test measurements. So, on the left we can see that I tested I have a full set of 19, blood biomarkers, in 2009, 2012 and 2013. And I've included all the data on up on the list in case anyone wants to double check my, my numbers. You know, go to aging.ai, put my numbers in, you'll see these these are the results that I've posted here. So, three blood tests over that four year span, 2009 and 2013. And we can see my chronological age on the left, my aging .ai three point o. They're they have a couple other versions that that require more than 19 biomarkers, that I don't have the full, spectrum in many of the cases. So that's why I'm using agentagent.aidot, 3pointo. Alright. So my agent.ai biological age in the middle, and then my average biological age of those three measurements on the right. So we can see that my average biological age is 32 years old compared with my chronological age over that period, which is around 39. So around a seven year reduction for my biological age compared to my chronological age. So that's not terrible. It's go it's in the right direction, but as as many who have watched my videos for, using Levine's phenotypic age calculator, I I'm, on average twelve years younger than my biological age for my blood test data since, 2018. So all this all the this, is good, the seven year reduction for these, you know, 2009 to 2013 data, it's it's not as good as, I I can do. So let's take a look at that data. So in 2015, I started tracking my diet including weighing all of my food, entering that data into an online free online software, without plugging their name because I'm not sponsored. And and any of them will work, you know, Fitbit, or or sorry, MyFitnessPal, Cronometer, all any of those will work for logging your, nutritional info. So then I recorded all of that data including macro and micronutrients into an Excel file. So again, since 2015, I have, more than 2,000 of dietary data in an Excel file. And then in 2016, I started blood testing more often. So instead of once a year at my yearly physical with my doctor, you know, up to six times a year, to get up to to get a more full picture of my my biochemical changes during through throughout, throughout aging. So, first let's take a look at my data from 2016 to 2017. So I measured twice in 2016 and then four times in 2017. And then we can see my chronological age, my biological age in the middle, and then my average biological age on the far right. So in 2016, we can see that based on those two measurements, my average biological age was 28. And, compared with my average chronological age of 44, that's about a fifteen year reduction. Now that's a big improvement too from the 2009 to 2013 data. And I I can say that I, you know, I I didn't record my data, my dietary data before 2015, so I can't give exact details of of about what I did differently. But, I'd I'd argue that the act of tracking and then intervening once I got my blood test data to try to improve my biomarkers is a part of, this ability, this big jump in from seven years to fifteen year improvement in a reduction in biological age. Alright. So let's go forward. What about 2018 to 2020? So, I blood tested far more often than in 2016 and 2017. First six times in 2018, and we can see that my average, biological age over that period was 29. Compared with my chronological age, that was now a fifteen point seven year reduction. So going the right direction and even further reductions in, biological age, year to year biological age. Alright. So twenty nineteen over three measurements, my average biological age was 30.3. Compared with my chronological, now I am 16.3 years younger. So still, you know, for at least a four year period, I'm able to consistently be fifteen to sixteen years younger than my biological age. Alright. And then what about twenty twenty? So we can see my average biological age, over six measurements is 31.3 and and when compared with the, my chronological age over that period, again, I'm sixteen years younger than my chronological age. So, I I do have some room for improvement. It isn't perfect. You know, if you notice my glucose levels, something like the last eight measurements are over 90 and, you know, I'd like to see levels somewhere around 80 to 85 more consistently. Eight my HDL is somewhere around 44 on average over all the blood tests over the last, since 2016. So I'd like to get it somewhere in the mid fifties. If you've missed my HDL video, I've got all the details about why the mid fifties may be optimal. So there is room for improvement. Now, not only can by tracking biological age, not only can we track the how much it's reduced relative to the chronological, by having many data points over a period of years, we can track rate of aging. So if we compare that data starting from 2016 and looking at my 2020 data, So with an average biological age of 28 in 2016 and then 31.3 in 2020, that's a three year three point three years of biological aging in four point eight years. Now I actually think I can do better than that too, especially if I'm able to reduce my glucose levels without and improve my HDL levels without changing anything else. Now that's easier said than done. So stay tuned for that progress, in in in my upcoming videos. So, let's play it forward. What if I'm able to maintain this rate of aging, three point three years, of biological aging for every four point eight years that pass over the next seventy five years? So when added to my current chronological age, 75, I'm gonna be 48, next week. So that'll put me at a 123 which would get me to breaking the the longevity record for, you know, a common in a hundred and twenty two. So if I'm able to maintain this aging rate for the next seventy five years, how would that translate into biological age? And based on the the 3.3 divided by 4.8, that rate would translate into fifty two years of biological aging over the next seventy five years, which would put me at about 83 years old biologically at at a 123 years. Now whether or not that that's how it's gonna play out, let's see. But, let's hope that I can do that so I can break the, you know, break the longevity record. Alright. That's all I've got for now. If you made it to the end, thank you, and, I hope you enjoy the video, and have a great day.