Is there an additive effect of nicotinamide mononucleotide NMN supplementation on exercise performance? That's what a study published last week sought to figure out. And as we can see by the title, NMN did improve aerobic capacity in runners. So first, what was the study population? Well, it included 27 to 50 year olds. They had an average age of 36 years. BMI was in the normal range, so, 22, which is relatively lean, and then there were 48 subjects, mostly men, 40 men, eight women. And then this was equally divided into four groups. So 10 men and two women in each of four groups. So what were the four groups? A control group that was given, cranberry powder and, sugar, maltodextrin, and then three different doses of NMN, low dose, medium dose, and high dose. And those doses were three hundred milligrams, six hundred milligrams, and twelve hundred milligrams per day for the three different groups. Now all all groups, all four groups, performed six weeks of aerobic exercise training, and that was performed five to six days per week, including three to four days per week for running and two days per week for biking. And exercise was performed for forty to sixty minutes per session. Now if you notice in the title, it says that they included amateur runners, but that really doesn't tell us if these are average runners, runners that had, elite aerobic capacity to start with. So what what can we see or what what what was the fitness level of the amateur runners? And we can see, that their resting heart rate for all of the groups was 67 for the first three groups and then 68 for the high dose NMN group. So how does that compare to the general population? Well, in this study of more than 35,000 people, we can, see the pulse, which is the heart rate, and in this case, it's the resting pulse or resting heart rate on the y axis plotted against age. And for the age range, of the people that were in the study, 27 to 50 years old, we can see that the median, resting heart rate was about is about 70 beats per minute, which isn't too far from the 67 to 68 for the people in this study. So from that, we can, conclude that the amateur runners that were included in this study, have relatively close to average cardiovascular fitness for their age. So this this was not a study of NMM on elite athletes. So with that in mind, which aerobic capacity metrics were improved as a result of NMN supplementation? And that's what we can see here. So, I'm gonna walk through each of these, components of aerobic capacity and how NMN impacted them. So, so there, we can see that there are four groups, and there's data for each of the four groups, control, low, medium, and high dose NMN. And then first, we're gonna see the effective exercise. So the six weeks of exercise training improved each of the five metrics of aerobic capacity on the left. And, again, I'll go through each one of them sequentially, so just bear with me. But what we're interested in is the, time times dose effect, t times d, which is shown here. And as we can see, for those five metrics of aerobic capacity, NMN supplementation had an additive effect on improving these five metrics when compared with, controls. So what were the five metrics? And in order to go through that, we need to look at this graph of, an aerobic, a maximal aerobic exercise capacity test. So starting from rest on the left, we can see, v t one, which is the first ventilatory threshold. This is the time during a maximal aerobic capacity test when the breathing rate starts to increase. And during the first ventilatory threshold, there were improvements as a result of NMN supplementation for four of the metrics here on the left. So first, now notice it says, triangle HR, which the triangle means change. So change in heart rate, HR, at the first ventilatory threshold. And also notice that they used, for statistical significance, they used the hashtag, which means it's different from the medium dose and the and sign, which is different from the high dose. And as we can see, the control group, had a significantly lower, heart rate during the first ventilatory ventilatory threshold when compared with the high dose, NMN group. And, also, I just, flashed the, and pound sign. When compared with the low dose NMN, high dose was also, they also reached a higher heart rate during the first ventilatory threshold. So the significance is that by being able to reach a higher heart rate during the first v t, the so more heart rate, more heart beats per minute because when the heart beats, it pumps blood and oxygen throughout the body, and including nutrients, that allows more oxygen and nutrients to be used for metabolic work. So in theory, you can, you know, run a greater distance or have greater power, etcetera, with a higher heart rate, relative, to the same time period. So, along those lines, the rate of oxygen consumption during the first ventilatory threshold was also increased. And in this case, it wasn't just for the, high dose NMN. Medium and high dose NMN had a higher, VO2, a higher rate of oxygen consumption relative to the control group. Now, also, what about within the NMN group? So high NMN group were able to have a higher VO2 relative to the low dose, NMN group. Now, power, the change in power was also improved in the medium and high dose NMN groups when compared with the control group. And power is force times distance divided by time. And in this case, the force is body weight. The time is the same for everyone. So the medium and high dose groups were able to run a, sorry, cycle. This was a cycling maximal cycling test. They were able to cycle for a longer distance during the first v t, ventilatory threshold when compared with controls. And again, when comparing between groups, we can also see that, between the NMA groups, we can see that the high dose NMA group also had a, greater power or a greater change in power when compared with the low and medium dose NMN groups. Now, unsurprisingly, because we saw a change in the rate of oxygen consumption, the percent change in the maximal rate of oxygen consumption, percent VO2 max was also better for the high dose NMN group when compared with controls and also for the high dose NMN group when compared with the low dose NMN group. And then lastly, so that that sums up the changes that were all, during the first ventilatory threshold, but there was also one aerobic capacity metric that was improved during the second ventilatory threshold, and that's the period of time when the breathing rate increases to the point where the person is out of breath. So during the second ventilatory threshold, although for whatever reason, the authors of the study did include the pound sign or the and sign for that data, the medium oh, the sorry. The low and the high dose n m n groups had a higher change in power when compared with the control group. Now, lastly, the last part of the, maximal aerobic capacity test is assessment of v o two max and this is, you know, exercising to exhaustion and NMN did not affect v o two max. So with all of these data in mind, then the idea is can differences for body weight or body composition explain this additive effect of on aerobic aerobic exercise capacity metrics. So, that's what they examined here. And starting from the left, well, starting from the four groups and then looking at, these four metrics. So they looked at changes in body mass, in BMI, FFM, fat free mass, which is essentially a measure of lean mass, which is a proxy for whole body muscle mass, and then body fat percentage. So was NMN supplementation, was that able to impact these metrics at all? So first exercise, these these four measures of body weight or or body composition or body mass or body composition were not different as a result of exercise. And also notice that the effect of NMN supplementation, the t times d p value, were all higher than 0.05 which indicates that NMN supplementation, didn't impact, body mass or composition, when compared with, just the exercise effect. So no effect of NMN supplementation on body weight or body composition. So then the authors of the study then wanted to further investigate how is NMN potentially impacting, aerobic capacity or metrics of measures of aerobic capacity. So aerobic capacity involves use of the lungs, heart, and skeletal muscle skeletal muscle as the major components. So is the additive effect of n m n on aerobic capacity measures related to cardiopulmonary, so heart and lungs, or and or skeletal muscle function? So starting with some cardio pump cardiopulmonary sorry, cardiopulmonary metrics on the left, first looking at some heart metrics including, the change delta the triangle is delta. So the change in maximum heart rate, the change in the heart rate reserve HRR, which is defined as the maximum heart rate, minus the, resting heart rate. And then when looking at one measure of lung function, so the v e max, which is the maximum ventilation during exercise measured in liters of air consumed per minute, we can see that although exercise, positively affected each of these variables, the effect of NMN did not, there was no additive effect of NMN on improving these measures of cardiopulmonary, function. So with that in mind, they then looked at some measures of muscle function and, that's what's shown here. They looked at four different measures of muscle function including a single leg stand test where, people stood on one leg, closed their eyes, and then they recorded the amount of time that people were able to stand on one leg without touching the with the without that leg then touching the floor, hand grip strength, push ups, and then a sit and reach test, which is measure of, lower back and hamstring flexibility. And of these four measures of muscle related function, only the single leg test was changed by exercise. And then there was also the t times d p value. You can see it's less than 0.05. That's, suggests that there was an additive effect of, NNN on on, on improving, single leg stands relative to exercise alone in the control group. Now then the question is which of the groups for NMN were improved relative to the control group for the single leg stand as a result as a result of NMN supplementation? And you can see that it's only the medium dose, NMN group was was, better when compared with controls. But then notice that the low dose and the high dose, you know, had almost I mean, it's not statistically significant that those, groups were different from the control group in terms of the amount of time they're able to stand on one leg. But, it just seems odd that that one group, but not the other groups, were able to have a better ability to stand on one leg as a result of NMN supplementation. Nonetheless, the authors of this study, because they saw a difference in a single leg stand test, but none of the cardio no differences in the cardiopulmonary metrics, they, proposed that it was, the the additive effect of NNN on the aerobic capacity metrics were as a result of changes in muscle, but not the heart. Now whether that's true, we'll need to see some additional studies from their group or others, in the future. That's all I've got for now. If you've made it to the end, I hope you enjoyed the video, and have a great day.