Glutathione isn't the only antioxidant that possibly impacts health. Others include alpha lipoic acid, allene found in garlic, and sulforaphane found in broccoli. Now the common thread through each of these four antioxidants is that they contain sulfur. But there's another sulfur containing antioxidant that may be as important or more important, and that antioxidant is called ergothioneine. So, whether it's in its reduced form on the left or in its oxidized form on the right, we can see that it is a sulfur containing antioxidant. Now, ergothioneine has been called a longevity vitamin in part because mammals don't synthesize ergothioneine, so we need to get it in a diet in order to have adequate amounts. So, why is it important? So first, ergothione levels decline with age, and, their, lower levels of ergothioneine are also associated with an increased incidence of, mild cognitive impairment. So let's have a look at that data. So first, ergothione levels decline during aging. So we're looking at plasma levels of ergothioneine on the y axis plotted against age. And we can see the clear decline for ergothioneine levels in plasma during aging. Now, lower erythioneine is also present in people who have mild cognitive impairment. So in subjects that had m MCI versus that were cognitively normal, we can see that the cognitively normal patients had higher levels of ergothinine on the y axis when compared with people who had mild cognitive impairment. Now other studies have also shown a similar similar effect of, lower blood levels of ergothioneine being associated with, cognitive impairment and also frailty in older adults. And that's what we can see here. So first, starting from, with cognition, with cognitively cognitively impaired in orange and cognitively normal in yellow, we can see that the cognitively normal people had relatively higher levels of ergothioneine when compared with cognitive cognitively impaired subjects. Now similarly, for frail versus non frail, we can see that people who were frail had lower levels of blood, blood levels of ergothioneine. Now beyond associations, for ergothioneine with cognitive function and frailty, are blood levels of ergothioneine associated with, coronary artery disease, so atherosclerosis, and risk of death from cardiovascular disease and all causes? And that's what we can see here. So the, HR is the hazard ratio, and, that's risk for, the incidence of coronary artery disease in in red. And then the two different shades of green are mortality related to CBD, cardiovascular disease, and all cause mortality in the, other shade of green. And what we can see is that the median NCI confidence interval interval are both below one for each of these three outcomes, which, identifies an association for relatively higher levels of erythionine with, lower incidence of having, atherosclerosis, coronary artery disease, and, risk of death is also reduced for, coronary, cardiovascular disease and all cause mortality. So higher ergothenine, less, risk for these three outcomes. So with that in mind, can and when considering that mammals don't produce ergothioneine, can diet impact blood levels of ergothioneine? So first, we need to know which foods contain, this antioxidant, ergothenine. So, this that's what we're looking at here. Ergothenine on the y axis in milligrams of ergothenine per kilogram of food, and, that's dry weight of the food. So, first, we can see that oats and kidney beans contain relatively low amounts, around two milligrams per kilogram of their these respective foods. Oat bran has about double or a little more than double than, oats and kidney beans, and then chicken liver has 10 times more ergothioneine than oat bran, And then, Tempe has even more than chicken, chicken liver, 201 kilogram. But, what should be obvious is that the highest amounts of ergothioneine on this chart are for mushrooms. So white button mushrooms and gray oyster mushrooms have six thirty milligrams and one point three grams of, ergothioneine per kilogram of their dry weight. So, mushrooms are a rich source of ergothioneine based on this study. Now another study looked at 15 different, species of mushroom, and we can see that, seven of them have over three hundred milligrams of vernon per kilogram, dry weight, which would, again, put them at the far right side of the, of the chart. Now, also in that study, they identified, decent amounts of ergothenian in garlic and also in, Mexican, asparagus, which is the green as asparagus that's normally sold in stores. And the reason I indicated, where it's from is because the, white asparagus contains significantly lower amounts of ergothinine, although I didn't didn't indicate it on the chart. So, when considering that mushrooms are a rich source of ergothinine, do does mushroom intake correlate with blood levels of ergothioneine? And that's what we can see here, and it does. So we're looking at, whole blood levels of ergothioneine on the y axis plotted against, consumption of mushrooms in terms of times per month, and this is self reported data. And we can see that people who reported eating more mushrooms had higher blood levels significantly higher blood levels of ergothenine. So with that in mind, an obvious question should be, is mushroom intake, reduced in the patients that had mild cognitive impairment? So, that's what we can see here, and, it wasn't. So, even though it looks like MCI patients had, less when they, compared the statistics between the two groups, those that were, had mild cognitive impairment did not consume less mushrooms when compared with cognitively normal subjects. So, if diet isn't responsible for the lower levels of ergothione in MCI patients, what other factors are contributing? And, it's important to note that gut bacteria make ergothione. So which gut bacteria produce ergothione? So in this study, they looked at, fecal levels of ergothione, so the amount of ergothione in poo, and then compared it against, fecal amounts of, the bacterium lactobacillus reuteri. And what we can see is that the higher the levels of lactobacillus rooterii, in in poo, the higher the fecal levels of ergothioneine. And this was a very strong correlation as you can see by the correlation coefficient of 0.83, and it's, statistically significant. Now, correlation doesn't equal causation. So, you know, this just identifies a correlation for l rutere with, ergothione levels. But, is there more direct evidence for l rutere actually producing ergothioneine? So that's what the authors of this study then, sought, sought to do. And on the left, we're looking at, ergothione so this is a cell culture experiment where they, looked at, lactobacillus reuteri in cell culture. So first, on the left, they measured ergothione levels in, lactobacillus reuteri and in a bacterium that they didn't expect to have, ergothione, E. Coli. So, what we can see compared to, for comparing the six different strains, all of them that start with JCM, of lactobacillus reuteri when compared with E. Coli, we can see that the lactobacillus reuteri have about threefold higher levels of ergothioneine inside of them than E. Coli. Now, just because lactobacillus reuteri have more ergothionine inside of them than E. Coli, it doesn't mean that they'll release it out out from from, you know, from their bacterium. So, to test that, lactobacillus reuteri release it, they then measured the amount of of ergothenine in the, supernatant of of the cell culture, the cell culture medium. And so that's what we're looking at here on the right. So first, note that, E. Coli for E. Coli, there was no extracellular release of ergothioneine. I mean, it's not there's nothing there. But then for the six different strains of lactobacillus reteri, all of the strains weren't equal in terms of their ability to release ergothioneine into the cell media. So four of the six strains, when compared with the negative control, GAM, released, decent amounts of ergothioneine into the cell media. And, actually, note that for two of the lactobacillus strains, they released, four and, up to five fold more ergothione when compared with the negative control. So, with when considering all of these data and that blood levels of ergothione decline during aging, is this because of a dietary insufficiency, not eating enough ergothioneine rich foods, or an age related decline for l. Reuteri? So as a summary and, hypothesis of everything I've shown, so, if we eat more mushrooms or other ergothioneine rich foods, we should expect to see higher blood levels of ergothione, and blood levels of ergothione decline during aging. And if we increase our blood levels of ergothioneine, based on the association data, we would expect to see a reduced risk for cognitive impairment, frailty, atherosclerosis, and, mortality from cardiovascular disease and all causes. Alternatively, or in addition to, if we supplement with l rutieri, which produces ergothioneine, or consume foods that increase its levels, including kefir, and, I've indicated the citation that, showed that, and I'll put all of the papers for the, video in the description. So if you're interested in the data, the published data, just please check the description, for the video. So So eat more mushrooms and or get more l rooter in the diet may be an important means for increasing blood ergothenine and for reducing risk for all of these, aging related outcomes. Now it's important to note that randomized controlled trials, RCTs, have yet to test this hypothesis. So, I'd stay tuned for the for the data on ergothioneine. It's a it's an emerging field, so it'll be interesting to see how, the studies pan out. So that's all I've got for now. You can find me lots of places online, and I hope you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.