For each of my recent quantifying biological age videos, I've also posted data for cardiovascular fitness related metrics, including resting heart rate and heart rate variability. So note that although these data correspond to a blood test, I have a lot more data that goes back all the way, to 2018. So the focus of this video will be analyzing year to year changes for both resting heart rate and heart rate variability. So starting with resting heart rate, I started tracking that, in August 2018, and this is data that goes through the 2021, so December 2021. And as you can see by the end, I have one thousand two hundred forty days of data for both resting heart rate and heart rate variability. So starting with the data for, 2018, we can see that my average resting heart rate was about 51 beats per minute, 50.9 BPM. And note that, my fitness tracker and I wear Whoop. I'm not sponsored by them. Other fitness trackers can, measure resting heart rate and heart rate variability similarly. Note that it records it automatically, during the last sleep psych cycle, which takes away the human error in quantifying this stuff myself. So going from 2018 with an average resting heart rate of about 51, in 2019, my average was 48.9. And note that each of these circles corresponds to one day of data. And then in 2020, I further reduced my resting heart rate to 48.1. And in 2021, my average daily resting heart rate was 47.4 beats per minute. Now we can evaluate whether these, resting heart rate values are significantly different from when I started in 2018 by using a two sample t test, which is what I did. And when looking at the p values for comparing each year versus 2018, we can see that each year I was able to, significantly reduce my resting heart rate when compared with the, 2018 data. And that's what's noted there. So is the resting heart rate though going in the right or wrong direction? So to assess that, let's have a look at how resting heart rate changes during aging. And this is WHOOP data. Since I wear WHOOP, I think it makes sense, at least to start, to look at, WHOOP users to compare me against other WHOOP users in terms of aging related changes. So resting heart rate increases during aging for both women in red and for men in blue. And I'm only gonna focus on the data for men as that directly applies to me. So we can see that age related change there for men with values of a little bit below 54 beats per minute for a 20 year old that increase to above 56 beats per minute for a 50 year old. And note that that this chart only goes from 20 to 50 years old. So for my chronological age, based on the population, average, I should expect to have a resting heart rate that's greater than 56 beats per minute. In contrast, my resting heart rate for 2021 was a little bit above 47 beats per minute. So by extrapolation on this, graph, I could, posit that my resting heart rate may be indicative of youth. Also, I've resisted the age related increase for resting heart rate, at least that age related increase that goes from twenty to fifty years. And there's a but in this story. So is the declining resting heart rate indicative of cardiovascular aging? So why would I think that? So whereas the WHOOP data goes from twenty to fifty years, this is Fitbit data and this is published. And I'll put the link to this paper in the video's description. So we're looking at average resting heart rate on the y axis plotted against age. And although the age range goes from 20 to 50, it also goes from 50 to 85. So it goes beyond the WHOOP data. So in agreement with the WHOOP data, we can see that resting heart rate increases for both women in green and for the men in blue up to 50 years old. And then after about 50, we can see that resting heart rate resting heart rate then declines all the way up to 85 years old. So how can we know if a declining resting heart rate is indicative of better or worse cardiovascular function? An evaluation of resting heart rate in conjunction with heart rate variability can help assess overall cardiovascular fitness. So, what is heart rate variability? Just as a brief introduction to that. So it's defined as the variation in time in between successive heartbeats. So what that means is the assumption is that when with a heart rate of 60 beats per minute is that the heart rate beats exactly one time per second, but that's not true. There's variability in that in that, how often that the heart beats. So it may be, point nine, one, one point one seconds, and that variability is then calculated as the heart rate variability. In this case, as shown by the picture here, the variability for the time in between beats was eight fifty nine, seven ninety three, and then seven twenty six milliseconds. When calculating the heart rate variability using the RMSSD calculation, you get a heart rate variability of 67 milliseconds. So what's my data? And, again, I the WHOOP tracks both heart rate variability and resting heart rate. So I have data that goes all the way back to August 2018, and this is more than twelve hundred days of data. So when I first started in 2018, my heart rate variability was 47.3. And I should mention too, at no point was I sedentary during any of these years. I've always been physically active. Back in 2018, I was walking at least 10 to 15 miles a week as to get to work. It's a one mile walk each way. So walking at least two miles a day every day, or at least five days a week. So getting up to 15 miles a week, including walking on the weekends, plus regular strength training, two to three days a week, at least an hour each session. So with that in mind, my rest my heart rate variability in 2018 was 47.3. I was able to increase that to 56.2 in 2019. I increased it further. And, again, this is the average daily heart rate variability. So each, you know, three hundred sixty five days of data, the year year average. So I increased it increased it in 2020 to close to 58 milliseconds. And then had a little bit of a dip in 2021, somewhere around 52 milliseconds. And then when comparing each of these years against 2018 using a two sample t test, we can see that each year was significantly different from 2018. So each of the years, 2019, 2020, '21, were each significantly different and significantly higher when compared to 2018. And that's what's noted there. So let's take a look at how heart rate variability changes during aging to put these data into more context. And, again, this is WHOOP data. So we're looking at heart rate variability on the y axis plotted against age. And in this case, for some reason, their data goes up to 65 years. So when looking at the high end of the range, as noted there for men, and the data for women in yellow is very similar. So in youth, heart rate variability is at the high end of the range can be as high as about one ten, a hundred and ten milliseconds that then get cut in half in 65 year olds to around sixty milliseconds. Similarly, the median value go, goes from about 80 in 20 year olds to somewhere around 40 in 65 year olds. And at the low end of this range, values of about 60 in 20 year olds dip to less than 30 in 65 year olds. So based on this data, it should be pretty clear that heart rate variability declines during aging. So from my data, for the more than twelve hundred days of data that I have, my average heart rate variability is 54.3 milliseconds. So to answer that question, how can we know if a declining resting heart rate, which is true in my case, is indicative of better or worse cap cardiovascular function when considering that my heart rate variability over this three plus year span is above the median for my age. The median here, although I haven't indicated to some indicated it, is somewhere around forty two milliseconds for my age group. So when considering I'm I'm I'm above that, one could argue that my cardiovascular function has improved since twenty eighteen, resisting age related changes for both resting heart rate and heart rate variability. Now, if the resting heart rate reduction that I've experienced over that three plus year period was in conjunction with a relatively low heart rate variability, for example, below the median for my age, so below 42, that would suggest worse cardiovascular function. So having a lower resting heart rate and relatively low heart rate variability would suggest worse cardiovascular function. Now it's not all sunshine in my data. As you can see, my data from 2019 and 2020 was much higher than 2018, and my 2021 data is significantly below the 2019 and 2020 data. So this shows that I definitely have room for improvement. So, 2022 is potentially a big year. Will my data continue to get worse from 2021, or can I reformulate my exercise approach to get back to the data in 2019 and 2020 in 2022? Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.