My current diet contains a lot of oxalate. For example, I eat a lot of spinach. And spinach is a rich source of oxalate ranging from 460 to more than 1,100 milligrams per 100 grams of spinach. So for the forty nine day period that corresponded to blood test number two in mid March, I averaged about a 138 grams of spinach per day. So when multiplied by the amount of oxalate found in steamed spinach, that yields about eleven hundred milligrams of oxalate per day just from spinach alone. But that's not not the only source of oxalate that I get in my diet. I also eat a lot of beets. So for blood test number two, again, that forty nine day period that corresponded to that blood test, I averaged about a 195 grams of raw beets per day, and when multiplying those values yields about a 125 of oxalate per day. And last but not least, oxalate is also found in carrots and I eat a lot of carrots in particular raw carrots. So for blood test number two, I averaged about 337 grams of carrots per day, which when multiplied by the amount of oxalate found in raw carrots yields a hundred and forty eight milligrams of oxalate per day just from carrots. So when summing these three foods just from these three foods, I get almost fourteen hundred milligrams of oxalate per day. So is this amount of oxalate potentially bad for health? So with that in mind, let's take a look at data from this recently published study, dietary oxalate to calcium ratio and incident cardiovascular events, a a ten year follow-up among an Asian population. So the keywords here are dietary oxalate intake and the incidence of cardiovascular events. But also note that in the title we see that calcium may affect this relationship, so let's jump into the data and see how it goes. So here we're looking at risk for any cardiovascular disease CVD related event versus the dietary oxalate intake. So first, it's important to define what would the CVD related events. So CVD related events included probable and definite or definite myocardial infarction. So heart attack, unstable angina pectoris, which is, chest pain that worsens, angiographic confirmed coronary heart disease, so, atherosclerosis as confirmed by angiography, and then any cardiovascular death including a fatal heart attack, coronary heart disease so atherosclerosis or stroke. Alright. So how what's the association for dietary oxalate intake with these cardiovascular disease related events? So dietary oxalate was, divided into three tertiles. Low, medium and high. So low oxalate intake was the fine, had a median value of a hundred and twenty milligrams of oxalate per day. Turtell two had a hundred and eighty one as a median value and Turtell three had two seventy seven as a median value. So right from the start, we can see that I would at least fall into Turtell three, the highest oxalate, intake group. So let's take a look at the association for dietary oxalate intake with CBD event risk. So that's the crude association unadjusted. And when compared with people who were in the lowest, Turtell for oxalate intake, We can see that there's a, statistically significant association for oxalate intake with CVD events. In particular, people who ate, in in tertile two, a 181, milligrams of oxalate per day and in tertile three, we see significantly increased risk for cardiovascular disease events in association with higher oxalate intakes. So more than a hundred and eighty one milligrams of oxalate per day. But note that many factors can impact this association, the association for dietary oxalate intake with cardiovascular disease events. So what might those be? So that's what's shown here. We're looking at data on the left for, people that had a cardiovascular disease related outcome on the left, and people who did not on the right. And you can see the total sample size for this study was about 3,000 people. So note that people who did have a CVD related, event were older, more men than women, there were more smokers, they had a higher BMI, a higher waist circumference, so, greater abdominal, adiposity, greater, fatness in the abdominal region. They had a higher, blood pressure, in in as indicated both by systolic and diastolic. People that had a CBD events had higher glucose, higher triglycerides, lower HDL, and then worse kidney function as indicated by a higher serum level of creatinine CR, which is used to derive e g f r. So a lower e g f r in people that had, more CVD events or had a CVD related outcome. Alright. So now that we've seen these data, it's important to note that any statistical model that looks at the association between dietary oxalate intake with CVD event risk should include adjustment for these variables. So did they adjust for these variables in the study. So let's take a look at what they included for model one. So model one included data for age, TC, total cholesterol, HDL, systolic, blood pressure, but interestingly not diastolic, treatment for hypertension, HTN, smoking, and type two diabetes, which accounts for, elevated glucose levels. So then what was the association for dietary oxalate after adjusting for these factors? So when compared with the lowest oxalate intake, we can again see a statistically significant association between oxalate with with CBD event risk, and this is true now only for the highest oxalate group, but not for the intermediate, oxalate group of a that had an intake of a hundred and eighty one milligrams, of oxalate per day. So from this, we can conclude that after accounting for model one variables, a relatively higher dietary oxalate intake is still significantly associated with an increased CVD event risk. Alright. So what about the other models? So in model two, they included model one variables and adjusted for kidney function with e g f r. And when compared with the lowest, intake of oxalate, we can see that there is a significant association as indicated by the p value, 0.03, and this is true for the, again, the highest oxalate intake group with a sixty percent increased risk for a CBD event, but not for the intermediate oxalate intake group, which you can see by that confidence interval interval in parenthesis 0.93 to 1.89, it overlaps with one. So when the confidence interval overlaps with one, it's not statistically significant. So we can adjust our summary statement to also include model two variables. So after accounting for model one and model two variables, that the relatively higher doc dietary oxalate intake is still significantly associated with an increased CVD event risk. Alright. What about model three? So model three, it included, model one and model two factors, but then also it adjusted for calorie, fat, and fiber intake. And now we can see that statistical significance is lost, but note that for the highest oxalate intake group, that confidence interval is still completely above one. It doesn't overlap. So there is a forty forty seven percent increased risk for CVD events after adjusting for all these variables in people that had relatively high 200 with a median value of two hundred seventy seven milligrams per day of oxalate, But not for the intermediate group. So again, as you can see, we can, annotate our summary statement to after adjusting for all these variables, a relatively higher dietary oxalate intake is still sorry, still significantly associated with an increased CBD event risk. Alright. So if you remember in the title, we saw that dietary calcium may, affect the association between oxalate intake with, CVD event risk. So how does dietary calcium intake affect this association? But before going there, it's important to ask why should we expect that calcium can impact impact this association? So dietary calcium impacts the absorption of dietary oxalate into the blood and that's what's illustrated here. So when looking at the intestinal tract, free oxalate anions ox two minus right there, are absorbed into the systemic circulation as shown there. And then once in the blood, they can then travel to, and accumulate to into structural tissues and organs where they can then potentially adversely affect health. So in the presence of calcium though, calcium binds to oxalate which then targets it for excretion first in feces as shown there. So a relatively higher dietary calcium intake should lead to reduced absorption of dietary oxalate into the systemic accumulate, systemic circulation leading to less accumulation in target tissues and organs, and then potentially, less affecting, overall health. Now note that that's not the only way to, calcium intake is not the only way to potentially, reduce oxalate absorption or to to get rid of oxalate. And the other way is free oxalate in blood can be, urinated. We can pee it out, and we can do that when there's good kidney function. But when there's poor kidney function, less oxalate is excreted via via urine. So that illustrates the important of having good kidney function if you're eating a potentially high oxalate containing diet. Now, note that diet and kidney function aren't the only ways to potentially, reduce oxalate in, oxalates amounts in the blood. Note that the liver and also red blood cells although I haven't illustrated it on this slide, the liver can produce oxalate via glycolate metabolism as shown there. And then once the liver produces produces it, it can be released from the liver or released from red blood cells, and where it can lead to its, accumulation in blood. So now that we know that calcium affects, oxalate absorption into the blood, now we can address that question. How does dietary calcium intake affect this association for, oxalate intake with CVD event risk? So here we're looking at risk for any CVD related event versus dietary oxalate intake and people consuming low, medium or high calcium diets. And this is data from the same study that was, listed on the, opening slide. So again, we've got our three turtles of oxalate intake. One twenty, one eighty one, and two seventy seven as median values for each of those three groups. But then we've got people who are eating a, low calcium diet, and this was defined as seven hundred sixty milligrams per day. And we can see that calcium impacts the association for oxalate with, CVD event risk as the p value for that association. We can see that it's lower than 0.05 so that's a statistically significant association. So what does the data show? So when computer compared with people on, a low oxalate low calcium diet, people that were on a relatively higher, oxalate low calcium diet, both TurTal two and TurTal three had significantly increased risk for a c v d event. Ninety two percent increased in tertile two, and a hundred and forty two percent increased in tertile three. So a relatively higher dietary oxalate intake, more than a hundred and eighty one milligrams per day, is significantly associated with an CVD event risk and people consuming a low calcium diet. So what about CVD event risk on higher calcium containing diets? Both the medium and high calcium diets are shown there. So in the medium calcium diet, these, these are people that average, that had a median calcium intake of eleven eighty milligrams per day, and on the high calcium diet, the median intake was seventeen sixty milligrams per day. And we can see from the p values that there weren't any significant associations between dietary oxalate with CBD event risk after accounting for calcium intake in the medium and high calcium groups. So let's just take a quick look at that data. So when compared with the lowest oxalate intake and medium and high calcium diets, we can see that the confidence interval for both tertile 2.61 to two two eight, two point two eight and point six seven to 2.51. So you can see it overlaps with one, so TurTal two is not significantly different from TurTal one data, and similarly TurTal three, we can also see the overlap for the confidence intervals both on the medium and high calcium diets, when compared with the, lowest oxalate intake, Tortell one versus Tortell three. So although relatively high dietary oxalate intake, more than a hundred and eighty one milligrams per day is significantly associated with an increased CVD event risk in people consuming a low calcium diet, this is not true at least based on this study for people consuming more than eleven hundred, almost twelve hundred milligrams per day of calcium. So to bring it back to the original question, is my oxalate intake of about fourteen hundred milligrams per day at least 1,400 of bad for health. We can put my data into context. So first, I would fall into Tertal three as mentioned before with an a median value of two seventy seven. I'm clearly within that group with almost fourteen hundred milligrams of oxalate per day. But then my average daily calcium intake for blood test number two was twelve nineteen milligrams per day. And if, for those who don't know, I use a food scale, I weigh all of my food and then log that into an online app. So, this is, as close to, as accurate of a calcium intake as it can be as as I'm weighing all my food and logging it. So twelve nineteen, milligrams per day for calcium would put me in the medium calcium diet, and when looking at the data for that, we can see that having a medium calcium diet, but high oxalate was not significantly associated with an increased CVD event risk when compared with lower oxalate intakes on a medium calcium diet. So, based on that, I may be okay. No increased risk for CVD based on my relatively high oxalate intake, but mostly because of my, high relatively high calcium intake. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more, about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.