What does the biochemistry of longevity look like? In an earlier video, we took a look at blood test data from the Hainan Centenarian study which included more than 1,700 people that had a median age of 100 years old. So in that video, we identified what was good in terms of biomarkers that were youthful and were associated with a low all cause mortality risk and correspondingly, biomarkers that were bad. But what about the biochemistry of longevity in other geographical regions? So with that in mind, in today's video, we're gonna take a look at blood test data from, four Italian centenarians. And that's what we can see here. So first, identifying some terms. So in this study, there were a 120 quote unquote healthy centenarians and I'll explain that more in a minute. So in terms of centenarians, this was, heavily weighted towards, more women than than men, a 100 women and only 20 men. And this is pretty common in centenarian studies as far more women, reach 100 years old than men. So in terms of healthy centenarians, what did what was that defined as? So these are centenarians that were free of acute or chronic illness and more specifically, they didn't have Alzheimer's disease, metabolic diseases, cardiovascular disease, stroke, cancer or any infectious disease, active infection. Alright. So what about the data? So in this video, we're gonna identify what was good, what was leaning towards not good, and what was just outright not good or even bad. And note that there's gonna be a lot of data in this video So there'll be time stamps in the video description for each biomarker. So if you don't wanna go through the whole video, you can just go through the video's description and click on each individual biomarker for the ones that you may be interested in. Alright. Starting off from the top, let's take a look at what was good, in terms and first on the list is glucose. So how let's put this data into into perspective with aging related changes and all cause mortality risk. So first, it should be pretty clear to everyone. Glucose increases during aging with values in the mid eighties in youth that increased to more than a 100 in both men in green and women in red as shown there. And this is data from a study that included about 12,500,000 people. So putting the centenarian, blood test, of blood glucose level of 84 into perspective, this would be a very useful value. So what about all cause mortality risk? So there's a similar story here and using data from the same study, we can see all cause mortality risk there and it's a j shaped curve, which means that lowest risk for all cause mortality was in the eighty to ninety four milligram per deciliter range. And then, all cause mortality risk increases for glucose levels below 80 and also higher than 95. So when we put the centenarian 84 into perspective, we can see it's right at the bottom of that curve. So lowest all cause mortality risk based on their centenarian glucose data. So in terms of what's good, these centenarians have youthful and healthy levels of glucose. So next up is HDL, and so let's put this data into perspective. How does HDL change during aging? And we can see that data here. So HDL peaks in youth with values of around 56 for men and around 65 for women in around in the twenties, early twenties and then the HDL declines pretty steadily during aging for women such that 88 year olds, the high end of the age range in this study, have values in the fifties. Now for men, the decline for HDL is more steep into the thirties after which it stabilizes in the low fifties, for the duration of the lifespan, or at least until 88 in this study. So when putting the centenarian data of fifty seven milligrams per deciliter into perspective, for women this would be what you would expect to see or an average value what you'd expect to see for someone approaching 60. And for men, this is higher than the peak, of around 56 in youth. So from this we can conclude that HDL for these centenarians is youthful. So what about all cause mortality risk? And we can see that data here. And again, this is, from a study of 15,900,000 people and all of these studies will be in the also in the video's description. So we're looking at all cause mortality risk and putting the centenarian fifty seven milligrams per deciliter into this chart. We can see that it's right at the bottom of, mortality risk so it's at the lowest all cause mortality risk. So in terms of what's good, we can see that these centenarians have both youthful and healthy levels of HDL. Alright. Next up are triglycerides. So starting with all cause mortality data and this is a meta analysis of 61 studies. Lowest all cause mortality risk for triglycerides is around ninety milligrams per deciliter or one millimolar. Now, when you go higher than one millimolar though as shown by the red, arrow, all cause mortality risk increases as triglycerides increase up to 3.5 millimolar in this study. So around that would be around, three hundred milligrams per deciliter. So putting these centenarian, one hundred and six, milligrams per deciliter into perspective, we can see that it's relatively close to the lowest all cause mortality risk. It's not at the lowest risk, ninety milligrams per deciliter or one millimolar, but it's not too far away from it. So in terms of what's good, these centenarians have relatively healthy levels of triglycerides, at least in terms of all cause mortality risk. But we can put this data into perspective in a different way. So relatively low triglycerides may also be a hallmark of longevity. And this is data from 13 separate studies that looked at triglyceride levels in people that were a 100 years old or older as shown here. And as you can see by their triglyceride levels, in 11 of these 13 studies, triglycerides were less than a 110 milligrams per deciliter or around 1.2 millimolar. So that's why, based on this data relatively low triglycerides may be a hallmark of longevity. Alright. Next up are red blood cells. So red blood cells decline during aging as shown here with values of about 4.8 in men, green line and, around 4.3 for women in youth that then that then declined to about 3.9 in, 95 year olds. So putting the centenarian data of 4.24, onto this plot, we can see that these red blood cells are about 30 to 80 years younger than expected based on a 100 year old chronological age. So the centenarians are off to a good start in terms of having relatively youthful red blood cell levels. Now, hemoglobin is found within red blood cells. So let's take a look at that data. And looking at all cause mortality data first starting with men, so in this study, the reference was defined as 14 to 14.9. In terms of the centenarian data, they had 12.53 grams per deciliter. And as you can see that men that had, hemoglobin levels that were, less than 13 in this study, that was significantly associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So any of the men in the Italian centenarian study that had hemoglobin levels of 12.53 would have an increased all cause mortality risk. Alright. What about data for women? And note that again, this Italian centenarian study was predominantly women. Five out of every six people were, or centenarians were women in this study. So when compared with the reference in this case which was 12 to 12.9, increased all cause mortality risk for women was only present when, hemoglobin was less than 11. So in this situation, the hemoglobin levels in the in the Italian centenarian study were 12.53 which would put these women at lowest all cause mortality risk. So in terms of what's good, these centenarians have relatively youthful and healthy, levels of hemoglobin for women and youthful red blood cells, but unhealthy hemoglobin levels for men with an increased all cause mortality risk. Alright. Next up are platelets. So platelets platelets decline during aging for both men and women. And so going from the age range from 20 all the way up to a 100 for both men and women in this study, We can see that platelet levels start off at about two thirty in men and decline to less than two ten, as they, get close to about a 100 years old. Similarly for women, platelet levels start off a little higher around two sixty that then decline, to two forty as these women, in this study, approach a 100 years old. So when considering that the platelets in, the Italian centenarian study were two twelve, that would be about twenty years younger than expected for the men, but even older than expected for the women. So what about all cause mortality risk? That can help to add perspective to the age related data. And in this study of about a 130,000 people, when looking at all cause mortality, 200 to 300 platelets was defined as the referent as shown there with the, relative risk of one. But then platelet levels that were less than 200 and that were greater than 300 had a significantly increased risk for all cause mortality. So from this we can conclude that 200 to 300 platelets, is associated with maximum reduced all cause mortality risk. So in terms of what's good, although these centenarians have aged relatively aged levels of platelets, these are healthy levels as it's associated with lowest all cause mortality risk. Alright. Next up is uric acid. So how does uric acid change during aging? And note that there are a very few studies on, how uric acid changes during aging and if anyone's come across larger studies, I'm gonna show data from, that included about 80,000 people. If anyone's come across larger studies than that, please post it in the comments. So starting with the data for men, this is about 50,000 men. First they looked at men at for, each individual age group. So 20 year olds, 30 year olds, 40 year olds all the way up to 60 year olds and then, these people came back and provided subsequent blood tests so it was evaluated longitudinally. And when evaluated longitudinally uric acid levels increase for each respective age group as shown there for the men. But note that uric acid UA was higher cross sectionally in young when compared with old. So we can see that the young people in this study had uric acid levels of about three fifty five whereas the 60 year olds had values that were lower of around three forty. And if we would put the centenarian uric acid levels onto this plot, this would be even further, reduced, with a value of three thirty three micromolar. So from this we can conclude that for at least for men in this study, uric acid levels were indicative of age. So what about the women? Now this is data from the same study about 30,000 women and it's a little bit more, consistent and clear. So after 40 years old, we can see that regardless of the, age, birth cohort or the age when, uric acid levels were evaluated whether in 20 year olds or 60 year olds, we can see that uric acid levels consistently increase during aging for women. So if we're gonna plot the, uric acid levels for women on this plot, we would see that it would be even higher than the top which was 300 micromolar. So again, from this we can conclude that uric acid levels in the Italian centenarians was aged or indicative of age levels. Alright. What about all cause mortality risk? So that's what we're looking at here. All cause mortality risk on the y axis plotted against the concentration of uric acid on the x. Now lowest all cause mortality risk is shown there at the bottom of the curve was present at, a concentration of 303 micromolar. And note that the centenarians, the Italian centenarians had an average value of three thirty three micromolar which is very close to lowest all cause mortality risk. So that's good news. So in terms of what's good, although these centenarians had aged levels of uric acid not youthful, they had close to the lowest all cause mortality risk based on their uric acid levels. Alright. So now we're gonna start to get into some, data that trends towards not good and get, starts to look down outright bad. Alright. So first, a s t, this is it mostly liver on enzyme. Let's put that data into perspective by looking at all cause mortality data. And in this study, it was sixteen point six million people. So, first when, looking at the reference which was, a s t with a median value of 20, the centenary, the Italian centenary value of twenty three point three will put them into q three, which had a five percent significantly reduced all cause mortality risk. So A S T is actually good news in this situation. Alright. So what about A L T? This is also a mostly liver, enzyme marker. So, what is the data for A S T look like in terms of all cause mortality risk? Risk? So using data from that same study, in this case, the referent was defined as, or was defined had a median value, sorry, of 15 and this is where we would find our Italian centenarians as their average value was 13.4. But notice there's a red rectangle there and that's because although the reference in most studies is usually lowest risk for all cause mortality, in this study actually q q '2 and q three, so relatively higher ALT, in this case 18 to 22 was associated with a significantly reduced all cause mortality risk. So in this situation, the ALT of 13.4 for the Italian centenarians would actually be higher all cause mortality risk when compared with values in the 18 to 22 range. So we've got one liver marker that's good, AST, and one liver marker that may be not good or suboptimal, ALT. So to break the tie or to add more insight, looking at the ratio between these two, the AST to ALT ratio with all cause mortality risk may provide more insight. And that's what we can see here. So, this is we're looking at survival on the y axis so all cause mortality, and then this is up to about a ten year follow-up after the baseline assessment of the AST to ALT ratio. So and again, it's all cause, mortality or all cause death as shown there. So in people that had a relatively low a s t to a l t ratio, in this case their ratio was about one point o two, and with a relatively high a s t to a l t ratio, in this case was, an average ratio of one point eight three. When looking at survival or again up to about ten year, ten years after the initial assessment, we can see that people that had a relatively lower AST to ALT ratio had improved survival as shown by the green line when compared with the red line the that had a higher AST to ALT ratio. So putting the centenarian data, into perspective, so dividing AST by ALT, that yields a ratio of 1.745, which is much closer to being in the high AST to ALT ratio range, versus the low, which had a value of one point o two. So in terms of what's good, although AST is good and ALT is suboptimal, AST to ALT that ratio is most definitely trending in the wrong direction. Alright. Next up, in terms of things that may be trending towards, not good was total cholesterol. So first, let's take a look at how total cholesterol, T C, changes during aging. And that's what we can see here. So total cholesterol is relatively low in youth and it's found in youth, and then it increases during aging up until around the mid fifties for both men in green and women in red, and then it starts to decline afterwards, up to, eighty eight years on or or the maximum age range in this study of 12,800,000 people, 80 so it declines up to around 88. But what what about older than 88? So if we're gonna extrapolate based on how that trend after the mid fifties goes for total cholesterol, I don't think it's a far stretch to think that we could see even further reductions for total cholesterol for a 100 year old. So in that case, low total cholesterol is found in youth but it can also be found potentially in an in advanced age. So total cholesterol, age related data for total cholesterol can't tell us anything about whether it's good or bad for the Italian centenarians and their value of hundred and eighty nine milligrams per deciliter. Alright. So what about all cause mortality risk? So this is data from the same study and looking at the seventy five to ninety nine year old age group which is pretty close to centenarian status. So when putting the centenarian data, the Italian centenarian data of one eighty nine into perspective, that's actually not too far from the lowest all cause mortality risk of two twenty to two twenty nine in this study. But note, there are some, sex specific effects. So having a centenarian value in this study of, one eighty nine was not significantly associated with an increased all cause mortality risk for men, but a five percent increase all cause mortality risk for women. So in terms of what's good, we can't tell if total cholesterol is youthful or age and although there isn't a an increase all cause mortality risk for men, there is a small but significant increase all cause mortality for women that would have a total cholesterol value of one eighty nine. Alright. So next up are leukocytes or white blood cells, WBC's. And this is data from the Baltimore Longitudinal Study on Aging. So people were assessed at a baseline visit and then provide a blood samples, and their mortality status was evaluated more than forty years up after the initial baseline assessment. So in this study, we can look at, median survival. This is the fifty percent survival when the time when half the population has died and half is still alive. And we can see that the longest life expectancy based on white blood cells in this study was for people that had white blood cells in 3.5 to six range. In this case, they live thirty seven years after the initial baseline assessment. Now shorter life expectancies were found for people that had white blood cells in the six to 10 range, and even shorter for people that had greater than 10 for white blood cells. But I should note that shortest life expectancy was found for people that had less than 3.5 for their white blood cell counts. So if we're gonna put the Italian centenarian data into perspective, that would put them in the six to 10 white blood cell range which isn't optimal, which isn't in the 3.5 to six. But note that's how much I mean 6.18 isn't that far from, you know, being within that, you know, six range. It's it's close. So in terms of what's good, white blood cells are just outside the optimal range, of 3.5 to six. So this isn't a terrible marker but, it could be a little bit better. Also note that how white blood cells change during aging isn't a home how much homogeneous change. So, white blood cells are comprised of neutrophils primarily. Neutrophils, lymphocytes and monocytes. Neutrophils and lymphocytes increase during aging whereas lymphocytes decline during aging. So unfortunately, in this study they didn't present that additional data for each of these white blood cell differentials, but that would provide more context to how how slash whether 6.18 is good, you know, or potentially bad for, longevity. Alright. Next up is total protein. So, total protein levels decline or decline during aging as shown there with values of around 7.4 in both men and women that decline to, around 6.6 to 6.8, depending on if it's, men or women as shown by the red arrow. So if we put the centenarian Italian centenarian data into perspective of one 7.11 gram per deciliter, this is, 35 these are values that are 35 to 45 years younger than expected based on chronological age. So if we stop there and only look at total protein based on aging related changes, we would miss the story because this is a superficial, analysis. And that's because total proteins equal the sum of albumin and globulin. So we can take a further look at how albumin levels are and how globulin levels are in terms of aging and all cause mortality risk and then get a better evaluation of whether total protein levels for these centenarians is good intermediate or potentially bad. So how to album let's start with the albumin levels as shown there, 38.4 grams per liter. So how do they change during aging? Well, they decline during aging as shown there. So we're looking at albumin levels on the y axis plotted against age, in this case, all the way up to a hundred years, and we can see that but for both men and women, albumin levels decline during aging with a peak in youth of around 46 for men and about 45 for women. So putting the Italian centenarian data into perspective is shown there 38 point four. Note that these are centenarians. So this is a small, you know, improvement. This is about eight years younger albumin than expected based on their chronological age. So it would seem that this is good data, but let's have a look at all cause mortality data for albumin and that's what shown here. So all cause mortality data for albumin on the y axis plotted against the concentration of albumin on the x. So in this case, albumin lowest all cause mortality risk for albumin is forty six grams per liter as shown there. So it's the bottom of the curve and then if we're gonna put the centenary centenarian data, the Italian centenarian data into perspective, 38 four, we can see that it there's a significantly increased all cause mortality rates based on their albumin levels. So, what about globulin? As I mentioned, total protein equals albumin plus globulin. So since we know protein total protein and albumin, we can rearrange this equation to calculate the globulin or the gamma gap concentration. When we do that we get a a value of 32.7 grams per liter. Now note that I can't calculate the standard deviation but at least we've got a pretty close to an average value there or what we'd expect the average value to be. So let's put the globulin level into perspective. And this is all cause mortality data or survival probability on the y axis plotted against time, after the baseline assessment of, globulin. And this was about a five year follow-up in a study of 94 year olds which isn't too far from our centenarians in the current in the current study. So there are two levels of globule globule sorry, globule here. We're looking at a blue line which had globule levels that were less than 3.2, and a red line that had globule levels that were greater than, 3.2. So in terms of life, expectancy or survival, we can see that people that had relatively lower levels of this gamma gap or lower globulins, so less than 3.2 had the longest life expectancy. And then people that had higher globulin levels or a higher gamma gap, more than 3.2 had a shorter, significantly shorter life expectancy. And if we put the Italian centenarian data into perspective on this plot, they would be in the on the red line as their globulin levels would be, 3.27 grams per deciliter. So, so based on that data the sent these centenarians, the Italian centenarians would have an increased all cause mortality risk when compared with lower levels of globulin. So in terms of what's bad, these centenarians have aged and unhealthy levels at least based on all cause mortality risk of albumin and unhealthy levels of globulin. Alright. So we've got two more biomarkers. First up is creatinine. So creatinine levels increase during aging as shown here. As you can see by the red line in this age ranges from 20 to, 90 year olds, around 90 year olds. So the importance of creatinine is that it's used to estimate kidney function using eGFR as the marker of kidney function. So when using the creatinine value of 1.29 and a 100 year old age, we get an eGFR of 37 for men and 49 for women. So why is that important? That's because eGFR as that metric of kidney function declines during aging as shown here. So, youthful levels of eGFR or again is that metric of kidney function or around one twenty five in youth that decline towards 50 in people approaching 100 years old. So putting the centenarian, eGFR data, into into perspective on this plot, we'd expect to see it somewhere there around 50 or even less, you know, at least based on the data for men. So in terms of what's bad, we've got these centenarians, these Italian centenarians have age levels of creatinine and a relatively low or age expected levels of e e g f r. Alright. So last but not least is urea nitrogen or blood urea nitrogen and these Italian centenarians have a, level of two milligrams per deciliter. So let's put that data into perspective. So blood urea nitrogen increases during aging and if you're you if you're familiar with the channel, you've seen this, this data many times. So, blood urea nitrogen levels are relatively low in youth with values of eleven and thirteen in, women and men respectively as shown there by the green rectangle and then it increases, to more than twenty milligrams per deciliter in people approaching 100. So putting the Italian centenarian data into perspective, it would be way off the chart as the highest blood urine nitrogen value on this chart is 24 milligrams per deciliter. So it would be way off the chart as I've indicated there. So what about all cause mortality risk? So that's we're looking at here, all cause mortality risk on the y axis plotted against the concentration of blood urine nitrogen on the x. So lowest all cause mortality risk in this study of more than four hundred and twenty five thousand people was present when, BUN was 14.7. As you can see, it's at the lowest it's at the low low the bottom of that u shaped curve. But then as blood urine nitrogen increases, especially during aging, you can see that there's that red line. It's there's a significant increase for all cause mortality risk. And putting the centenarian data of fifty two milligrams per deciliter, onto this plot, again, it would be way off, the chart as the high end of the chart only goes up to thirty nine milligrams per deciliter for blood urine nitrogen. So in terms of what's bad, these centenarians had aged and unhealthy levels of blood urine nitrogen. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.