If we track and optimize biomarkers of organ and systemic health, can aging be slowed? If so, what should we track? So here we can see biomarkers representative of many different organ systems. And more specifically, many of these biomarkers are included in the blood based biological age clocks, PhenoAge and or aging.ai. And they include biomarkers of immune function, liver function, metabolic function, glucose lipid panel, etcetera and kidney function. But other biomarkers are not included, including biomarkers of muscle, bone, and body composition or related to muscle, bone, and body composition, lung function, brain function, and or health, and cardiovascular metrics. So, with that in mind, the focus of this video will be what's optimal for the cardiovascular fitness metrics including resting heart rate and heart rate variability. So let's start off with the resting heart rate, RHR, and seeing how it changes during aging. So this is Whoop data. Whoop is what I wear, not sponsored by them. That's I've worn them since 2018. There are many different devices that can provide this information. So here, we're looking at the average resting heart rate over the twenty to fifty age age range, and this is data for women in red and men in blue. And we can see that wrestling heart rate increases for both men and women up to 50 years of age. What about older than 50 years? So for that, we've got to go to Fitbit data and here again, we're looking at the average wrestling heart rate. But now, we can see that the age range is wider from 20 to 85 years old. And in agreement with the WHOOP data, we can see that wrestling heart rate does indeed increase up until around 50 years of age for women in green and men in blue. But after that, resting heart rate declines during aging from about 50 to 85 years old. So we can see that resting heart rate increases then it decreases during aging. Now, note that relatively low resting heart rates are found both in youth and in older age. So is a relatively low resting heart rate indicative of youth or aging? How can we answer that question? So for that heart rate variability, HRV provides more context. So what is the HRV? So the definition of it is, it's the variability for the time in between heartbeats. So for example, for a heart rate of 60 beats per minute, the assumption is that the heart beats exactly once per second, but that's not necessarily true. So here, we're looking at three consecutive heartbeats, and we can see that the time in between those heartbeats is not exactly the same. Eight eight hundred fifty nine milliseconds, seven ninety three, and seven hundred twenty six milliseconds for those three, the intervals for those three intervals for each heartbeat there. So the time in between heartbeats is the variability that's calculated as heart rate variability. And more specifically, Woot provides the r m s s d, that's the root mean squared of successive differences. So that's the data that I'm gonna present as as it directly applies to what I'm wear or what I'm wearing or the gen the data that I'm getting from from Woot. So let's have a look at how heart rate variability changes during aging. And we can see that here. Again, this is the RMSSD. This is the version of heart rate variability provided by WHOOP. And note that all heart rate variability measurements are not the same. So it's an important distinction to know if it's the RMSSD SSD or other heart rate variability measures. And this data is from the twenty to sixty year age range. And this is a study of more than 8,200,000 people. So this isn't whoop data. And note that we've got two different curves here. We've got the solid lines and the dash lines with the data for women in red, men in blue. And note that the data, the solid lines is heart rate variability data obtained early in the morning at six in the morning, and the dash lines is at 06:00 at night. So we can see that heart rate variability is higher in the morning when compared with nighttime measurements. Now for me, Woot provides the data, in the morning. So while I'm asleep during the last sleep cycle. So that's the data that I'm going to focus on going forward. So with that, we can see that heart rate variability declines during aging as shown there with values of about 75, median values of about 75 and 20 year olds, and values of about half of that around thirty five forty in 60 year olds. So what about older than 60 going beyond this age range? So there there are very few studies that have looked into this in older adults. At least very large studies that have looked at this. Here's one of them that's highlighted and when looking at from youth up until 79 years old, we can see that heart rate variability does indeed decline during aging. Starting from values of fifty three milliseconds down to nineteen milliseconds. But then, something interesting happens at least in this study for the 20, 80 to 99 year olds. And we can see that the heart rate variability is higher than expected based on the age related decline with a with an RMSSD of thirty milliseconds. I mean, this would be something you'd expect to see for someone in their late thirties. So having a higher this suggests that a higher heart rate variability than expected based on chronological age, maybe a marker of longevity. And it's important that let's take a look at data for, older than 99 years old. So data in centenarians. So again, this is the RMSSD, so heart rate variability. And sent the centenarians in the study, again, it's a small study. So, we can't make definitive conclusions. We'd need to see more data. But for the 17 centenarians in the study that had an average age of 102 years, they had a median heart rate variability of 36 milliseconds. Now, that was significantly higher than the, 84 year olds, that had a median heart rate variability of 24 milliseconds. But note that the centenarians didn't have higher heart rate variabilities than very young adults, 21 year olds that had a heart rate variability of about 58 milliseconds. So from that, we can see from these two studies that suggest that having a a higher heart rate variability than expected based on chronological age, maybe a marker of longevity, but we'll need to see more studies to see if that will be true or not. So to, address our question earlier, is a relatively low resting heart rate indicative of youth or aging? We can we can now, answer that question. So, at younger ages, we see relatively lower resting heart rates but relatively higher heart rate variabilities. And conversely, at older ages going even beyond 60 years old, we we can expect to see lower resting heart rates but also relatively low heart rate variability. Now, I've tracked both of these metrics since August 2018 and I now have more than fifteen hundred days of data. So let's take a look at that data. Now based on the population based averages that I've presented on this slide, we'd expect to see an increasing, resting heart rate and a declining heart rate variability over that four year period. So let's see if that's true. So let's start off with data for resting heart rate and, this is individual days. So this is, fifteen hundred more than fifteen hundred days of data each each dot is a single day of data. So when I first started tracking in 2018, my resting heart rate was about fifty fifty one beats per minute which was then reduced, and this is the year average, was then reduced in 2019 to about 49 beats per minute, further reduced in 2020 to 48.1, further reduced in 2020, sorry, 2020, further reduced in 2021 to '47, around 47 beats per minute, And my current average in 2022 is 44.9 beats per minute. Now, besides just looking at averages, year to year averages, we can calculate whether a year to year changes may be significantly different using a two sample t test. So when doing that, we can see that each of these years, 2019, 2020, etcetera, when compared to 2018 are significantly lower based on the p value with a p value less than 0.05 being statistically significant. And then, we can also compare year over year changes not just 2019 verse 2018. So when doing that, each each of the years from 2020 to 2022 is significantly better than the preceding year. So a significantly reduced year over year y o y resting heart rate since 2018. So from now, we can see that I've consistently reduced my resting heart rate over the past four years. So is that good or bad? And the reason that I asked that question is because we know that a relatively low resting heart rate can be found in youth, but also in advanced stage as shown there. So note that I I've resisted at the very least, I've resisted the age related increase for resting heart rate based on this, data we'd expect to see an increasing resting heart rate over the last four years, but that's not the case. I've actually reversed that. So to address that question, is is this good or bad? The the constantly, consistently declining resting heart rate. For more context, let's have a look at heart rate variability data since 2018. And that's what we can see here. So, when I first started tracking in 2018, my average heart rate variability was 40 set, around 47. In 2019, I increased it to 56 and using a two sample t test, that was a significant increase, so I significantly improved heart rate variability 2019 versus 2018. In 2020, 57.8 for for an average for the year, and then, when compared with 2018, still significantly higher but, just outside of statistical significance for being a year over year improvement. So from that, we can conclude that 2019 data was not different from 2020 for heart rate variability, although it was better than when I started in 2018. But then in 2021, I regressed. You can see my average heart rate variability was 59 51.9 milliseconds for the full year, daily average. And this is better than 2018, but significantly worse than 2020 as shown there. So a major goal of 2022 was to get my heart rate variability back up, and we can see that thus far in in 2022, my average heart rate variability is 59.4 milliseconds, which is better than when I started in 2018 based on a two sample t test, and better year over year when compared with 2021. So So, from that we can see that I've increased my heart rate variability over the past four years with that hiccup in 2021. Now, let's let's put these data into context. How do these data compare with age related changes for heart rate variability? So we can the the expected median heart rate variability based on my chronological age, which I'll be 50 in January would be thirty five point one milliseconds based on how it changes during aging. Now, to put my 2022 data into context, at worst, fifty nine milliseconds is just above the high end of the heart rate variability range for my chronological age. But at best, this is this is the median heart rate variability that will be found for someone that's about 22 years younger. So what whether the truth is just good for my chronological age or a value, that you would expect to see in someone much younger, the the truth is probably somewhere in the middle. Alright. So now, we can address that question again. Is a relatively low resting heart rate indicative of youth or aging? So in my case, having a relatively high heart rate variability plus a low resting heart rate, more specifically, 59 for heart rate variability, forty forty five for resting heart rate in 2022, that suggests cardiovascular youth. In contrast, for my chronological age, a lower heart rate variability but a higher resting heart rate. More specifically, expected data would be 35 for HRV, 57 based on chronological age. So we can see that fifty nine forty five is better than thirty five fifty seven. Higher heart rate variability, lower resting heart rate suggestive of c v youth, cardiovascular youth. Alright. So what's contributing to these improvements for resting heart rate and heart rate variability? How am I doing it? So a big factor may involve body weight. So, this is my average monthly body weight from August 2018 through September 2022. So, over the same period that I've been tracking these cardiovascular fitness metrics. And we can see that Oh, before saying, jumping into the data, note that I record my body weight, every morning after, you know, pee and poop and fasted. So, when I first started, we can see I was heavier than where I am now. So, around one fifty nine, hundred fifty nine pounds. Where currently now, I'm about one fifty one, one fifty two. So, So, what's the relationship for body weight with resting heart rate? So here, we're looking at my average monthly resting heart rate over that same time period and the two curves look interestingly, similar where they could even potentially overlap. And more specifically, when we look at the periods where my body weight was reduced over time, we can see that our heart resting heart rate also declined over that over that same, time period. Conversely, when my body weight went up for given given periods of time, resting heart rate increased. So that then raises the question, is body weight significantly correlated with resting heart rate? So for that, let's look at individual data points for daily resting heart rate versus body weight in order to calculate the correlation between the two. And we can see that that correlation is positive meaning as as body weight increases, resting heart rate, increases too. Or as body weight increases, that's significantly correlated based on that p value there with a higher resting heart rate. Conversely, as body weight approaches a 150, that's significantly correlated with, resting heart rate approaching 45 beats per minute. And because my most recent body weights or average monthly body weights are approaching one fifty, that shouldn't be a surprise then why my resting heart rate is around 45 beats per minute. Alright. So what about heart rate variability? What's the relationship for body weight with heart rate variability? So the this plot for average monthly heart rate variability is shown there isn't as clear, clear cut as the data for resting heart rate where you can't overlap it with with the, body weight trace. But we do see some, apparent trends. So as body weight has declined as shown there by the green arrows, we can see increases for heart rate variability. And conversely, as body weight has increased, we can also see that my heart rate variability has decreased during those periods. Now, it's not as clear cut though. So, what about this the correlation? Are they significantly correlated? So, we can see that data here. Daily heart rate variability versus body weight over the past four plus years. And again, we see a significant negative correlation, which means that as body weight increases, that's significantly correlated with, reduced heart rate variability. And conversely, as body weight approaches a 150, we can see that my heart rate variability approaches 60 which is pretty close to where I am, currently for 2022. So to answer the question, what's the relationship for body weight with heart rate variability and resting heart rate? At least for me, it may be different for others. Resting heart rate and heart rate variability approach youthful values as body weight decreases. Now, note that this may not be the only factor that's impacting my data. Daily physical activity also and I should mention obviously, impacts cardiovascular fitness metrics. So let's take a look at that data. So as measure measure of daily physical activity, I track the average daily heart rate which is provided by my fitness tracker. So the, and that's and I mentioned, I use it as an index the a b h r as an index of daily physical activity. And why that's important is because if you walk a thousand step steps on flat ground, that'll that'll result in a lower heart rate when compared with walking a thousand steps up a hill. So when compared with tracking steps, tracking heart rate may be a more informative measure of, of the effort involved in in your steps or the effort involved overall effort involved in your daily physical activity. But note that a higher average daily, heart rate isn't just indicative of physical activity. I've had days where I wasn't very physically active but had some, you know, emotional stress going on. And fortunately, those days are rare. But I've seen heart rates on those, heart rates on those days that are can even surpass my days that include workouts. So, obviously, I try to minimize as much non workout stress as possible to to limit that variable. Alright. So what's the correlation for the average daily heart rate with next day resting heart rate? Then we can see that here. So this is data for, from March 2020 through September 2022. So I have far less data only about nine hundred days. Unfortunately, I didn't have the idea to track the average daily heart rate until about nine hundred days ago, but I wish I tracked it, earlier so I'd have a lot more data. Nonetheless, we can see that there's a positive core a significant positive correlation between how active that I was and my next day resting heart rate. So that suggests that too much daily activity and too often will be bad for the resting heart rate. Alright. So what about heart rate variability? How does physical activity affect next day heart rate variability? So we can see that here and, we can see that again, a significant negative correlation which suggests that the higher my average daily heart rate, the lower my next day heart rate variability. Which again too, suggest too much daily activity and too often would be bad for heart rate variability. So with that in mind, finding the balance between active and rest days will be important for optimizing resting heart rate and heart rate variability. Now I can't say how that would work for others. I think that's an individual thing. You'd have to determine, you know, after a workout day, how many days you may need to recover based on tracking, heart rate variability, resting heart rate, and the average daily heart rate. But to illustrate in my data what that looks like, so we can see that my, on my active days that include a workout, my usual workout, my average daily heart rate is 59 beats per minute. So starting from the middle with that 59, we can then see over the next three days, I purposely titrated activity downward so that it was lower than 59 beats per minute allowing my cardiovascular system to recover and potentially enabling, you know, maximum improvements for resting heart rate and heart rate variability. And then you can see by the 59 spike at the end, then I then had another workout. So that's a four day cycle workout and then three relatively lower intensity days and then workout again. But, I also have a three day cycle as you can see on the left side of the graph, there was a 59 and that was a workout day too. And then I titrated activity downward over the next two days after then I had another workout on day three. So three day cycle for exercise followed by a four day cycle in this, representative image. And that's basically the approach that I've stuck to for the last few weeks. I I try to stick to a three day cycle but sometimes, you know, work life balance gets in the way. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. Before you go, we've got some discount links you may be interested in. If you wanna, blood test at home, you can do that using, the the company Quantify. So discount links for all these will be in the video's description. If you wanna measure your epigenetic age using Horvath, Hannem or Dunedin Pace, we've got a discount link for that. Oral microbiome composition, and I should have that update video coming within the next, few weeks, so stay tuned for that. If you wanna track your own, there'll be a discount link for that. If you wanna track your diet using Cronometer, discount link for that. Or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee and ink. Again, all of these links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.