The central premise of this channel is that aging and disease are biochemical processes that happen over many decades. So if we track and optimize well established biomarkers of organ and systemic health, can aging and diseases be slowed? So, with that in mind, earlier this week, I blood tested for the sixth time in 2022. So, with that in mind, what's my biological age? So first, when using doctor Morgan Levine's phenotypic age calculator which is a metric of biological age. And if you're interested in measuring your own phenotypic age or biological age, that link will be in the video's description. So, when using this test, we can see that my biological age is 34.5 years, which is fifteen point two years younger than my chronological. Now, note that the lab measurement, Quest high sensitivity c reactive protein measurement was less than point three milligrams per liter. So CRP could be lower than point three milligrams per liter, but it can't be higher because that's the limit of their detection. And besides just putting data into a spreadsheet, all of the blood test data, screenshots of of the lab report will be included at the end of the video. Now, this is just one test. So for more context, let's have a look at biological age results since 2018. And I have 21 blood tests over that time period. And we can see that here. So, first, from 2018 to 2019, I only have three measurements, but over those three tests, my average biological age using Levine's test was 36.1 years. Then, in 2020, I tested six times with an average age of 35.6. Similarly, 35.6 in 2021, and thus far in 2022, we can see that I've reduced it down to 34. Now, besides looking at averages from year to year or differences for averages, for Levine's test from year to year, we can compare them statistically. And when I use a two sample t test for the 2020 to 2021 data, so those 12 blood tests versus the six blood tests in 2022, I've significantly reduced, LaVine's biological age, with a p value of 0.04. Now, this is one way to to look at the data. Another way is by comparing the the, chronological age minus biological age. And prior to 2022, that average reduction was about twelve years over 15 tests from 2018 to 2021. Thus far in 2022, we can see that the average chronological age minus biological biological age, again, c a minus b a is has been better than twelve years for each of the first six tests in 2022. With a low of thirteen point six years, but at my best, a reduction of seventeen point two years. Nonetheless, the average chronological age minus biological age reduction for the first six tests in 2022 is fifteen point three years which we can see is further reduced when compared with the about twelve year average from 2018 to 2021. So, this is one easy to use and, reliable biological age metric, Lemin's test. What about aging.ai? So, aging.ai3pointo is also free to use and I'm not sponsored by either, doctor Morgan Levine or by aging.ai. I just use it because they're relatively reliable test for predicting chronological age and free and easy to use. So, aging.ai, it's easy. You just type it in, go to the website and you put your data in. And when entering the 19 variables as shown here, I get a predicted age of 33 years. Now, and that's I I should note that that's sixteen point seven years younger than my chronological. Now, just like we did for Levine's test for more context, let's have a look at previous data, using aging.ai age date age data. And we can see that here and I have a lot more data for aging.ai because it doesn't include CRP which is an add on test here in The US. I just started ordering it for every blood test, over the past few years. Whereas, early on I didn't, include it for every test. Nonetheless, aging.ai doesn't include that so I have a lot more data. So from 2009 to 2013, I only have three tests but my average aging dot a I age over those three tests was 32. And then, as you can see, I started to test more often in 2016 such that from 2016 to 2021, I tested 27 times with an average aging.ai age of 29.9 years. Alright. So, what about 2022? So, over the first six tests in 2022, my average aging.ai age is 29.7 years. And when comparing 2016 to '21, 2021 data versus the six tests in 2022, these two groups of data are not significantly different. In other words, my aging.ai age is pretty close to thirty years over the past, six year span or seven year span including 2016. And also, going back to 2009, my aging.ai age range is consistently in the 29 to 32 year range regardless of my chronological age. Alright. So what's contributing to these biological age reductions? What about supplements, fitness, and or diet? And over the next few videos, I'll break down each of these specifically to see how they may be contributing to these, blood test data. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more of my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And we've got some discount links that you may be interested in including epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing, diet tracking with chronometer, or if you're interested in supporting the channel, you can do that with the website, Buy Me a Coffee. Now onto the blood test data.