Longevity interventions. What works and what doesn't? To start, let's have a look at data for glycine, ergothioneine, and nicotinamide riboside or anon supplementation in mice and their effects on longevity. But is there something better? And that something better may include bile acids. So first, does glycine supplementation extend lifespan? So here we're looking at data, survival data for, females on the left and then males on the right. And notice that it says pooled females and that's because data from three, different study sites, the Jackson Lab, University of Michigan, and University of Texas. So each of these sites conducted their own independent lifespan studies looking at glycine supplementation. And then this data, these two images is the pool data from all three sites. So it's essentially a meta analysis for the effect of glycine supplementation on longevity. So glycine supplementation was started at nine months in both the male and female mice. And then when looking at median survival, so this is fifty percent survival. This is the time when half the colony has died and half is still alive. We can see that glycine supplementation increased significantly increased lifespan, median lifespan by 4% in females. So what about maximum lifespan? So this is ten percent survival, this is the time when ninety percent of the colony has died and ten percent is still alive. So in the female mice, glycine supplementation did not extend maximum lifespan. Alright. What about the data in males? So first, median survival, we can see that glycine supplementation significantly increased median survival in the male mice by six percent, and similarly for maximum survival also a significant six percent increase for, glycine supplementation. So from this we can see that glycine extends lifespan in mice. So what about in people? Now if glycine contributes to it longevity in people, I'd expect that long live people would have relatively higher blood levels of glycine. So is this true? So here we're looking at blood levels of glycine in people that were in the 94 to a 105 year old age range, so they had an average age of 97 years. And then their offspring, which were in the 50 to 79 year age range, and then an at that had an average age of 67 years. And when comparing the older versus the younger group, we can see that blood levels of glycine were 10% higher. So is this statistically significant? And in this case, this is when the p value is less than 0.05, and the false discovery rate FDR, which is an extra level of statistical rigor is also less than 0.05. So in both cases, we can see that the p value is less than 0.05 and the F D R is less than 0.052. So this is a 10% increase in four blood levels of glycine in the 97 year olds when compared with the younger age group. So from this we can conclude higher blood levels of glycine in long lived people. So next up is Ergotinine and I've already presented this data in a in an earlier video and so that data will be in the right corner if you're interested in seeing the full story. So I'm only gonna present a little bit of the Ergotianine data. So this is, survival curves for Ergotianine supplementation in fruit flies. So this is the Canton s, strain for fruit flies and this is, data in females. So when looking at median survival, again fifty percent survival, we can see that three different concentrations of Ergotinine supplementation in flies significantly extended median lifespan. So what about on a different strain of flies and in this case that different strain is the YW strain and again in females. So when looking at median survival, we can again see two different, concentrations of Ergotathione in EGT on the right, significantly it's extended, lifespan. So from this we can conclude that Ergotathione extends lifespan in flies and that data doesn't yet exist yet in mice or other mammals, so we'll have to keep our eyes open for when those studies are eventually published. So what about in people? Will, Ergothenian extend lifespan in people? Now, if Ergothenian promotes longevity in people, I'd expect again relatively higher blood levels in the long lived. So for that we go back to to see if this is true, we go back to that earlier study that I showed on the last slide for glycine, and now we're looking at ergothione ergothione levels in blood. So first in the 97 year olds, when compared with the 67 year olds, we can see that the older group had a 40% reduction for blood levels of Ergothenine, and this reduction is significant. Meaning the p value and FDR are both less than 0.05. So in this case, blood levels of Ergothenine are not higher in long lived people. So that kind of argues against them having a potential role on longevity in long lived people. Now note that, it also raises a question. Would increasing dietary Ergotinine in long lived people further improve longevity? And there's no data yet to see, to test that so we'll have to stay tuned for those studies. Alright. Third on this list is Nicotinamide Riboside or n r. So again, here we're looking at pool data for females on the left and this again is in mice, and this is again from, pool data from three sites, the Jackson Lab, University of Michigan and University of Texas, and I should note that this data is from the interventions testing program and one reason why they're considered the gold standard for lifespan studies is because, they they do, you know, independent testing at multiple test sites and then pull that data. So again, it's like looking at a meta analysis of, supplements and their potential effects on lifespan. So, note that supplementation with NR was a thousand parts per million and it was started in youth at eight months of age for both the female and male mice. So, in terms of n r, we're looking at the pink triangles and then when looking at median survival for both the female on the left and male on the right, mice, we can see that n r did not have an effect on median lifespan in either female or male mice. Alright. What about maximum survival? Again, ten percent survival, ninety percent of the colony, died, was already dead and ten percent was still alive. So similarly, no effect on maximal survival for in our supplementation in either female or male mice. Now note that there's a lot of data on, these lifespan curves, so it's kind of hard to see, because there's so much overlapping data. So let's take a look at the actual numbers. So here we're looking at median lifespan and first starting with the data in females, we can see that median lifespan for the control fed mice was eight hundred and seventy four days, and for nicotinamide riboside supplemented female mice it was eight 75. But, that p value is 6.12, 0.612, so we can see that median lifespan was not different for the n r supplemented female mice when compared with controls. Similarly for the male mice, controls live eight seven hundred eighty seven days, a median lifespan, and our supplemented mice live seven hundred sixty three days and that too, that difference is not significant as indicated by the p value of 0.25. Alright. In terms of maximum lifespan, so ninetieth percentile, ten percent survival, for controls. The female controls they lived, had a maximum lifespan of a thousand forty seven days and although the n r supplemented female mice live a thousand sixty eight days, that that wasn't a significant difference as you can see by the p value of 0.99. And then similarly for the male mice maximum lifespan, not different as you can see by the, a thousand forty seven days for the controls, a thousand nineteen for the n r supplemented mice, but again the p value is 0.99 not even close to statistically significant. So n r does not extend lifespan in mice. Now based on these data, the expectation would be that long lived people do not have higher levels of n r in blood when compared with younger subjects. So again, is that true? So for that we go back to that initial study that looked at blood levels of many different things in the 97 year olds, when compared with their offspring 67 year olds for nicotinamide riboside this time. And for the older group, we can see a 1% higher level of blood levels of n r and a significant significantly higher levels of NR one by one percent in the 97 year olds when compared with the 67 year olds. So again, yeah, 1% higher blood levels of NR in relatively long lived people. So but that raises the the question, is 1% higher for NR enough to impact longevity? So of these three interventions, glycine with that four to six percent increased lifespan may be the most promising. But is there something better? And I know for most people the obvious is, you know, to jump out would be c r, arachnomycin. I've already covered those in other videos. So let's take a look at something else. And that something else may include bile bile acids. So an abundance of bile acids are higher in long lived older adults. So this is data from that same study that compared the, blood levels of many different things that were, different for the 97 year olds versus their offspring, the 67 year olds. And as we can see by this very long list, these are primary and secondary bile acids. The whole list is just those, you know, metabolites that are bile acids. So when comparing the 97 year olds versus the 67 year olds, you can see this starting from the bottom of the list glycol collate, The 97 year olds had a 16% higher blood level of glycololate when compared with the 67 year olds. But if you go all the way up to the top of the list, you can see that the longest lived had more than seven fold higher levels of a particular bile acid known as ursocolate. And if you look at the median on this list, it's about two fold higher. So ursodeoxycholate somewhere around 2.12 o six to be specific, in terms of blood levels in the 97 year olds when compared to the 67 year olds. So in other words, when looking at all the bile acids on this list, they're not up by a little bit, they're up by a lot. And where there's smoke, there's fire. And what I mean by that is, this isn't one bile acid that's higher in the longest of the group. It's a whole bunch of them. So let's go into the bile acid story more because this this is their first time appearing on my channel so it's important to introduce them. So starting from cholesterol in the liver, cholesterol undergoes a series of enzymatic steps to be degraded into primary bile acids, c a, cholic acid, otherwise known as cholate and c d c a, which is known as chino, keno or chino or keno, I'm not sure how it's pronounced but, chino deoxycholic acid or chino deoxycholate, c d c a. Now those two primary bile acids can then be converted into other forms. In particular, conjugated with either taurine or glycine to form tauro c a, glyco c a, or tauro c d c a, or glyco c d c a. Now, note that on this list for, blood metabolites that were higher in the 97 year olds when compared with the 67 year olds, each of these four metabolites are there and again, not up by a little bit in blood, but up by a lot as much as 2.1 fold higher for Toro, Kenodeoxycholate in the 97 year olds when compared with the 67 year olds. Now, these primary bile acids are then stored in the gallbladder and are then released after a meal into the intestine to promote lipid absorption. Now once these bile acids are in the intestine, primary bile acids b a's are converted by gut bacteria into secondary bile acids And there are just a few secondary bile acids that are shown on this, cartoon, but there are many different forms and, that aren't included in the cartoon and that you can see on the list on the left. So just as a few examples of secondary bile acids, we can see, D C A. So Deoxycholic acid or Deoxycholate and then we can see U D C A, ursodeoxycholic acid, ursodeoxycholate and L C A, LithoCholate. Now, two of these secondary bile acids are on the list. Deoxycholate is 86% higher in the 97 year olds versus the 67 year olds and ursodeoxycholate is again 2.2 o six fold higher in the older group when compared with younger. So how are bile acids related to longevity? Besides the associations that are in the longest live versus short lived shorter lived, let's have a look at more data for bile acids and how they may relate to longevity. So primary and secondary bile acids are increased in blood from dwarf mice which have increases for average and maximum lifespan. And that's what we can see here but we need to introduce what we're looking at in terms of the model. So the model the dwarf model that we're looking at are lit lit mice and they're indicated by the black circles, and the lit lit mice have a mutation for the receptor for growth hormone releasing hormone, G H R H, which as the primary intervention results in ninety nine percent reduced circulating levels of growth hormone, but also reduced circulating levels of I g f one. Alright. So now back to the survival data. So we're looking at median survival. First starting with the controls and note that the median survival for the controls is 30 which in comparison to other interventions, the control strain is often short lived like in the case of alpha ketoglutarate and berberine. Controls are short lived so a small extension of median lifespan by those interventions got them to, you know, thirty months or a little bit above, but the control strain was short lived. So in other words, for this study and looking at dwarf force versus controls, the control strain was not short lived as they had an, a median lifespan of thirty months. So these dwarf mice have a 23 to 25% increase for average lifespan including both males and females. And similarly, when looking at maximum lifespan or 10% survival, dwarf these dwarf mice, the little little mice also have a 15% increase for maximum lifespan. So now we can return to the original premise of this slide, which is that primary and secondary bile acids are increased in blood from dwarf mice, which is what we see here. So starting on the left, we've got the primary and secondary bile acids, and their concentration in the little mice or these dwarf mice, lit lit mice, in wild type mice, so normal mice, and then the ratio between the little mice with the wild type mice. So just highlighting three of these primary and secondary bile acids that were on the list for the longest lived human group, and that that's what's shown here. Deoxycholate, Cholate and ursodeoxycholate. We can see that these bile acids aren't up by a little in the dwarf mice, they're up by a lot. So for example, Deoxycholate is up 3.7 fold, cholic acid is up 3.5 fold, and ursodeoxycholic is up 2.8 fold in the dwarf mice when compared with the wild type mice. And then looking at the total of all of these bile acids, we can see that, beyond the three that I indicated, the sum of all these bile acids on the list are 4.2 fold higher in the dwarf mice that have extended longevity when compared with wild type mice. And again note that these, bile acids, the ones that I boxed or rectangle were also higher in blood from long lived people. So note that this isn't the only animal model where bile acids are increased in association in association with longevity. So let's have a look at that data. So first starting with, dietary methionine restriction, that's been shown to extend lifespan and I presented this in a in a in another day, video on my on my channel. So if you're interested just look up methionine restriction and you will find that data. So just as a quick review, methionine restriction extend light extends lifespan. So when starting from median survival of the control strain, we can see that, methionine restriction significantly increased median survival, six points by six point six percent and also maximum survival as we can see there. Now, liver levels of cholic acid, again, which is a primary bile acid are increased on a methionine restricted restricted diet and that it's increased in liver that indicates that there's an increase in synthesis of cholic acid. So what are we looking at here? Wild type c d or mice on the control diet on the left and then w t m r is mice on the methionine restricted diet. And with that green arrow, we can see that mice on the methionine restricted diet have higher level up liver levels of cholic acid. So from this, although methionine restriction is the primary intervention, we can see that cholic acid is associated with longevity in mice on a methionine restricted diet. Now I to go further, there are more animal models where bile acids are increased in association with longevity And that's what we can see here by looking at levels of cholic acid in progeroid mice on a methionine restricted diet. Now, progeria is a mouse model of accelerated aging. So for the mouse model of accelerated aging for progeroid mice, that's the g six zero nine G and these were progeroid mice on a control diet c d. Now, note that to start, there are very low levels of cholic acid in these progeroid mice. And then in this study, they fed these progeroid mice meth or methionine restricted diet or m r and then we can see that, levels of cholic acid are significantly increased in the progeria mouse model. So what's the importance of higher c a, cholic acid levels in progeroid mice on a methionine restricted diet? Well, dietary methionine restriction extends lifespan in this progeroid mouse model. So when looking at median lifespan for the controls, we can see that there was a significant increase by twenty percent in the progeroid mice on a methionine restricted diet and it close to significant increase for maximum lifespan with a p value of 0.08 for maximum lifespan. Now note again note that although the primary intervention is methionine restriction relatively higher levels of the bile acid, cholic acid, c a is a part of this story. So what about causation? Everything I've shown so far for cholic acid is just association. What about causation? Can bile acid supplementation independently increase lifespan? And as we'll see, cholic acid supplementation extends lifespan in a mouse model, of accelerated accelerated aging or progeria and that's what we can see here. So in this case, they use a different model for, progeria which is the ZMPSTE knockout mice. So again, this is an accelerated aging model or progeria. And in this study, they divided the mice in two, fed one proger progeroid, group controlled a controlled diet and the second, they fed them with, point 1% Cholic Acid or CA. And what we can see when looking at median survival when compared with controls, was that there was a seven percent increase for median survival in the progeroid mice fed a cholic acid diet. And in terms of, maximum survival which was, twenty percent survival in this case, so eighty percent of the colony died, twenty percent was still alive. This was borderline significant with a p value right at the border 0.054. So this then raises another question, would, cholic acid or cholate supplementation in age mice that are not prodrug extend lifespan? And that study hasn't been published yet, so I'm eager to see, if slash when that study is published to see if it actually impacts, to see if it impacts aging and not just accelerated aging models. But it also raises the question, is cholic acid related to longevity in people? And just to refresh your memory, cholic acid was indeed found on that list of metabolites in particular bile acids that were higher in the 97 year olds when compared with the 67, year olds. As shown there, it was twenty two percent higher in the longest lived group when compared with their offspring and it was statistically significant as you can see by the p and p value in FDR less than 0.05. So this then raises other questions. Will other bile acids besides collate when considering that long list of bile acids that are higher in the longest lived group, 97 year old, will other bile acids increase longevity in mice and potentially even people? And if that's true, if cholic acid and other bile acids, are able to impact longevity in people, how can we how can we optimize levels of bile acids in our blood? What interventions can possibly affect levels of bile acids in in our blood? And stay tuned for that. I'll have, videos on that coming up, sometime in the future. So with all this in mind, in terms of bile acids, they may be the next frontier in longevity research as there's very little press on them yet, but, that may change after, people see this video. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.