In earlier videos, we saw that my biological age using doctor Morgan Levine's phenotypic age calculator as a metric of biological age is consistently in the 34 to 36 year old age range which is about thirteen years younger than my chronological age. Similarly, when using aging.ai and with data that goes all the way back to 2009 and with a lot more blood tests, we can see that my biological age range is in the 29 to 32 year range, which is significantly younger than my chronological age during that corresponding time period. So So we can see from these two blood based biomarker, biological age calculators that I have a consistently younger biological age, but what's my biological age using epigenetic testing? So with that in mind, I reached out to True Diagnostic and they sent me a couple of kits. And in this video, we're gonna go over data for Horvath, Hannum and Dunedin Pace. So all of those, each of those epigenetic clocks. And if you're interested in measuring your own epigenetic age, I have a discount link from True Diagnostic, and that link will be in the video's description. Alright. So as a first, first step, for each of these epigenetic tests, how well do they correlate with chronological age? What's their association with all cause mortality risk? And then once we've put these data into perspective, what's my own epigenetic data? So first, starting with Horvath's epigenetic test or more specifically, this is the intrinsic epigenetic age acceleration or IEA and this is a measure of cell intrinsic aging. So how does Horvath's epigenetic test correlate to, correlate with chronological age and what's its association with all cause mortality risk? So first, Horvath's epigenetic clock is strongly correlated with chronological age. In fact, better than every other epigenetic test that exists and we can see that data here. So, on the y axis, we've got two different iterations of the Horvath clock, on the left Horvath one, and on the right Horvath two, and we can see it says DNA m h, so DNA methylation age, or epigenetic age and then that's plotted against chronological age on the x axis. Now, you can see a lot of different colored, dots on each of these plots and each of those, colored circles is a, different cell type. So this is a multi cell and multi tissue clock, and more specifically, we got cells from the from breast, buccal cells or cheek, brain, cerebellum, colon, cord blood, dermis or skin and so on. So it's a multi cell and tissue clock and it's looking at the correlation for epigenetic age with chronological age. So for both iterations of the Horvath clock on the left and right, we can see strong correlations with chronological age. And more specifically, when looking at the numbers, we can see that the correlations for Horvath's epigenetic test with chronological age is 0.94 on the left and 0.85 on the right. So, very strong correlations for Horvath's epigenetic test with chronological age. And just as a quick note, statistical significance is usually less than, a p value of zero point o five. You can see that the p values for each of these correlations is one times 10 to the negative 200. So I I hate to use the term highly significant but these are very significant correlations for Horvath Horvath's epigenetic test with chronological age. Alright. What about all cause mortality risk? So, Horvath's I e a a is also significantly associated with it associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. And we can see that here. This is a meta analysis of 13 studies that included more than 13,000 people. And when looking at the meta analysis hazard ratio and p value as shown there, we can see that a relatively higher IEAA or a relatively higher Horvath epigenetic age is significantly associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. Now, if there's a weakness in that data, it's that the hazard ratio is very small. So although this is a significant association for a relatively higher I E A A or a relatively higher Horvath epigenetic age, the hazard ratio for all cause mortality only increases by one point four percent. Alright. So with these data in mind, the chronological age and all cause mortality, what's my Horvath epigenetic age? So I have two, blood, two time points. The first was on 05/26/2022, and we can see that my intrinsic age or my Horvath epigenetic age on the first test was 54.99 years, which is six years older than my chronological age of 49.3 at that time. And then I tested again on July 11, and again, we can see that my Horvath epigenetic age, 53.52 years, and that's four years older than my chronological age. So we can see an older Horvath epigenetic age relative to my chronological age. Now to the so we're off to a bad start. To add insult to injury, centenarian offspring, so the kids of people who live to older than a 100 years or or longer, centenarian offspring have a lower Horvath Epigenetic Age or IEAA when compared with age match controls and we can see that here. So first looking at IEAA on the y axis and then we've got Horvath Epigenetic Age in centenarian offspring, which is the orange bars when compared with the age match controls in gray bars. And then we can see for the centenarian offspring that they have a significantly a lower, Horvath epigenetic age when compared with the age match controls. So note that I don't have longevity genes. The longest lived person in my family was, to date 95 years. So this may be one possible explanation. Alright. So that's the bad news, but there is good news. So let's get into that. And the start of the good news is data for Hannum's extrinsic epigenetic age acceleration otherwise known as EEEAA and this is a marker of immune system aging. So first, just like we did for Horvath's test, how is the Hannam epigenetic clock related to chronological age and all cause mortality risk. So Hannum's epigenetic clock or EEEAA is significantly correlated with chronological age and we can see that data here. So again, starting on the y axis where we've got DNA m age or DNA methyl age, DNA methylation age or more specifically epigenetic age for the Hannum clock plotted against chronological age. And when using that multi cell and tissue clock just like we did or we saw for the Horvath test, we can see a significant correlation for Hanham's clock with chronological age. Now, note that the correlation for the Hanham clock isn't as strong as for the Horvath test. The correlation coefficient is 0.68, but we can again see that very low and statistically significant p value of one times 10 to the negative 200. Alright. Now, Horvath's, sorry. Hanham's test isn't just significantly associated or correlated with chronological age, a relatively higher EEAA or Hanham Epigenetic, clock test score is significantly associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. And we can see that here using that same meta analysis of 13 studies where we showed data just showed data for the Horvath test. And we're looking at the meta analysis has ratio and p value as shown there, we can see that a relatively higher Horvath, epigenetic, age is significantly associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. Now, again, just note that that hazard ratio, although it's a little bit stronger than what we saw for the Horvath test, that's a 2.9% increase for a relatively older hore, Hannem epigenetic age. So let's just keep that in mind as we go forward as we go forward before we get into the Dunedin PACE, data. Alright. So now that we've seen how good, or or what the data is for chronological age and all cause mortality for Hannem, what's my Hannem epigenetic age? So on the first test in May, we can see that my Hannem epigenetic age was 36.87 years, which is twelve years younger than my chronological age at that time. And then similarly, before going into the second test, we should note that why this is is considered an immune system aging metric is because it includes many different immune parameters including levels of b cells, c d four, c d eight, and the ratio between c d four and c d eight t cells. Levels of NK cells or natural killer cells. Total levels of lymphocytes, neutrophils, monocytes, and eosinophils. So those amounts are factored into this metric. It isn't just epigenetic age, it also includes, the proportions and amounts of of each of these immune cells. Alright. So what about the second test in July? So then relatively consistent data, we can see that my Hannem epigenetic age was 37.47 years, which was again twelve years younger than my chronological. So from both tests, I've got a twelve year younger Hannem, epigenetic age or EEAA relative to chronological age. Alright. So next up, let's take a look at Dunedin PACE data. So first, what is Dunedin PACE? So this is data derived from the Dunedin study, which is located in New Zealand, and then PACE stands for the pace of aging calculated from the epigenome. So it's a PACE of epigenetic aging clock. So just like we did for the Horvath and Hannem test, how does Dunedin PACE related to chronological age and then how what's its association with all cause mortality risk? So, here we're looking at the correlation for, chronological age with Dunedin PACE data on the y axis plotted against chronological age. And we're looking at that data for men in blue and women in orange, we can see that Dunedin PACE is significantly correlated with chronological age. More specifically though, we can see that that correlation is 0.32. And if there's a but, the but is that Horvath's and Hannem's epigenetic test have stronger correlations with chronological age. And just to refresh your memory, remember both iterations of the Horvath test had correlations, with chronological age of zero point nine four and zero point eight five, which are both higher than Dunedin Pace, and Hanham's was, correlation was 0.68. So so far Dunedin Pace has a weaker, but still significant, correlation with chronological age. So where Dunedin PACE shines it's for it is for its association with all cause mortality risk and its ability to detect the biological age reduction induced by calorie restriction. So let's start off with the data for all cause mortality and you can see by the title, Dunedin PACE is as good as good as the best epigenetic clocks for their association with all cause mortality risk. So first, starting with data from the normative aging study and this is a study only in men, no worries though. The second study framing out Framingham offspring includes both men and women. And then, we're look on the y axis, we're looking at the mortality effect size. The HR is hazard ratio. So in other words, this is the risk for all cause mortality on the y axis. And then on the x axis, we've got a head to head match up for many epigenetic tests including Dunedin and PACE. The first iteration of Dunedin and PACE, which is Dunedin p o a m, PACE of aging methylation. And we've got Horvath and Hannem epigenetic test there, and then we can see PhenoAge. But note that this isn't the blood based biomarker PhenoAge metric, this is the DNA methylation or the epigenetic test that was used for PhenoAge. So PhenoAge has two tests, the blood based biomarker test that I commonly report on this channel, and a separate DNA methylation, repigenetic age based pheno age. And then last, head to head match up with grim age. So first, we can see well, before going into the first, so now then at a hazard ratio of one, where the confidence interval is either completely above one or completely below one, we've got statistical significance. So, when considering that, we can see both the Horvath and Hannem tests, their confidence interval overlaps with one. So, they are not significantly associated with all cause mortality risk in that study, in the normative aging study. In contrast, we can see that both both iterations of the of Dunedin, the Dunedin and PACE and POAM and PhenoAge and GrimAge epigenetic test were each significantly associated with all cause mortality risk in this study. So, so far, Danina PACE is as good as the best Epigenetic clocks in the same ballpark, which in this case would be PhenoAge and GrimAge for their association with all cause mortality risk. Alright. What about in study number two? So this is the, again, the Framingham offspring study which included both men and women. And in in this case, we can see that the Horvath test again has an, confidence interval that overlaps with one. So it was not significantly associated with all cause mortality risk in this study, But we do see statistical significance for the Hannem epigenetic test and also PhenoAge and GrimAge. You can see that GrimAge at the far right has the largest hazard ratio or the largest risk or the associated with all cause mortality in this study. But also note that both iterations of the Dunedin epigenetic tests including Dunedin PACE are as good as the best epigenetic clocks or in the same ballpark in terms of hazard ratio and being associated with all cause mortality risk. Now so if we've just got a an all cause mortality risk that's similar for Dunedin and PACE with all of the, you know, with the best epigenetic clocks including PhenoAge and GrimAge. So so what? We can use either of those four metrics for epigenetic, testing. What's special about Dunedin and PACE? Well, a younger biological age for people on calorie restriction is identified by Dunedin and PACE, but not by other Epigenetic clocks. And for this study, this is a study done in people, this is not a study done in mice. This was a two year randomized control trial, RCT, of calorie restriction, and more specifically, the average calorie restriction over that two year period was about 12%. Now, the expectation is that people on CR would have a younger epigenetic age or DNA m, DNA methylation when compared with people who could eat as much as they wanted whenever they wanted ad lib. And one reason to expect that is because blood biomarker based biological age improved for people on CR and I have a video on that. It'll be in the right corner. That's a video from a while back. So if you're interested in that, check it out. Alright. So let's get into the into the data. So here we're looking at changes for Horvath and Hannem for the epigenetic changes on on calorie restriction for up to two years. And that's we can see there. So we've got three measures at baseline epigenetic age, genetic age after 12, and 24 on the diet. And then again, those two groups, so in black we've got the ad lib, people that ate as much as they wanted whenever they wanted, and then the calorie restriction calorie restricted group in red. Again, about a 12% c r over the two year period. And then, we can see that starting from baseline, and this is gonna be the case for each of the six epigenetic clocks I'm gonna show. Starting from baseline, there were no differences in epigenetic age for both groups. They started from the same epigenetic age whether they were in the ad lib or calorie restricted group. Alright. So what about changes as a result of being on CR? So for Horvath, we can see that that's not significant and for those that may think there's some group separation between the twelve and twenty four month points for Ad Lib versus CR. Note that the CR group would have a trend, again, not significant though, a trend towards an older epigenetic age using the Horvath test at least at the twelve month point. But again, this was not statistically significant. And so not no significant differences for epigenetic age for Ad Lib for c r on Horvath and similarly, you can see that the curves for epigenetic change or the change for epigenetic age using Hanum overlap. Not not significantly different. Alright. What about Pheno age and GrimAge? Which again, were able were associated with all cause mortality risk in both the studies that I just showed. So, when looking at both of those clocks and for the change in epigenetic age using them, we can again see no significant differences for either of these clocks for people on c r when compared with Ad Lib. Now for the PhenoAge data, again, it looks like at the twenty four month period, that's people on CR actually had an older epigenetic age. But, again, that data was not significantly, significantly different from people on Ad Lib, so we can't conclude anything. It's just the, you know, the the the line goes that way but based on the numbers, based on the stats, it's not statistically different. Alright. So what about both Dunedin Epigenetic, age measures? First, starting with the first iteration of the Dunedin PACE study or or Dunedin PACE epigenetic test. Dunedin POAM, p o a m on the left. So again, that too not significantly different. So there were no differences detected for the change in epigenetic age when looking at ad lib versus c r. But where we do see changes between group, changes for the change in epigenetic age is with Dunedin Pace. You can see that ad lib have a significantly older epigenetic age or change in epigenetic age at both the twelve and twenty four month time periods when looking at, the differences between Ad Lib and CR. So in other words, people on CR were detected to have a younger epigenetic age using Dunedin PACE at both the twelve and twenty four month time points when compared with Ad Lib. Alright. So, with this in mind and putting the Dunedin PACE data into perspective, what's my Dunedin PACE data? So, we can see that here and just going straight to the numbers. So, my Dunedin PACE value is 0.8. So, what does that mean? So on the left, we can see the slowest epigenetic aging rate, which would be 0.6. And what that means is for every one year of chronological age, epigenetic age increases by 0.6 years. Conversely though, the fastest epigenetic aging rate is on the right and that's 1.4, and that means for every one year of chronological age, epigenetic age increases by 1.4 years. So we can see that my value of 0.8 is on on the right track in terms of relatively slow Epigenetic aging. Obviously, I do have some room for improvement as the slowest Epigenetic age would be 0.6. So, 0.8 not too far away from that though. Alright. Now, I mentioned that I have two tests. So in the seven eleven test, we can again see that my Dunedin PACE value was 0.82. So I've got consistently relatively slower biological age using the Dunedin PACE epigenetic age test, based based on this data. So, that's again, that's good news that it's on the right track, but there is some room for improvement to get me to 0.6 which would be the slowest Epigenetic aging rate. Alright. So summary, so using true diagnostic which provided Epigenetic age data for the Horvath, Hannem and true, Dunedin Pace, Epigenetic tests, we saw that I have a relatively older Horvath Epigenetic age and one reason maybe is because I I just don't have longevity genes. But then we saw a relatively low HANAM epigenetic age, which would be indicative of youthful immune cell aging and then using, Dunedin PACE, we saw a relatively slow Dunedin PACE epigenetic aging or that we suggestive of a reduced, epigenetic aging rate. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And note that there are now discount links which first, epigenetic testing using true diagnostic. Again, and all these links will be in the video's description. If you're interested in quantifying your oral microbiome, that will be in the video's description or using Cronometer. Or if you just wanna support the channel, you can support the channel with Buy Me a Coffee. All those links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.