Oral bacteria have been linked with multiple adverse health related conditions, which is what we can see here. So starting with, inside the mouth, they've been linked with dental caries or cavities, primary endodontic infection or dental root infection, periodontal disease or gum disease, dry mouth but also dry eyes, so Sjogren's syndrome. And then oral bacteria have been linked with conditions outside of the mouth too, including atherosclerotic plaque, pneumonia, rheumatoid arthritis, and lupus. So with that in mind, how can we optimize oral bacterial composition? So to me, the first step is quantification. So with the goal of quantifying oral bacterial composition, I used bristle. And if you're interested in quantifying your own oral bacterial composition, you can use my discount link conquer age your fifth conquer aging 15 and that link will be in the video's description. So what's my oral bacterial composition? And I've listed most of it here. This is, 98.3 of my full oral bacterial composition. Just there wasn't enough space on the slide to put all of it, but you can see that the lowest relative abundance, so how much of each bacteria, on a on a scale of a 100% is in the sample. You can see that that goes down to point 2%. So, so very low amount. So we've got 1.7% that's missing if anybody's interested, which is missing it. Just leave a comment. I'll be happy to post that information. So first, I want to know are there are any of these bacteria linked with oral and or systemic health? You know, it's great to get the data, but what does it mean? Is it good or bad? So first, in terms of bacteria oral bacteria that have been linked with health, oral health, there are two main genera, Neisseria and Rothia. So in my, saliva, this is a saliva sample, I have a decent amount of both of those genera, with the sum of about 53% for for for both Neisseria and Rothia in my salivary microbiome. So is 53% for just these two bacteria or these two bacterial genera, is that optimal for oral health? And nobody knows. That's the honest truth. There there is a paucity of studies on how the oral microbiome changes during aging and its association with all cause mortality risk. So that data just doesn't exist yet. Alright. So how does my oral bacterial composition compare with bacteria that have been linked with oral and systemic health? So this data that we just showed earlier. So first starting in the mouth, I'm gonna start with one bacterium, streptococcus mutans, which has been linked with, cavity formation, so dental caries. Now, in my salivary, sample, there was no streptococcus, streptococcus mutants in my data. So the question is why? Now, I make a homemade mouthwash that contains Xylitol so that may be one reason why I didn't have any of this bacterium in my sample. So let's take a look at that data. So the growth of this bacterium, again streptococcus mutans, is limited in the in the presence of 1% xylitol. So here we're looking at levels, in vitro levels of, streptococcus mutans and specifically it's the strain two three six six s one. So the c is control levels of this bacterium without any xylitol, and then we can see increasing levels of xylitol in the in the media and then what happened to growth. So when compared with the control sample that had no xylitol and when compared with 1% xylitol one per 1% x as shown by the green arrow, we can see that there was a 76% reduction for streptococcus mutants in the presence of 1% xylitol. Now, what about Xylitol's potency against other strains of this bacterium? So just because it works against one strain, there may be many strains and if this is the only strain it works against then why use Xylitol at all? So here we're looking at the inhibition percentage for the for Xylitol against other streptococcus mutant strains. And specifically there are five. The one I just showed which is 23, six six s one, but then four other, streptococcus mutant strains as, strains as shown by the black arrows. And what we can see is that in the presence of 1% xylitol, there's a 61% to 76%, growth inhibition of this bacterium in the presence of 1% xylitol. So with these data in mind, I make my own homemade mouthwash containing 1% Xylitol, and that's one gram of Xylitol per 100 milliliters of water, which then raises the question, what else is in the mouthwash? So to, help address that, let's take a look at what happens, with an increase in oral acidity, which is a major contributor to tooth decay. So here we're looking at on the y axis at plaque pH, so plaque is a sticky substance on teeth, and as a function of time starting at time zero, after exposure to a glucose rinse. So for the person who has active cavity formation after, the glucose rinse after exposure to the glucose rinse, we can see a rapid decline in plaque pH to below 5.5 all the way down to about 4.5. So why is a pH an oral pH of 5.5 important? Well, that that's the quote unquote critical pH and there that's a high risk for cavity formation when the pH drops. The oral pH drops or plaque pH more specifically drops below 5.5. So for the person who has active cavity formation after the, glucose rinse, there's that rapid decline to below 5.5 all the way down to 4.5, and then you can see that they spend a significant amount of time below 5.5 as indicated by the area under the curve, AUC, the red region. And then, unfortunately, the person a person who has active cavity formation also has a slow recovery to above 5.5. Now in contrast with the person who has inactive cavity formation, after the glucose rinse, there is a small dip below the pH of plaque pH of 5.5, but then there's a rapid recovery away from that zone. And for the person who's resistant to cavity formation, we can see that after the glucose rinse, the plaque pH never approaches 5.5 and there's also a quick recovery, after that initial dip from a pH of around 6.8 to around six to back up to 6.8 pretty quickly. Alright. So with this in mind, to limit oral pH drops below a pH of 5.5, I add Sodium Bicarbonate which is a base. So I basically al alkalize alcalonize, I alkalize my mouth. And for that, I use one gram of Sodium Bicarbonate per 100 milliliters of water. And I and I chose that amount because the, salt concentration of blood is point 9%. So this is 1% sodium bicarbonate. So it's essentially, close to isotonic with plasma. So one gram per 100 mils of sodium bicarbonate also is in the homemade mouthwash. Alright. So what else is in the mouthwash? And I raised that issue because P. Gingivalis has been linked with adverse health conditions both both inside and away from the mouth as we can see by the red arrows for atherosclerotic plaque, for pneumonia, arthritis, periodontal disease, Sjogren's syndrome, and also, root primary endodontic infection. And I put how much of that that I have for each of these conditions. So I have point 2% of my total levels of salivary bacteria are P. Gingivalis. Now that's not a lot. I'd say that that's trending towards very low, amounts of P. Gingivalis. And one reason for that is because also in the mouthwash is peppermint oil. And there weren't any pretty pictures from this paper but in this paper Meyer et al 1993 and I'll leave that paper in the video's description, peppermint oil inhibits the growth of P. Gingivalis. So also in the mouthwash is two drops of peppermint oil, per one one thousand mils per per liter. Now is that optimal? I don't know. Is that causing my relatively low levels of of peach and gevous? I don't know. But, it's in the mouthwash and it's a correlation, for having relatively low levels of of this bacterium. Alright. To summarize for what's good for my oral, my salivary microbiome, I I don't have any streptococcus mutans, which has been linked with, cavity formation. I have relatively low levels of P. Gingivalis, which again is associated with a whole bunch of adverse health related conditions. And I have relatively high levels of Neisseria and Rothia, which have been linked with oral health. So what's not good? So I have relatively high levels or at least greater than or equal to point 2% of bacteria that have been previously linked with adverse oral and or systemic health. And I've listed them here in red. So starting with atherosclerotic plaque, I have two of these bacteria including Tannerella, forsythia, and streptococcus, sanguine. So I have 2% of my total bacteria are, are related to I guess atherosclerotic plaque. I have bacteria related to rheumatoid arthritis. I have BECT four bacteria that are linked with, dental root infections, and then I have three bacteria that are linked with lupus. So, to to me that's not sufficient. I don't want to have any bacteria that have been linked with adverse health related conditions both in the mouth and outside of the mouth. So how can I reduce levels of at least some of these bacteria, if not all? Now for that, there's, as I mentioned, there's very little information on the oral microbiome, the salivary microbiome, especially when compared with the gut microbiome, and even fewer studies on randomized controlled trials for interventions to improve the oral microbiome. So defining what an oral microbiome is, very few papers, but then even less, how to optimize it. Now one of the papers, fortunately, for how to optimize it is an in vitro study that's I've I've shown the title here, Nitrate as a Potential Prebiotic for the Oral Microbiome. Now to define some terms, a prebiotic is a substance that feeds already existing bacteria which enables their growth. So how can nitrate act as a prebiotic for the oral microbiome? So starting from a diet rich in nitrate, and that includes green vegetables, beets, carrots, and other foods, those foods are nitrate rich. So the direct effect is to increase oral levels of nitrate, n o three minus, in the mouth. Now the indirect effect is after you eat nitrate containing foods, that increases the plasma concentration of nitrate, which which then gets concentrated in the parotid gland and other salivary glands, which then release nitrate into the mouth. So how does nitrate impact the oral microbiome? So in this study they looked at and again, it's a very small study, but again, there is very few data that exist in this subject, unfortunately. They use saliva from 12 quote unquote healthy donors. They didn't define the age. It was only men. Unfortunately, they didn't use women. They didn't identify, BMI or diet or any other factors. So quote unquote healthy donors from 12 people, 12 men was incubated with nitrate. And what was the effect of this nitrate exposure to saliva in vitro on the levels of oral bacteria? So on the y axis, we're looking at the levels of nitrate relative to the controls that were not treated, controlled saliva that wasn't treated with nitrate. And then on the x axis, we've got how each of the, individual oral bacteria changed after exposure to nitrate, and that's after five hours in light green and darker green after nine hours. So first, note that there were significant increases for the oral health related bacteria, Neisseria and Rothia, in the presence of nitrate. So you can see, those three, actually, it's the unclassified neisseria two, all of them being higher or, higher at five and nine hours with the exception of Rothia, which was higher at five hours, but not nine hours. Now nitrate exposure saliva to so, exposing saliva to nitrate wasn't just, there wasn't just an increase for, these three bacteria, bacterial genera. It also reduced quote unquote bad bacteria, at least bacteria that have been linked with caries and halitosis. And more specifically, each of these green arrows, I had, I had levels of, I should say, I I was gonna say relatively high, but who knows how high is bad. I had levels of these bacteria that have been linked with, deficits in oral and or systemic health. So note that for each of these bacteria, streptococcus, valinella, porphyromondis, fusobacteria, and leptotrichia, after exposing the saliva to nitrate, each of them was significantly reduced, which is good because I wanna reduce the quote unquote bad bacteria while increasing the good ones. Now two other bacteria or bacterial genera that I had in my data that have been linked with, oral and or systemic, poor oral and or systemic health were Tetrarella and Trepanema and although, they weren't significantly decreased after nitrate exposure, note that the trend is downward. So maybe it didn't work in these 12 subjects, but maybe it could work for me. But nonetheless, there's enough positive data in this study with an increase of the nitrate reducing bacteria, the quote unquote good oral health bacteria, and a decrease in the quote unquote bad, oral health bacteria. So I think it's a good idea to increase nitrate as a as a means for optimizing my own oral microbiome. So how can I increase oral nitrate? Now with the goal of optimizing oral bacterial composition, since we see that a diet rich in nitrate will increase, oral nitrate, should I eat more nitrate containing foods? Well, I'm already on a high nitrate diet. Now here are many foods that I eat, in my diet, and it isn't a comprehensive list. It's missing things like collard greens, which I eat a lot of, but it's it's got most of the nitrate, contained in my diet. So we're looking at nitrate content of each of these foods in milligrams per 100 gram of food. And then note that I track my diet every day. I should say, shameless plug with Cronometer, and if you're interested in a Cronometer discount link, that will also be in the video's description. So when looking at the the dietary period for my last blood test on May 9 through my last my my latest blood test on July 11, that period, I have my average intake for each of these foods, and then we can calculate the nitrate content that I'm eating from each of these foods on a daily basis. The average for each of these foods on a daily basis by multiplying the nitrate concentration of these foods by my average intake. So we've got my nitrate intake for all those foods, and when we sum them, we can see that my total nitrate intake, per day on average is almost nineteen hundred milligrams, almost two grams of nitrate per day. This is a high relatively high nitrate diet. So I it's gonna be difficult for me to increase more beets. I'm already eating 200 of beets per day and 200 of mushrooms per day, 300 grams of carrots per day. It's gonna be tough to go further with nitrate rich foods. So as many of you know on this channel, I generally don't supplement. I try to get it all from food. But I do support, I do, you know, promote, as a part of my approach targeted supplementation. So this is a situation where I think adding potassium nitrate to my homemade mouthwash, may have some benefit. So then the question is how much nitrate and how often? Now note that this study was a an in vitro study, so whether the in vitro concentration that they used is something I should replicate is unknown. And especially there aren't any published randomized controlled trials, RCTs, that use the specific amount of nitrate to optimize the salivary microbiome. So with that in mind, I think a fair amount to use is two grams of potassium nitrate per 1,000 milliliters. This is, thirty two millimolar concentration, which is five times the concentration using the in vitro study, but again, I'd have no idea. This is just where I'm gonna start. I can always titrate it down or even titrate it up based on, what my results will be in for, future salivary micro microbiome experiments. So next up then is how often should I use this mouthwash? So here we're looking at salivary nitrate levels and conversion to nitrite after nitrate exposure, in saliva. So saliva that was exposed to nitrate, how much nitrate was left in the sample after a period of time. So immediately after exposing the saliva to nitrate, we can see a big burst in the concentration of nitrate in the sample. But then after five hours, almost all of it was consumed probably by the nitrate reducing bacteria, Neisseria and Rothia. And that, after consuming it, they convert it into nitrite as shown there. There's a there's an increase in nitrite at the five hour point in conjunction with the decrease in nitrate, at the five hour point. And then after nine hours, there's no more nitrate remaining in the sample. So what does this mean? This suggests that I should use the mouthwash once every five hours as most of the nitrate will be consumed after five hours and nine hours at the latest, and then no rinse after using the mouthwash because if I use the mouth wash and then rinse, I'm probably washing away all of the nitrate, but also xylitol. So I won't get that prebiotic effect for my salivary microbiome. Whereas if I have mouthwash and then spit, whatever's left can be used as a prebiotic potentially to increase or increase the good quote unquote good bacteria or reducing the quote unquote bad bacteria. Alright. So then that raises some some questions. Will levels of nitrate reducing bacteria, more specifically than Neisseria and Rothia, further increase and levels of those those quote unquote bad bacteria which are associated with a whole bunch of adverse health related conditions, will they decrease? And to test that, I'm gonna again use Bristle. They sent me another kit, so I'll retest probably in less than a month. I wanna give my oral microbiome a chance to, assimilate to the nitrate in my mouthwash. I I honestly, I don't know how long to go. It could be two weeks, it could be a month, but I think a month is a fair amount of time to, do the experiment. So, yeah, I'll use Bristle, and again, that link will be in the video's description if you wanna get a discount on your own oral microbiome. So stay tuned for that video update. That'll be coming sometime in the near future. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.