Circulating levels of bile acids are elevated in a mouse model of longevity. So first, let's have a look at the mouse model of longevity. Here's survival data for control animals and lit lit mice, which are in black circles. These are animals that have a mutation for the in the growth hormone receptor, thereby leading to ninety nine percent reduced levels of circulating growth hormone. So when looking at survival, median survival is indicated by fifty percent survival. This is when half the colony has died, half is still alive. And, maximum survival, this is ten percent survival. This is when ninety percent of the colony has died and only ten percent is still alive. We can see a significant increase, for both median and maximal life span in the lit mice, which are otherwise known as dwarf mice or little mice. So we can see that circulating levels of bile acids as I've written here are elevated in this mouse model of longevity. And we can see that data there. So here are, seven bile acids as, contained in blood for the little mice, for wild type mice, and the ratio between the little mice, the dwarf mice with wild type mice, and then to the far right is the p value for whether the differences are are if whether these amounts are different between groups. So what we can see is for all of these bile acids with the exception of one, alpha muricholic acid, all of them are significantly higher in the dwarf mice when compared with the wild type mice. And not just a little bit, higher but a lot higher ranging from 2.8 fold to 5.4 fold higher in the dwarf mice when compared with wild type. And you can see at the bottom too that, total levels of these bile acids are 4.2 fold elevated in the dwarf mice or compared with the wild type. So from this, we can conclude that circulating bile acids are associated with an increased lifespan. Although the primary intervention was the mutation in the growth hormone receptor, bile acids as we can see by this data are associated with an increased lifespan. So what about causation? So in an earlier video, we saw that one of these bile acids, the primary bile acid, known as Cholic acid was significantly higher in the dwarf mice, 3.5 fold higher in the dwarf mice when compared with wild type. And Cholic Acid on its own extends lifespan in a mouse model of accelerated aging which is what we can see here. So in this study, they used, the z m p s t e 24 knockout mice and this is an accelerated aging model or a mouse model of, progeria which is accelerated aging. A genetic model of accelerated aging. So they split half these mice into control fed and cholic acid fed, CA. More specifically, point 1% cholic acid was supplied in the diet. And what we can see by looking at median, so fifty percent survival and maximum survival which was defined as twenty percent survival. So in this study, it was eighty percent of the colony of diet, only twenty percent was still alive. We can see a significant increase by seven percent for median life span and a borderline significant increase for maximum life span, lifespan with the, p value for maximum life span being right at the borders. P p value equals 0.054. So what about other bile acids? We see that one at least one bile acid can extend lifespan. What about other bile bile acids? Can they extend lifespan? So I think a good idea is to look at other bile acids on this list and to look into the literature to see if any of them have, extended lifespan in other animal models. More specifically, what about Lithicholic Acid which is 3.5 3.7 fold higher in the dwarf mice when compared with wild type. So first, we can see that Lithicholic Acid extends lifespan in yeast. So here we're looking at the percentage of alive cells or alive yeast cells on the y axis, against days in culture. So these are yeast cells grown in cell culture. And when looking at the wild type yeast, these, yeast were not supplied with bile acids. So that's the, black squares as shown there. And when looking at median survival, again, fifty percent survival, half the yeast cells have died, half are still alive. We can see that median survival for the wild type non bile acid supplemented yeast was twelve days. Now, notice there is a dramatic extension in lifespan shifting the survival curves to the far right. And as you guessed it, Lithicholic Acid. So yeast that were supplemented with Lithicholic Acid, you can see there's a dramatic increase in median lifespan up to thirty days. So that's a 250 fold increase or 2.5 fold increase for median lifespan in Lithicholic Acid supplemented yeast. But note that this is when the yeast cells are grown under point 2% glucose And these are calorie restricted conditions as we'll see in a minute. So, does Lithicholic acid extend yeast yeast lifespan without calorie restriction? And it does. As we can see by the title, Lithicholic acid extends lifespan and yeast under calorie restricted and non calorie restricted conditions. So what are we looking at here? So we've got lifespan on the on the y axis, including both average lifespan on the left and maximum lifespan on the right. And then we've got the glucose concentration that the yeast cells were exposed to, ranging from no zero all the way up to or point 2% glucose all the way up to 2% glucose. So 10 times higher than the data that I just showed on the previous slide. And then we've got the, data for yeast that were not supplements not supplemented with the the cholic acid in the open white circles and then the yeast that were supplemented with the cholic acid in the black, in the filled circles. So when looking at point 2% glucose, the data that I just showed in the previous slide, there was that increase in, median, but also as we can see here on the left, maximum, average lifespan, mean lifespan, but then what I didn't show was there was also a significant increase in maximum lifespan as shown in the right panel. Alright. So what about under non calorie restricted conditions? So from that we go from the point 2% supplemented, media that had Glucose. Glucose in the media at point 2%, and we go to 2%. So 10 fold higher 10 times higher glucose level. What's the effect on lifespan in Lithicholic Acid versus non non Lithicholic Acid supplemented yeast? And we can see that even under non calorie restricted conditions, 2% glucose, Lithicholic Acid supplemented yeast still had significant increases for both average and maximum lifespan. So that's why we can see LCA, Lithicholic Acid extends lifespan in yeast under both calorie restricted and non calorie restricted conditions. Alright. So can Lithicholic Acid extend lifespan in other animal models? So for that, we go to flies and Lithicholic Acid extends life span in flies too. So here again, we're looking at survival on the y axis plotted against the age. So how long did the flies live? And this is data in male w, one one one eight flies. I haven't come across any data for Lithicholic Acid supplementation on lifespan in female flies. If anybody's, seen that data, please leave it in the comments so we can, share share the information. Alright. So we're looking at median and maximum lifespan. And this study being fifty percent survival for median lifespan. Ten percent survival for maximum lifespan. We can see significant increases in flies that were supplemented with Lithicholic Acid for both median lifespan and maximum lifespan. Alright. So what about mice? Can Lithocholic Acid supplementation extend lifespan in mice? And unfortunately, I haven't come across that data yet. And again, if anyone's come across that data, please leave it leave a comment. I'd be happy to, make a video, about that in in the future. Alright. So what about human data? Is there human data that suggests a role for Lithicholic Acid on longevity in people? So fecal levels of Lithicholic Acid are higher in centenarians, so people who've lived to older than 100 years when compared with younger age groups. And we can see that data here. So we've got Lymphicholic Acid LCA, and that's micromoles, per gram micromoles of Lymphicholic Acid per gram of feces or how much Lymphicholic Acid was in poop, and then there are four groups on the x axis. So first, centenarians. In this centenarian group, there were a 160 people who had an average age of a 107 years. And then there were three younger groups. Older, which had an average age of 86 years and there were a 112 of those subjects. Young, which had an average age of 31 years, 40 one of those subjects. And then, c e l, which are lineal descendants, so, offspring of centenarians that had an average age of 75 years and there were 22 of those subjects. And what we can see is that centenarians had significantly higher levels of Lithicholic Acid when compared with all of the other groups. So higher than the older group, higher than the younger group, and higher than their kids. Now let's take a side step, as to why this may be important. And that's because relatively higher fecal levels of Lithicholic lipocholic acid suggest a role for gut bacteria on longevity. So why would why is that the case? So starting from cholesterol in the liver, cholesterol is degraded by a series of enzymatic steps to produce the primary bile acid, chino or quino deoxycholic acid c d c a, which is then conjugated with either taurine or glycine to form tauro c d c a or glyco c d c a. Now those metabolites, those conjugated metabolites are then released by the gallbladder after a meal into the intestine. What gut bacteria convert it into either ursodeoxycholate, u d c a, or lithicholic acid, LCA. So in other words, Lithicholic acid is exclusively produced by the gut back by gut bacteria. So, alright, this was one study that I showed you for, Lithicholic acid levels in poop in humans, human subjects higher in centenarians have other human studies, replicated this finding. And they there is indeed another study that looked at Lithicholic acid levels in centenarians when compared with younger age groups. And that's what we're looking at here, Lithicholic acid levels in feces or poop. So the the two groups in this study were, centenarians or closest centenarians, people in the 94 to a 105 year old age range that had an average age of 97 years, and their kids who had an average age of 67 years, 50 79 year olds. Olds. And what we can see is that these centenarians or closest centenarians had a 4043% higher level of Lithicholic acid in feces when compared with their offspring. And these, this difference was statistically significant as you can see by the p value and false discovery rate FDR were both less than 0.05. Alright. So with the goal of longevity, can levels of lithicholic acid be increased? And if so, how? Well, exercise may be one way to do that. And blood levels of lithicholic acid are increased after exercise. So this is after either one hour of endurance exercise or one hour of resistance exercise or strength training. So let's break down the data. So in this study was a very small study. It only included 10 people and this this study only included men. And again, if anyone's come across studies in women, please leave a comment. I'd be happy to share it with with the community. So this was young men, 24 years old, lean with a BMI of twenty three point seven, so not overweight or obese. And when I say lean, we can see by the body fat percentage was 12.7%, which is lean. And these were fit subjects that had a v o two peak of fifty five point seven. So these are not average fitness people. This is a relatively high level of fitness. Alright. So what was the endurance training protocol for those who are interested in trying to increase their own Lithicholic acid levels or at least reproduce the the findings of this study. So there was a ten minute warm up on the bike and then it was fifty minutes of biking at 70% of their v o two peaks. So a relatively strenuous 50 bike ride not including the warm up, but a one hour of total endurance exercise. Alright. So what was the effect of that one hour of endurance exercise on blood levels of Lithocolates? So before exercise, Lithocolates levels were point zero one micromolar and then sixty minutes after exercise, that amount was tripled to point o three micromolar and it still remained elevated up to three hours after exercise at 0.02, micromolar. So doubled when compared with before exercise. So from this, we can see that Lithicholic Acid levels are increased up to three hours after exercise at for endurance exercise. Alright. So what about resistance exercise or strength training? So first, what was the strength training protocol? So there there was a five minute warm up on the bike followed by 15 reps each for squats, push ups, sit ups and back raises and then the actual strength training protocol aside from the warm up was five sets of 10 reps each for knee extension, bench press, hamstring curls, lat pull downs, and leg press. Alright. So what was the effect on lipicholic acid levels in blood? So again, starting from before exercise, they had point zero one micromolar levels of lipicholic acid in in blood, which was then tripled either sixty minutes after exercise and a hundred and eighty minutes. So three hours after exercise, blood Lithicholic acid levels were tripled after this resistance x exercise training protocol. So this then raises the question, is Lithicholic acid levels are are Lithicholic acid levels in blood higher in athletes when compared with sedentary subjects? And that's another one that I haven't come across that data, but, if so, it could, suggest that that may be one reason why there's an increase in average life lifespan for, at least animal in animal models for, exercise training when compared with sedentary, sedentary animals. So, if anyone's come across the athlete data and lithicholic acid levels in blood, please leave it in the comments. I'd be happy to share it with the with the community. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.