Can probiotic bacteria improve muscle mass and physical function? In the last video, we saw that isolation followed by transplantation of L. Plantarum from the poop of Olympic weightlifter, Sing Chung Kuo, increased muscle mass and physical function in young mice. Now, a different strain of L. Plantarum is also present in Taiwanese pickled cabbage, which then raises a couple of questions. Can fermented cabbage survive L plantarum similarly impact muscle in young mice, but also in aged? And also, can fermented cabbage derived L plantarum impact muscle in people, and more specifically in randomized controlled trials or RCTs? So to address that first, let's have a look at the data in young mice, where, L plantarum was isolated from Taiwanese pickled cabbage, and then transplanted into both young and aged mice, and this was an eight week study. So, did a non poop derived L plantarum strain improve muscle strength? So, that's we can see here, grip strength on the y axis plotted against time. So, week zero will be baseline before transplantation of L plantarum, and then weeks four and eight are four and eight weeks after transplantation into both young and old mice. So, starting with the data at baseline, we can see that there are four groups. Why control as shown there in purple. So, young control, young t w k 10, that's the strain of L plantarum isolated from Taiwanese pickle cabbage that was used. A control, which are the aged mice controls not supplemented, and then, aged t w k 10, aged mice supplemented with, or that were going to be supplemented with L Plantarum. Now, before even looking at these supplemented versus non supplement non supplemented data as a function of time, we can see that aged mice have a worse grip strength or worse muscle strength when compared with young. And And this isn't any any big news, this just demonstrates the age related decline for muscle strength which is well, well documented in many studies. So what was the effect of L Plantarum at four and eight weeks after starting supplementation? So, for both young and, aged mice, both at the four and eight week time point, we can see an improvement for grip strength in the L planterium supplemented mice. So, clearly, we can see that muscle strength was improved in both young and aged mice. So, what about muscle mass? So here, we're looking at relative muscle weight, which is muscle mass divided by body weight for both young and aged mice, and then we've got two groups, control and the L plantarum group, TWK 10. But unlike the data for crypt strength, here we see that, L plantarum did not affect relative muscle weight or muscle mass divided by body weight in either young or aged mice. So together, from this study, we can see that there was improved muscle strength, but not muscle mass in L planetarium supplemented young and aged mice. So, does L planetarium supplementation improve muscle mass and or physical function in people? So to address that, first we're gonna have a look at this study and all the studies referenced in this video will be in the video's description. So if you're interested in that, check it out. So in this study, they looked at the effect of l plantarum supplementation in healthy humans. So let's just define that more appropriately. So we can see whom these data may generally apply. So, in this study, it included both men and women with relatively small amounts of men and women within each group. So, you can see that within each of these three groups, there were nine subjects per group. Both men and women, so 18 in the placebo, 18 people in the low dose, and 18 people in the high dose of L Plantarum supplementation. So in terms of how much the actual supplementation was in the L Plantarum groups, you can see that for the one x group, it was three times ten to the ten colony forming units, CFUs of l plantarum per day, and for the three x group, it was nine times 10 to the tenth. And note that these are both higher doses, for the human study relative to the mouse studies. So then, in terms of age, these were young adults as you can see by the average ages within each group, they were, within the 21 to 23 year old range. In terms of B M I, the the, these subjects were already relatively lean which is a, defined as a B M I less than 25 kilograms per meter squared. For all of the groups except for the three x, l plantar group, as you can see by that red arrow. And then, in terms of cardiovascular fitness, all of these subjects were relatively cardiovascular fit as indicated by v o two max. For the men, we can see that they had average values approaching 50 and for women, we can see average values around 45. So what was the effect of l plantarum supplementation for six weeks on muscle mass and function? So first, let's start with the muscle mass change or muscle weight change as shown here. And then, muscle muscle mass was measured by BIA or bioelectric impedance analysis as shown with the device there. That's an actual device that they used. And then in terms of we've our our three groups, placebo, low, and high dose L Plantarum. We can see that muscle weight was increased significantly increased only for the highest dose of L Plantarum as shown by the green arrow. Now note that BIA also measures fat mass, And interestingly, body fat percentage or B F percentage was also impacted which is what we can see here. So, the body fat change percentage on the y axis plotted against our three groups. And once again, we can see an alteration for, body composition more specifically the percent body fat change for the highest dose of L Plantarum which there was a reduction for the body fat percentage in the highest dose of L Plantarum supplementation. So from these two, figures we can see that there was increased lean mass, as as measure of muscle mass, a decreased percentage of body fat in young people supplemented with L Plantarum. Now, it's important to note or ask the question, are these data confounded by weight loss or diet changes? Because if you lose weight, one would expect reduction in the percentage of body fat, or if you alter your diet, it's possible to see changes in the amount of muscle mass. So without showing the data, but actually just saying what what they showed, calorie, protein, fat, and carbon take were not different when compared with baseline for any of the three groups, and also, body weight was not different when when compared with baseline. Again, for any of the three groups, placebo or the low or high dose L Plantarum groups, Which then highlights a potential role for L Plantarum on increasing muscle mass, and decreasing the percentage of body fat in the young adults of this study. So, what about physical function? So for that, in this study, they looked at treadmill exhaustion time. So a run to exhaustion test on the treadmill. And first, looking at the data for for placebo, we can see that that was not different when compared with base baseline. But then, we can see for both the low and high dose L plantarum supplemented groups, the treadmill exhaustion time, or run to exhaustion time was significantly longer for both supplemented groups. So we can see that aerobic exercise capacity is improved in young adults supplemented with L Plantarum. Now, just as a brief summary because we're about to jump into even more data. In terms of, L Plantarum supplementation in young adults, they had an increase in muscle mass and aerobic exercise capacity, and a reduction for the percentage of body fat. So, studies in young adults are nice. What about studies in older adults? Does L Plantarum supplementation impact muscle mass and or physical function in older adults? So for that, we'll have a look at this study which looked at frail older adults. So let's just define that a little bit more clearly because when I hear frail older older adults, I think of a severe phenotype. So let's see if that was actually true or not. So first, we've got our three groups again, placebo, and then low and high dose of L Plantarum. For the low dose L Plantarum, we can see that that was two times 10 to the tenth colony forming units, and for the high dose L Plantarum, that was six times 10 to the tenth colony forming units. Now, note that both of these doses that were used in this study in older adults, were lower than what was used in the study that I just showed for younger adults. So the low dose was actually 50% lower than what was used in the earlier study and for the high dose, that's 33% lower than we than than what was used for the study in young adults. In terms of age, this study included, people with average ages within each group, within the 75 to about 81 year old range, and then we can see a frailty score. So about three for a frailty score for each of these three groups. So what does that actually mean? What are we looking at here? So in this study, they used the clinical frailty scale and people with a clinical frailty scale score between one to four were included. So we can see that one would be very fit, four would be vulnerable. Now, the average frailty score in this study was about three which means that on average, the subjects in the study were managing well. So people whose medical problems were well controlled but were not regularly active between, beyond routine walking. You know, in other words, sedentary but, with adequate control of their medical problems. So did l Plantarum supplementation for eighteen weeks, so this was a longer study too relative to relative to the younger, the younger adult study that used L Plantarum supplementation. Did that improve muscle mass and physical function in these older adults? So let's start with muscle mass on the y axis, and then we've got our three groups again, young, sorry, placebo, low and high dose of L Plantarum on the x. And then, we've got four time points that muscle mass was assessed. So, baseline, six weeks, twelve weeks, and eighteen weeks after, starting L Plantarum supplementation. So first, low dose L Plantarum did not affect the amount of muscle mass, but then we can see small but significant increases for each of the high dose L Plantarum groups at each of the time points. Six, twelve and eighteen weeks when compared with baseline. About a one to 3% increase for muscle mass. Now, muscle mass can go a correspondingly go with an increase in body weight, so you don't necessarily improve body composition if if that's the case. So to address that, the authors of the study looked at relative muscle weight or the relative muscle weight percentage, which is the muscle mass divided by body weight times a 100. And when doing that, once again, we see that the low dose L Plantarum group was not significant in terms of the change in the relative muscle weight percentage, but there was one time point where it was significant for the high dose L Plantarum supplemented group. About a 3% increase in only at eighteen weeks. So we can see that the six and twelve week changes for only looking at muscle mass now are non significant when accounting for body weight, using the relative muscle weight percentage. So together from these two figures, we can see a small, but significant increase for muscle mass in L Plantarum, more specifically the high dose only supplemented older adults. Now, also note that unlike the randomized control trial in young people, the body fat percentage was not different for any of the L Plantarum supplemented groups, both for low and high dose in older adults. So what was the effect of L Plantarum supplementation on physical function? So for that, I'm gonna show, four functional measures. First, we'll we'll start with grip strength. We've got data for the right hand, and then data for the left hand. So starting with the data for the right hand, we can see that grip strength was not significantly increased in either of the L Plantarum groups. And then when looking at the left hand, we can see that the low dose group did not have a significant improvement for grip strength, but at eighteen weeks, there was a 13% significant increase for grip strength for the highest L Plantarum supplemented group. Now, I find this data a little bit curious. How can you improve grip strength in one hand, but not the other? I'd expect it to be, in both hands or or none. So, I find this data maybe a little bit suspect, but nonetheless, the study reported increased muscle strength only for the left hand in in the high dose L Plantarum supplemented older adults. So, what about lower body strength and or endurance? Did L Plantarum supplementation impact those measures? So, in terms of lower body strength slash endurance, they use a thirty second chair stand test, which basically is how many chair stands can you do, from standing or from sitting down to standing up and then sitting back down again in thirty seconds. So, we've got our three groups, low, placebo, low and high dose L Plantarum. And then, here we can see that at both twelve weeks and eighteen weeks, L Plantarum supplementation or the number of chair stands at twelve and eighteen weeks was significantly increased for both low and high dose L Plantarum. So, what about measures of mobility, balance, and or gait? So for that, we'll take a look at two different measures. First, starting with the three meter timed up and go. In that test, that's where you stand up from a chair, walk three meters, and then sit back down, and abbreviated it's the three meter three m T U G. So first, we can see the placebo got significantly worse at performing this test over each of the time points. So six, twelve and eighteen weeks after the baseline visit. And then, there was no effect for the three meter timed up and go for the low dose supplemented group, but then there was a significant improvement at eighteen weeks for a faster three meter times up and go for the high dose L Plantarum group. So what about the 10 meter walk test? So, how fast you able to walk 10 meters? And once again, we can see that placebo got worse over the course of the eighteen week study, whereas the low dose, low dose L Plantarum supplemented group had a faster 10 meter walk again at the eighteen, eighteen week time point. But interestingly, high dose L Plantarum did not see an improvement for this test. So if L Plantarum was maybe there's a sweet spot of supplementation or, maybe it's not a real effect. I don't know. But they did see a significant difference for at least for the low, L Plantarum supplemented group for the 10 meter walk test in this study. Alright. So we just went through a lot of data. Let's just summarize it including the data from the last video. So first, L Plantarum transplantation from an Olympic weightlifter improved muscle mass and physical function in young mice. And that was again in the in the last video. And then for the three studies in this video, using l plantarum isolated from fermented cabbage. First data in mice, both young and old, we saw improved muscle strength, but not muscle mass. And then when looking at the two RCTs, first in young adults, there was an increase from muscle mass and aerobic exercise capacity, and for the study in older adults, there were small but significant improvements from muscle mass and physical function. So that's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And, before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links that you may be interested in. Epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing, diet tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, Buy Me a Coffee. And we've also got merch that you may be interested in, and all of the links for these things will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.