In terms of fitness related videos on this channel, so far I've only posted two and both of them are pull ups. So how many pull ups could I do in 2020, 2021 and how many in 2020? Well, my usual workout includes a lot more than that. It's a full body eight eighty minute workout that includes strength training, but also a variety of other movements aimed at optimizing not just strength, but mobility, balance, flexibility, and so on. So in today's video, I'm just gonna focus on the strength training portion of that. So let's get into it. To start off, pull ups. So, my previous highs for pull ups were 12 in both 2021 and 2020. So, let's see if I can get at least 12, in today's video. So I apologize for the camera angle, I wanted to be able to get the camera angle so that you can see chin above the bar, but my legs are crossed so my feet don't touch the ground at any point during the pull ups. I should emphasize too that I I aim for full extension, full flexion. I'm not interested in doing half reps to build strength through a half or partial range of motion. I wanna build strength through a full range of motion for every movement that I do. Alright. So that was 13. And then I do a, one pull up with an inside grip because it's easier to do than the pronated grip. So that's what I did there and then I walked towards the camera because I was gonna go pick up some weights, but then I realized, this is basically like a semi superset where I do just a few squats to get my legs ready for, heavier squats and some deadlifts later on. So I just do three, squats and these are ATG squats. So, it's full I'm look I'm a I'm aiming for a full range of motion with my squats. So you can't see it, with the camera angle. So I've gotta work on that camera angle in future videos. So So then I do a few more pull ups, really try to burn it out. I go for three with the, palms forward pronated grip, and then I'll do another inside grip. Alright. So then I get, now I actually go to pick up the weights and it's just a little bit of weight. These are 10 pounds in each arm, in each hand, and I'm gonna go do those, three more, you know, squats. So, ATG squats. So, full, full depth squats just to warm up, my my hips and thighs, again, to get ready for the squats and deadlifts, later on. And this is kind of a super set because I'm not standing around, waiting to do the extra reps for my pull ups. It's while while my lats and biceps are, recovering a little bit, I'm, you know, working my legs or at least warming up my legs. Alright. So then I'm just gonna finish it up with three more, pronated palms forward pull ups and then another one on with an inside grip as that's easier to do than the, pronated grip. And I should mention that my usual workout for this, not only the strength strength training portion of my workouts, but my full eighty minute workout. I do that once every three days. Sometimes once every four days if my schedule gets in the way, if it was up to me, I would do it once every three days without fail. But that's what I stick to. And that's what works best for me being able to maintain strength, over time. Alright. So I just showed you the, pull. Now I go to a push, and this is an overhead shoulder press. I didn't show you the warm up. I do a quick warm up with 20 pounds. I do 20 reps just to warm up my shoulders, and so the bar is 20 about 22 pounds actually. So this is 70 pounds, which may not seem like much, but my current body weight is one fifty two. So it's about a little less than half my body weight. So I aim for 12 strict form reps, no leaning back, just just press overhead, full range of motion, all the way down, all the way up. And from workout to workout, I make sure that I meet these rep goal targets. So for every workout I'm doing, when I do, pull ups, I get 12. Sometimes 13. Today I got 13. I haven't gotten to where I'm consistently getting 13 every time, but I'm getting at least 12 for pull ups, with again 13 today. Same thing for the shoulder press. When I go to 72, it's 12 reps and that's without fail. And I do that to standardize the workout so that I'm not gonna get weaker in any of these movements. Alright. So I just got those 12 reps then I, put the weight on my back just to keep warming up my my legs in anticipation for, going a little heavier, with, deadlifts. So again, you can't see because of the camera angle. I'm gonna have to work on that again in future videos, but these are ATG squats, so I'm going all the way down while keeping strict form in my lower back, and I just do five of those just to warm up my, again, warm up my hips and thighs. Yeah. And then I turn because I'm not sure about the camera angle because I'm not used to filming, my workouts. Alright. The next up, I'm just gonna do some shrugs. So you can see for like two to three minute bursts, I'm it's it's like, I'm building strength endurance because I'm lifting the whole time or I'm holding the weight the whole time. It's not just not just a fifteen second burst, which in has its has its role in a fitness program, but, I'm aiming for the combination of strength and endurance, full body, not just in one movement. Alright. So that was my first set and then I go a little heavier on the second set for the shoulder press. In this case, it's 90 pounds so I added 10 pounds on each side. Sometimes I go as high as one ten or one twenty. I may show that in a future video, But for this, I aim for five reps, 90 pounds, 92 pounds. Sometimes when I get a little bit less sleep than I'd like, I get four reps, but, the goal is to get five every time and for almost exclusively all of my workouts, I I get five reps. I'm trying my best not to lean back and just maintain strict form, full extension, full flexion. Alright. Same just like before, put the weight on the back, get a few reps, warm up my, my legs, my hips and thighs in anticipation for going a little bit heavier, with deadlifts. And I'm sure there'll be people who will say, well, you should go very heavy, do heavier squats, you know, that's that's not a lot of weight and this is true. But in my youth, I had plenty of days of going heavy, you know, to squatting two two two fifty, and I ended up messing up my back whether it's from over training or poor poor form. So, and I've had herniated disc. So, I'm trying to minimize that because aside from sleep deprivation in my experience, injury, makes me feel old. So I'm not I'm not I'm trying to avoid injury. So a little bit more on the, shrugs. I actually do a bunch of sets for shrugs. Try not to lose muscle mass in my traps, which is very easy if I'm not doing shrugs. Alright. So then I go to the the trap bar to start, doing some deadlifts, and this is just 45 pounds. And if you notice, I'm holding the the the bar upside down, most people hold it with the grips a little bit higher, and I do that so that I can get a little more range of motion. And that's why I turned to the side because, my goal is to get, strength through a full range of motion. With the grips flipped the other way, I'm losing a little bit of range of motion. So I wanna get as much range of motion as possible, so I flip the grip like that. And then add a little bit of weight. This is still technically like a warm up, 95 pounds on the bar right now. Nothing too crazy. And I've had a tendency in the past to round my upper back when doing deadlifts, so and I actually did there for a couple reps, not good. But for the for the majority, my technique is is pretty decent where I'm keeping my back arched and tight, while doing deadlifts. And then a few more, shrugs. I am bending my knees to try to get a little bit more momentum to, you know, it's a little bit heavier in terms of a shrug. Maybe it's not heavy for most people, but I'm I'm pushing 50, you know. So, and I'm trying to maintain strength over time. Again, I'm not looking for ego lifting. I'm trying to, you know, maintain and optimize muscle mass. So, now we've got one thirty five on the bar, going a little heavier. And it's, same thing five reps. I get bored after five reps, so, that's why I'm just sticking to the five rep range. My technique's pretty good here. You can see the lower back is tight, no rounding, decent depth, controlling the weight all the way down, not slamming it off the floor. Finishing up with some shrugs. Alright. And then for the last set, I just put another 10 pound on your side. So this is one fifty five. It's not close to my, you know, my one rep max, but again, I'm trying to find that balance between, minimizing my injury risk and leading to a flare up of the herniated disc in my back, and optimizing strength, you know. So I could probably go heavier. I've gone heavier one seventy five, but to be totally honest, I'm a little bit scared to go heavier than that considering my lower back injury history. So I'm happy to be getting any strength strength training on my, legs especially using deadlifts and somewhat with a little bit on the squats. Alright. So that was the the beginning of the, push pull. So now I go back to a little bit more push pull. This is kind of like doing a seated row, and again I'm doing this workout at my house. I don't have the machinery to do a seated row. So the angle on this, is basically like doing a seated row. And my goal here is to get 13 reps, and once I get to a, a rep, target, again, I stick to that going forward. And then the goal is to keep increasing reps over time. So if I'm doing 13 reps in this movement and then a year from now I'm doing 14, I'm okay with that because aging I'm supposed to decrease reps, you know, whether whether because of, less strength or, you know, just choosing to to move to move less. So I'm trying to stick to a rep range and not go lower. Alright. So then I go to, ball, push ups off a ball, and the angle is pretty bad here. You can't see that my toes are pointed on the ball, but in the next set I figured out a better angle. So, that should be good. And again, I'm looking for a full range of motion, you know, strength through a full range of motion. That's the goal here. And I'm up to 23 reps in this movement now. When I first started this maybe two years ago, this movement, I was doing less. Maybe 17 on the first set. So I've improved my strength in this movement over time. It hasn't it hasn't decreased. Alright, so that was 23, and then a couple of quick stretches, inverted L, stretch the upper back, and then again to a cat pose, stretch the the lower back. Alright, So back to the second set of my of my pull. This is, you know, again like a seated row, and I'm only doing two work sets for this movement, and also two work sets for push ups. Because again, in an eighty minute workout, there's only so much time, to get everything in. And there are other movements that I didn't show in this video. A lot of other movements, most of it being warm ups and and, you know, so I cut that out. But other movements, you know, like, side bends and and, hamstring, lower back stretches. But at some point I'll probably put all that in a full uncut video. And I do get 13 reps on this second set. So I may actually add I have a weight vest. I may I may add add a weight vest to that movement to get a little bit more, resistance on that second set. Alright. So here we go. Second set of the weighted ball push ups and you can see my feet are my toes are pointed, up on the ball which is a little bit more difficult. And the ball the ball adds, you know, not just resistance, but it's also I have to balance the ball and it isn't touching the side of the couch there, it's on its own. So I have to balance the ball while also doing the push ups. So, easier said than done, but, that's what I do. So for the second set I get, the goal is 17 reps and I've been pretty consistent in getting 17 reps without fail for a long time, for as long as I've been doing this exercise. And again, the goal is to increase that slowly over time knowing that with aging, there should be a decrease over time. I'm trying to resist that for as long as possible. Alright. So then last but not least, this is, from the knees over toes YouTube channel, and this is an exercise aimed at building strength, like, basically strength of the knees and and ankles. And it looks weird but it's it's great for my knees and ankles. And then to give my my quads, knees and ankles a rest, I do a hamstring stretch, since it's such a quad dominant movement that, you know, doing a basically a super set with the hamstring stretch which is what I'm doing there, is giving my quads that momentary break. So then I warm up my knees for a few reps and then you can see I go to a reverse nordic and I've got a long way to go to get all the way to the floor going backwards with that, but, that's where I am with it for now. Yeah. Full range of motion there would be my back going all the way down to the floor. And I do 15 of these, but, I'm somewhere in the 12 to 15, range depending on how my knees feel on that day. My knees are generally very good when I'm hoping to keep them that way, for, you know, as many years as I physically can. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.