In an earlier video, we saw that dietary oxalate intake is associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular disease, CVD related events. Now if you missed that video, I'm gonna do a quick review because I'm gonna further investigate whether my relatively high dietary oxalate intake maybe, neutral, bad or good for health. So in that study, we saw that a dietary relatively high dietary oxalate intake in this case, with a median value of two hundred and seventy seven milligrams per day in turtle three was associated with an increased risk for CVD related events. As you can see, there's a forty seven percent increased risk and that confidence interval one point o two to 2.12, doesn't overlap with one. So that's a significant core, association. So that's in comparison with relatively lower oxalate intakes. In this case, tertile one which was identified as a 120 with a median value of a 120, milligrams of oxalate per day. Now, we then saw that this association was true for only in people that were on a low calcium diet and a low calcium diet was identified as, people who had a median calcium intake of seven hundred sixty milligrams per day. So for those people, we can see the significantly increased CVD event risk for both tertile two and tertile three in terms of oxalate intake. But in contrast, oxalate intake was not associated with CVD event risk in people on medium to high calcium diets with those values being identified as greater than eleven eighty milligrams of calcium per day. And as you can see, the oxalate, association for oxalate with CVD event risk is now not significant after accounting for relatively higher calcium intakes as that confidence interval, the data in parentheses for both tertile two and tertile three is not, significantly different when compared with tertile one. You can see that the, the data in parentheses completely overlaps one so it's not statistically significant. Now, we also saw in that video that just from these three foods, I eat a lot of spinach, beets and carrots. I my intake for oxalate is more almost fourteen hundred milligrams per day and I rationalize that based on this study, my relatively high oxalate intake might be okay as calcium intake for my most recent blood test average was about twelve hundred milligrams per day. And based on that amount that would put me in tertile three for oxalate intake but that would also put me on a medium calcium diet, and we can see that the confidence interval for for that medium calcium with tertile three overlaps with one, so it's not significant. In other words, oxalate intake is not associated with CVD event risk in people on a medium calcium diet. But is there a more specific way to evaluate whether oxalate intake may be good, bad, or neutral for health? So with that in mind, what's the correlation for dietary oxalate intake with big big picture biomarkers from April 2015 through April 2022. So I know my dietary oxalate intake over that seven year period because I've weighed literally all my food over the past seven years. I started tracking my daily diet in April 2015 and I've continued it for the for each of the, every day for the past seven years. So I then enter those daily food amounts into Cronometer and I'm not sponsored by them. Any there are many fit, nutrition tracking apps. They're probably all relatively good. So I'm not here to say that Cronometer or any of the others are better first, you know, in comparison. So then Cronometer can provide or does provide daily oxalate intake and I can log that or I'd log that in my, spreadsheet and then I can then look at associations. Sorry. Correlations between oxalate intake with the big big picture biomarkers. So before we go there, let's take a look at my average daily oxalate intake over the past seven years. So we're looking at a lot of red dots and each red dot is the average oxalate intake that corresponds to a blood test. For example, in between test number one and test number two, for, blood test for 2022, that forty nine day period prior to test number two. So the the red dot that corresponds to that is the average oxalate intake for that forty nine day period. So similarly for test number one, there was a forty two day period in between blood tests. So for that forty two day period, the red dot would be the average daily oxalate intake that corresponds to blood test number one, and so on for each of these, for each of these data points over the past seven years. So we can see that my average oxalate intake is relatively high. Almost sixteen hundred milligrams per day over the over this seven year stretch. In contrast, tertile three in the previous study, the Baha Doran, paper, tertile three the highest intake was two hundred and seventy seven milligrams of oxalate per day and that was the group that potentially had the highest CVD event risk. So we can see that for almost every blood test, my average daily oxalate intake is four to eight times higher than Turtop three. So also note, as I mentioned, I have up to 36 blood tests for most blood biomarkers over this seven year period. So when considering I have dietary oxalate intake for every day over the past seven years and have up to 36 blood tests, we can then start to address this question. So what's the correlation for oxalate intake with the big picture biomarkers over the past seven years? So if you're not familiar what, I consider to be these big picture biomarkers, if you're new to the channel this will be new for you. So, but if you're if you're familiar with this, I apologize. I'm just gonna go go through it relatively quickly. So the big picture biomarkers are a panel of blood based biomarkers, that I track regularly up to, six to eight times per year, and they include things like glucose but also homocysteine. I haven't figured out where to classify that yet in the big picture biomarker scheme. But then three markers of kidney function, three markers of liver liver function, four all the major lipoproteins, five immune related cells, or cell types or actually globulins are in a cell type so, proteins. Three red blood cell related markers, inflammation is indicated by high sensitivity c reactive protein and the overall biological age score is indicated by levine's PhenoAge and aging.ai. Now for a little bit more info, you can see a little n next to each biomarker and that's how many blood tests that I have over the past seven years. R at the top of the column is the correlation coefficient and then the p value is the measure of statistical significance or not with a value less than 0.05 being identified as statistically significant. So with that in mind, what's the correlation for dietary oxalate with these big picture biomarkers? So first, starting from the top and working working our way down, a relatively higher oxalate intake is significantly correlated with higher blood urea nitrogen or bun. So I put a red arrow there red arrow there and I'm only gonna go through aging data. I'm not gonna go through aging and all cause mortality, data because that would be for a very long video. So for the for the purpose of this video, I'm only gonna go through aging data. If you're interested in more info, you can just do a search for each of these biomarkers and I've explained, how it changes during aging and the the association with all cause mortality risk. So bond levels increase during aging as shown here for both men in green, and women in blue, and you can see that it increases for men with the red line. So when considering that a higher oxalate intake is significantly correlated with higher bun, this correlation is going in the wrong direction so I gave it a red arrow. Now a relatively higher oxalate intake is also significantly correlated with higher LDL. An An LDL also increases during aging as shown here for data in, with the men in green and women in red. And you can see that youth is characterized by relatively lower levels of LDL and after that it increases for both men and women. So that's why I gave it a red arrow. Alright. So then a relatively high oxalate intake is also significantly correlated with higher VLDL. Also red arrow and that's because VLDL increases during aging as shown here. So we're looking at data for males as that data directly applies to me. I have a video on, VLDL for, that goes through the data for men and women. So if you're interested in that, yeah, check it out. So starting from youth, in this case, 15 and 19 year olds, we can see that VLDL levels are around 16 milligrams per deciliter, and then during aging up to 79 years in this study, we can see that VLDL levels approximately double. So then a higher, oxalate intake is significantly correlated with higher VLDL. This is going in the wrong direction as higher VLDL is found in aging so that's why I gave it a red arrow. Alright. A higher oxalate intake is also significantly correlated with lower lymphocytes at least in my data as shown there by the red arrow. And lymphocytes decline during aging as shown here. So relatively higher levels of lymphocytes are found in youth and then you can see by the red arrow, the red line, they decline during aging with statistical significance in the upper left corner. So when considering that a higher oxalate intake is significantly correlated with lower lymph ocytes in my data, lower lymphocytes are found in the age not during youth. So that's why I gave that a red arrow. Now similarly, a relatively higher oxalate intake is also significantly correlated with a lower lymphocyte percentage, with the lymphocyte percentage being lymphocytes divided by all of the white blood cells. So, lymphocyte percentage also declines during aging as shown here. So data for men in green and women in blue. And we can see a clear and consistent decline for men for percentage of lymphocytes. Now note that that isn't only driven by a lower levels of lymphocytes during aging. We can see that also in my data, the relatively higher oxalate intake is positively correlated with neutrophils. Very close to statistical significance. You can see it's a has a p value of 0.06. So it's likely that higher oxalate based on the data looks like higher oxalate is correlated significantly correlated with lower lymphocytes but also right on the verge of significance for higher lymph, neutrophils which potentially explains the significant correlation for the, lower percentage of lymphocytes. So a relatively higher, oxalate intake is also significantly correlated with higher platelets and I've given that a green line. So, platelets decline during aging. So let's take a look. So in in relative youth, twenty to thirty year olds, we can see the platelets are relatively high around two thirty, two thirty one more specifically, and then during aging all the way up to 100 years old, we can see that plate platelet levels decline to less than two ten. So when considering that platelet levels decline during aging and when considering that oxalate intake is associated with higher platelets that would be against the, aging related trends so that's why I've given it a, green arrow not a green line. Sorry. So to summarize, we've got oxalate intake, my dietary oxalate intake and it may be different for others. But this is what my data shows is significantly correlated with five biomarkers going in the right direction sorry, in the wrong direction and only one, platelets going in the right direction. So with that, we have a net score of minus four and that suggests that reducing my oxalate intake below my average, my seven year average of about sixteen hundred milligrams per day, may be better for, overall systemic health. Now note that as I mentioned on the opening slide that relatively higher calcium intakes impact the association for oxalate intake with CVD event risk. So to, what about this question? Does dietary calcium, intake affect correlations for oxalate with the big picture biomarkers? So I then looked at that and these there's a data there with the correlation coefficient and a p value for the oxalate, divided by calcium ratio and their correlate this correlation, but it's correlation with the big picture biomarkers. So after accounting for calcium intake, more specifically this ratio, correlations for, blood urine nitrogen, for LDL and VLDL, and for lymphocytes and the lymphocyte percentage are no longer statistically significant. So that's potentially good news because that suggests that, having a relatively higher calcium intake, may indeed affect, how, you know, oxalate being associated with big picture biomarkers as statistical significance goes away for all five of the red arrows that were only correlated with, oxalate intake. But platelets are still going in the right direction so we've got one green and we've removed basic or the data indicates the removal of five red arrows. But we've got new, correlations that significant correlations that pop up. Higher oxalate to calcium ratio is now significantly correlated with higher uric acid as shown there and uric acid levels increase during aging. This is data for men. So in this study, it was a longitudinal study for men of, starting at different ages. So whether looking at 20 year olds longitudinally, 30, 40, 50 or 60 year olds, uric acid levels increased for each respective age group. So that's why I've given that a red arrow because higher oxalate to calcium ratio, higher uric acid, higher uric acid is found in older relative to younger people. So, a higher oxalate to calcium ratio is also significantly correlated with higher levels of alkaline phosphatase. Now whether alkaline phosphatase increases during aging is debatable. There are a couple of studies that show that it does increase but also a couple that showed no increase but, more definitive is that relatively higher levels of alkaline phosphatase are associated with an increased all cause mortality ACM risk and that's what shown here. So this is a study of almost 9,000,000 people and when the confidence interval, so the dash lines, when they are both completely above a hazard ratio of one as delineated by that red line, then we have statistical significance. So that becomes a true at an alkaline phosphatase level of 48 above which, the correlation the association for alkaline phosphatase within increased all cause mortality risk becomes evident. So higher levels of alkaline phosphatase above 48 significantly associated with an increase all cause mortality risk. So when considering a positive association for the oxalate to calcium ratio with alkaline phosphatase, this is going in the wrong direction based on all cause mortality risk data. And then we also have a positive correlation, so a higher oxalate to calcium ratio is significantly associated with a higher red blood cell distribution with or RDW. And that's potentially a problem because the RDW increases during aging as shown here, and You can see the trend line for RDW and how it changes during age. So that's given, I've given that a red arrow because higher RDW found in age relative to youth. So to summarize the oxalate calcium ratio and associations with, or correlations with big picture biomarkers, we've now got three, only three biomarkers going in the wrong direction, but one going in the right with a net score of minus two. So after accounting for calcium intake, dietary oxalate is still significantly correlated with more biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. So with that in mind going forward, I'm going to replace spinach where I'm getting about half of my daily oxalate intake with other low oxalate greens. In this case, collard greens as I prefer the taste of that over other greens like kale and and and others. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoy the video. Have a great day.