Last month, I blood tested for the third time in 2022. And when using doctor Morgan Levine's biological age calculator, we saw that my biological age was fourteen years younger than my chronological. Similarly, using aging.ai, seventeen years younger than my chronological. So what's contributing to these data? What about supplements? So in terms of supplements, there were three. First, Levothyroxine. I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism, in my twenties. So I've been taking Levothyroxine for the past twenty plus years. Vitamin d, a thousand I use per day every day, during the fifty six day period that corresponded to blood test number three. And then, a little bit of melatonin. Note that that's about fifty three micrograms per day, not milligrams but micrograms. So, occasional very small amounts of melatonin at night. And that's it for supplements. No or gero protectors. So what about diet? So in terms of diet, since 2015, I've weighed literally all of my food with food scale, and those food amounts are then entered into Cronometer and Cronometer is a food tracking app that I've used since 2015. I can't say which is the best but that's what I've used. So along those lines, if you want to get a Cronometer membership discount link, it'll be in the video's description. Alright. So when considering that I've tracked my diets in 2015, what's the diet composition including macronutrients, micronutrients and individual foods that corresponds to this blood test? So let's dig into the approach. In March, more specifically March 14, I blood tested for the second time in 2022. And on March, May 9, I blood tested for the third time. So in between blood tests is a 56 period. So the average intake for those fifty six days including macro and micronutrients and individual food amounts correspond to test number three's diet composition, and I then enter that data into a spreadsheet. Now I've done this for, since 2015 and I have up to 37 blood tests since 2015. So because each blood test now has corresponding dietary data, I can calculate correlations between diet with 24 big picture as I like to call them, blood biomarkers which are representative of many organ systems, and other things like glucose, insulin sensitivity etcetera. So I can calculate correlations between diet with these big picture blood biomarkers and then are the significant correlations, the ones that have a p value less than 0.05 going in the right or wrong direction in terms of aging and all cause mortality risk. Now, in this video, I won't detail how the the directionality of the biomarkers in terms of aging and all cause mortality risk, but you're if you're interested in in that data, just leave a comment and I'll direct you to where I've, shown that data in other videos. And then note that following these correlations may be important for optimizing not only the blood blood biomarkers, but we can get towards a more direct approach for precision nutrition. In other words, optimizing diet while also optimizing blood biomarkers. So let's so let's have a look at the diet composition that corresponds to this blood test and see how well I'm following these correlations. So first, calorie intake. So for the fifty six day period that corresponded to blood test number three, my average calorie intake was 23, 23 calories per day. And when doing the analysis for, the big big picture biomarkers with calorie intake since 2015, the net correlative score is negative six. So what does that mean and let's dig into that a little bit more. So here we're looking at correlations for calorie intake with big picture biomarkers. And a few notes, n little n little n next to each biomarker is how many blood tests that I have for that biomarker. So for example, for glucose, we see n equals 35, that means I have 35 individual data points for glucose since 2015. Similarly, for homocysteine, I have 19 blood tests, creatinine thirty seven, etcetera. And then, the little r at the top left column is the correlation and then next to that as the p value which is the measure of statistical significance and if it's less than 0.05, it's a significant correlation. So the net correlative score of negative six is up there and that's because we can see that calorie intake is significantly correlated with this these six biomarkers. And And again, I won't go into direction directionality but note that each of these are going in the wrong direction in terms of aging and all cause mortality risk. In other words, a relatively higher calorie intake is significantly correlated with higher levels of each of these biomarkers which again are going in the wrong direction in terms of aging and all cause mortality risk. Now note that when there is a net negative correlative score, that suggests that I should eat below my average intake since 2015 using the data that I have since 2015. Now based on these data, test number three's, calorie intake, was twenty three twenty three which was purposefully below my average intake since 2015 which is 2559. So for that, I give a check which means that I'm following the correlations, just to know if I wasn't following that correlation, or the net correlative score, with a higher calorie intake, say I was eating 2,700 calories, that would be that I'm not following the correlations because the data suggests that I I should eat below my average intake not above it, which would probably lead to worse biomarker data at least based on the net correlative score. Now a couple of other situations are possible. When there's a neutral correlative score, so an equal amount of biomarkers going in the right and wrong direction. In that case, I would eat my average intake since 2015, and in the situation when there's a net positive correlative score, I would eat above my average intake for that for that given nutrient or food even, since twenty fifteen. So let's take it let's look at more examples. So again, this is the average intake for, test number three for the fifty six day period that corresponds to that test, and we're looking at my protein intake that corresponds to test number three which was about 99. Now that too has a net correlative score of minus six and I won't go through each of the biomarkers that it was significantly correlated with. If you're interested in that data just leave a comment and I'll, indicate which we're going the right and wrong direction. And I may actually do a live stream at some point with, each of the correlations for each individual, macro or or micronutrient so that you can actually see, what's what's going in the right direction and what's going in the wrong direction. Alright. So protein has a net correlative score with these big picture biomarkers of negative six. And that suggests that protein intake below my average intake, again since 2015, may be optimal for my blood biomarkers. Now my average protein intake since 2015 is a 113 grams per day. So 99 is less than one thirteen, so for that, I am following the correlations. Again, if I was eating above one thirteen because of that net negative correlative score, that would expect to lead to more biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. So to minimize that, eating below my average may minimize the the potential adverse effects of too high of a protein intake on multiple biomarkers or multiple blood biomarkers. Alright. So as an approach for optimizing blood biomarkers, how well am I following the correlations with diet? Let's go even further besides just calorie intake and and protein. Let's take a look at carbohydrate intake. So on the right, we've got the net correlative score, and on the left we've got my average, intake for each of these, macronutrients since 2015. And note first note at at the top of list is fiber. And based on the USDA dietary guidelines, for someone in my, chronological age group, what's, recommended is a fiber intake of about thirty three grams per grams per day. So we can see that for this blood test, my average fiber intake was eighty six grams per day. So what about the net correlative score? So there we can see that my the the net correlative score for fiber is plus two which, and when considering my average intake is 97 with a positive net correlative score that suggests that for, I should be eating above actually, ninety seven grams per day to have a net positive effect potentially have a net positive effect on the blood biomarkers. But I was below that for this test at 86 so that gets a, an x. I need to do a better job of, fiber intake and try to get it closer and above ninety seven grams per day. So this goes beyond this approach goes beyond the RDA. By using this approach, we can actually see, you know, how much is optimal. Beyond just following general recommendations, how much should we eat using this biomarker based analysis. Alright. So next up, total sugars. So for that, I track total fructose intake because I have a tendency to eat a a lot of fruit. And, in terms of, fructose, total fructose intake that's equal to fructose plus sucrose divided by two because fructose is half fructose. So for that we can see that the net correlative score for total fructose is minus three which suggests that I should eat below my average of 87 grams per day which was again since 2015. So for this test the total fructose with fructose plus fructose, sucrose divided by two was 62 grams per day. So that's below 87. So for that I am following the correlations and we get a check. Alright. For net carbs, net correlate score of plus two, that suggests I should eat above my average intake of 235 grams per day and I did for this test with two fifty seven since February is higher than two thirty five, so that too gets a check. Alright. So what about lipids? So again, on the right we've got the net correlative score and then the average intake on the left. So we'll go through these one by one and then I'll start to show, all the rest of the micronutrients micronutrients by just showing, large patterns. So first, total fat net correlative score of minus seven which suggests that I should be eating below my average intake which was eighty six grams per day. So for this test, I averaged about 81 grams per day so that gets a check. So because I'm I'm following the correlations. And net negative score suggests I should be eating eating below my average intake. So fat can be further subdivided into mono and polyunsaturated fats. So monounsaturated fats have a net negative core, a net correlative score of minus one, which which suggests I should eat below my average intake of 17. So for this test, the average 16 which is below 17 so that too gets a check. So polyunsaturated fatty acids can be divided into omega three and omega six. Both omega three and omega six have net positive correlative scores which suggest I should be above my average, average intake. So we can see that for omega three, eight is higher than sevens, that gets a check. And then similarly for omega six, seventeen is higher than 16 so that two gets a check. So then for saturated fat, we can see a net negative, score of minus seven, net correlate score of minus seven. So a lot more biomarkers, blood biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right in correlation with a higher saturated fat intake. So that data suggests I should be below my average intake of twenty seven grams per day. So I did for this test at twenty one grams per day so that gets a check. And then last but not least, even though this could qualify as a micronutrient, cholesterol has a net negative score of minus nine. Again, suggesting I should be below my average intake of a hundred and thirty two milligrams per day. So for this test, I averaged thirty four milligrams per day which again is below my average intake and I'm following the correlations. So to summarize for macros, nine out of these 10 situations I'm following them except for fiber. So for the next test again, I'm gonna try to bump my fiber intake even higher than it was for this test, 86 per day to try to also follow, all of the correlations for macros. Alright. So what about vitamins? So we've got them listed here and then we can see their net correlative scores. And then starting from the top just to just to go through this, so thiamine b one, vitamin b one, net correlative score of one, which suggests I should be higher than two milligrams per day, but it was exactly two milligrams per day so that gets an x. Riboflavin's data suggests I should eat below my average intake but I was above it so that gets an x. And then we can see niacin and I've put the RDA's here just for reference because my Niacin intake is two and a half times the RDA. And you know, this again goes to this idea of how much is optimal. And this approach can also be used for supplements in comparison with blood biomarkers to see how much of a given supplement may be optimal. Now in my case my Niacin intake is not based on supplements, it's whole food, and we can see that the net correlative score for niacin is plus six, which suggests that I can go even higher than my average intake of thirty five milligrams per day, which I did in this case for, niacin with forty milligrams per day so it gets a check. Similarly, vitamin b five net positive score of plus two. 11.1 is higher than my average intake of eleven so that gets a check. And then we can see a net neutral score for vitamin b six. Now my average intake has been seven milligrams per day for b six. For this test it was three point three milligrams, so that actually gets an x which suggests that I can go higher. Now, I've supplemented with b six in the past and when considering this data suggest that I close to the seven maybe optimal or somewhere in between three and seven may be optimal, I'm I'm considering reintroducing vitamin b six supplements, into the approach. Now in terms of that supplementation approach, here we can see b twelve which I have supplemented with many times for many tests in in the past. And b twelve has a net correlative score of minus six. But a lot more biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. Now my average b twelve, intake is five hundred seventy one micrograms per day which you definitely can't get from diet alone. In fact, my ten micrograms per day was diet alone for this test. So when considering that B twelve has a net score of minus six, that suggests I should be below the five seventy one which I did. So I'm following that correlation. So the folate story is similar to B six. It's got a net neutral score which suggests that my more than eleven hundred micrograms of folate for this test can go higher somewhere up to about fifteen hundred micrograms per day. And that too, to get to those levels, I've used, Methylfolate as a supplement so I may actually consider, including that again in the near future. Okay. And then last on the chart is Vitamin A and it's, related carotenoids. So Vitamin A overall, total Vitamin A has a positive score of plus one which suggests I can go higher than a 105, about a 105,000 I use per day. And again, note that the RDA is only 3,000 and I'm way above that. And we'd expect that if being way above the RDA was bad for the biomarkers, I would see very strong negative net correlative scores. For example, using vitamin a. And that's not what we see. We see a net correlative score of plus one which suggest that I can go even higher than where it was for this test about 95,000 I u. Now vitamin a divides into the five main carotenoids and here we can see that, within that, alpha and beta carotene have net negative correlative scores. So that suggests I should eat below my average intake which I did for both of these, carotenes. 12,000 for alpha carotene so I'm following that correlation. So I'm following the correlation for alpha carotene and similarly beta carotene, I'm following that too as, fifty thousand micrograms is below 54,000, and eating below the the the average intake is suggested based on that net correlative score of minus six. Now in contrast, beta cryptoxanthin has a net positive, correlative score of plus three which suggests that I should eat above my average intake of forty three hundred micrograms. But for this test, I was at sixteen seventy one. So going forward I'm gonna reintroduce, butternut squash but in relatively small amounts because I have a tendency to eat just way too much of it. So, let's see how those correlations look in future blood tests. So to finish up the, vitamins, we've got net correlative score, average intake since 2015 and then just going through the first four, we can see that I didn't follow them or I'm, I need to increase, sorry, I need to decrease, my levels of lycopene because I have a net negative correlative score and I need to increase my lutein plus zeaxanthin even though it's relatively high at twenty three thousand micrograms per day. I'm following the correlations for vitamin c and vitamin d. But the one I really wanna wanna point out here is, vitamin e. So vitamin e has a net correlate score of minus eight and even though twenty milligrams per day is higher than the RDA, the net score of minus eight suggests that less than my average of 25, is what I should be doing. Less than, you know, eating less than my average may be optimal based on that net correlative score. So with that in mind, I'm at twenty milligrams per day. So for whatever reason, too much dietary vitamin e is associated or significantly correlated with many more biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. Now in contrast, vitamin K has a net positive correlative score and note that my average vitamin K intake that corresponds to this test was about 14 times higher than the RDA. And again, if intakes that high were bad for the biomarkers or quote unquote bad for health, we'd expect to see relatively super physiological doses and again this is from diet not supplements, but we'd expect to see overall net negative correlative scores. For example vitamin E. But that's not true in the case of vitamin K which has a net positive score which suggests that I should eat above my average intake of, fifteen hundred micrograms per day and I did that for this test so that gets a check. Alright. So, let's go through the minerals real quick. We've got the net correlative scores and we can see that, it's a mixed bag. Some of them I'm following the correlations and others I can do better. So to summarize the micronutrient summary, I'm following the ones the most negative and most positive. So for example, vitamin E has a net score of minus eight, calcium minus seven, niacin I think was plus six. So I've been following the strongest positive and negative correlations thinking that because they're correlated with so many going in the wrong or right direction, that following those should have the biggest impact on my biomarkers. But improvement from any others is possible as we can see by all of the red x's. Now if I do a better job for all for getting these micronutrients to also follow the correlations, will my biological age using the veins test and aging.ai and other blood biomarkers, you know, looking beyond just the simple biological age calculators but really getting towards that, you know, biochemistry of youth. Will they be further improved? Alright. So what about food composition? What does that look like for test number three? So we can see that here. This is the average daily, daily dietary intake for the fifty six day period that corresponded to test number three in 2022. So I ate, 45 different foods and I won't go through, you know, the, amounts in which, you know, top 10 and all that, but what I wanna point out is that even though I'm on a mostly whole food based diet, I do have cheat days or cheat meals. And we can see that here and it's important to raise this point because someone in a forum, saw this data and maybe didn't watch the whole video and thought that I literally eat five grams of ice cream sandwiches or or five grams of caramels every day and that's not the case. When I do have a cheat meal, it's like immediately after the blood test, I have it and I'll eat a relatively large amount maybe a thousand calories and then I'll also do that on the day after the test and then I do my best to shut it down. Literally no junk until the next blood test. So in this case, it was 54 that I had literally no junk, after the first two days of having the ice cream sandwiches and caramels. Now this approach works best for me. I Once a week doesn't work for me, once every two weeks. This is what I've developed over time. Again, that works best for me. And also as, I guess a little bit of junk, you can see gum on the list. I chew gum during my standard seventy to eighty minute workout. I don't know why it's just, you know, it's just the thing I've always done. So other than that, it's whole foods as you can see based on the list. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.