Jarrahiman Kimura was a supercentenarian who lived until he was a 116 years old. Now in an earlier video, we looked at Jarrahiman's blood test data for the last four years of his life, and we identified which biomarkers were good and which biomarkers were not good. Now that was part one, and note that there's more blood test data in that was published in that paper. So let's have a look. So correspondingly, this will be part two of Jeraihiman Kimura's blood test analysis from when he was a 112 through a 116 years old. So which biomarkers will they cover? Well, they include the 10 biomarkers here, uric acid, total protein, four markers of liver function, hemoglobin, hematocrit, platelets, and total cholesterol. So starting with three data points, so when Jurahiman was a 111 years old, a 113.3 years old, and a 115.7 years old, we'll identify what was good or what appears to be good and what was bad. So unfortunately, in this video, most of it is gonna be biomarker data that was going in the wrong direction rather than right. So starting from the top, uric acid. Let's put this, Jarrahiman's data into context. So here we're looking at, the hazard ratio for all cause mortality plotted on the y axis against the concentration of uric acid. And we can see that lowest all cause mortality risk is when uric acid is 303 micromolar or five point o nine milligrams per deciliter. So when taking Jarrahiman's average value over three blood tests, his average, uric acid was 263 and a half micromolar or 4.43. And we can see that his data is not far from the lowest all cause mortality risk for the association with uric acid. So from this, we can conclude that his uric acid data is close to optimal. Now as an interesting aside, note that uric acid accumulates when kidney function is, impaired or suboptimal. And in part one, we saw that, Jarrahiman had suboptimal kidney function as indicated by elevated cystatin c and blood urea nitrogen bond. So, an important question to ask would be why isn't uric acid correspondingly increased when considering that he may have had suboptimal kidney function? So one possibility is that he may have had a relatively low intake of dietary precursors that can be degraded to form uric acid. But note that there are no published studies, that exist for his usual dietary intake to verify that hypothesis. Alright. Moving along, total protein. So total protein levels decline during aging for both men and women. The data for men in green and the data for women in in blue. And note that I'm only gonna go over the data for men as it directly applies to Jerahiman. So, 20 year olds have total protein levels in blood of about 7.4 grams per deciliter, And then they decline during aging such that, 90 year olds or older have total protein levels less than 6.6. So when we look at Jurahiman's average total protein levels, we can see that he's somewhere in the middle, somewhere close to around 60 years old based on his average total protein of seven point o seven grams per deciliter. Now superficially, that seems pretty good because he was a 116 or in the 112 to 116 range over these three blood tests. So he's at least 50 years younger based on his total protein levels. But note that, total protein equals Albumin plus Globulin. And in in Part one, we saw that Jerahiman had aged and unhealthy levels of Albumin. Now when we subtract albumin from total protein, that equals globulin, which is also known as the gamma gap. So we can do that here and calculate Jurajomon's globulin or his gamma gap and get the values there of three two, four point o, and four grams per deciliter. So let's put that data into context. So here we're looking at survival probability or all cause mortality risk plotted on the y axis against time after the baseline assessment of globulin or gam the gamma, gamma gap. So it was about, a five year follow-up after the baseline assessment of globulin levels. So, note that this study was in, people who had an average age of 94 years, which is relatively close to Jurajimann's age, you know, 20 or so years. But I'd I'd expect that this data would be more relevant when con comparing a study in 50 year olds. So what does the data show? So for people that had a gamma gap, again, those are globulin levels, less than 3.2 in blue or greater than, 3.2 in red. Starting with the people who had relatively low globulin levels, we can see that they had an average, life expectancy or sorry, a mean, median survival when looking at fifty fifty percent survival, which is what the green line indicates, of about forty four months from the baseline assessment. However, people that had higher globulin levels or a higher gamma gap live significantly shorter as shown there. And note that, that, Jerahiman's, average globulin level or his gamma gap was 3.73, grams per deciliter which would put him on that red line for a significantly shorter, life expectancy after the baseline assessment when compared with people who who had a lower gamma gap. So relatively high globulin, as evidenced by the gamma gap, and low albumin reflect the bad for health phenotype. So although total protein may have looked, fifty years younger superficially, when we investigate deeper, when we investigate further, we see that, his albumin globulin levels were not optimal or far in fact, far from optimal. So moving along, we're gonna look at four mark four markers of liver function, GOT, GPT, gamma GTP, and cholinesterase. So starting with GOT, GOT stands for glutamate oxaloacetate transferase and that's also commonly known as aspartate aminotransferase AST. So let's put his data into context. So here is all cause mortality data for GOT or AST, And we've got it in four quartiles, with, lowest lowest risk, for people who had, AST or got in the 21 to 23 range when compared with the referent, which was a median value of 20. So Jerahiman's data was 29 for average data for for god. And based on that, that would put him in quartile four with which had a median value of 27 which would indicate he had a significantly all cause mortality risk based on his god data. So his, got got data is not good as it would be associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. Alright. What about GPT? So GPT stands for glutamate pyruvate transferase and this is also more commonly known as, alanine aminotransferase ALT. So let's put that data into context looking at all cause mortality data for ALT or GPT. So, Jarrahiman's average GPT was 14.7 and when compared with the reference or actually that would put him into the reference group that had a median value of 15. Now, normally, the reference or I shouldn't say normally, but most often, the reference is has the lowest risk for all cause mortality. But that's not the situation in this case. As we can see, q two and q three with median values of ALT of 18 to 22 had a significantly reduced all cause mortality risk comp when compared with people who had ALT values of 15. So, that would indicate that Geraghim had significantly increased all cause mortality risk based on his GPT levels. Now so so note that his GPT would also not be good or a little bit far from optimal. Now besides assessing all cause mortality risk for got and GPT individual individ individually, evaluating their ratio or, you know, got divided by GPT or AST divided by ALT has value. And that's what we've we can see here with average AST or ALT over ALT values of 1.9, 1.9, and 2.1 at those three different data points over that four year period. So let's put these data into perspective. So here we're looking at survival rate on the y axis or all cause mortality risk for people who had a relatively low AST, ALT ratio, in which case their their ratio was one point o two, their average ratio. And that was compared against survival the survival rate for people who had a relatively high AST to ALT ratio as shown there in red. With and their average AST to ALT ratio was 1.83. So these two curves are significantly different. In other words, people who had a relatively lower AST to ALT ratio had a lower risk for all cause mortality when compared with the group that had a higher AST to ALT ratio. So note that Jurajimann's average AST to ALT ratio is two point zero, which would put him pretty close to the high AST to ALT ratio group, which also would put him at a significantly increased all cause mortality risk based on his ratio. So that data too is not good. Alright. So moving along, gamma GTP, which is known as gamma glutamyl transpeptidase, and that's also more commonly known as gamma glutamyltransferase or GGT. So let's put that data into context by looking at all cause mortality data, which is shown there. And in this case, lower is better in terms of all cause mortality risk with a median value of 12 in q one being associated with lowest all cause mortality risk, and then risk significantly increases as GGT increases from the median value of 12. So Jiraihimon's average gamma GTP ratio was 41, which would put him somewhere in between q three and q four, which had median values of thirty two and fifty eight. Nonetheless, both are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So, Jurajimann's gamma GTP data is also not good, unfortunately. Alright. And then last for these four liver markers is cholinesterase. Now in contrast with these other markers that I've just presented, which are commonly performed when one goes to their doctor for their annual physical on a blood test, cholinesterase is not. So let's, dig a little deeper into what cholinesterase is. So, obviously, it's a liver enzyme. As I mentioned, these are four liver enzymes. And within the liver, there are different, liver cell types. One of them being hepatocytes, which is zoomed in in that circle. So cholinesterase is an enzyme that's produced within, hepatocytes. And when liver function is reduced, less cholinesterase is made and then released into the blood. So note that cholinesterase declines during aging which is shown here from the age range of about 50 to more than 110 years old. So when looking at Jurajeeman's well and you can see the clear, age related decline with that red arrow. So when looking at Jurajeeman's average cholinesterase data of about 199, international units per liter, that would put him at, extra by extrapolation, somewhere close to the 110 year old, data point which is pretty close to his actual chronological age. So from this, we conclude that that Jarrahiman had had aged and not youthful levels of cholinesterase. So what about all cause mortality risk? And that's what's shown here in data from the same study. And note that all of these studies, if you're interested in checking out the papers, they'll be linked in the description box for the video. So here, we can see that having a relatively higher level of cholinesterase is significantly associated with a reduced all cause mortality risk. As you can see, the confidence interval, the data in parentheses, is completely below one, which indicates lower all cause mortality risk with a higher level of cholinesterase. However, Jurajiman has relatively low levels of cholinesterase. So this would put him at an increased all cause mortality risk. So based on that, we can see that, collectively, these four markers of liver function, Jurajiman's liver health slash function and or function, was suboptimal and potentially poor. Alright. So moving along, hemoglobin, we can see his three data there, 11.6, 12.8, and 12 o. And let's put his data into context. So here, we're looking at all cause mortality in men. And note that for each of these, data that I present in the video, I go after the largest studies that are representative of the majority of studies as I do deep dives. You know, I don't just look at one paper. I look at as many papers that exist for a given biomarker as possible and then present the data for the largest study that exists on that given biomarker. Now in case I missed, a study, feel free to leave it in the comments, and I'll I'd be glad to give you a shout out and and present that data in a future video. So here for hemoglobin, when compared well, actually, Jiraihiman's average hemoglobin level is 12.1 grams per deciliter. So when compared with the reference, which was 14 to 14.9, we we can see that Jiraihiman is at a significantly increased all cause mortality risk based on his hemoglobin level. So that would indicate that his hemoglobin levels, unfortunately, are not good. Alright. What about hematocrit? So hematocrit is the percentage of red blood cells, RBCs, that are present in blood in blood. And in part one of this video series, we saw that Jurajimann had had aged and not youthful levels of red blood cells. So it shouldn't be a surprise that his hematocrit is also relatively low. Nonetheless, let's put his hematocrit data into perspective by looking at all cause mortality data which is shown here. So all cause mortality risk on the y axis plotted against the, percentage of hematocrit on the, x axis. So as we can see, lowest all cause mortality risk is when hematocrit is forty three point five, percent. And Jurajomon's data is thirty seven point seven which although it isn't too far, it's definitely going in the wrong direction. So from that, we can conclude that his hematocrit was suboptimal. Note that if his if his hematocrit was somewhere around 30, it would be even worse, but nonetheless, it isn't it isn't great. It's not as good as uric acid which is relatively closer to the lowest risk for all cause mortality when compared with hematocrit. Alright. Next up are platelets. So note that platelets decline during aging. Again, this is data in men. It's a study of 200 more than 230,000 men. So starting from the age range of twenty to thirty years all the way through 90 to 100 years, we can see that platelets which start off in in about the two thirty range up until about, 50 to 60. They then decline after that, with values approaching, less than two ten or so approaching 200 as you, approach about a 100 years old. So note that this is up to a 100 years old, so it isn't, a far stretch to expect that platelets would further continue to decline, which would be one potential explanation for Jarrahiman's average, platelets. Sorry. That's a that's a, mistake there. It should be Jarrahiman's average platelets at a 173,700, platelets per microliter. Now note that the units, for the data for platelets are 18.8, sixteen, and seventeen point three. So if we multiply that data by a 100, we get a 188 times 10 to the three platelets per microliter in case you wanted you were wondering why the data looks, different in terms of, the units. Alright. So let's put his date his platelet data into perspective for all cause mortality risk, which is shown there. So in this study of more than a 131,000 people, when compared with people who had platelets in the 200 to 300 range, which was defined as the reference, we can see that people who had, platelets in the 100 to 200 range, which Jiraihi Mann does, they had a significantly all cause mortality risk, in the multi, multivariate adjusted model and in the crude unadjusted model as shown but by the twenty five percent increased all cause mortality risk there too. So, nonetheless, increased all cause mortality risk for platelets based on Juraheman's, platelet data. So for that, we can, conclude that as platelets, they were aged, not youthful, and unhealthy based on the all cause mortality data. Alright. Next up and last but not least, total cholesterol. So in part one, we saw that Geraihiemans HDL and VLDL, which can be calculated simply by dividing, or a very close approximation by the dividing triglycerides by five. HDL and VLDL were among the what's good list for biomarkers in part one. Now note that total cholesterol equals HDL plus VLDL plus LDL, so this could potentially be a mostly LDL story, and I'll have more on that, coming up in a bit. So let's look at, this with let's look at the all cause mortality data first and then look at the aging data second. So here we're looking at all cause mortality data for total cholesterol. And this is in, people who are 75 to 99 years. Again, I was trying to look at, representative data for an age group that was as close to Jurajimann's age group as possible. So when, looking at Jurajimann's average total cholesterol of a 153 milligrams per deciliter as indicated there, we can see that that's, significantly, associated with a significantly increased all cause mortality risk when compared with relatively higher total cholesterol, which in this case was, lowest risk of, with, for people who had total cholesterol in the 200 to two twenty nine milligram per deciliter range. So, from that, we can conclude that he, Jarrahiman had a significantly increased all cause mortality risk based on his, total cholesterol data. So let's look at have a look at the aging data. How does total cholesterol change during aging? And that's what's shown here all the way up through 88 year olds and this is in a study of twelve point eight more than 12,800,000 people. So total cholesterol increases during aging for both men in green and women in red as shown there up until about 50 years. So it goes from about one sixty to 200 up until 50 in men. And then after the age 50, it declines, all the way to, about one eighty. Now, note that Jerahiman's total cholesterol was had an average of one fifty three so it may not be a far stretch to think that his total cholesterol levels may have been higher in youth and then continued to decline after 88 in this, data here to his, one fifty three for the last four years of his life. So that's what's stated there. Was his, was Gerrahiemann's total cholesterol relatively high but then declined until reaching 116 years? So that's one possibility. Alternatively, also note that relatively lower total cholesterol, somewhere around 160 in men, were, people who were younger than 20, around 18 years old, lower total cholesterol is also found in youth. So another question that we can ask is, is Jurajuemann's total cholesterol of one fifty three, that average value over three years, indicative of youth? So, we can assess that by looking at data for albumin and HDL. And that's what's shown here. Albumin and HDL can be used to further evaluate all cause mortality risk when total cholesterol is less than a 160 milligrams per deciliter. So first, starting off and and note that all four of these data are in people who have total cholesterol lower than one sixty. So starting within that group and granted, this is a very small, group. It's only 393 subjects. There isn't a lot of published data on this on this subject, at least in terms of all cause mortality risk, total cholesterol lower than one sixty, and then other biomarkers in assessing whether that, that low total cholesterol may be, neutral, beneficial, or detrimental for health. So in this relatively small study and again, if anybody's come across a bigger study that, tried to stratify all cause mortality risk in people who had lower, total cholesterol, please post it in the comments. Please please share that data. So for starting with people who had a total cholesterol less than one sixty, relatively low albumin of 38 grams per deciliter, and relatively low HDL of 47, that was defined as the reference starting on the left. And then for people who had high HDL but also relatively low albumin and low total cholesterol, all cause mortality risk was similar to people who also had low HDL. So HDL didn't impact, all cause mortality risk for people who had, low, relatively low total cholesterol less than one sixty. But what happens when those people had relatively higher albumin? And now we can see a significantly reduced all cause mortality risk for people who have low total cholesterol less than one sixty, relatively high albumin of greater than 38 grams per deciliter, but then also relatively low HDL. So in this case, let's say thirty two percent, reduced all cause mortality risk when compared with someone who has, a low total cholesterol, low albumin, and low HDL. But even better are people that have low total cholesterol, relatively high albumin, and relatively high HDL, higher than 47 as shown shown there. There's a sixty two percent reduced all cause mortality risk when compared with people who have low total cholesterol, low albumin, and low HDL. Now these data can be, more easily simplified by looking at a flowchart here. So starting with low total cholesterol at the top, and in Jurahiman's case, he did have low total cholesterol with an average of a 153 milligrams per deciliter. And then taking it from there, did he have low albumin or high albumin, relatively high albumin? In his case, he had relatively low albumin with an average data of 3.3 grams per deciliter. That should be deciliter. Sorry. That's that's correct. That you those units are correct. Three point three grams per liter for albumin. So that would put him at at highest risk for all cause mortality based on his albumin and total cholesterol data. Note that, if if he had high albumin, but and then correspondingly are either low or high HDL, we could then, look at intermediate risk and low risk but that's not the case in Jurajimann's data. So, in his case, his relatively low total cholesterol in combination with low abdomen but high HDL may not be indicative of youth but an increased all cause mortality risk. So as a summary for part two, I'd we identified what may have been good, uric acid, but then there was a lot going in the wrong direction in terms of, Jarrahiman's blood biomarkers. Now, when considering in part one, as I showed that his glucose, hba one c, HDL, triglycerides, white blood cells, and CRP were in the what's or CRP at least for the first data point when he was a 111.5 years old, were in the what's good, category, it highlights a potentially important role for these biomarkers on longevity, especially when considering that he had a multitude of not good biomarkers of kidney, liver, red blood cells, and red blood blood cell related measures, including hemoglobin and hematocrit, platelets, and total cholesterol. Now, if you read the paper, you'll notice that only one biomarker is missing from the 22 that were that were published, and that's LDL. And that's because in a very recently published paper, which is shown here, they stratified, cardiovascular disease risk based on LDL levels and glucose levels, which may contribute to identifying when relatively low LDL, in Jurajimann's case, would be associated with an increased cardiovascular disease risk or mortality from cardiovascular disease or not. So I'm probably gonna make a future video about that, so stay tuned for that. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoy the video. Have a great day.