How many hours of weekly exercise is optimal for health? To help answer that, let's have a look at a study that was published last month where they identified a u shaped association for the duration of sports activities with all cause mortality risk. So first, what did these sports activities include? So PA or physical activity included tennis, badminton, soccer, and handball, but also more commonly performed, sports activities or exercises including cycling, swimming, jogging, calisthenics, health club activities, and weightlifting. Now, associations for low levels of physical activity with all cause mortality risk makes sense because that's been shown in previous studies. But is too much physical activity actually bad for health? So let's have a look at the data. So first, this was a study of about 8,800 people that had an average age of about 57 years. And starting with a baseline assessment of weekly duration of sports activities, deaths were followed up up to twenty six years later. So this is a relatively long study. And then let's have a look at data for the fully adjusted model, which they've defined as the extended multivariate model. So, after looking at the association for duration of sports activities with all cause mortality risk, they included these other variables in the model because they may confound the association between duration of sports activities with all cause mortality. So when, first looking at the reference, in this case, which was defined as people who exercise from two point six to four point five hours per week, so that's about twenty to forty minutes a day, we can see that having lower levels of weekly exercise, so zero to two point five hours per week, was associated with significant increases for all cause mortality risk. Forty one percent for people who reported no weekly exercise and twenty one percent increased for people who reported up to two and a half hours per week for these exercises. So, also, look at look at the data for more than ten hours per week. We can see also a significantly increased all cause mortality risk of twenty two percent. So that's why both low and high levels of physical activity or that u shaped association, is present for, significantly increased all cause mortality risk. So what's contributing to these associations? So let's have a look at some of the data that they presented in the paper, including smoking, BMI, sex, and age. So first, let's start with current and former smokers. So when compared with the reference, which in this case, again, was two point six to four point five hours of these sports activities per week, we can see that both lower and higher levels of, weekly exercise was associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So what about never smokers? So, again, starting with the reference, we can see that both lower amounts of weekly sports activity, so less than two and a half hours per week, but also more than four point six hours per week were not significantly associated, which I've delineated as n s, with an increased all cause mortality risk. So from this, we can conclude that that u shaped association that's mentioned in the title of this paper for weekly, sports activities with an increased all cause mortality risk is significant only in current and former smokers and not in never smokers. So which other variables may be driving this u shaped association? So let's have a look at body mass index. And starting with, people who were of a normal weight, which is a BMI between eighteen point five and twenty four point nine kilograms per meter squared. So first, again, looking at the reference when compared with the reference, we can see that there was an increased all cause mortality risk for people who were sedentary who reported no weekly sports activities. But people who reported more than four point six hours per week of these exercises did not have a significantly increased all cause mortality risk. So from that, we can conclude that there is no u shaped association for the duration of weekly sports activities with all cause mortality risk in people with a BMI between eighteen and a half and twenty four point nine. Alright. So what about in overweight and obese people? So overweight is classified as a BMI of twenty five to thirty, and obese is classified as having a BMI greater than thirty. So, again, starting with the reference or when compared with the reference, we can see significant increases for all cause mortality risk for weekly duration of sports activities that were less than two and a half hours per week. And, also, higher, people who reported sports activities that were higher than four point six hours per week also had a significantly increased all cause mortality risk. So there, we do see the u shaped association for an increased all cause mortality risk, in people with, a BMI of greater than twenty five, but not in people who had a BMI between eighteen and a half and twenty four point nine. Alright. So let's take this further. Let's have a look at how the data looks in men and women. So let's start with the data, in women. And when compared with the reference again, people who, women who reported, weekly duration of weekly sports activities for two point six to four and a half hours per week, we can see that only zero, hours per week sedentary, behavior was associated with an increased all cause mortality risk in women. But more than four point six hours per week was not significantly so associated with mortality risk. So from that, we can conclude that there was no u shaped association for the duration of weekly sports activities with all cause mortality risk in women. So what about the data in men? So, again, when compared with the reference, we can see that having, men who reported, exercising less than two and a half hours per week had significant increases for all cause mortality risk. And similarly, men that reported, duration of weekly sports activities that were greater than four point six hours per week also had an increased significantly increased all cause mortality risk. So from this, we can see that that u shaped association for weekly sports activities with an increased all cause mortality risk is significant significant only for men and not for women. Alright. So let's go through one more of these. Let's have a look at age. So in, people that were younger than 60 years old when compared with the reference, only people who were younger than 60 that reported no sports activities, no weekly sports activities, sedentary behavior was associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. But people younger than 60 that reported exercising more, so, 4.6 to greater than ten hours per week, that was not significantly associated with all cause mortality risk. So for people younger than 60, there's no u shaped association for the duration of weekly sports activities with all cause mortality risk. So what about in people older than 60? So, again, when compared with the reference, we can see that people who exercised for less than two and a half hours per week had significant increases for all cause mortality risk, but people who reported exercising more than four point six hours per week and greater than ten hours per week did not have significant increases for all cause mortality risk. So that u shaped association for duration of weekly sports activities with all cause mortality risk is not significant in people younger than 60 or in people older older than 60. So from this, we can conclude that there is no u shaped association for this association with weekly sports activities for the duration of that with all cause mortality risk in people of any age. So to take it back to the title where they, stated that there was a u shaped association between the duration of sports activities and mortality. But I wish that they would clarify would have clarified this and, you know, put this more upfront where this is true only in current and former smokers, in men, and in people with a BMI of greater than twenty five, at least in this study. Note that the u shaped association was not significantly associated with all cause mortality risk for, never smokers, for women, and for people who had a BMI less than twenty five. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.