In my last video, we saw that my biological age using Levine's test was seventeen years younger than my chronological. And similarly using aging.ai, 21 years younger. So what's contributing to these data? So first, let's start with supplements. So I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in my mid twenties so I've been taking Levothyroxine for about twenty five years, a hundred and thirty seven and a half micrograms per day. Now for about nine months out of the year, I supplement with vitamin d, a thousand I use per day. But note that in the summer, I don't. Especially on days that I get sun exposure. So for the sixty three day period that corresponded to this blood test, I did include vitamin d but it wasn't every day. And then occasional melatonin. So this is a very small amount. This is about thirty nine micrograms per day. So not milligrams, micrograms. So, mel melatonin either before bed or in the middle of the night to help with sleep but rarely as you can see thirty nine micrograms per day isn't much. And that's it for supplements. Nothing else including, gel protectors or senolytics. So that brings us to diet. How is diet or is diet contributing to these data? So first, how am I tracking diet? Well, note that the blood test is on July 11, of 2022. So how does diet correspond to that? So my average daily dietary intake from the last blood test which was on May 9 through the day before, the to the day before this blood test on July 10 corresponds to blood test number four in 2022. So let's explain that approach a little bit more. So here we're looking at May, June and July. So, blood test number three was on May 9 and blood test number four was on July 11 and then in between, sixty three days. So for each of those sixty three days, I weighed my I weighed my food and I've done that every day since April 2015. I've weighed my food every day using a food scale. And then I enter that those food amounts into Cronometer and, that's the diet tracking app that I've used. I'm not here to say that they're the best but that's what I've used. And along those lines, if you're interested in using a discount link for Cronometer that will be in the video's description. Alright. So then that daily data for Cronometer, I enter into a spreadsheet and then the average intake for those 63 in between blood tests corresponds to blood test number four. And because I have up to, 38 blood tests since 2015, I can then correlate diet with the blood biomarkers. So, yeah. So let's get into that approach, a little bit further including looking at individual food amounts. So that's what we can see here. Again, this is the average, daily dietary intake from test number three to test number four. It's a sixty three day period average intake. And starting at the top with the amounts in grams, we can see that strawberries, were the food that I consume the most, 622 grams per day. So why are these foods at the top not just strawberries but the others on the list? So by tracking diet in conjunction with blood biomarkers, I can focus on eating foods that have positive correlative scores with the biomarkers while minimizing intake for foods that have negative scores. So what does that mean? So first to, illustrate, let's take a look at correlations for strawberry intake with big picture biomarkers. And then as a side note, although I've tracked macros and micros since 2015, I only started tracking individual food amounts since 2018. So what that means is I have, 23 to up to 23 tests that correlate that individual food amounts with the blood biomarkers whereas I have up to 38 tests for macros and micros with the blood biomarkers since I started tracking that in the beginning and and it wasn't until later that I decided to start tracking the individual food amounts too. So if anyone is interested in this approach, I'd recommend tracking both macros, micros and the individual food amounts because the macros and micros, may not fully explain, food, you know, you're reducing food down to 40 or so nutrients that may not it may be too reductionist. Alright. So correlations for strawberry intake with the big picture biomarkers and the big picture biomarkers are listed here and I've covered this in other videos but let's just go through it real quick. So they include glucose but also homocysteine, three markers of kidney function, three markers of liver function, all the major lipoproteins, immune related cells and proteins, for example, globulin, red blood cells and their related measures, a marker of inflammation, high sensitivity c reactive protein, and then overall biological age score is indicated by Levine's phenoage and aging.ai. So as as another note, the little n next to each, blood biomarker is the number of blood tests that I have. So for example, for glucose I have n equals 23. That's 23 blood tests that correspond to diet data for or food food intake. R at the top on the left is the little r is a correlation correlation coefficient and then to the right is the p value, the measure of statistical significance with a value less than 0.005 being being indicative of statistically significant. Alright. So what's significantly associated with strawberry intake? So first, a relatively higher strawberry intake is significantly correlated with lower levels of the liver enzyme AST, lower LDL, lower platelets, and also lower high sensitivity c reactive protein. So then the next question that I would ask is, are the significant correlations going in the right or wrong direction in terms of aging and or all cause mortality ACM risk? Now I've covered how each of these biomarkers, changes with aging and or all cause mortality risk in other videos, so I won't go that and go through that in this video. But, we can see that I've put green arrows there. So these are correlations that are going in the right direction in terms of aging. For example, AST, higher than around 29 or around 29, is associated with, an increased all cause mortality as compared with somewhere in the eighteen to twenty two range. So I've had AST data even higher than 40. So for me, having strawberry intake being negatively correlated with AST suggests a higher core, strawberry intake is significantly correlated with lower AST. So that will be going in the right direction in terms of all cause mortality risk. So using a similar similar analysis for each of these four biomarkers, they're going in the right direction in terms of, aging and or all cause mortality risk. So that leads us to a net correlative score of plus four. So what does that mean? Well, if the net score for diet with blood biomarkers was negative, I would eat below my average intake since twenty fifteen since I started tracking diet. And if the net score was zero, I would eat close to or at my average intake for that food or macro micronutrient. But in this case, if the net score is positive, I should eat above my average intake to follow the correlations. So with that in mind, my average strawberry intake since 2018 is 350 grams per day. And as I mentioned, my strawberry intake for the sixty three day period that corresponded to this blood test was 622 grams per day. So I'm following that that that correlation which suggested I should eat above my average intake so that gets a green check. Alright. So let's illustrate another example by looking at red bell pepper. So here we're looking at correlations for red bell pepper intake with the big picture biomarkers. So what's statistically significant? So we can see that a relatively higher red bell pepper intake is significant correlated with higher creatinine, with higher levels of neutrophils and also a lower level of lymphocytes, lymphocyte percentage. Sorry. So these are going in the wrong direction in terms of in terms of aging and or all cause mortality risk. For example, creatinine increases during aging so we don't wanna have relatively higher levels so that red bell pepper is positively correlated with higher levels of creatinine that's going in the wrong direction. So all of the red arrows are going in the wrong direction So that yields a net correlative score of minus three. Now if you remember a net score when the net score is negative that suggests I should eat below my average intake. My average daily red red bell pepper intake since 2018 is 298. So for the sixty three day period that corresponded to this blood test, I purposefully averaged about two hundred and forty eight grams per day. So I'm following the correlations because it's a net negative correlation and I'm below my average intake purposefully. And I should say that none of these values, the diet, intake values are by accident. I carefully examine my diet every day to make sure that I'm following as many of these correlations as possible in order to get the best biomarker profile that I possibly can. Alright. So how well am I following the correlations for the other high intake foods which which can help address the question, why are these foods at the top in terms of intake? So I've already shown, strawberry and red bell pepper. So for carrots, carrots have a net score of plus one and they they are significantly correlated with lower homocysteine. Homocysteine increases during age, during aging, and relatively higher levels are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So, that would suggest that carrots, if correlation, equals causation and that's a big if, that carrots may, reduce homocysteine in my case. I don't know if that's causation but that's what the data suggests. So my average intake since, 2018 since I started tracking food intake is 372 Because the correlation is positive that suggests I should eat above 372 grams per day, but note that I was at less than that for this test. So we give it a red x. Now, the carrot story is a little bit complicated because carrots are a rich source of beta carotene, which would which as we'll see in a bit, beta carotene has a net negative correlative score so I have to be careful with my total amount of beta carotene containing foods including carrots and then green leaf vegetables, broccoli, even things like red bell pepper, etcetera. Alright. So for some of the other foods on the list, mushrooms have a net score of plus four and you can see, with the significant biomarker correlations, the foods that are going in the right direction are listed in green and going in the wrong direction are listed in red. So, actually for mushrooms, it's five biomarkers going in the right direction, one in the wrong direction to get that net score. So average intake is forty two grams per day. I used to eat a lot more mushrooms prior to 2018 before I started tracking individual food amounts. And it wasn't only until, about somewhere around this year that I added, them back into the diet and, we can see that they've got that net positive score. So that looks like it was a good idea. So 02/1931 is above 42 because the net score is positive. It suggests I eat above my average intake. So I'm following that correlation. Alright. Next up, beets and we can see that beets have a net score of plus eight and I'm not a fan of the term super foods but with a net score of plus eight that would suggest that beets may be a super food for me. We can see that they're positively, significantly positively correlated with eight all eight biomarkers going the right direction, and none going in the wrong direction. So my average beet intake since, I started tracking food intake in 2018 is a hundred and fifteen grams per day. We can see that for the sixty three day period that corresponded to this test. I'm above that so we give it a green arrow. Alright. Collard greens, net score of plus one. This is one that I just recently added into my diet switching it out, for spinach which are high in oxalates and I was eating a lot of spinach And oxalates actually have a net negative score, in my with my blood biomarkers. I won't show that data here but if anyone's interested I can indicate which biomarkers are going in the right and wrong direction with oxalate intake. So, nonetheless, my average intake for collard greens, fourteen grams per day since I'm above that, I'm following the correlations we give it a green arrow. Alright. So then last but not least, watermelon intake. Watermelon has a net score of plus five. Five biomarkers going in the right direction, none in the wrong. My average intake since 2018, a hundred and fifty two grams per day and two hundred is above one fifty two so I'm also following that correlation. So as I mentioned, by following the correlations for as many foods and macros and micros as possible, I expect that my best biomarker profile will will result. Now whether that's the case, I don't know but the biomarkers are looking pretty good for now so I'd argue that diet may be contributing. Alright. So what about the rest of the diet? Here are the first 23 foods but where's the rest of it? So we can see that here, same approach, a mountain grams at the top and then, 40 so I eat 46, different foods for this sixty three day period that corresponds to test number four. Now note that it isn't always, clean. I do include junk and when I do, it's immediately after the blood test on blood test day and then on the day after and then I shut it down until the next next test or I try my best to shut it down. So in this case it was sixty one days with no junk food. So the quote unquote junk food for this test was a small bag of M and M's as you can see by the red arrow, but then also store bought peanut butter which is roasted and has salt added to it. And although that may not qualify as junk, I usually eat all my nuts and seeds raw to limit age age products. So, I put that in the junk, category for now even though there's far far worse things to eat if including M and M's. And then also I I chew gum during my standard seventy five to eighty minute workout that I do once every three days so that's a couple pieces of gum every three days, so that's also in the in the junk list. Alright. So what about macro macronutrient and micronutrient profile? How does how does that correspond to test number four? So let's start off by taking a look at calorie, protein, and fat intake that corresponds to this blood this blood test. So as I mentioned, I have up to 23 blood tests that correspond to food intake since 2018, but up to 38 tests that correspond to macros and micros since 2015. So let's start it off by looking at calorie intake. So my calorie intake for the sixty three day period that corresponded to this test was about twenty three zero two and then is that too high? Is that just right? Is that too low? To address that we can do a correlation analysis for calorie intake versus the big picture biomarkers. And when I do that, calorie intake has a net score of minus five including higher levels, of these five biomarkers alkaline phosphatase, ALP, the the liver enzyme AST, LDL, platelets, PLT, and the red blood cell distribution with RDW. So in other words, a higher calorie intake is significantly correlated with higher levels of each of these biomarkers which is going in the wrong direction of in terms of aging and all and or all cause mortality risk. So with the net negative score that suggests I should eat below my average intake in order to minimize any potential detrimental effects of calorie intake on the blood biomarkers. So my average intake since 2015 is 20 about twenty five fifty. So we can see that for this test, I follow that the correlations by eating less than my average intake, so it gets a green check. Alright. So next up, protein intake about 96 grams per day. So why 96 grams per day? Again, we'll go to the correlation analysis and see, why why that amount. And, just as a quick note, that's 16% 16.6% of my total diet composition is from protein. So correlation analysis, protein intake has a net negative correlative score of or a net correlative score of minus eight. And you can see that nine biomarkers going in the wrong direction in red and only one homocysteine going in the right direction. So that suggests I should eat below my average intake, which is about a 113 grams per day and and again, this isn't by accident. I I know these correlations because I reevaluate for every test and knowing that protein has a net negative correlative score, I aim for 96 grams of protein for this test so that I'd be under my average intake since 2015 of a 113 grams. Alright. So we give it a green check because I'm following the correlations for protein. Alright. So what about fat intake? So for this test, I average 80 and a half grams per day of total fat and, that's 31 and a half percent of my total diet composition. Alright. So why 80 and a half grams for fat? So again, we go to the correlation analysis and we can see that, total fat intake in my data and maybe different for other people has a net correlative score of minus seven and it's significantly correlated actually with nine biomarkers going the wrong direction and only two in green going in the right direction. So that suggests that I should eat below my average intake which as we can see is 86 grams per day And because 80 and a half is less than 86, I'm following that correlation by eating under my average in average intake when the correlation net correlation score is negative. Alright. So total fat can, divide further be further subdivided into mono and polyunsaturated fats. So first starting with the monounsaturated fats, we can see that, even though they're reported to have health benefits and eat more olive oil and all that, even though my diet doesn't contain oils, it's from whole foods, we can see that monounsaturated fats have a net negative, correlative score in my data including being significantly correlated with higher levels of glucose and red blood cells. Alright. So that suggests I should be less than my average intake, which is 16.9 grams since 2015, and because 16.4 is less than 16.9, I'm following that correlation too. So polyunsaturated fatty acids can be then further subdivided into omega three and omega six. And as I mentioned, may not be perfect but that's what I've used since 2015. You can see that omega three and omega six at eight and sixteen grams per day should add up to polyunsaturated the polyunsaturated amount of 23 half. But individually 24 is higher than 23 and a half. So, there are yeah. In coronary mean there's not perfect but this is what I've used since 2015. So going to the correlations, omega three has a net positive correlative score of plus two and it's significantly correlated with five biomarkers going the right direction as shown in green and only two in the wrong direction. So that suggests I should eat above my average intake which is seven grams per day and because eight is higher than seven, I'm following the correlations there. Similarly, omega six has a net positive core score of plus three including those biomarkers there. So that suggests I should eat above my average intake, which is 15.5 grams, and we can see green check because I'm also following that correlation. Now, saturated fat has a net correlated score of minus seven, so I should eat below my average intake in order to minimize any potential detrimental effects if correlation equals causation for saturated fat on the blood biomarkers. So my average intake for, saturated fat is twenty seven grams per day. So I was at twenty one grams per day for this test. So again, I'm following that correlation too. And then, cholesterol, very strong negative correlative score of minus nine including those biomarkers there. Nine going in the wrong direction, none in the right. So that suggests I should be below my average intake, which is a 129. So we can see 22 is less than one twenty nine, so I'm following the correlation. So to sum, sick I'm six for six and following the correlations for fat intake with the big picture biomarkers and I and again, this isn't by accident. I purposefully aim for either above my average intake, below my average intake, or right at my average intake based on what these correlation show. Alright. So what about, carbohydrate intake? So first my net carb intake was about 250 grams per day, which translates into 52% of my total calories. So is that amount too much? What is the correlation? What are the correlation show? So net carbs have a, correlative score of plus one, which suggests suggests that I should eat above my average intake, which is two and about 235 grams per day, and we can see two forty nine and a half is higher than my average intake, so it gets a green check. Alright. So fiber has a net correlated score of plus one. So I should eat above my average intake which is 97 grams per day. So 90 and a half is less than 97 so we give that an x. But for those who are familiar with the my my channel and who have seen previous, videos on my diet breakdowns for other biological age tests including test number three in 2022, my fiber intake for test number three was 86 and a half. So I increased it by a little bit, just obviously not enough to get above 97.1. So, there are more details in terms of why I didn't just, you know, add a whole bunch more broccoli, or other high fiber containing foods to get higher than 97.1, grams of fiber per day. So if anyone's interested in that story, just leave a comment and I'll be happy to explain the why. Alright. So then in terms of sugars, I tracked total, fructose which is defined as fructose plus sucrose divided by two. So 62 and a half, 62.4 grams of total fructose per day for the sixty three day period that corresponded to this blood test. Alright. So net correlative score, total fructose has a net score of minus two, which suggests that I eat should eat below my average intake which is about 86 day. So because 62 is less than about 86, I followed that correlation, two. Alright. So what about micronutrients? And I won't go through all of these. I'm just gonna highlight some key points in the vitamins and minerals. So first starting with the first half of vitamins, so let's go we'll take a look at the net correlative score and then the average my average since 2015 and whether or not I'm following the correlation or not. And and again here if anyone's interested in which biomarkers are going in the right or wrong direction, just leave a comment for each of the vitamins and minerals and I'll be happy to share that information. So first up, niacin, note that it has a very positive score of plus six. My average intake since 2015 is about thirty six milligrams per day. For this test I averaged about forty one milligrams per day and because of score is positive I should eat above my average intake. 41 is greater than thirty six so I followed that correlation. Now note that the RDA for niacin is sixteen milligrams per day. So if I only if I only ate at sixteen milligrams per day because of the net correlative score being so highly positive, that would suggest I would limit myself on any potential cause of the effects of niacin intake on the blood biomarkers. So, this approach can help get closer to what is optimal at the individual letter level not just for individual foods but also macros and, you know, micro micronutrients including vitamins and minerals. So that, you know, that addresses the question beyond the RDA, what's optimal? Should we just aim for the RDA or what's optimal beyond that? And the niacin story, you know, with two and a half times higher than the RDA would, support this approach in in trying to figure out what's optimal at the individual level. Alright. In contrast, b twelve has a very strong negative correlate score of minus seven. And my average, since 2015 is 556. Obviously, that's with supplementation of of about a thousand micrograms per day for a lot of the past seven years. Now for this test, I only averaged on purpose, a a ten point six micrograms per day knowing that, b twelve has a strong negative correlative score on my data. So we give that a green check because I'm following the correlations eating below my average intake. But that's another example too. The RDA is two point four micrograms. So I'm already four four and a half time times higher than the RDA. So again, it goes to that question of how much above the RDA is optimal. Is it one x, eight x? Clearly not, you know, 25 x because my average intake would be too high based on that net correlative score of minus seven. And then also beta carotene as I mentioned back with the carrot story, beta carotene has a very strong negative negative correlative score in my data of minus six. So my average intake since 2015 is 54 about fifty four thousand micrograms of beta carotene per day. For this test, I purposely averaged about fifty thousand micrograms or it's actually equivalent to about fifty milligrams. So I'm following the correlations. Now beta carotene, one of the biomarkers that is significantly correlated in my data is with albumin. So I don't wanna cut it too low because I may limit any potential effects of beta carotene on albumin. But if I obviously, if I go too high based on the net correlative score, it may negatively impact many biomarkers. So I'm aiming for it just a bit below my average. And note that there's no RDA defined for beta carotene. So this approach can help one get towards what's the, what's optimal for each individual, you know, micronutrient even without an RDA. Alright. So finishing up the other half of the vitamins, some key points vitamin e with a net score of minus six. Now my average intake since '20, '15 is about twenty five milligrams per day. So for this test, I aim for twenty milligrams per day falling on nineteen point eight. So because the net score is negative, I should eat below my average intake and I did that so green check. So the RDA for vitamin E is fifteen milligrams per day. So if one just went with a general rule of I'm gonna eat X amount above the RDA for all vitamins and minerals, As you can see by my data, things like, Niacin, two and a half fold higher than the RDA. You know, B twelve, I'm right now four about four four and a half times higher than the RDA. So there's no general rule for all micronutrients. As you can see by, Vitamin E, somewhere around 20 may be optimal for me. But if I go higher, that's associated with more biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. So in other words, I wouldn't say that there's a general, magnitude that that each each micronutrient should be higher than the RDA. It's individual and each should be, assessed individually to to figure out what's optimal for each. Again, individual, micro or even macronutrient. Alright. So then also looking at vitamin k. Vitamin k k has a, net correlated score of plus three. So I should eat above my average intake, which is, about fifteen fifteen fifty micrograms per day. And we can see that I was about eighteen eighty micrograms per day. And again, I do that on purpose. It's not by accident. And so we give that a green arrow. Now note that what's defined as the RDA or AI adequate intake for vitamin k is only a hundred and twenty micrograms per day. So in this case, I'm more than 15 times higher than the RDA. Now, if 15 times higher was too much, I'd expect to see more biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. And as a perfect example of that b twelve, clearly b twelve, which has a very negative correlative score going too high, maybe bad for all of my bio or many of my biomarkers. Alright. So last up are the minerals. So some key points, calcium has a score of minus seven. So that suggests I should eat below my average intake, so we can see I did that there. Iron, net score of plus five, That suggests I should eat above my average intake of twenty eight, milligrams per day. So I did that there about thirty one milligrams per day. And that's another interesting one in terms of the RDA. So the RDA for iron is only eight milligrams per day. So there I'm four x higher with a net score of plus five. And again, I'm four x higher because after seeing that it's a net positive score, I purposely go higher, to see how high, you know, how high can it go, how high should I go in order to to to define what's optimal for me at the individual level? And then last on this list is sodium with a net score of minus four. So that suggests I should eat below my average intake there which we can see that I did seventeen thirty two is less than eighteen eighty nine. Now the RDA for sodium is less than 2,300 but with this, this approach of looking at the correlations and then basing the diet based on that, we can see that maybe even nineteen hundred milligrams of sodium may be too much for me and going a little bit lower may be optimal. So alright. So just as a last note, by using this approach I can get closer to what's optimal at the individual level for n over one n equals one which goes beyond the RDA or inadequate intake AI for many nutrients. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And then, discount links, which will be in the video's description. If you're interested in using diet tracking with Cronometer, there's a 10% discount link there. If you're interested in quantifying your oral microbiome composition, there'll be a discount link there and you can use my code conquer aging 15. Or if you're interested in supporting the channel, you can use buy me a coffee and again that link will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoy the video. Have a great day.