For blood test number six in 2022, we saw that my biological age using Levine's test was 34.5 years, which is 15.2 years younger than my chronological. Similarly, when using aging.ai, that gave me a predicted age of 33 years which is 16.7 younger than my chronological. So what's contributing to these data? First, let's take a look at supplements. Well, if you're a regular watcher of this channel, then the first one shouldn't be a surprise. I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in my twenties. So I've been taking Levothyroxine for about half of my life. And then I restarted vitamin d on October 1. So about the last three weeks before the test. So I didn't take any vitamin d for the first six weeks as I was getting regular sun exposure. And that's it. No other supplements including ger protectors or senolytics, which then brings us to diet. So we can see that this blood test was on October 24, but how does diet relate to that date? So how am I tracking diet? So the average daily dietary intake from the last blood test which was on August 22 through the day before this blood test for blood test number six on October 23, so that sixty three day period corresponds to blood test number six in 2022. So let's go through that approach for people who may not be familiar. So here we're looking at the calendar, August, September, and October. And as I mentioned, blood test number five was on August 22, whereas October 24 was blood test number six. And then we see those sixty three days in between tests. Now every day since April 2015, I've weighed all of my food prior to intake. And then I enter those food amounts into an online tracking app known as Cronometer. And if you're interested in a discount link, that'll be in the video's description. I then enter daily Cronometer data into a spreadsheet, and the average intake for those sixty three days, including individual food amounts, macro, and micronutrients, corresponds to blood test number six. So each blood test since 2015 has a corresponding diet composition, which then allows me to calculate correlations. And based on that data, I alter my dietary intake to optimize blood biomarkers. So let's start off by taking a look at individual food amounts that corresponded to blood test number six in 2022. And that's what we can see here. So ranked in order in terms of amount in grams from the highest intake down to the lowest. This is the first half of the diet that corresponded to blood test number six, including the first 25 foods. So in in terms of why are the top seven foods here, I covered that in test number four. And if you're interested in that video, it'll be in the right corner. What I'd like to focus on in this video is what's different for test number six when compared with test number five. There are a whole bunch of little experiments that I tried. So let's go through each one of those. So first, I switched back to strawberries whereas for the last test, I was mostly using a three berry mix of strawberries, blackberries, and blueberries. So correspondingly, we can see that my strawberry intake increased from 289 grams per day to five forty seven grams per day. And also, we can see that blackberries and blueberries decreased from a 144 grams per day each down to about 32 grams per day. So there were two main reasons why I prefer to go with strawberries over the combination of blackberries and blueberries. First is that strawberries had a relatively lower fructose content per 100 calories when compared with the same amount of calories, a 100 calories from black blackberries and blueberries. So strawberries have 6.8 grams whereas the combination of blackberries and blueberries, they get a 100 calories has 8.3. And that's important because in my data, a relatively higher fructose intake is significantly correlated with more blood biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. So I try to limit as much as possible overall fructose intake. And the other reason for focusing on strawberries is that they have a net correlative score with big picture biomarkers that I've covered in other videos of positive four. In other words, a relatively higher strawberry intake is significantly correlated with, lower levels of the liver enzyme AST, lower levels of high sensitivity c reactive protein, lower LDL, and lower platelets. And those are each going in the right direction in terms of aging or all cause mortality risk. So I've given that I've I've made them green. If it was red, they'd be going in the wrong direction in terms of aging and or all cause mortality risk. My average strawberry intake since I started tracking food intake is three hundred fifty six grams per day. And in terms of the rules, in terms of following these correlations, that suggested I should eat above my average intake because a positive score, a positive correlative score, I would try to eat above my average intake. So with that, five forty seven is higher than three fifty six. So I give it a check because I'm following that correlation. Now, with the goal of optimizing as many blood biomarkers as possible, I think it makes the most sense to follow also as many correlations as possible. I don't know which food or macro micronutrients will impact the given biomarker. But if I follow the data, if I follow the correlations as much as I can, I'd expect for the best biomarker profile to result. And that may be one reason underlying my relatively youthful biological ages using LaVine's test and aging.ai. Alright. Now, whereas strawberries have a net positive correlative score with big picture biomarkers, conversely, blackberries and blueberries each have negative correlative scores of minus two and minus three respectively, and with average intakes of more than a hundred and eleven hundred and eleven grams per day each, that suggests the the net negative correlative score suggests that I should be below that. And I did, 32 is less than more than one eleven. So I get green checks because I'm following those correlations. Now, next, I also, made a small but significant reduction for red bell pepper intake. Two hundred and thirty three to two hundred and twenty seven grams per day. Now, red bell peppers have a net correlative score with big picture biomarkers of negative four. Although they are significantly correlated with higher levels of albumin as shown in green, they're also significant significantly correlated with higher levels of AST, creatinine, neutrophils, plate and platelets which are going in the wrong direction in terms of aging and or all cause mortality risk, and they're also significantly correlated with a lower percentage of lymphocytes. My average red bell pepper intake since I started tracking food intake in 2018. I I started tracking macros and micros in 2015. Unfortunately, I didn't have the idea to track food going all the way back to 2015, and I wish I did. Nonetheless, my red bell pepper average intake since I started tracking food intake is 293 grams per day. And because two twenty seven is less than that, which is what we'd wanna do with a net negative correlative score, we give that a green check. Now note that red bell peppers have a net negative correlative score. And a criticism that I've I've gotten a few times is why not just take them out? For the net negatives, just take them out. Maybe it's completely bad. Well, red bell peppers are one of the few foods that are a concentrated source of the carotenoid beta cryptoxanthin. And that's important because relatively higher blood levels of beta cryptoxanthin are significantly correlated with a younger epigenetic age, which is what we can see here. So here we've got blood levels of beta cryptoxanthin. The epigenetic clock in this case is GrimAge DNA m, a DNA methylation. So it's GrimAge epigenetic clock, which is one of the best epigenetic clocks for its association with all cause mortality risk. And we can see that the relatively higher blood levels of beta cryptoxanthin were significantly correlated with a younger, grim age as shown by the bicore and the p value. Alright. So moving along, I also reduced barley intake from about fifty nine grams per day for test number five to forty grams per day for test number six. Barley has a net positive score in my data of plus three. It's significantly correlated with higher homocysteine and triglycerides which you can see I have red there. Those are going in the wrong direction in terms of aging and or all cause mortality risk. But then it's got five biomarkers that it's inversely correlated significantly inversely correlated with in green. And when I say significantly, note that that's a p value less than 0.05. So, barley intake since I started tracking food intake in 2018, my average is fourteen grams per day with a net positive correlative score that suggests I should eat more than my average. And because 40 is higher than 14, we give it a green check. Now, although for this test, I wanted by cutting the barley from 59 to 40 grams, I wanted to address the question, although its correlative score is positive, how high is too high? In other words, above fourteen grams per day, what's the upper barley limit to simultaneously optimize each of these seven biomarkers? And I should say that when considering its positive significant correlation with homocysteine and triglycerides, both of those came down a bit, for this test when compared with the last test. Whereas the other biomarkers in green didn't change much at all. So, based on these data, it's possible that somewhere around 40 grams within the context of everything else in my diet, of course, may be, optimal for me relative to a relatively higher barley intake of fifty nine grams per day. Alright. So that's the first half of the of the diet. Let's take a look at what was different for test to test from, from test to test for the other half. And here's the other half using the same approach ranked in order from highest, intake in grams, to lowest intake, in grams too. So we've got, all 50 foods that I ate or over the sixty three day period. And I should say there are two exceptions to the, listing it listing it in grams. Green tea, I listed in ounces, and pizza, I listed in calories number ranked it number 31. But we'll get more into that in a bit. Alright. So the first thing that we can see that I changed from test to test, five to six, was flaxseed intake. Increased it from about 12 to about 16. Flaxseeds in my data have a net correlative score of plus four. They're significantly correlated with lower neutrophils, creatinine, HDL, LDL, and platelets. Sorry. And also red blood cells. And you can see that five of those are going in the right direction in terms of aging and or all cause mortality risk whereas that correlation for HDL is going in the wrong direction. So lower HDL will be worse. My average flaxseed intake since 2018 is nine point seven grams per day. So with a net positive correlative score, I would try to eat above my average intake and because 16 is higher than nine point seven, we give that a green check. Now, note that for test number five, I was at eleven point eight grams per day which is which was already higher than my average intake which is following the correlation. So why did I further increase flaxseeds for this test? Now, one of the biomarkers that flaxseeds are significantly correlated with is creatinine. And for from test five to test six, I was able to reduce creatinine from 1.04 to 0.98 milligrams per deciliter. Now, I'd like to have, creatinine levels that are even lower. Somewhere around zero point nine milligrams per deciliter which is the low end of my range since, 2035. Since I started tracking blood, doing blood testing so often. Now my average creatinine level since, 2015 is 0.95. So, 0.98 isn't much different from 0.95, but I'd like to further improve that down to 0.9 or so. If correlation equals causation and if flaxseed somehow impact creatinine, I thought it made sense where if I further increase flaxseeds, I should see further reductions for creatinine. And so far so good. I'm gonna actually try to go a little bit higher and try to find that upper limit, again, if correlation equals causation in terms of creatinine for flaxseeds. Alright. Next up on the list are peanuts. So I increased them from none, zero grams per day up to 12. And the major reason is because peanuts are a good source of niacin, And one of the goals was to keep niacin relatively high, so more than forty milligrams per day, and we'll go into that in another video. And that was to make up for the, niacin reduction by cutting barley. So barley is also a good source of niacin. So by cutting barley, I cut niacin. But by including peanuts, I was able to keep niacin relatively high. Now peanuts have a net score of zero. It's not significantly correlated with, it's it's significantly correlated with an equal amount of biomarkers going in the wrong and right direction, which gives it a net score of zero, which suggests that I should eat my average intake, which is two point six grams per day since 2018. So we can see that twelve point three is higher than two point six, so I give that an x. So I'm not following that correlation. Alright. So next up are pistachios. So I went from eleven grams per day down to 9.9, and that's a significant difference. The two groups, sixty three days for this period versus however many days were that corresponded to test number five. Now, one reason I did that is because, and one gram a day may not seem like much. But, let's take a look at why I did that. So pistachios are a great source of melatonin and I'll put that link the link for that paper in the video description. So in a few days, I purposely didn't eat them to limit the morning sleepiness that can come with too much melatonin. Now, whether that was related to just some mild sleep that that had nothing to do with pistachios, or indeed from too much, melatonin coming from, eating pistachios on too many consecutive days. I don't know. But that was one of the reasons that I cut their intake. Now in terms of their correlations, they have a net correlative score of plus four, and you can see the biomarkers there. So based on my average intake of two point one grams, that suggests with a positive correlated score, I should eat above my average intake. And because 9.9 is higher than 2.1, we give that a check. Alright. Next up are eggs. So I increased it from zero grams per day up to seven. And the main reason for that is be to do the dietary cholesterol DHEA sulfate experiment. And if you missed that, that video will be in the right corner. I also increased Brazil nut intake from three point four grams per day up to four point seven. Now Brazil nuts are a rich source of selenium. Selenium is required for conversion of the thyroid hormone t four into its active form t three. So, did the ratio t three to t four improve because selenium is there and selenium, you know, may improve the conversion of t four to t three. So I have two data points. So this is very preliminary data, for the t three to t four ratio. And I should mention that a relatively higher ratio is associated with reduced all cause mortality risk. So a higher t three to t four ratio would be better in terms of, risk of death for all causes. So, I have a finger prick test that I did on October 3, so that ratio was 1.64, and the average selenium intake, my average selenium intake for the seven days prior to that test was a hundred and eighty six micrograms per day. Now I then tested by Venipuncture on October 18, so about two weeks later, and my t three to t four ratio was then 2.92, which is higher. Now I can't obviously evaluate statistical significance for those two ratios, 1.64 versus 2.92, but, the two hundred and seventy two micrograms per day for selenium for the seven days prior to that test is significantly higher versus the first test. So, whether it was selenium or some other factor that I ended up having a higher t three to t four ratio, including maybe it's a difference for venipuncture versus finger prick. I don't know. But the ratio, t three to t four, definitely went in the right direction, as my selenium intake also went up. And again, I don't know if that's causation. It could be lots of different things. So Brazil nuts, in terms of the correlations, they have a net correlative score in my data of minus two with, four biomarkers going the wrong direction in red and two going in the right direction in green. My average Brazil nut intake since I started tracking food intake is five grams per day. So when the core net correlative score is negative, that suggests I should be below my average intake. 4.7 is less than five. So we give that a green check. I also increased my ginger intake, and this is fresh ginger, not powdered, from 0.6 up to 1.9. And the major reason there is because ginger has a very positive net correlative score of plus seven in my data with seven biomarkers going in the right direction in terms of aging and all and or all cause mortality risk. My average ginger intake since I started tracking food intake is zero point six five grams per day. And because 1.9 is higher than that, we give that a check following the correlation. Alright. And then last for these foods, I increased clove intake and that may not seem like a big difference, 0.1 versus zero. But the data showed it, two sample t sets two sample t test as significantly different, at least nominally significant significantly different. I can also already hear people yelling at me about adjusted p values, but that's another story. Anyway, the main reason why I increased my clove intake through diet is because although it's already in my homemade mouthwash with the goal of trying to optimize the oral microbiome, and I'll put that video in the right corner too, I think that adding ground cloves into the diet may also be a good idea. And as the corollary for why I think that may be a good idea, just like a dietary nitrate, the direct effect will be, an increase in oral nitrate in the mouth from the food, but also absorbing it through the blood and then secreted back into, to the into the mouth by the, salivary glands. I think a similar possibility, is is is pot I think it's also possible for by eating clothes, I may get some of the beneficial, it's beneficial metabolites that can impact the salivary microbiome to be, absorbed into my salivary glands through the blood, and then secreted into the mouth, potentially optimizing my oral microbiome. Now that's the hypothesis. We'll see if that's true when I retest, for test number three for the salivary microbiome, which I haven't done yet. So my, for cloves, they have a net correlated score of plus one. My average clove intake since 2018 is point one three grams per day. So since that's identical to what my average was for this test, and because the, correlated score was positive that suggests I should go higher, so we give that an x. Now, I've I've been eating clothes more regularly since this test on October 24. So, I'll be following this correlation for test number seven in 2022. Alright. So what about junk? I haven't gone through that yet. My diet isn't always clean. So I do occasionally ink, add junk. And if I do, I try to stick to the day of immediately after the blood test and the day after. For this period, it was actually three days. So I had junk on three of the sixty three days that corresponded to this test, and no junk on sixty days. And for the junk, I had two slices of pizza. It was nothing special, Domino's, and actually regretted eating it, after the fact. Anyway. So I'll I'll probably get some higher quality pizza in a couple months when I travel on the East Coast to see my parents. And then, other junk was Nutella which was on the day of and the day after the test, and I had to put a 145 grams there because people have commented before where they thought that I was eating literally 2.3 grams of Nutella every day. But That's not the case. I had Nutella on two of the days that corresponded to the 63 for this test and then nothing after that. And then last in terms of junk was Swedish fish, which is a type of candy. I had that just on one day, 60 grams, not one gram every day for sixty three days. That would be ridiculous. Alright. So that's the first part of my diet analysis that corresponds to blood test number six in 2022. In part two of this series, we'll look at the macronutrient and micronutrient profile that corresponded to test number six. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, you can check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got some discount links that you may be interested in, including epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing, diet tracking with Cronometer, or if you would just like to support the channel, you can do that with the website Buy Me a Coffee, and all these links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.