Aging and disease are biochemical processes that happen over many decades. And if we track well established biomarkers of organ and systemic health, can aging and disease risk be slowed? So that's my central premise. And with that in mind, last month, I blood tested for the fourth time in 2022. So what's my biological age? So using so using, doctor Morgan Levine's, biological age calculator, which is, known as phenotypic age, And when entering its nine component biomarkers and chronological age, we can see that my biological age using the beans test is 32.6. And that's 16.8 younger than my chronological. So note that, these, blood tests were performed by Quest by the lab Quest. So their high sensitivity c reactive protein measurement was less than point three milligrams per liter on the, on the lab report. So CRP could be anywhere from zero to, 0.3. So I entered the upper limit of that 0.3. Now note that in contrast to venipuncture, which is what, Quest, that's what is performed generally at every lab. In contrast with that, at home blood biomarker testing may be the next frontier for attempting to slow aging. So why is that? Well, you don't need you don't need to go to the lab. You can just prick your finger at home whenever you want. And why that's beneficial is because you can prick a different finger every day. So for example, I have up to 38 blood tests since 2015. So about five an average of about five tests per year through venipuncture. In contrast, I could get 40 blood tests theoretically by pricking a different finger every day in six weeks instead of seven years. So one can get closer to biomarker optimization much faster with, at home blood biomarker testing. So with that in mind, I, got a kit from a company. I'm not sponsored by them, so I won't, indicate who it was. But this is an at home dry blood spot test. So you basically just prick your finger, you put it on a card, and, you mail it off. And they mail it they, you know, they tell you the results, one or two days later. So I got the at home dry blood blood spot test for, HS CRP. And so then the big question is, is at home testing as good as the gold standard, which is venipuncture? And note that, the lab test, the in person lab test was at about 07:30 in the morning fasted. So when I got home, I also then did the fingerprint test. So the fingerprint test is about an hour later, still fasted. So then to answer the question, was high sensitivity c reactive protein less than point three milligrams per liter? And that's an important question because if it's higher, then it's probably not a reliable test. But if it's lower, that suggested it could be as good as venipuncture, which is good news. So, here's the their lab report from the at home test for HSCRP, and we can see that, actually, their the sensitivity of their test is a little bit better than the, in person venipuncture test. So the, the upper or the lower the upper limit of their sensitivity is point two milligrams per liter. So, and my data was less than point two milligrams per liter. So it would appear that this at home test is as good as venipuncture for at least detecting HSCRP. I can't guarantee that for other, at home, dry blood spot test, but at least for h s c r p, that's good news. So, to answer the question, was h s c r p less than point milligrams per liter? We can give it a resounding yes. And then we can return to, LaVine's test data. And instead of point three milligrams per liter, we can put the upper limit for the at home test point two. And when I do that, my biological age is then 32.2 for this test, which is seventeen years younger than my chronological of 49.4. So how did these data compare with earlier tests? It's it, you know, it may be relatively easy to, quote, unquote, biohack one test, but what's the bigger picture? What what's my, what's my biological age over many tests over many years? So for more context, let's have a look at biological age results since 2020. And that's what we can see here, Levine's biological age on the y axis plotted against time. So, in 2020, I blood tested six times and using the Levine's test and entering my biomarker data, I get an average age of 35.6. Similarly, also 35.6 in 2021 over six tests. And then over four tests, the first four tests in 2022, I plan on measuring at least three more times. We can see that my average is thirty three point nine years. So I'm off to a good start in terms of lowering it. Now I don't think I can lower it much further than where it is now. Once you get your biomarker values to youthful levels, then the key is just maintaining them for maintaining them for as long as possible. So now as another way of looking at this, note that prior to 2022, my average biological age reduction relative to my chronological age was about twelve years, and that's over 15 tests. So from 2018 to 2019, I also blood tested three times. So plus the 12 blood tests in 2020 and 2021, though, that's 15 tests. So my average chronological age minus biological age about 12 twelve years over those 15 tests. But so far in 2022, I've further reduced that such that my average reduction per test is fifteen point two years. So a further three year reduction. Now note that pheno age, while I'm a big fan of it, don't get me wrong. I'm not here to knock it by any means. While it includes chronological, it includes chronological age in its model, which limits the maximum biological age reduction. And that's important because if I maintain these biomarkers indefinitely, say let's say, when I'm 80 years old and nothing has changed except for my chronological age, what's built into this metric is even with these same biomarker values, my, biological age at the age of 80 will be 59. So to me, that doesn't seem right. If if your biochemistry is the same, you shouldn't be at most twenty years younger. So it's a limitation of the of the training set that they use. They probably didn't have super healthy fit people in there. Not that I'm saying I am. But, anyway, that's a limitation of the model. So, anyway, in contrast, aging.ai does not include chronological agents models, so greater reductions for biological age are possible. So then what's my aging.ai, blood test? What's what's what's my biological age using aging.ai? So my aging.ai3pointo, again, free to use like Louvins' test. You can put your own data in at aging.ai, and I'm not sponsored by either of these companies. I'm just grateful they exist so that I can calculate these, my biological age using these metrics. So when entering the 19 component biomarkers as shown there on the 07/11/2022 test, I get a biological age of 28, which is 21.4 younger than my chronological. Now data for one blood test is good, but just like we did for the LEVINCE test, let's look at more data to to get more context to see how I'm doing. So I have a lot more data that can compute aging.ai biological age. The difference is that, all of these biomarkers are fan found on the standard chem panel, the lipid lipid panel, and the CBC, which is basically a standard physical that you get at a yearly, checkup at, with your doctor, at least here in The United States. So on the VINES test, it requires HSCRP. That's like an add on extra test that you've got a pay extra for. So I wasn't doing that way back when in 2009. But I did have at least basic, basic data from my yearly physical with my doctor from starting in 2009. So, starting from 2009 and 2013, I was only measuring at most once a year, and I have three blood test, points over that that five year span or four year span. And my average aging dot ai age was 32. And then in 2016, I decided to start testing more often to try to get a more reflective, overview of how my biologically look look. And more specifically, how all of the component biomarkers. I'm not married to the, you know, the cutesy number of a biological age. I want all of these component biomarkers to be youthful for as long as possible. So in 2016 to 2021, I then tested 27 times. And and over those 27 tests, my average aging dot ai age was just the tick under 30, 29.9 years. So what about in 2022? So we can see that there. And after four tests, I further reduced it to twenty eight and a half years. Now just as I mentioned for the Levine's test, I don't think I can further reduce it beyond this range. I mean, it I can I'm confident that it I can keep it around 30 a little or a little below almost indefinitely or that's the hope. So then the bigger question is how long can I resist these age related biomarker changes? Will I be 80, 90, a 100, and beyond with the biochemistry of a 30 year old? We'll see. So what's contributing to these biological age reductions? Am I taking Jira protectors or Sinalytics? What's my diet? So in terms of what's contributing to these data, let's just take a a look at supplements. So I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism, in my mid twenties. So I've been taking levothyroxine. I'm currently taking a hundred thirty seven and a half micrograms per day, and I've been doing that for probably half my life. And then, for, I I take vitamin d probably about eight or nine months of the year. I live in Boston. So for eight or nine months of the year here, not getting adequate sun exposure. So I take a thousand I use per day. But for some of the portion of of the this blood test for the sixty three day period that corresponds to this blood test, I didn't take it. So, probably 80% if, 80% of the days I took vitamin d, you know, for this blood test. And then I do take occasional melatonin either before bed or in the middle of the night, But you can see this isn't a lot. This is only about thirty nine micrograms per day, not milligrams. So it's just, you know, it's a fraction of a milligram. So very small amounts when I feel like I need to get better sleep. And that's it. No other supplements, no jira protectors or senolytics. I have taken methyl b twelve in the past, but for a few blood tests, at least in 2022, I stopped taking it. And if anyone is curious, I can answer that, you know, bit after after the presentation. Alright. So then what about diet? How's diet or how might diet contribute to these data? So you can see that my blood test was on July 11, but that doesn't tell us anything about how diet may correspond. So the average daily dietary intake from my last blood test on May 9 to the day before this blood test, on July 10 corresponds to blood test number four in 2022. So, how am I tracking diet? How am I doing that? So in taking a look at the calendar because it's easier easier to illustrate, here we can see May, June, and July. And then I blood as I mentioned, I blood tested on, May. That was blood test number three. And then test number four on July 11. So in between are sixty three days in between tests, and that's what corresponds to blood test number four. The average intake for those sixty three days, corresponds to test number four. And so every day since April 2015, I've weighed all my food, and then I've entered those food amounts into Cronometer. It's an online tracking app. I'm not here to say they're the best. There are others that one can use, but that's what I've used since, 2015. And then I enter daily, the daily chronometer data, chronometer data into a spreadsheet, my own personal spreadsheet, just an Excel spreadsheet, nothing special. And then I compute the average intake for those sixty three days, and then I line that up with the blood test data, blood test number four. And then since every blood test has a corresponding diet composition or an average corresponding diet composition with enough data for both blood biomarkers and diet, I can I can investigate correlations? And then based on the correlations, I can modify my diet or even supplements for one, if that's what one wants to do. I can modify those with the goal of optimizing the blood biomarkers. So in a sense, I'm not only am I optimizing blood biomarkers, this is kind of a precision nutrition approach. So I'm covering basically both bases. So let's first start off by looking at the individual food amounts or at least some of the individual food amounts that corresponded to this blood test. So I've got the first 23 foods listed here, and this again is for the sixty three day period that corresponded to the latest blood test, amount in grams at the top, and then ranked based on, the highest intake, to the lowest intake. So why are these foods at the top? Why have I chosen to include these foods? So by tracking diet in conjunction with blood biomarkers, I can focus on eating foods that have positive correlative scores with the blood biomarkers while minimizing intake for foods with negative scores. So for that, let's take a look at correlations for strawberry intake with what I've come to define as big picture biomarkers. Now note that this is, right now, it's about 24 blood biomarkers, and I have plans to expand it on addition upcoming tests, and bridging out into hormones like DHEA. So it's a current it's a constantly expanding, panel of big big picture biomarkers. And note that although I've tracked macros and micros since 2015, I only started tracking individual food amounts since '28 2018. So in other words, I have less tests, so I have up to 23 blood tests that correspond to diet, in contrast with macros, micros, where I have a lot more data, up to 38 blood tests. Alright. So here are the big picture biomarkers and just to run through them. They include obviously things like glucose, which in my opinion should be on any, panel aimed at optimizing or slowing aging. Homocysteine, which I haven't given its own, haven't given its own, category yet, but I've grouped it with glucose just for now. Three markers of kidney function, three markers of liver function, all the major lipoproteins, immune related cells in a protein globulin, red blood cell related related measures, marker of inflammation, high sensitivity c reactive protein, and then the overall biological biological age score using PhenoAge and agent dot ai. So just to further introduces, the little n next to next to x, sorry, next to each blood test is how many blood tests that that I had that correspond to that biomarker. The r at the top left, is the, correlation, and the p value is the measure of statistical significance with less than 0.05 being, statistically significant. Alright. So what's significantly associated with strawberry intake? So, a relatively higher strawberry intake is significantly associated with a lower level of the liver enzyme liver enzyme AST, lower LDL, lower levels of platelets, and a lower high sensitivity c reactive protein. So once the there are significant correlations, the next step is identifying whether the significant correlations are going in the right or wrong direction in terms of aging and or all cause mortality rates. And I don't have time to go into that in this, video, but I have plenty of those videos on my YouTube channel. So, if you're interested in that, check it out, or, we can talk about it after the presentation. But just to go through it real quick, for something like AST, even just using the reference range, I've had data that's been higher than the reference range, and somewhere around 20 is optimal based on all cause mortality data. So since this is an inverse association that suggests higher strawberry intake is correlated with lower in white direction. So I've given it a green arrow. So green arrows will be going in the So you can see that there are four green arrows, and that gives me a net correlative score of plus four. So what does that mean? If the net score was negative, that would indicate that I should be below my average intake. If the net score was zero, I would eat at my average intake. And if the net score is positive, I should eat above my intake. So my average strawberry intake since 2018 is 350 grams per day. We can see that for this test, I averaged 622 grams. So I'm following that that correlation, so we give it a green check. So let's do another example, red bell peppers. So here, we'll take a look at correlations for red bell peppers with these big picture biomarkers. So we can see that red bell pepper intake is significantly correlated with higher creatinine, with higher neutrophils, and then a lower lymphocyte percentage. And you can see I've given these all red arrows because they're going in the wrong direction. Similarly, neutrophils increase during aging, and the lymphocyte percentage declines during aging. So those are going in the wrong direction in terms of their correlation with red bell pepper intake. So three red arrows, we can see that the net score is minus three. When the net score is negative, that suggests I should eat below my average intake. My average daily red bell pepper intake since 2018 is two hundred ninety eight grams per day. And we can see that I I purposely ate below that. Red is in indicative of it's going the wrong direction. So, for example, a relatively higher carrot intake is significantly correlated with lower homocysteine so that we're going in the right direction because homocysteine increases during aging and relatively higher levels are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So my average intake since 2018 is 372 grams. I should be eating above that based on the positive net score, but we can see that I'm not. So that we give that a red x. And, this is a there's a there's a little bit more depth to that story. Part of it involves beta carotene. So if anybody's curious, I can answer questions about that later. Why have haven't gone above three seventy two four carrots? Alright. So mushrooms have a a net score of plus four, significantly correlated with lower levels of alkaline phosphatase, AST, CRP, LDL, and platelets, but a higher, homocysteine. So five going in the right direction, one in the wrong, gives it the net score of plus four. So prior to '20, prior to 2018, I was eating lots of mushrooms, but I took them out until relatively recently. So we can see that my average intake isn't very high. So it was easy to eat above them for this test, two hundred thirty one grams per day. So red arrow, sorry, green, check because I'm following the correlations. Next up are beets, and I'm not a fan of the term, superfoods, but we can see that beets, for whatever reason, in my data have a net score of plus eight with eight biomarkers going in the right direction and none in the wrong, including a lower overall aging dot ai age, lower AST, lower creatinine, glucose, LDL, neutrophils, and platelets. We can see inverse, correlations for all those, but a higher lymphocyte percentage. And remember, lymphocyte percentage declines during aging. So my average intake for beets is is a hundred and fifteen grams per day, and we can see that two zero six is greater than one fifteen. So I follow the correlation there. Next up, collard greens and net score of, plus one. It's significantly correlated with lower LDL. And, I've recently switched from, spinach. I was seeing a lot of spinach basically forever. And I recently switched because oxalates in my data have a very negative overall score. Collard greens have are very low in oxalates by comparison, so I recently switched. That's that's why you can see my average intake of collard greens is very low, and it was easy to eat above that for this test. And then last on this list are is watermelon net score of plus five, which suggests I should eat above my average intake of one fifty two. And, I did that for this test with an intake of, two hundred grams per day. Alright. So as I mentioned, by following the correlation for as many foods and macros and micros, I also use this approach for all the macros and micronutrients as possible. I expect that my best biomarker profile will result. So, what about the rest of the diet including macros and micros? And I don't have time to go, into it in this presentation, But I have lots of YouTube videos on that on my channel, and you can check it out there. So, with that, I'll I'm ready for questions. Alright. Thank you very much, Michael. Yeah. We've got several questions coming in. So, regarding, well, regarding, biomarkers of aging, I've got one, but here's one from our audience. Do you measure your photo age? There are apps for that. Would your photo age be nonincreasing as your epigenetic age or blood age? Yeah. And you you look great, by the way. So I I think it is I think it is holding steady. Thanks, Oliver. I I haven't I haven't done photo age yet. I think a lot of things could probably impact it, like lighting and and you know, sleep that I get enough sleep on on that day. But it it gets into the bigger question of, you know, skin aging. Right? Is, how do you optimize skin skin aging? And, I think that probably is the the hardest thing to optimize. You know, you can take someone that's a 100 years old and maybe optimize their biochemistry and and many other organ organ systems, but, you know, their skin will still look old. So, that's on the to do list in figuring figuring that out. Okay. And another question is, you show no consumption of alcoholic beverages or other recreational drugs. Wines in particular have been suggested as health enhancers. Do you see nothing but harm from consuming them? Yes. So that's a tricky thing because, I wear a fitness tracker, and I track my, heart rate variability and resting heart rate. These are metrics of cardiovascular fitness, and there's a ton of data on alcohol messing up, cardiovascular metrics. So I already have some issues with sleep or I should say I'm always so that's answer number one. Answer number two is, I've read or heard anecdotally or both that alcohol can mess with, sleep quality in terms of increasing light sleep while taking away from REM and slow wave sleep. And I'm constantly trying to optimize my sleep, so that would work against me if I was, drinking even a small amount of alcohol. So and then, you know, it's not new alcohol is not nutrient dense. The whole food is, you know, grapes. So, one can make an argument that I should maybe include grapes in my in my approach rather than the processed version of the whole food. So, fourth, by looking I hate to say scoreboard and look at the blood biomarkers, but how would you further improve that? What what would you expect that alcohol would further improve in my biomarker data? If it isn't gonna improve my CV metrics, if it isn't gonna improve the blood biomarkers, I don't see a need. So that said, this is the approach for me. Now for others, they may have different experiences with alcohol where there it improves their blood biomarkers or it doesn't affect their sleep or, you know, whatever the case may be. You know, but I'd encourage objective, you know, objective metric train metric tracking so that they can see rather than taking it based on some epidemiological or some RCT. Does it actually improve some objective measures of health at the individual level? So and you've got a lot of blood based markers, obviously, that you're looking at. But have you have you been correlating them with or performing other types of, kind of more easily accessible, physiologic based markers, for on yourself such as gait or cognitive testing or lung volume, for example? Have you been doing that? Yeah. Not lung volume yet. But in terms of the physical function measures, as I mentioned, I'm tracking the CV metrics. And I hate to say my CV metrics have never been better, but, I bay I basically had a purse a PR, personal record this morning for heart rate variability, resting heart rate. So I'm on the right track there. My workouts are standardized. You know, you hear the thing, you know, switching up your workouts. Well, I don't do that. My workouts are standardized. I know exactly how many sets and reps and how much weight I'm doing. You know, workout to workout, week to week, year to year. So I know if my strength is going to decline because I have these things standardized. So since I've been doing that over the past three or four years, there's no decrement in strength at all. At worst, I've maintained strength. So so, FEV in terms of lung volume is a great measure that's on the to do list, but I have expanded it into other things like, the oral microbiome. I think that maybe, you know, the blood blood biomarker, metrics may miss changes in the oral microbiome. And you could have microbes in the mouth that may be associated with, you know, plaque formation or Alzheimer's disease. So I've recently gotten gotten into quantifying that and then trying to optimize that. So, it's a it's a constantly expanding approach, but, you know, trying to include as many things as possible. I don't wanna I don't wanna get to eighty, ninety, a 100 and and and realize that I missed something that I should have been tracking. Okay. Okay. And I think I have one one more question. I remember this from from a talk you gave a while back. I think it may have been even live conference when we when we did that pre COVID. You mentioned that, I think, one of one of the more important markers, that you had was albumin levels. Is that is that, would you like to maybe talk just to make a few comments on that if that's, you know, how relevant that is, or has that changed? Does this based on data that you've later collected? Yeah. So albumin is still very important, not just its its, inclusion on these two biological age calculators. It's not just because of that. But in terms of the concentration of the protein that's the most abundant in blood, it's albumin. And its levels decline during aging and relatively low levels are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So and there's plenty of data too linking relatively low levels of albumin with decreased physical function just as an example. So, yeah, my albumin levels are still high and youthful, but I've learned that, you know, even even based on what's youthful and what's associated with lowest all cause mortality risk, higher is not necessarily better. And in fact, in my data, I've had values as high as, you know, five two, five three, five four. And even though that's still within the reference range, when I do a biomarker versus biomarker analysis, in other words, albumin versus the quote, unquote big picture biomarkers, so, how, you know, how well does that fit in into the context of the broader systemic health? There is too high. You know? There can be too high even within the reference range. So, with that in mind, I've tried to focus it more narrowly around four eight, four nine and try to limit the times on five one, five two, five three, five four. And, so far so good with that. But, yeah, albumin is still super important. Beta carotene is still very strongly correlated with albumin in my data. However, I should mention I've I've seen people where that's true. People that are that I work with that I'm tracking helping them track their data where they also have correlations with albumin, for beta carotene, but then others that don't have that correlation in their data. So I can't say that everybody go go eat more carrots till you'll have higher albumin. Actually, they've actually got a measure and try to identify the factors that may, you know, impact it for them.