By simultaneously optimizing biomarkers of multiple organ systems, can we maximize health and slow aging? So with that in mind, in today's video, we're gonna go through a longitudinal biomarker assessment for creatinine. Now, creatinine is used to estimate the glomerular filtration rate or GFR which is a measure of kidney function. And we can see that more specifically represented there, glomerular filtration being a marker of renal or kidney function. More specifically, the GFR is used to estimate stages of CKD or chronic kidney disease. So, when there is no CKD or slight stage one, EGFR is greater than 90 and then as kidneys approach failure, stage five CKD, EGFR is less than 15. Alright. So, with that in mind, let's jump into the longitudinal biomarker assessment and see how creatinine changes during aging. So, here we've got serum levels of creatinine on the y axis plotted against age and this is somewhere around 20 to 90 years old. And there, we can see a significant positive correlation for creatinine levels versus age in this study of about 6,000 people. More specifically, creatinine increases during aging. Now, the reference range and this is Quest Labs reference range is zero point six to one point two nine milligrams per deciliter for creatinine. And if we only focus on the reference range, we would miss creatinine age related increase until about 80 years. So we can see that graphically represented here by putting up the reference range zero point six to one point two nine as the black lines. And with with the exception of a small amount of time in the early twenties, we can see that for most of the lifespan from 25 to 80 years, creatinine is within Quest reference range until about 80 and then creatinine levels would be a bit higher than the reference range. Now, as I mentioned earlier, creatinine is used to derive the e g f r as a measure of kidney function. So how does creatinine derived eGFR change during aging? And we can see that here. So GFR estimate on the y axis, so eGFR plotted against age. And in this study, it's a little bit younger than 20 up to 95 years. So eGFR declines during aging from values of about one twenty five in young adults. So lower creatinine in young adults would be, indicative of a higher eGFR, so better kidney function. And then, in older adults relatively higher creatinine, would be indicative of lower, a lower e g f r or worse kidney function. So how is creatinine derived e g f r related to all cause mortality risk? And we can see that data here. This is a meta analysis of 46 studies that included more than 2,000,000 people. So we've got the adjusted HR or hazard ratio on the y axis. This is the all cause mortality risk plotted against E G F R on the x. And, first, we're gonna start with data in people younger than 65 years old. So we put up a line at the hazard ratio of one and then the shaded region or the 95% confidence interval when that's completely above or below a hazard ratio of one, we have a statistically significant association. So when compared with the referent, which was, identified or delineated as 95 and eGFR of 95, we can see that having relatively higher eGFRs, First for men in red and then second for women in black for people that were younger than, not 65 had a significantly reduced all cause mortality risk when compared with the referent of 95. So from this, we can see that if for people younger than 65 years of age, having an e g f r greater than 95 was associated with lowest all cause mortality risk. So what about increased all cause mortality risk? First in men, when e g f r was 85 to 95 and less than 70, As you can see the with the red, lines, there was a significantly increased all cause mortality risk in men. And then for women, when eGFR was less than 95, there was also a significantly increased all cause mortality risk, when compared with ninety five. So what about, what about all cause mortality data in people that were older than 65? And we can see that here. So again, when compared with the referent which was an e g f r of 95, we can see that lowest all cause mortality risk in men was an eGFR in the 65 to one fifteen range. And note that the shaded red region, within that range 65 to one fifteen completely overlaps with one. So that's not significantly different when compared with the referent of an eGFR of 95. For women, when e g f r was in the 75 to one eighteen range, that was also not significantly different with 95. So, that would be the range for both men and women that's associated with lowest all cause mortality risk. So what about increased all cause mortality risk? First in men, when e g f r was greater than one fifteen and less than 65, there was a significantly increased all cause mortality risk for people that were older than 65. And in women, when e g f r was greater than one eighteen and less than 75 or less than 75, also an increase all cause mortality risk. So, what's consistent for people that are older than 65 was that there was an increase all cause mortality risk when e g f r was less than 65. So now, since we know how creatinine, e g f r, and all cause mortality risk, are Now that we've seen that data, we can, identify our longitudinal creatinine goals. So first, to avoid the age related increase for creatinine and the decrease for e g f r, and second, to consistently keep e g f r greater than 95 mils per minute per 1.73 meters squared. So, with that in mind, what's my data? So first, we're gonna take a look at creatinine versus age from 2,006 to twenty twenty two. And over that, seventeen year span, I have 48 blood tests as we can see there. And what we can also see is that there was a significant decrease for creatinine since 2006. As you can see, that's an inverse correlation. So as I've aged, my creatinine levels have declined, not increased as expected based on the age related trend. So in terms of the longitudinal creatinine goals, at least superficially, it looks like I've I've I've avoided the age related increase for creatinine. But note that, there's a little bit more to this data. So for the first eight measurements, this was before I started tracking diet. And for those who are unfamiliar with how I'm tracking diet and how that relates to my blood test data, I'll leave a video in the right corner. So check that out if you're interested. So for the first eight measurements on this plot, this was before diet tracking and my average creatinine was 1.12 resulting in an e g f r, an average e g f r of 86. But then in 2015, I started tracking diet every day and, over those 40 tests since 2015, my average creatinine is, 0.95 resulting in an eGFR of 96. And both of those values are significantly better when compared with the first eight, data points before diet tracking, which then raises the question, is the pre tracking data driving the significance of this correlation? So with that in mind, let's take a look at creatinine versus age since the onset of diet tracking in 2015. And that's what we can see here. So this is the 40 blood test since 2015 for creatinine versus age. And although that we we can see that there's a positive correlation, so the little r, the correlation coefficient is positive which suggests, that as I've aged, creatinine has also increased. The p value is not statistically significant. So there has been no significant age related change for creatinine since I started tracking diet in 2015. So now, we can return to the longitudinal creatinine goals and I can say with some more confidence that I've avoided the age related increase for creatinine. So we give that a green check. What about consistently keeping e g f r greater than 95? So, we're gonna see that here. So, we're gonna see a plot of e g f r versus age over that same, eight year period and 40 blood tests. And, when we put up a line at for 95 to delineate, eGFR being either higher than 95 or lower than 95, we can see just by looking at the dots about half the dots are higher and about half the dots are lower. More specifically, my eGFR has been greater than 95 for 24 of the 40 tests. So sixty percent of the tests have had an eGFR higher than 95 since 2015. So now I can give a check because this for a majority of the tests, I had an e g f r that was higher than 95 which would be associated with lowest all cause mortality risk. But sixty percent could be better. So for that, I'll also give it a a red x as there is room for improvement to more consistently keep e g f r higher than 95. So then the next question would be, how will I attempt to more consistently keep creatinine relatively low thereby resulting in an e g f r greater than 95? Now, I mentioned earlier that I've been tracking diets since 2015 and because I've been doing that, we can address the question which dietary components are significantly correlated with creatinine. So here, we can see only the significant correlations for creatinine with, macros or micronutrients and I've got them color coded. So green and red are significantly correlated with lower and higher creatinine respectively. So, in other words, when the the green stuff, it's a it's an inverse correlation. So higher levels of macro macro or micronutrient, lower creatinine and when it's red, when I've highlighted as red, higher levels of the nutrient, higher levels of creatinine. So what we can see on this chart is that at atop the list is omega three. So a relatively higher omega three intake is significantly correlated with lower creatinine in my data. And again, this is over the 40 blood test since 2015. But it doesn't tell me omega three from what? So in 2018, I started I started tracking individual food amounts And, I wish I had the idea to track, track individual food amounts sooner, but nonetheless, I had less data for individual food amounts in relation to blood test biomarkers when compared with macros and micros. But over 25 tests since 2018, when looking at my primary sources of omega three which are from flaxseeds, walnuts and sardines, as you can see by this mini graph, flaxseeds may be driving the association for omega three with creatinine as flaxseeds are significantly correlated with lower creatinine in my data. So when my flax seeds have been relatively higher, creatinine has been relatively lower. You can see by the p value that that's a significant correlation as it's less than 0.05. In contrast, walnuts and sardines are not significantly correlated with creatinine in my data over those 25 blood tests. So for the next blood test which I should be taking in the next few weeks, blood test number seven in 2022, I'll increase flaxseed to test this hypothesis and correspondingly, omega three intake will increase and but will that impact creatinine? Now, note that a big part of my approach is not is not to make one biomarker better and mess up the rest. I also wanna make sure I've optimized all the other biomarkers while attempting to optimize one. So with that in mind, flaxseeds have a net correlative score of plus four which means that they have four biomarkers are going in the right direction relative to biomarkers going in the wrong direction. So and that's in terms of aging and all cause mortality risk. So increasing flaxseed intake may improve creatinine without messing up other biomarkers. So, stay tuned for that data, and that's all I've got for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a bunch of discount links that you may be interested in, including epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee, and all of those links are in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.