Gauge, bio which is a biological age calculator, and I see Morgan on the call. So hi, Morgan. And, thanks for your thanks for, you know, developing this tool because I use it so often. So, yeah, so I measured my blood test for the sixth time 2021, and then, this the Morgan's biological calculator includes, nine, blood test biomarkers shown there, albumin, creatinine, glucose, etcetera. And then when you plug in that data in conjunction with your chronological age, it gives you your biological age or which is otherwise known as phenotypic age, which in this case, in this test was 36.9, which was twelve years younger than my chronological. So the big question should be how good is this biological age calculator? So, these nine biomarkers and chronological age, so that combination is strongly correlated with chronological age, which is shown here in this plot of phenotypic age or biological age, against chronological age. So you can see it's almost perfectly linear. And in two separate studies in NHANES three and NHANES four, these are U, US based cohorts of, you know, about 10,011 subjects. The correlation for this biological age tool with chronological age was 0.94 in NHANES three and zero point nine six in, NHANES four. So a correlation of one is as, perfectly linear. That's as close as you can get. You know? That's as good as it gets for, linearity. So 0.94 is very close to, almost perfectly linear. So how how good does, Morgan's test compare with the best epigenetic clocks? Because I think when most people think about biological age, they don't think about these blood based biomarker tools. They think straight away about epigenetic clocks. So the best performing epigenetic clock in terms of its correlation with, chronological age is the Horvath clock. And, this is a multi tissue, clock that included, 15 different cell types including, you know, just looking at the the right side. So breast cells, cheek cells, brain cells, colon, blood, etcetera. And when using that multi tissue clock, we can see that the its correlation for, epigenetic age with chronological age is 0.94, which is basically identical or very similar, however you wanna look at it, to the Levine clock using the blood based biomarkers. So, the Levine test, isn't just, strongly correlated with biological age. It's also significantly associated with all cause mortality risk or risk of death for all causes. So for for every one year increase for biological age, all cause mortality risk increases by nine percent. And this biological age, again, being using, the phenotypic aid, so, Morgan's test. So this was true for all cause mortality in a study of 11,000 plus people. You can see that hazard ratio for every one year increase in biological age, that hazard ratio increases by nine percent. Now that was true whether, it was young, middle age, or older adults. So for every one year increase in biological age using Labien's test, we can see that, all cause mortality has increased by thirteen percent, ten percent, and eight percent in young, middle age, and older adults, and these are significant associations. So it's not just all cause mortality. We can also break that down into disease specific increased deaths from heart disease, cancer, lower respiratory disease. Interestingly, not cerebrovascular disease, diabetes related mortality, and then, deaths from influenza or pneumonia. And then along those lines, an older biological age from, 2006 to '2 two thousand ten, so up to fourteen years before the pandemic, was associated with an increased all cause mortality or associated with an increased mortality risk in COVID nineteen patients. And then last but not least, an older biological age using, Levin's test is associated with, an increased risk of death from kidney related, issues, including nephritis and nephrosis. So while I just showed you data from my last test, while that's a good start, having data from many tests can provide for a more accurate picture. And I see a lot of people testing once a year and then posting their data. And whether or not that's reflective of the full year, that that's another story. So I'm gonna go through all of my data that I've, gathered over the past few years. So I've measured, I had 15 blood tests since 2018 using Levine's test. And as we'll see in a bit, I have more data than 15 tests for a different biological age tool. So for more context, let let's have a look at the other five biological age results that I have in 2021. And that's what's shown here. So Levine's biological age on the y axis versus time. And starting from my, 36.9 on my last test, it wasn't much different from test number five, but not as good as test number one, thirty two point seven. So when taking the average of these six tests in 2021, my average, biological age was 35.6. So then the obvious question should should then be, how how does how did these, biologically aged results compare with 2020 data? Because the goal that you know, one of my goals is to slow biologically aging or even, you know, stop it if if possible for as long as possible. So what about 2020 data? So, my range for 2020 went from 33.5 of a low to as high as 39.8. But, again, over those six tests, my average was 35.6. So just having two two different average values, you know, we can assess whether they're statistically significantly different or not. So to assess that, I used a two sample t test, and we can see that they are not significantly different. So, essentially, I've got the same biological age using Levine's test year over year. Now note that I I I said I had 15 tests since 2018. These are 12 of them. So, I just started testing, for CRP because it's not included in the standard chem panel. It's something you have to order extra at least here in The US. So I only have three tests from 2018 to 2019. And over those three tests, over a two year span, my average Levine biological age was 36.1. So, at worst, you know, I've I've flattened the, biological age for at least a two year period. But at best, one could argue that I've reduced it over over a three to four year period. Now note that, while I'm a big fan of Morgan's work and everything that she does, even if all nine biomarkers stay the same year over year, biological age using this tool will increase by point nine years for every one year increase in chronological age. So to me, if I'm 80 and I have the biochemistry, the systemic biochemistry of a 20 year old, or at least it looks like that in the numbers, am I, you know, up to twenty years younger than my chronological age, or am I somewhere even younger than that? So, to account for that, I I like to include other biological age tools, including aging.ai, which doesn't include chronological age in its model. So greater reductions for biological age are possible. So aging.ai is also free to use, and I should mention that I have, an Excel file as a downloadable link. So if if anyone out there is interested in calculating their own biological age, just, reach out, and I'll send you that link, and you can calculate your own, you know, biological age using Morgan Levine's test on your own. So, aging.ai3pointo is also free to use. Hopefully, it stays that way, and you can find it at aging.ai. So for that test, it includes 19 biomarkers, and that's usually the biomarkers that are found on a standard chemistry panel in a complete blood count, CBC, which in The US is about a $35 test. And I should mention that, CRP is about a $45 test. So, essentially, for $80, you can run two different biological age or blood based biological age, use two different tools. So aging.ai has strongly correlated with biological age without including chronological age in its model, and that's we can see there with its correlation of 0.8 for chronological age. But note that it's not as strong as Labien's test. So what about its association with all cause mortality risk? Well, biological ages that were younger than their corresponding chronologically age were associated with reduced all all cause mortality risk. And this is true in a Canadian cohort. So for people that had biological ages that were greater than five years older than their chronological age, we can see a significantly increased all cause mortality risk as shown there. And then, conversely, people that had biological ages that were five years younger than their chronological age had a significantly reduced all cause mortality risk as shown there. And that data is basically, the same in a US cohort, in this case, case, NHANES, with similar value for the older biological ages with increased all cause mortality risk and the opposite data for people who had younger bio biological ages being associated with a reduced all cause mortality risk. Alright. So what's my data? So here's the my data for my blood test number six. That's the test that I got done about a month ago. And when entering all of these values into aging.ai3pointo, I get a biological age of 29 years, which is pretty close to twenty, nineteen point nine years than my chronological age. So for more context, just like we did with the Levine's test data, let's have a look at previous data for aging.ai age because one blood test is interesting, but more data can help tell the more complete story. So I've been I've been blood testing as far back as 2009, and or and since then, I've got, 30 blood tests. So from 2009 to 02/2013, I was just going to the doctor once a year for my annual checkup, annual physical, and then recording that data in an Excel file. And over the over three tests over that five year span, my average aging dot ai age was 32 years. Now note that I wasn't tracking diet. I wasn't, you know, I was exercising, of course, and, trying to be fit in general. That's always been a focus of mine, but, I wasn't as hardcore, until starting in about 2015. And in 2015, I started diet tracking, and I'll talk more about that approach, in a slide or two. But since I've been diet tracking for the last six and a half years, I have a I I also decided to start blood testing more often with the idea that more data, again, will help me get closer to what the actual picture is. And then once I know what the actual picture is in terms of systemic biomarkers, I can then go after trying to optimize it. So over that six the last six plus year, period, my average biological age with two tests in 2016 was 28, 29.3 over four tests in 2017. It's hard to see because it's in yellow, so apologies for that. 29.5, six tests in 2018. 30.3 average, three tests in 2019. Over six tests in, 2020, thirty one point three. Now it should be pretty obvious that these data are increasing in terms of biological age from 2016 to 2020. Now fortunately, over six tests in 2021, I was able to at least slow that down, to with an average of 29.8 over those six tests, which is definitely going in the right direction. So, over these 27 blood tests since I started diet tracking, my average, biological age using aging.ai is 29.9, and my chronological age over that period is between 45, 43 and, 45 48 years old. So I'm about fifteen to twenty years younger using, aging.a.ai consistently. So So then the big question is how am I doing it? So I'm gonna co cover two aspects of that. I'm gonna go through my diet and some aspects of of why I do and include some of the things that I do, and then, cardiovascular fitness metrics. So in terms of diet, what's the approach? So as I mentioned, I've been tracking my intake since 2015, and that starts with a food scale. And I literally weigh weigh everything. I weigh all my food. And then I enter those food amounts into Cronometer, and I'm not sponsored by Cronometer. There are other apps that can do, similar things. And then the Cronometer's output data, I take that including macro and micronutrients and the individual food amounts, and I put that into a spreadsheet. And then with enough data for diet, fitness metrics, and blood biomarkers, note that now I have up to 34 blood tests depending on the biomarker since 2015. I can investigate correlations between those variables and then followed by interventions aimed at optimizing the blood biomarkers, which I expect will minimize disease risk and maximize longevity. So what's my actual diet? So here we're looking at my average daily dietary intake from, 11/01/2021 through 12/12. And the reason those dates are important is because, November 1 was the, date of blood test number five, and twelve thirteen day period is the period in between blood tests. So this is my average dot daily dietary intake for a forty two day period that then corresponds to blood test number six. So for each blood test, I have an average dietary intake. And when the with enough blood test and enough average intake, you can start to look at correlations. So let's go through why I've got certain foods here and why they're important. So, atop the list are carotenoid rich foods, and that's because relatively higher blood levels of carotenoids are correlated with the younger biological age. In this case, it's, an epigenetic test called, GRIM age. And so we can see that the higher the average level of carotenoids in blood, as indicated by the bicor, so the blue the blue column, that's significantly correlated with a younger epigenetic age. And then more specifically, carotenoids are are subdivided into five main groups, including lycopene, alpha carotene, beta carotene, lutein plazaxanthin, and beta cryptoxanthin. So each of those, individual carotenoids are also significantly correlated with a younger epigenetic age as shown in the bicore plot in the p value for statistical significance. So I try to have my diet abundant in each of these five, carotenoids. For example, watermelon watermelon and tomatoes, and you can see that on the left, you know, there how much I'm eating of them on a daily basis in terms of grams. Carrots are are a rich source of alpha carotene. Carrots and spinach, I get most of my beta carotene. Spinach and parsley, I get most of my lutein and zeaxanthin. And then red bep red bell peppers is a pretty good source of beta cryptoxanthin. So also abundant in my diet are strawberries, second in second on the list, and one reason for that is because they're a rich source of placentin, which extends median and maximum lifespan in mice. And that's what's shown here in this plot. So we're looking at percent survival against age. And when we when we go to 50% survival, this is the time when half the population mouse in this study, it's a mouse study, half the population is dead and half is still alive. We can assess median survival, and we can see that there's an increase in median, life span in the fisetin treated in the red line when compared with the control diet. And there's also you can see there's an increase in the maximum lifespan here when compared with the controls too. Alright. So, also, I've got, foods like blackberry and parsley. So why are they included? These foods contain dietary CD thirty eight inhibitors. In parsley, it's apigenin. And in blackberries, it's currmanin. So why is that important? So here we're looking at a plot of activity versus age in, with NAD and CD 38. So NAD, which is a, metabolite that that's involved in the health and function reverse virtually every organ system in the body. NAD levels decline during aging as shown there. And then conversely, CD 38 levels increase during aging, and that's important because CD 38 is an NADase, which means it degrades NAD. So one way to, help slow this down, is by including dietary CD thirty eight inhibitors. Again, apigenin and curaminin, which are found in parsley and blackberries. And then by including them, I expect to increase NAD or at worst to potentially slow the age related n NAD, decline. Now also abundant in my diet are mushrooms. We can see about a 167 per day, and one reason for that is because they're a rich source of spermidine. So why is spermidine important? And, I should mention that I have videos on my YouTube channel for basically all of these things, you know, fisetin and carotenoids. So if you're interested in any, additional info, I'm just gonna give the abridged version in this, presentation. But if you're interested in more info, my YouTube channel is a a gold mine for everything else, going into this stuff, you know, more in-depth. So spermidine extends lifespan. This is data in mice. Again, when looking at, median survival, we can see that, spermidine supplemented mice have an increased median lifespan when compared with controls. Now mushrooms are also a rich source rich source of ergothioneine, which, up until a few weeks ago, hadn't been assessed in terms of it in terms of its long longevity, potential longevity promoting effects in model organisms. But, a couple weeks ago, a study was publishing flies that shows that erbethionine extends lifespan in flies, and that's what's shown here. So, again, looking at median survival, you can see that two doses of erbethionine significantly extended lifespan were compared with the controlled, fed flies in the, purple. So just going so those data are in mice and flies. What about in humans? So here we're looking at all cause mortality risk, and this is for spermidine. So all cause mortality risk, cumulative incidence of death on the y axis, against follow-up, so up to twenty years after baseline assessment of spermidine intake. And what we can see is that the lowest, all cause mortality risk was for people that were consuming greater than 11.6 of spermidine per day with higher mortality risk for people who are consuming lower spermidine, intakes per day. So just from the mushrooms, I get more than, eleven point six milligrams per day. I get eleven point eight just from, mushrooms alone with smaller amounts in the rest of my diet. Alright. Now also note that for this, for this dietary period, I increased my intake of corn, oats, and barley. And, when you sum those three, it was a 154, which was only 30 about 32 for blood that corresponded to blood test number five. So at five x my intake of those whole grains or, you know, or, starchy, you know, containing foods. So why did I do that? Why did I increase, whole grain intake for this blood test? So in order to answer that, now it's time to look at some of my blood test data. So here's our data for glucose, and this is 32 blood tests over the past six plus years, and it's pretty clear to see that, it's been increasing over time. And more more, specifically, blood glucose has been greater than 90, milligrams per deciliter for 15 consecutive tests. So what may be impacting glucose? So to assess that, I can look at again, look I can look at correlations for my diet with the blood biomarkers and then alter, you know, stuff in my diet in the in an attempt to optimize blood biomarkers including glucose. So, this is correlations for macronutrients. We'll start there with glucose. So let's start with what's not significantly, correlated with glucose, and that's calorie intake as shown there with the r correlation coefficient and the p value. It's not statistically significant. And then the strongest correlation for, blood glucose is with fat a higher average, daily fat intake. So the higher my fat intake, that's significantly correlated with the higher glucose. And conversely, the higher my carbohydrate intake, that's significantly correlated with lower glucose. And, note that, again, this is for 32 dietary periods that correspond to these 32 blood tests. Now from whenever, I've shown this data, many people, you know, I don't know. I wanna say raise the outrage that they find it hard to believe that, having a higher carbohydrate intake can be correlated with lower glucose. But I think that that's probably true if you're eating a lot of junk and eating a western diet and it's filled with simple simple carbs. And, you know, in my case, as we'll see with with full diet composition in a minute, that that's not the case at all. And along those lines, we can see that a higher fiber intake is significantly correlated with a lower, blood glucose. So I get most of my fiber intake from carbohydrates. I mean, you know, fruits and vegetables, specifically. So, that's probably what's behind the carbohydrate correlation with with glucose. Now also note that a higher protein intake, a higher average daily protein intake is also significantly correlated with higher glucose. So my highest protein intake over the past six and a half years has been a 147 grams per day. But for this blood test, it was about a 108 grams per day. So I've already cut it by 40 grams, and going forward, cutting it more, doesn't make sense. But what does make sense is going after the biggest fish, biggest potential fish, which would be fat intakes. So let's take a little bit of a deeper look at that. So we can see that my fat intake has been increasing, since 2015. And if you look at the plot on the right versus the plot on the left, they look almost identical. Although the plot on the left is for glucose and the plot on the right is for my average daily fat intake. And, again, remember that each of the circles for fat is the average daily intake that corresponds to a blood test. Now my average daily fat intake, I've purposefully, been increasing it over time so that I could have enough data at low, intermediate, and relatively high values, in order to have a data range to to assess correlation with glucose and other other biomarkers. Now for the most recent blood test, I cut my fat intake, total fat from a 116 grams per day, which is one of my highest intakes, to 94 grams per day. And along those lines, my blood glucose fell from, somewhere closer to actually a 100 to, about 90 somewhere I think it was 91 or 92. Now if correlation, is causation for the next blood test, if I continue to cut, in this case, down into the 80 to 85 range, that may bring my glucose out of the nineties and into the eighties for the first time in 16 tests. Now because note that because protein intake is also correlated with higher glucose, I'm gonna keep that close to the same, a 108 as the last test. And when I do that, that that will then that'll be better a better evaluator of what's going on, in terms of fat intake's potential impact on glucose levels. Now I'm not just interested in optimizing one biomarker. I wanna optimize as many as possible. So if I reduce total fat intake, will will it improve glucose or make other biomarkers worse? And if so, I may I may not wanna reduce total fat intake. Alright. So what are the big picture biomarkers? So that's that's what's shown there. And, they're, basic they're basically 23 biomarkers and composites of biomarkers that, cover multiple organ systems. So more specifically, they include glucose, homocysteine as a as an index of, methylation, three markers of kidney function, three markers of liver function, all the major lipoproteins, all the major, immune cells, including platelets, red blood cells, and other red blood cell related measures like the, average red cell volume and the red blood cell distribution with RDW, inflammation, so c react protein, and then overall biological age score with, Morgan Levine's PhenoAge and aging.ai. So when evaluating, correlations for total fat intake with these big picture picture biomarkers, 11 are significantly correlated. So what what what can we make of that? If total fat intake is significantly correlated with more biomarkers going in the right direction than wrong, then a higher fat intake daily fat intake may be optimal. And for me, I I can't suppose that this is true for for other people without actually seeing what their data is. So to assess what if they're going in the right or wrong direction, how do these biomarkers change during aging, and what's their association with all cause mortality risk? So I'm only gonna cover a couple of these in the interest of time. But if, again, if you're interested in more info about, further details about each of these biomarkers and how they change during aging and with all cause mortality risk, I've got that data on my YouTube channel. So let's start with the easiest one, which is glucose. Here, we're looking at, average fasting glucose plotted on the y axis against, against age. And for both men and women, in this case, I've highlighted the data for men as it directly applies to me, we can see that glucose levels increase during aging. Also, relatively higher glucose levels are significantly associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So in my case, a higher fed intake is significantly correlated with higher glucose, so that's clearly going in the wrong direction, so we give it a red arrow. Now another easy one to go through are, neutrophils, which is shown here. So we've got, levels of neutrophils on the y axis plotted against chronological age with data for men in green and data for women in blue. And for men, it's pretty straightforward. Neutrophil levels increase during aging. For women, there's more variability, likely related to pregnancy. And along those lines, I have that data in my neutrophil video on my YouTube channel. But nonetheless, the data for women increases, pretty consistently after 55. And then similarly, neutrophil levels relatively higher, neutrophil levels are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So when starting with, two to 3,000 neutrophils per microliter there as the reference, we can see that having relatively higher levels than that, again, is associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So in my case, a higher fed intake is associated with or significantly correlated with higher neutrophils. And when considering the aging and all cause mortality data, that's going in the wrong direction. So we give that a red arrow too. So just using that same analysis, a higher fat intake is significantly correlated with seven biomarkers going in the wrong direction. So glucose, blood urea nitrogen is shown there, neutrophils, percentage of lymphocytes, which is shown there, monocytes, and platelets. Now one biomarker that's actually going the right direction, so higher fat intake is correlated significantly correlated with a lower MCV, so the average volume inside of a red blood cell. And that's going in the right direction because lower MCV is found in youth and, relatively higher MCV is associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. And these are in big studies. So, so that's going in the right direction in terms of higher fat being better for that potentially being better for that biomarker. Now there are three debatable biomarkers, including AST, which is, specific for, liver for the liver, but it's also found in other tissues. And I say it's debatable because if you go by the all cause mortality data, relatively lower is associated with a lower all cause mortality risk. But when I do a biomarker versus other biomarkers, so AST versus these other 23 biomarkers, having a little bit higher AST is actually correlated with more biomarkers going the right direction than wrong. So that may be a green. It It it it may be, sorry. It may be, it may lower is better, so it would be, green. But then in my data, it it may be red. So, so, yeah, debatable. And then, similarly for LDL, both lower and higher, it had been reported in studies to be associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. But when I do a biomarker versus biomarker analysis, having relatively lower is, seems to be better for my biomarkers correlated with more going in the right direction groups, significantly correlated with higher LDL. And then similar story for red blood cells. So higher is found in youth and, lower is, you know, they decline during aging and and lower is associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So superficially, that higher fat is correlated with higher red blood cells would seem to be positive. But when using a biomarker versus biomarker analysis, it's possible that there is such a thing as too high even within the range. So, this potentially is also a red. So even without the debatable biomarkers, we've got, definitively seven that are going in the wrong direction of the 11. So from that, I conclude that a higher average daily fat intake is significantly correlated with more of the big picture biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. And then along those lines, beyond the correlations with the glucose, this explains why I reduced fat intake for my latest blood test and correspondingly increased my intake of higher carbohydrate containing foods. So what does the rest of the diet look like? So this is gonna be my full macro and micronutrient composition that corresponded to the last blood test in 2021. So a little bit less than 2,400 calories. We already saw my protein intake, full breakdown of fat intake, full breakdown of carbohydrate intake, and just I'm gonna highlight some key notes. Note that I averaged 86 grams of fiber a day, which is three x the RDA, and that's intended to optimize the gut microbiome. And then I keep an eye on, total fructose and and, total fructose intake. So sucrose is fructose divided by two. So when you sum that, that's a total fructose intake. That's because a relatively higher fructose intake is significantly correlated with lower HDL of my data. So this is actually a relatively low amount of fructose for me as I can eat, you know, tons of fruits. I'm a fruitaholic. I can eat that stuff all day, so I've gotta be careful with that based on my HDL correlation. And then full vitamin breakdown. And, again, you'll notice that most of this is way higher than the RDA. And one of the benefits of this approach is that I'm not just going after optimizing blood biomarkers. But in doing that, I'm getting closer towards a personalized diet that is, you know, optimal based on the blood biomarker. So it's like a two way street of optimization, both blood biomarkers and diet. So some key notes here, you can see the carotenoid abundance with each of those five individual carotenoids, vitamin c intakes that are, way higher than the RDA. One reason for that is because there's a published dose response for high blood levels of vitamin c with all cause, reduced all cause mortality risk. Similarly, vitamin k and adequate intake is about a hundred micrograms per day. So for this blood test, that was 17 times that, and there's published data. And, again, I have a video on that on my YouTube channel where, vitamin k intakes greater than a thousand micrograms per day may be optimal. And then in terms of minerals, there's a full breakdown. Just as a key highlight, you can see my selenium intake, which is also, about three times higher than the RDA. And one reason for that is their published studies showing that up to two hundred micrograms per per per day may be optimal. And in terms of the rest of the diet, so I showed the first 26 foods in terms of abundance. So here's the remaining 26 foods in terms of, how much of it I ate, their average intakes over the forty two day period that corresponded to blood test number six. And I should mention I have a video, on this, you know, on YouTube, but I for for some reason, I didn't include, that I had Nutella. So for every blood test, I basically after the blood test is over for that day and the day after, if I'm gonna splurge on some junk, that's that's when I do it. And then I basically shut it down for the rest of the blood test, period. You know? So I didn't need any other junk for the forty days after, having it on the first two days, that corresponded to this blood test. So four grams of Nutella per day is is for a forty two day period. That was about a 160 over two days in conjunction with the peanut butter. So I made homemade Reese's peanut butter cups, or not really homemade. I just mixed those two together to make that. Alright. So diet isn't the only factor that can affect blood biomarkers and biological aids. So what about supplements and fitness? And a big question I get is when I show these data, people think I'm taking, you know, purported semalinics, you know, like NMN, NR, or other other, you know, metformin, rapamycin. So what what about supplements and, cardiovascular fitness metrics? So in terms of supplements, I was diagnosed, as being hypothyroid more than twenty years ago. So this is prescribed. I'm taking hundred thirty seven and a half micrograms per day of levothyroxine. And then in terms of other supplements, all I take is, well, vitamin d in the winter. I didn't include that there, but that should be there. For this blood test, it was, methyl b twelve, a thousand micrograms per day, and that was once every three days. But that's it for supplements. No other no no NMN, no rapamycin, no metformin, none of that. It's all diet and exercise. So what about fitness related stats? So in terms of body weight, I'm hundred and fifty five pounds. And, again, I weigh my myself every day too in the morning, so about seventy kilograms. And then my resting heart rate in terms of cardiovascular fitness, resting heart rate is 47, about 47 beats per minute, and heart rate variability is about 50 milliseconds. So what are those what what are those metrics and why are they important? So the resting heart rate is pretty easy, to define. It's the number of heartbeats per minute while at rest, and the fitness tracker that I wear records that automatically, so it takes away the human error in measurement. So is to when seeing these numbers, let's put into perspective, is cardiovascular fitness contributing to my relatively youthful biological age? So first, let's look at the aging data for resting heart rate. And this is using WHOOP. I wear WHOOP. I'm not sponsored by them. Other fitness trackers do, you know, a similar thing by looking at a resting heart rate, heart rate variability. I'm not here to promote them or any other any other brand. So when looking at this data, which goes from 20 to 50 years old, we can see that the wrestling heart rate increases during aging for both women in red and men in blue. So based on my chronological age, I should expect to have a resting heart rate of about 56 beats per minute. But in contrast, I'm at the other end of that range, 47.2, which one could posit would be youthful based on extrapolation. So is a lower resting heart rate, though, associated with health? So to assess that, we can look at all cause mortality risk against the resting heart rate. And this is a meta analysis of 46 studies that included more than 1,200,000 subjects. So we can see that when compared with the resting heart rate of 45, which was lowest all cause mortality risk, as the resting heart rate goes away from that, all cause mortality risk significantly increases. So that would see that would suggest that my data of 47.2 may be youthful and associated with health, but there's a button in this story. So whereas the WHOOP data only went up to 50, this is data for Fitbit users. And we can see that, in agreement with the WHOOP data, resting heart rate does indeed increase up until about 50 for both women in green and men in blue. But after 50, from 50 to 85, now we can see that resting heart rate, decreases during aging. So how can we know if, relatively low resting heart rate, in my case, is indicative of health or low because of aging? So, looking at data for heart rate variability can provide more insight about cardiovascular fitness. So what is HR HRV? So the simple definition is that it's the variation in time in between successive heartbeats. So, for example, if your heart rate is 60 beats per minute, the assumption is that it beats exactly once every second, but that's not true. It It can be point nine, one, 1.1, you know, and that would give you the same one beat per minute average, but there is variability in the time in between beats. And that's what's shown here. So based on these times in between beats, we would get a heart rate variability of 60 milliseconds. And this is using the RMSSD method in in case anybody wants the, details on that. Alright. So how does the HRV change during aging? So that's what's shown here. And, again, this is whoop data. Now it goes up to 65 for some reason. But what we can see is that when looking at the high end of this range, so starting in youth, where 20 year olds have values about one ten, they get knocked in half, about half to 65 year olds. Similarly, that happens to median values, and that also happens to the low end of this range. So it should be pretty clear that, HRV declines during aging. So what about my data? So for the last test, my average HRV every day, my average daily, was 50.3, which would put me for my chronological age somewhere there. Now note that the median HRV for my chronological age is somewhere around 42. So, in to answer the question, you know, is my low resting heart rate, good or bad? Is that the aging or is that youthful? In my case, resting heart rate is relatively low in conjunction with a heart rate variability that is higher than the median for my age at worst or at the low end of the range for a 25 year old. So there are two situations, low heart low resting heart rate, high HRV, which are found in youth, and then a low resting heart rate and and a low heart rate variability, which are found in older adults. So to address that question, I posit that my data is more representative of youth because if my average heart rate variability was below the median for my age, then I'd that would suggest that that my, low resting heart rate would be in conjunction with, a low heart rate variability would would be indicative of poor cardiovascular fitness, but that doesn't seem to be the case based on these data. Now similar to, the blood test stuff, this is only, you know, the data that corresponds to one test. How's my data since 2018? And I I say since 2018 because I started tracking this stuff, in August 2018. So I have more than 1,200 of data for both resting heart rate and heart rate variability. So first, the resting heart rate data. So and each each dot corresponds to one day. So, just to delineate that. So in 2018, my average resting heart heart rate was about 51 beats per minute. And note note that I wasn't inactive at any time, during during this journey. I mean, I've always, you know, strength trained two to three times a week, walked 10 to 15 miles a week. So I didn't go from sedentary to fit, so I've always been relatively fit. So, in 2019, I reduced the resting heart rate down to about 49 to about 48 in 2020 and then to 47, closer to 47 in 2021. And we can assess these chain these, differences when compared to 2018 using a two sample t test. So we can see that, based on the t test, the p value, each year since 2018, I've significantly reduced it, you know, yeah, relative to 2018 value. So it's a statistically significant, reduction for resting heart rate for each year when compared with 2018. So is it going in the right or wrong direction? It's a cumulative thing, not just one one, you know, for one blood test as I showed before. So, again, we go back to the how, it chain how resting heart rate changes during aging. So first, up to 50, we can see that resting heart rate increases during age. So at least I've resisted the age related increase for resting heart rate. But then the same question arises. How do we know that I'm not on the declining age related decline for resting heart rate? So to assess that, let's take a look at heart rate variability since 2018. So I started off in 2018, with about four months of data with a a heart rate variability of 47. I increased it in 2019 to 56, further increased it in 2020 to about 58, and then I had a little bit of a dip in 2021 to '52. And each of these, years, each of these data for each year is significantly higher than 2018. So I've been able to, significantly increase heart rate variability each year since 2018. So to answer that question, how can we know if the declining resting heart rate is indicative of better or worse cardiovascular function? Let's go back to the data for how heart rate variability changes during aging. And then when looking at the data for my chronological age, this three year period from 45 to 48 or up to about 49, that twelve, twelve hundred plus day average is about 54, which is higher than the median for my age. So if the resting heart rate, a reduction that I've had over this three plus year period was in conjunction again with a relatively low heart rate variability, that would suggest worse cardiovascular function, but that does not seem to be the case for me. So that suggests I've been able to improve my cardiovascular fitness at least since 2018. But note that it's not all sunshine. In 2019 or 2020, I had higher heart rate variabilities. So, that shows that there's room for improvement, especially since I had a little bit of a dip in 2021 even though 2021 was better than 2018. So So then the big question going question going forward is, you know, is the 2021 data the sign of a decrease in cardiovascular fitness, and 2022 is gonna have a lower heart rate variability, or will I reverse this trend and get it back to 2019, 2020 to at my highest levels? Alright. So that's all I've got for now. There are lots of places to find me online, including on Patreon. And then with that, I'm ready for questions. Oh, hey. Wow. That was awesome. What a what a incredible sort of, like, you know, outlay of data and just, like, so meticulous too. I just I just love it. But yeah. Thank you. Thank you once again, Mike, for for coming in and speaking. Maybe we'll get to a couple questions. But, yeah. But before I do that, actually, I I wanna make sure that we ask, you know, the question that we ask all our our speakers, you know, in the spirit of service here at OnDeck, is there anything that we can do to to help you? I know you mentioned some things on on the last slide, but, I'll just open that up for you as well. Yeah. I I mean, Patreon's a good spot. It's a growing community there, so that's probably the top. But, if you wanna know more about, any of the things that I presented, I've got further detailed analysis with approaching a 100 videos on my YouTube channel, so that's another place to get some pretty pretty solid content. Those are probably the two top self promotion, yeah, places to go. Okay. Awesome. Great. So everyone check out, Mike's stuff on YouTube and also his Patreon. Okay. Great. So we have a couple of questions. Carl, asks, do you do time restricted eating? That's a good question. Yeah. I do. And, the thing is so I I try to stop eating all of my food. So I wake up between four and 6AM. So I basically start eating as soon as I wake up, and, I stop eating by 3PM on most days. On the weekends, it's about probably about 2PM. Some days, it's about 1PM. I don't notice a difference in the blood biomarkers when I time restricted, you know, when I do TRF. I don't I don't notice a difference there. But I do it mostly for an improvement in sleep quality. Because I'm eating such a high fruit and vegetable diet, which is a lot of water, you know, fruits and vegetables are water abundant. So, I used to have a a really bad problem of eating two to three hours before bedtime. And, again, normal food, fruits and vegetables, all the things that I just showed that I ate. And I'd wake up to pee two, three, four times during the nighttime, and I'd wake up in the morning just feeling terrible. So by doing this, it gives this gives me, you know, six to seven hours before before I go to bed with enough time to, you know, use the bathroom before, which limits my nighttime awakenings, which leads to better sleep quality. So, for that reason, TRF is is the major reason why why I include that. But also the I may get the benefit of, you know, you know, fasting may drive the, longevity promoting effects of the calories here at the diet. And I'm mildly CR, depending on what you define as my ad lib intake. So, you know, maybe there's secondary effects there in terms of longevity. We'll find out. Right? We'll find out over the next seventy seventy plus years if the TRF also impacts that. So Okay. Awesome. Your, your GI tract is, is very impressive for, 85 of fiber per day in a, you know, in a only half the day, half the twenty four hour period. So I I don't know if everyone could do that. And probably you couldn't do the one meal a day thing some people really like to do and maintain that quantity of fiber is my guess. I I've done I mean, I've done it as one meal a day. I used to eat, I used to fast all day and then, you know, do OMAD from six to 9PM at night. So it's it's doable. I mean, granted, in the beginning, it was, you know, titrate up. I had to work my way up to it, but, and there are certain foods that aggravate my GI tract that I have to stay away from or minimize. So I think if you find, you know, foods that you can tolerate that don't cause more GI distress than than can potentially impact the blood biomarkers, I think it's easily doable. But that said, I wouldn't recommend doing that replicating my diet as an approach for everybody. You know, I do this because having a higher fiber intake, even as high as that, is significantly correlated with more of these big picture biomarkers going in the right direction than wrong. And I actually titrate I'm consistently titrating how much omega three, how much omega six, how much saturated, how much saturated fat from dairy, how much saturated fat from things like coconut butter, to to optimize the blood biomarkers, but also by evaluating them both, I can see how the diet is correlated with the blood biomarkers. So if more things are going in the wrong direction than right, I get towards a more precise amount. So for someone, it for for some people, eating a very high fiber diet may be correlated with more biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. I'd say don't do it then. It's not for you. You follow your own data. So k. Awesome. Awesome. Aaron, do you have a question? You can come off me or I can read it for you. Sure. Hey, Michael. So is there an online database for all the biomarkers, with age correlation somewhere? I'd like, not so for for aging.ai, what you do there is you put in your a whole list of information and then they just throw it through a black box and then they spit out some number to you. Is there raw data? Like, is there just, like, a database somewhere of raw data for changes over time of any and all measured biomarkers? You know what I'm talking about? Yep. Yeah. Yeah. So, yeah. So the the the direct answer is no. Okay. I I hate to say I'm the first to to start to look at this stuff, but I'm probably one of the first to, start to try to organize that. And, on my YouTube channel, I mean, if you just do a search for the biomarker of interest, I've, I basically go after the largest. So I I do comprehensive literature reviews and then basically put in the videos the most representative data. But, you know, I'm I'm going after very large studies, you know, if they exist for other things like MCV, maybe there aren't studies of 10,000 people where we've got MCV published data. But for each of these major biomarkers, yeah, I've got that on my, YouTube channel in terms of in terms of age related changes and changes with all cause, mortality risk. Okay. We're gonna need that at some point. So I'll try to I'll see if if that can be pushed into the current project. Morgan mentioned NHANES. What's NHANES? It's the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Okay. Go ahead. Hi, Aaron. I'm running Yeah. In Discord. I haven't forgotten. No problem. It's been a while. Yeah. Cool. Okay. Awesome. Brad, did you wanna come off mute and ask your question? Yeah. Sure. It's all the same. Yeah. Thank you. Talk to us, Kerwin. That was really incredible, to do all that guinea pig work for all of humanity. Do you have the raw methylation data on yourself from those, biological age tests that you've taken up to this point? Yeah. So, I I do. I have I have data for two tests, but I'm not ready to present it yet because I wanna have more data. And and when I start presenting the epigenetic data, I wanna have it with correlations with not just the blood biomarkers, but diet. But, yeah, fortunately, I reached out to the, Horvath Group and the Clock Foundation. I don't know if they're on the call now. And, yeah, they agreed to measure at least two samples, using all of their epigenetic tools. And, we may actually, be working together to, provide epigenetic app analysis every time I do the other blood test. So, I'm pretty sure there isn't published data for, you know, Levine's phenotypicageandaging.ai and how that even compared. Well, there is some data. But at least at the end of one level, I don't think there's any published data. So it'll be interesting to see how the epigenetic data with more tests looks in correlation with these other blood based biomarker metrics. Yeah. Wow. Fascinating. Thank you. That's really interesting. And this is a bit more in the weeds maybe than most, so I apologize to some ears. But, just to throw a potential wrench in the works down the line. I don't know if people are thinking about this this much, but, the clocks that are, trained on chronological age, I know sometimes have diminished returns with regards to their all cause mortality. So that might be something if you're if anyone's using that as a golden standard to sort of keep in mind going forward, but that's that's just a ongoing problem in the field, I think. Yeah. And Morgan Morgan just, noted that too. Yeah. I mean, they are noisy. So that's another you know, and I'm a big fan of the epigenetic, clock approach, but at some point, the noise, you know, the variability will be reduced, and I'm definitely gonna integrate that, you know, as potentially in a higher level to, you know, optimize everything. But in contrast, most people I'd say, you know, are not thinking about these blood based biomarker tools, which is disappointing, you know, because they you know, these biomarkers have been studied for fifty to a hundred years plus depending on the biomarker. So it's well known how they change during aging, and with all cause mortality risk. Whereas for the epigenetic clocks, even that, it's still being, discovered. All epigenetic epigenetic clocks aren't the same for the predictive ability with chronological age or all cause mortality risk or even which aspects of aging that they're even measuring. So, but like I said, I'm a big fan of that approach and, even multi omic, based clocks. So I've got my eye on that stuff too. I'm not just trying to stay in one box, the blood based biomarkers forever. I'm I'm always trying to look how to branch out and improve. Yeah. That was very informative. That was a wonderful presentation. Thank you. Thanks, Brent. Actually, I had a question to to segue onto that. Do you do any other sort of, like, functional measures that you you track over time as well? Or, and also you mentioned something about sleep too. Yeah. I track I mean, strength. You know, I have a pretty standard, fitness workout, you know, compound movements. So I'm I'm always paying attention to physical function there, but cognitive function, someone was asking me about that, you know, and, I mean, that's hard to gauge. I mean, basically, somewhat you could you could tell by, I don't know, how someone talks. You can you can hear it over time. I don't know. Maybe people listen to my YouTube videos, you know, a couple years ago versus now and hear a change. I don't know. But, yeah, I do track sleep. There is some, decent comparison with the gold standard for sleep, polysomnography, with my fitness tracker with, slow wave sleep and total sleep. How good that actually is is, I'd say, debatable. It's still an evolving field in very small studies too. So, but I do track that stuff. I don't try to optimize it so much anymore these days based on changing my diet to optimize sleep. I find that, again, the TRF does the best to improve sleep quality and even extending potentially my, slow wave sleep, which, declines early aging. Yeah. I'm tracking all the stuff that I mentioned, physical physical strength, flexibility, mobility, balance, all those things because I don't wanna be 80 and I, you know, can't bend down and tie my shoes or, you know, or move because mobility, the clients are aging too. But, yeah, sleep and and physical fitness too, those are big aspects. Mhmm. Mhmm. And in terms of, like, you know, just in the name of science doing all this tracking and and biological, you know, opt age optimization, have you ever been tempted to, you know, try some of the the more esoteric interventions, I guess, like, I don't know, like metformin or or rapamycin and see what happens to the to the biomarkers? Yeah. So I'm not I'm not opposed to these purported senolytics. I'm not opposed to it at all. I just I think, targeted need. So, for example, here here in the summer, I I try to get as much sunlight, full body exposure as possible so that I can actually have my skin make vitamin d, but in the winter, it's impossible, so I have to supplement with it. Right? So same thing with b twelve. Methyl b twelve reduces my homocysteine by about 20%. If I could do that totally through diet, I would, but it you know, I have, I don't know, 17 or 18 blood test, something like that for homocysteine that that seems to be resistant to all of my dietary changes so far. I've tried other things in the published literature to reduce various things, whether it's liver enzymes or changing my diet, but I I just, I you know, maybe there'll come a point when diet and exercise and tweaking and doing my own little interventions doesn't work anymore, and I have to take something like metformin. But I think most people jump to that right away without going after the foundation of what's causing high glucose in the case of metformin, as an example. But even things like rapamycin so rapamycin is a well known antifungal, especially against things like candida. Candida infections and bloodstream infections with candida, increase during aging. So older adults have about a ten to fifteen increased incidence of bloodstream infections with candida versus younger age groups. So if I have a documented bloodstream infection, for sure, I'm gonna take rapamycin or whatever the antifungal of choice would be to kill that, you know, specific antifungal species. So, and I'm actually considering doing a blood microbiome analysis. There are companies that do that. Maybe I have a subclinical, you know, subclinical amounts of fungi in my blood that shouldn't be there. Right? So, yeah, I'm I'm open to taking these things. But, you know, e but even then, how much to take and, you know, in terms of milligrams per day or micrograms per day and, you know, how often. By using this approach, it doesn't have to be okay. This is what the animal study show. This is what the r t RCT show. In my opinion, all published data has to be evaluated at the end of one level. Even if the study had a million people, 10,000,000 people, 50,000,000 people, and it works on a population based average, you still have to do the individual testing with ample testing, not one or two tests, maybe ten, fifteen, 20, an abundance of tests to see if it actually works for you. And then with that said too, is it net beneficial? Is it neutral? Is it detrimental? Right? Really taking a scientific approach to whichever supplement, whether it's retamycin or something else. Right? So I wish more people were doing that rather than just based on hope and, you know, published studies, you know, looking at their own data to see if it's actually beneficial. So that's how I would do it. Okay. Yes. Absolutely. And I think I think that's something that we we can all take to heart, like, you know, in terms of actually measuring in a meticulous way, you know, in a scientific way. And I I I really enjoy that. Obviously, it's a little hard to do, here in Canada, but, I think in The US, it's a lot easier to get these web tests. And it's it's also tedious, right, and time consuming to do the correlations on my own. It's time consuming. I should say I'm working with one company right now. I'm I have plans in mind to develop my own company to make it easier to do this for other people. So, eventually, this will be much easier to do, whether it's through me or other people doing. Okay. Awesome. Looking forward to that. Okay. So I'd just like to thank Michael, for for giving the maiden talk again and, you know, spending his time to answer all of our questions. It's fantastic. We learned a bunch. And, yeah. Hopefully, we can have you back sometime in the future. Thank you so much. Alright. Thanks, Nathan. Thanks for your time. Take care, everyone. Bye bye.