In an earlier video, we saw that fasting drives the lifespan extending effect of calorie restriction, c r. So let's take a look at that data as it sets us up for a larger story. So here we're looking at percent survival, how many mice were alive or dead, and then age, at death. And there are three groups. CR calorie restricted, so this is 30% calorie restriction, and mice ate all of their food within a two hour eating window, and then fasted for the remaining twenty two hours in the day. Then we've got Ad Lib, so these mice ate as much as they wanted when whenever they wanted, and I should mention that these data are in c 57, black six j male mice. Unfortunately, the study didn't go into, data on female mice. And then there's a third group, diluted Ad Lib. So, this is third also 30% calorie restriction, but without fasting. So the mice were, allowed to eat as much as they wanted, but the diet was diluted, the Ad Lib diet was diluted, such that the total amount of calories was the same as 30% c r. Alright. So let's look at median lifespan. This is also known as 50% survival. This is when half the colony has died, and half is still alive. So for calorie restriction, we can see that there is a significant 20% increase for median lifespan for the c r group, the 30% c r group that also had a very short eating window. In contrast, and that's when compared with the Ad Lib diet as shown there in gray. In contrast, the c r group that was 30%, but without prolonged fasting had a significant decrease in lifespan of nine percent. So that raises the question, is c r without fasting bad for lifespan or prolonged lifespan? Prolonged fasting. So alternatively though, can lifespan be further increased in fasted CR mice? And one one way we may be able to do that is through circadian alignment. Now for mice, circadian alignment means eating during the night, not the day, And that's because mice are nocturnal. The majority of their physical activity is during the nighttime, not the daytime. So, and note that most studies in mice are conducted during the day, not night. So there's a lot of circadian misalignment going on in most mouse studies. So with that in mind, what's the effect of fasting and circadian alignment on lifespan in calorie restricted mice? And that data was published here in a, a recently published paper. If you're interested in this paper and the paper on the last slide, it'll be in the video's description. So there's a lot of data on this slide, so let's unpack it piece by piece. So once again, we're looking at percent survival on the y axis plotted against age, so, how long did the mice live, and then when starting off with median survival as shown there, we can see the ad lib group, which again is not CR. These mice were eating as much as they wanted, whenever they wanted. We can see that they had a median lifespan of seven hundred ninety two days as indicated by the gray line. So then, the next group was CR spread, and this is 30% calorie restriction, but with but without prolonged fasting. So the mice were given food nine times during a twenty four hour period. So there was a little bit less than three hours in between each meal, and that's shown in purple. And even with without prolonged fasting, we we can see that there was a significant increase in median lifespan for the 30% c r group, the c r spread that didn't have any prolonged fast, or at least longer than about three hours. Alright. So what about so so then we can go into, showing this data, thirty percent c r, median lifespan increase versus the ad lib. We can see that without prolonged fasting, there was a 10% increase, significant increase for median lifespan. So what about maximum lifespan? So we can see that the the last mouse that died looks later than the grade line, the ad lib, but most studies you, report ten percent survival. So this is, ninety ninety percent of the colony has died and only ten percent is still alive. It isn't when was the age of death at the last, for the last animal between groups. So when looking at ten percent survival, again, ninety percent of the colony died and only ten percent was still alive. You can see by the p value, when comparing the c r spread versus ad lib, it's greater than 0.05. So there wasn't a significant difference in maximum lifespan for the c r spread group when compared with ad lib. Alright. So then that brings us to the c r during the day groups, and this this again is 30% calorie restriction with a twelve or twenty two hour fast, but note that since it's during the day, the animals are eating during the day, this is circadian misalignment. And you can see that for the C R day group in yellow where it says, two hours, that means that their eating window was two hours and then they fasted for the remaining twenty two hours in the day. So for that group, for the, CR day group, we can see an even longer median lifespan as shown there. So somewhere around nine hundred fifty days, we're compared with seven hundred ninety two for ad lib. And that's a 20% increase, for median lifespan. So what about maximum lifespan? And here too, there was an increase in maximum lifespan for the CR day groups, both, twenty two hour fast and the twelve hour fast, when compared with the mice that were allowed to eat as much as they wanted whenever they wanted. So, last but not least, and this is why we're here, is the c r at night group. So the mice were only allowed to eat at night. So this again was 30% c r with a twelve or twenty two hour fast, and this would could be defined as circadian alignment. So when looking, at the survival curves there in blue and green, we can see that the longest median lifespan was for this group, for the c r night group, again that has fasting, prolonged fasting, and circadian alignment. And we can see that there it was a 35% increase in median lifespan. Note that for median median life, median lifespan data of around a thousand fifty or a thousand sixty days, most supplement based studies don't even have maximum lifespans, that reach those, you know, that those amounts of days or months. So, this is an impressive finding of 35% increase, in median lifespan for fasting, prolonged fasting plus, circadian alignment on a CR diet. And also, in terms of maximum lifespan, we can see that it was, also significantly increased. I put the p values there, when compared with the Ad Lib diet. So then, this also raises a question, is the shortest eating window optimal for longevity? Should we all be eating a two hour, all of all of our food within two hours or is twelve hour, twelve hour eating window sufficient for, increasing lifespan? So based on the data in the c r day and at c r night, there was no added added effect or there was no increase in survival for having a two hour eating window versus a twelve hour eating window. So when looking at the orange and yellow curves, you can see that median lifespan looks pretty close to identical and similarly for the green and and, and and blue curves, you can see again median lifespan is basically overlapping at 50% survival whether it's, a two hour, eating all the food within two hours or within twelve hours. So with that, it would seem that if we have a twelve hour eating window that may be sufficient for optimizing lifespan if we're on a CR diet and we optimize our, circadian rhythm. So that's then the bigger question in people with circadian alignment equal eating most of the food in the morning, afternoon, or before bed. And there's very little data, definitely no data in terms of lifespan and people, but if we were gonna speculate, I bet that eating, almost all of the food, from sun up to sundown at the latest, may be optimal in people. So with that in mind, I try to finish everything, around 04:00 at the latest, some days as early as 01:00, most of my eating window. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.