Can gut bacteria from an Olympic athlete improve muscle mass and physical function? So first, who's the Olympic athlete? That's Sing Chun Quo. Now, Sing Sing Chun Quo's Aboriginal name is Tana. So for the rest of this video, I refer to her as Tana. Tana is a highly accomplished weight lifter. And we can see that by taking a look at her medal record, which is shown here. Now most recently, she, earned a gold medal in the twenty twenty Tokyo Olympic Games. But you can see she's also won a lot of gold medals and some silver and bronze at a variety of other weightlifting competitions since 2010. So, what was the experimental approach with the goal of addressing the question, can gut bacteria from Olympic athlete improve muscle mass and physical function? So starting from her poop, a specific bacteria was isolated and that's lacti plante bacillus plantarum, which was then transplanted once per day for four weeks into young, which were, six week old male mice. And the mice were ICR mice as shown there on the left. And then, did this specific bacterium isolated from Tanna, the Olympic weight lifter, the Olympic, weight lifter. Did L plantarum improve muscle mass and physical function? So, what was the impact of L Plantarum colonization on muscle mass? Let's start there. So, here we can see a variety of characteristics on the left, including relative tissue weights for a variety of tissues. Now, the relative weight equals the tissue weight divided by a 100, multiply it by by a 100%. And for each of the tissues that were examined, we can see that it's liver, muscle, kidney, heart, lung, a couple of fat depots including including the epidural fat pad EFP, and then also brown adipose tissue, BAT, and then also the cecum. Now there are four groups. First on the left, we've got vehicle, so mice that were not supplemented with bacteria from Tana. And then we've got three different Tana groups, Tana one x, two x, and five x, which were increasing concentrations of bacteria that were, supplemented to the mice. And if you're interested in the exact concentrations that were used, we can see that there. So what was different between groups? So for that, we go to the trend analysis, and we can see that there were three that were significantly different between the groups. First, was muscle mass. So starting with the vehicle, which had a relative muscle weight of point 95%, we can see that all of the Tanner groups, Tanner one x, two x, and five x, had significantly increased, a significantly increased relative muscle weight when compared with vehicle. So point nine nine, point nine nine, and one point o 4% when compared with vehicle. But also, fat mass was reduced. The e f p, the epididymal fat pass pad was reduced. So first starting with vehicle, which had a e f p of point 9%, we can see that 10 of five x had a significantly reduced e f p percentage of point seven four. But last but not least, we can see that the cecum weight was affected, or, so 2.66% in the vehicle, and before going on, note that the cecum is a major site of bacterial short chain fatty acid, SCFA production, and I've covered short chain fatty acids in a variety of videos on this channel. So, if you're interested in that, just do a search and check it out. So, in the 10 of five x, we can see that the cecum weight, relative cecum weight was significantly increased when compared with vehicle, which suggests that supplementation of this bacterium from the Olympic weight lifter may have altered, well, increased cecum weight, which may have altered overall the the overall gut microbiome. So I'll have more on that in a minute. So, collectively from this data, from these data, we can see that supplementation of L plantarum significantly increased muscle and cecal mass, while decreasing fat mass. So then, the next question that could be asked is, as a potential explanation for these alterations was body weight or food intake between the groups. And we can see that data here. So we've got on the left, initial body weight, final body weight, water intake, and then dietary intake in terms of grams of food consumed per mouse per day. And what we can see is that none of these were significantly different when looking at vehicle versus any of the three ten of supplementation groups. So, to address the question, was body weight or food intake different between the groups? It was not. Alright. So, what's the impact of L. Plantarum on physical function? So, first starting with the relative grip strength as shown there, and the that, relative grip strength means grip strength divided by body weight times a 100%. And then, we've got our four groups. So first, looking at vehicle, and then the three different Tana, one X, two X, and five X groups. We can see that grip strength was significantly increased for all of the Tana groups. In other words, the mice that were treated with bacteria from the Olympic weight lifter had significantly increased grip strength at all concentrations of the bacterium. Now, note that there's a plateau effect at ten and two x and five x, so they're not significantly different from each other in terms of grip strength, but both of those, ten and two x and five x were higher than both 10 to one x and the vehicle. Alright. What about aerobic exercise capacity? So, here we're looking at time to exhaustion, and this is a swimming test. And once again, we've got our four groups, and then we can see significant significantly increased time to exhaustion. So an improved aerobic exercise capacity in the Tana, the Tana supplemented groups were compared with vehicle. Also note that plateau effect in the Tana two x and five x again. So the highest time to exhaustion was in 10 to two x and five x, which was significantly higher, or significantly longer than 10 to one x and vehicle. So from these two, from these two images, we can see that muscle strength and aerobic exercise capacity were improved in L plantarum supplemented mice. So earlier, we saw that in there was an increased cecum mass in L plantarum supplemented mice, so was the gut microbiome altered? So for that, we go to a beta diversity plot, which is a measure of how similar or dissimilar that the gut bacterial communities may be. And then, we've got our four groups as delineated there with the different colors. So starting with the vehicle, we can see that that projects to a different space where compared with Tana one x as shown there. But then, also note that the two highest Tana groups, as shown in pink and green, are in a different space when compared with Tana one x, and with the vehicle, which suggests an overall different microbiome composition, not just for Tana one x versus the vehicle, but also for the two highest Tanner groups versus Tana one x and the group that wasn't supplemented with, L plantarum. So, from this, we can see that overall gut bacterial composition in L plantarum colonized mice is different from the untreated controls. But what that doesn't tell us is which specific bacteria were different. So, for that we go to a relative abundance plot as shown there, and in terms of relative abundance, here we're looking at the Phylum taxonomic level. Now, you can see that most of the relative abundance is comprised of two main bacterial phyla, which are Firmicutes and Bacteroides. So Firmicutes in pink or red, and Bacteroides in in blue. So when compared with the vehicle, you can see that comprises almost all of the bacterial composition, just those two bacterial phyla. But then, for the two highest Tana groups, Tana two x and Tana five x, we can see that there was a significant decrease for Firmicutes in red slash pink, but a significant significant increase for bacteroides as shown in blue. So collectively, we can see that Lactoplantibacillus plantarum, which was isolated from the Olympic weight lifter, and then supplemented, once per day for four weeks into young mice, positively impacts the gut muscle axis. Or more specifically, it altered the weight of the cecum, it altered the composition of the gut microbiome, and then it improved muscle mass, but also reduced fat mass. So, a net positive. Alright. So there's a lot more to this story including what are the effects of L plantarum on the gut muscle axis in aged mice. So data in young mice is interesting, but what about old mice? And also, going beyond animal models, what's the effects of this bacterium on the gut muscle axis in young and older adult people? And more specifically, in randomized controlled trials that gave this specific bacterium, and the potential impact on both the gut microbiome and on muscle mass. So stay tuned for that, and if you're interested in seeing that data, I'll post it, over the next few days on Patreon before I make next week next week's video. So, before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links that you may be interested in, and these will be in the video's description, including epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee, and all of these links will be in the video's description. And note that we also have merch. So if you're interested in that, check it out. That too, the link for that will be in the video's this, video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.