For every age group, relatively low LDL is associated with an increased mortality risk from cardiovascular disease. So this is data from a study of about fourteen point nine million people that weren't taking lipid lowering medication. So for every age group starting with 18 year olds and all the way up to 99 year olds, we can see that for LDL in the 100 to about one twenty milligram per deciliter range, that's associated with lowest risk for Cardiovascular disease related mortality. However, with lower LDL as shown by the red arrows, we can see increased mortality risk from CBD. So the big question is why? So to gain some insight, let's take a look at how LDL changes during aging which is shown here. So with the data for men in green and women in red, we can see that LDL increases during aging up until about the fifties and then it declines. Now note that relatively low LDL is found in youth. So why why would low LDL be associated with an increased all cause mortality risk or an increased cardiovascular disease mortality risk? That seems paradoxical. So to gain more insight, let's take a look at some data from patients that had coronary artery disease, CAD. And that data is here published in a paper earlier this year. Non HDL cholesterol paradox and the effect of underlying malnutrition in patients with coronary artery disease. And this was a study that included, almost 42,000 people. So let's define some terms. So first, what is the non HDL cholesterol paradox? So that's when low levels of non HDL cholesterol are associated with an increased c v d mortality risk. Alright. So what about non HDL cholesterol? What is that? So that's when, total that equals total cholesterol, TC minus HDL or more specifically LDL plus VLDL plus intermediate density lipoprotein, IDL. Now, IDL is a very minor component of this equation in terms of concentration, so So I won't focus on it in this video, focusing instead on LDL and VLDL which are almost exclusively, non HDL cholesterol or make up the majority of it. So first, relatively low VLDL is associated with a reduced risk for cardiovascular disease related mortality and that's what's shown here. So we're looking at the risk for acute myocardial infarction, so heart attack, sudden coronary death and other coronary death in association with the VLDL cholesterol concentration. So for people that had less than 20 for VLDL, but, when compared with higher levels of VLDL 20 to 29 and greater than 30, we can see that having a low VLDL was associated with lowest risk for these cardiovascular disease related outcomes when compared with higher levels of VLDL which had a significantly increased risk as shown there. So from this we can conclude that because low VLDL is associated with a reduced cardiovascular disease mortality risk not an increased, CBD mortality risk as, shown by the non HDL cholesterol paradox, the non HDL cholesterol paradox would then mostly involve LDL. So just keep that in mind, as we go forward. So then why is low non, HDL cholesterol significantly associated with an increased all cause mortality risk in coronary artery disease patients. To start to address that, let's take a look at the association between non HDL cholesterol with all cause mortality risk and that's what's shown here. So note that this study involved, people with an average age of 65 and that it was 80 men included in the study. So first note that lowest all cause mortality risk in this subject population, had a non HDL cholesterol level of four to five millimolar which is approximately one fifty five to one ninety three milligrams per deciliter. But then we can see that non HDL cholesterol paradox there. So less than 85 for the non HDL C was significantly associated with an increased all cause mortality risk in coronary artery disease patients. But note that this is an unadjusted association and there are many other factors that may impact this association. So it's important to account for those variables in this model. So what happens to all cause mortality risk when this association includes adjustment for other health related variables? So what are those variables that can impact the association? And they include an older age, sex, other CBD related comorbidities, AFib or atrial fibrillation, high blood pressure, hypertension, elevated blood glucose as indicated by type two diabetes, poor poor kidney function as indicated by chronic kidney disease, CKD, which was more specifically an eGFR less than 60. Anemia as indicated by the, relatively low concentration of red blood cells in blood, is indicated by a, hematocrit levels and, lung disease as indicated by COPD, chronic, obstructive pulmonary disease. So when these when this association includes these variables, now the some of the risk has gone away. So we can see that although, it's still significant, the lowest all cause mortality risk for a relatively higher each non HDLC is right at the border of statistical significance and similarly similarly the lower non HDLC, that increased risk has also been reduced by a bit as we can see that the confidence interval is right at the border of statistical significance. So from this we can conclude that age, sex and comorbidities affect the relationship between non HDL cholesterol with all cause mortality risk in coronary artery disease patients. But note that the title of this paper includes malnutrition. So how does malnutrition contribute to the association for non HDL cholesterol with all cause mortality risk? So first, how did they define malnutrition? So they included blood test data for albumin, lymphocytes and total cholesterol. And then also as a quick aside, note that because this the association for non HDL cholesterol with all cause mortality risk, because total cholesterol includes non HDL cholesterol, the only other component that isn't included is HDL. So by including total cholesterol in these models, it's essentially accounting for HDL. So what happens to all cause mortality risk when the association for non HDL cholesterol with all cause mortality is adjusted for malnutrition as defined by these three factors. And now we're looking at it looks like a totally different curve. So after accounting for albumin lymphocytes and total cholesterol, none higher, non HDL cholesterol so greater than 85 milligrams per deciliter is now associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. And conversely, the non HDL cholesterol paradox is gone so that we see that having a non HDL cholesterol of less than 85 milligrams per deciliter is now associated significantly associated with a reduced all cause mortality risk in coronary artery disease patients. So from this, we can conclude that malnutrition may be driving the effect of a low non HDL cholesterol on all cause mortality risk in CAD patients. So before going forward, it's important to also account for those other, factors that could, impact this this association including age, sex, and comorbidity. So what happens to this plot if those variables are included in the malnutrition model? So that's what we can see here and the data looks almost, essentially the same with very some very small changes. We can still see that having a non HDL cholesterol level greater than 85 is still significantly associated with an increased all cause mortality risk and then that, the non HDL cholesterol paradox is still, it's it's it's now reversed. I mean, you still see that reduced all cause mortality risk. Granted, it's right at the border of statistical significance. You can see that the confidence interval, the red dash lines are right at a hazard ratio of one. But nonetheless, we can see that, malnutrition may be driving the effect of having a low non HDL cholesterol on all cause mortality risk at least in this, subject population coronary artery disease patients. So the big question though is why? Why would malnutrition drive the effect of low non HDL cholesterol or more specifically potentially LDL on all cause mortality risk? So note that having low levels of albumin, lymphocytes and HDL are a part of the aged phenotype. So let's take a look at that data. And I presented this in other videos so I'm gonna kinda fly through this, but if you've missed it, just, do a search for albumin lymphocytes and HDL on my on my channel and you can get more in-depth, breakdowns. So Albumin levels are high in youth but decline during aging. So we're looking at, levels of serum levels of Albumin on the y axis plotted against age all the way up to a 100. And we can see that albumin levels peak in youth from values of about 46 in men, and 45 in women and then decline to about 36 grams per liter in 100 year olds. So what's the importance of having youthful levels of albumin? So we can assess that by looking at all cause mortality risk which is which is what's shown here. Hazard ratio for all cause mortality on the y axis plotted against the albumin concentration on the x. And we can see that lowest all cause mortality risk is, associated with an albumin level that's found in youth, forty six grams per liter. And then as the albumin concentration declines as found in aging, we see that significantly increased all cause mortality risk as indicated by the red lines. Similarly, lymphocytes are high in youth but also decline during aging as shown here. So levels of lymphocytes on the y axis, again, plotted versus age all the way up to a 100 years. And with the red line, we can see that lymphocytes decline during aging. So just like the album data, what's the importance of having youthful levels of lymphocytes? So we can assess that by looking at all cause mortality risk as shown there. That's on the y axis plotted against the lymphocyte count on the x. And we can see that lowest all cause mortality risk is associated with having 2,000,000,000,000 lymphocytes per liter as shown there by the that little the, vertical black lines, on the x axis. But then as lymphocyte levels decline, we can see that's again significantly increased all cause mortality risk. Now as I mentioned earlier, malnutrition also included total cholesterol and because we're looking at the association for non HDL cholesterol with all cause mortality risk, this becomes an HDL story because total cholesterol equals non HDL cholesterol plus HDL as HDL is the only factor that's not included in that model. So HDL also is high in youth, relatively high in youth but also declines during aging as shown here. So HDL peaks in youth from values of about 64 in women and 56 in men and then steadily declines during aging for women as shown there. And then for men, there's a pretty rapid decline into the about the thirties after which it's mostly, stable in the low fifties afterwards all the way up to eighty eighty eight years, the, endpoint age, age range on this plot. So relatively low HDL is also associated with an increased all cause mortality risk as shown here with this all cause mortality plot. So, for values less than 45 for men and less than 55 for women, we can see that HDL, we can see an increased, all cause mortality risk for relatively lower levels of HDL. So to bring it back to the original question, why is LDL less than a 100 to a 120 milligrams per deciliter associated with an increased mortality risk from cardiovascular disease. So low LDL within the context of low albumin, lymphocytes and HDL which is defined as malnutrition, that also equals the aged phenotype. So that collectively could potentially explain the increased cardiovascular, mortality risk when in the context of low LDL. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.