For my first blood test in 2022, we saw that my biological age when using doctor Morgan Levine's biological age calculator PhenoAge. And if you're interested in calculating your own biological age, that link will be in the video's description. So when using that calculator, we saw that my biological age was 32.6 years, which was sixteen point four years younger than my chronological. Now prior to 2022, my average reduction for my chronological age minus my biological age over 15 tests was about twelve years. So that's a four year further reduction or four year further improvement. Similarly, when using aging.ai, we saw that my biological age was 26 years which is twenty three years younger than my chronological age and but prior to 2022, my 27 test average reduction was sixteen point four years. So that's a further about seven year, reduction for biological age. So that's my best data over 35 blood tests since 2015. So what about test number two? So the goal for test number two in 2022 was to replicate test number one's diet to see if that's a major factor driving the improvement in biological age. So the big question is how well was I able to replicate test number one's diet for test number two? So just to refresh everyone's memory for test number two in 2022, I tested about two weeks ago, March 14, and we saw that my biological age was 35.4 years, which is thirteen point seven years younger than my chronological. Now, again, just to refresh everybody's memory, prior to 2022, my average 15 test reduction for biological age was about 12. So that's still about two years younger than my average, reduction for biological age. Similarly, for aging.ai, my predicted age was 28 years, which was twenty eight twenty one years younger than my chronological age of 49. And again, prior to 2022, over 27 tests, my average reduction was sixteen years. So let's say about about a five year further reduction. So even though test number two biological age data isn't as good as test number one, both of these two tests are better than my previous chronological age minus biological age average improvements since twenty fifteen. So then that raises the question, am I getting closer to the optimal diet for me? Now everyone may not use this exact macro micronutrient and food composition, for themselves. I can't say what what the ideal composition will be for for others. But for me, am I getting closer to the optimal diet? Thereby optimizing multiple blood biomarkers. So with that in mind, for the, the focus of this video will be a full comprehensive diet composition both macro and micronutrients and individual foods for this dietary period when compared with test number one. So first, let's start with calorie intake as shown there. So again, we're gonna compare test number one's calorie intake first test number two. So on the left, we've got the black dots. Those, that's the forty two day period that corresponded to test number one and that was 12/13/2021 through 01/23/2022. And for test number two, it was a forty nine day period from January 24 through March thirteenth of of twenty twenty two. So for test number one, my average calorie intake was twenty three twenty two calories per day and for, test number two, it was twenty three forty three calories per day and besides looking at the averages for the for these two dietary periods, we can compare these two groups of data using a two sample t test, and when we do that, we see that these two groups of data are not significantly different as the p value is higher than 0.05 with a p value of 0.08. So from now we can conclude that there was a similar calorie intake test number two when compared with test number one. So what about macronutrients? So, in terms of macronutrients, remember the goal was to replicate test number one's diet composition for test number two. And again, although I'm gonna show averages for test one versus test two, this isn't just looking at average data, it's comparing the forty two day period that corresponded to test number one versus the forty nine day period that corresponded to test number two. So first, let's start with lipids or fat. So, we've got blood test number one data on the left, and then blood test data for number two on the right. So, just rounding, we can see that for test number one, my average fat intake was about 84 grams per day, and it was 83 grams per day for test number two. And when using the two sample t's t t sorry, t test, we can see that these two groups of data are not significantly different. So what about the individual individual fats? So monounsaturated fats, just going down list, not different. Test one versus test two, about 16 grams per day. Total polyunsaturated fats, not different, about 23 grams per day for both test one and test two. Polyunsaturated fats break down into omega three and omega six. So we can see that my omega three was eight grams versus 8.1 grams, not significantly different. Omega six, fifteen point four versus 15.5, not different. And saturated fat identical 24.4 grams per day, it for both test number one and test number two. So from this we can conclude that there was similar similar levels of total fat and individual fats including monounsaturated, polyunsaturated, which include omega three and omega six, and also saturated fatty acids SFA when comparing test number two versus test number one. Now note that this was not by accident. I purposely altered my diet each day to try to match test number one's macronutrients and micronutrients as we'll see in a minute for test number two. So knowing what the macronutrient and micronutrients were for test number one, everyday in Cronometer, I went and looked at my averages for this dietary period that that was going to correspond to test number two, And if I was low in beta carotene or low in fiber, I adjusted my intake to try to get as close as possible to the test number one diet composition. And based on the fat so far, it looks like I did a a decent job. Alright. So what about, looking at the other macronutrients including protein, fiber, sugars and net carbohydrates? So that's what shown here. Again, test number one data on the left, test number two data on the right. So first looking at protein intake, a 102 grams for test number one, a 103 grams per day for test number two, not different. Fiber intake, about 86 grams for both dietary periods, not different. So in terms of, sugars, I track total fructose intake because for me I have a tendency to eat a lot of fruit. So, and in my data, total fructose which is defined as fructose plus sucrose divided by two, as sucrose is half, fructose. So I have a tendency to eat a lot of fruit, so I don't want to eat too much fruit sugar, which is what fructose is, because, in my data having relatively higher levels of fructose is significantly correlated with more biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. So when looking at total fructose for test number one versus test number two, it was sixty five grams per day for test one versus sixty two grams per day for test number two, and you can see by the p value of those two groups of data are not different. And then in terms of net carbs, it was two hun about 243 grams per day versus two forty eight. Again, not different. So from this, we can see that I had similar levels of protein, fiber, total fructose, and net carbs when comparing test number two data versus test number one in 2022. So to summarize that, some I I I had similar levels of all macronutrients for the first test when compared with the second test in 2022. Alright. So what about micronutrients? So starting with vitamins, again, test number one versus test number two. And again, this isn't just showing average data and saying they're different, it's comparing the forty two day period that corresponded to test number one versus the forty nine day period that corresponded to test number two using two sample t tests. So instead of going through all of these vitamins and minerals, in terms of are they different or not, and again, we've got test one data on the left, test two data on the right. I'm just gonna show all of these, that were not different and and that's almost all of the vitamins were not different when comparing, data for test number one versus test number two with the exception of vitamin c. And we can see that for test number two is about a 100 and, well, it was about a hundred milligrams higher for for for vitamin c in test number two versus test number one. And we'll see why in a minute when we look at, food composition. So what about, for minerals? Actually before going to minerals, I should note that, let's highlight my b twelve intake which is about three hundred micrograms test one, three eighteen for test two and that's because I, as I mentioned in my late, my most recent video, I supplement with, methyl b twelve once every three days, a thousand micrograms. So that's why those are significantly higher than the RDA. Note that I've taken that out for the next blood test so we'll see how that goes. But I also supplement with vitamin d in the winter so we can see that, my d intake was about twelve eighty I use per day and that's because I supplement with a thousand I use of vitamin d per day in the winter. As the summer comes up, I don't I take it out. Alright. So what about for minerals? Again, test number two, one data on the left, test number two data on the right. And again, just going through what was not different, we can see that almost all of these minerals in terms of average amounts per day were not different when comparing test number one data versus test number two data. With the exception of potassium, which was three hundred milligrams per day higher and I didn't purposely try to increase my potassium that's likely because of the increased strawberries. Alright. So what about differences for food intake? So that's what shown here, full diet composition test number two versus test number one. So, we've got foods on the left, and then ranked in order in terms of the foods that I ate in the highest amounts at the top and at the lowest amounts at the bottom. And then test number two data on the left, test number one data on the right, and then whether these two groups of data, the forty two day period that corresponded to test number one versus the forty nine day period for test number two, whether they were significantly different based on a two sample t test. So I'm just gonna highlight what was different, again. So starting with strawberries, we can see that I ate about, 260 ish, more grams or test number two versus test number one. And that's because Costco ran out of the three berry mix that I usually get. It's a mix of strawberries, blackberries and blueberries. So they ran out, so I was I I went with strawberries instead. So we'll see in a minute that my blueberry and blackberry intake for this dietary period for test number two was zero. Whereas strawberries, it was basically replaced by strawberries. So strawberries were the food also that I ate mo more abundantly than all other foods on the list. Alright. Also different, but very small differences, but statistically significant, when comparing test number two versus test number one was watermelon only three grams a day higher though for test number two versus test number one. That's that's basically insignificant. Similarly small but insignificant increases for pickles, four grams per day, but then almonds, I increase them by seven grams per day, in part to get close to my, daily goal of vitamin e of twenty milligrams per day. Now note that fifteen milligrams is the RDA and as I'll present in a future video, why aim for about twenty milligrams per day right now is because having very high vitamin, e intakes is correlated with more blood biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. So for now, it seems like twenty milligrams per day, seems to be, good for the biomarker, so that's the the value that I've settled on. Alright. Then finishing out the remaining, foods that I consume for test number one and test number two and comparing them. So again, looking at differences, so Brazil nuts were a tenth of a gram less for test number two versus test number one and all although that's significant statistically, again, that's an insignificant amount. And then we can see that peanuts, I reduced my intake there from six to about point seven grams per day in test two. And so I basically replaced almonds for peanuts to to get more vitamin e because peanuts don't have as much, vitamin e as almonds. And then we can see that zero intake of blackberry blackberry and blueberry for test two versus test one, which again Costco ran out. And then then note that, my my diet isn't always perfectly clean. If I'm gonna eat junk, I do it on the day of the blood test and the day after and then I try to shut it down completely. No junk for the remainder of the period until the next blood test. So for test number one, the junk that I ate, on those two days was, some Nutella as highlighted there mixed with peanut butter, so homemade Reese's peanut butter cups. But I also had some pizza as I was traveling on the East Coast, so I figured it was a good time to get some of the, you know, world famous East Coast pizza. So we can see that for test number two pizza, but not for test number, for test number one, but not for test number two. And we can also see that I didn't have any Nutella for that for this blood test, the the the forty nine day period that was in test number two. And that's because I replaced it with a different version of a, homemade Reese's Peanut Butter Cup with, you know, milk chocolate bar mixed with M and M's and also peanut butter. And when looking at the amounts, so that's a forty nine day period. So we're looking at the amounts of the milk chocolate and M and M's, that was about a 100 grams each over those two days for the day of the blood test and the day after, and then I shut it down. There were no there was no junk, after that for the next forty seven days. And note that that approach seems to work for me. For me I have to completely eliminate it otherwise I'll be thinking about it every week and I I don't wanna do that it's not healthy for me. So note that when looking at full diet composition, my overall diet for test number two was very close to test number one with the exception of the strawberries, blackberries, and blueberries, and almonds for peanuts. Now to try to keep biological age better than my recent averages with the test number one and test number two data, I'm gonna try to stick as close as possible to this diet composition, going forward. So if I can maintain a greater than fourteen year biological age reduction just using the VINES test as an example, that would be better than a twelve year reduction. And this diet composition may be one contributing factor, as to why I had that, recent improvement for these two tests. So whether that's true, we'll see. I'm gonna try to stick to this composition going forward, and we'll see how the biological age results, how they look. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.