For blood test number three in 2023, we saw that my biological age using doctor Morgan Levine's biological age calculator PhenoAge was sixteen years younger than my chronological. Similarly, when using aging.ai, it was seventeen years younger. So what's contributing to these data? So first up, let's take a look at supplements. And for those who are familiar with the channel, the first two shouldn't be a surprise. I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in my twenties, so I've been taking levothyroxine since then. And then also in the non summer months, I supplement with vitamin d, a thousand IUs per day. But then what's specific to this test is that I supplemented with serine, the amino acid serine, and vitamin b six, or more specifically, pyridoxal five phosphate for the forty nine day period that corresponded to blood test number three. In other words, the day of blood test number two, which was 03/06/2023, to the day before blood test number three, on 04/23/2023, for that forty nine day period, my average serine intake was one point nine grams per day, and my average vitamin b six intake, including from supplementation, was eleven point three milligrams per day, which is a 3.5 fold increase over my previous average for test number two. So why serine and b six? Well, first, I expect expected that serine and b six would potentially reduce homocysteine, and I have a video on that. So if you missed it, it'll be in the right corner. And then similarly, b six can potentially increase NAD. And if you missed that video, that too will be in the right corner. Now note that in the presence of serine and b six, which were new supplements, again, that corresponded to blood test number three, there was no dramatic improvement or worsening of Levine's biological age data in the presence of these two supplements. So you can see that although my most recent test, which was sixteen years younger, is a little bit worse than the first two tests in 2023, it's still at the lower end of my range, since 2022 and even be before then. Similarly oh, actually, not similarly, but although aging.ai data seems like a far stretch from the '27 and '28 that I had for test one and two to jump to to '33, '33 is still within my range since 2016 from '26 to '34. So I'm not convinced that serine plus b six dramatically affected my aging dot ai age either. So with that in mind, the plan for blood test number four, and that test will be in June 2023, is to go higher for serine and b six. And just as a, some info before we get that test, I'm gonna double my serine intake to about four grams per day, and my current b six intake is about thirty five milligrams per day. So I've tripled that to see if I can further bring down homocysteine and also increase NAD while potentially not messing anything else up. Alright. What about diet? What diet composition corresponds to test number three? Here, we're gonna take a look at my average daily dietary intake. And, again, this is the forty nine day period from test number two, the right after the blood test number two, to the day before test number three. And that's what we can see here. So as I've done in previous videos, I ranked, the foods from most abundant in terms of intake to least abundant. So for this test, there were 50 different foods, and then the list is ranked in terms of grams. Now if you're familiar with the channel, you may notice that these foods and their amounts have been purposely consistent for the past few tests. And that's because after 40 plus blood tests since 2015, this diet including macro and micronutrients is consistently associated with relatively youthful biomarker data in my case with a few exceptions of course including Horvath septigenetic age, homocysteine, NAD, and DHEA sulfate, but I'm working on improving improving those two. Now, my diet does include cheat meals. I try to limit it to, at most, two cheat meals per cycle in terms of the time in between blood tests. For this test, immediately after the blood test, I had a chocolate bar, 130 grams, mixed with peanut butter and jelly, And then, on the second, I had cheesecake on my daughter's birthday. Now, in terms of the junk for this test, including chocolate, jelly, and cheesecake, I'd include it didn't include peanut butter as it's whole food and the ingredients were peanuts and salt. These three foods are 1.1% of total calories. So in other words, it's a 99% clean diet. Alright. So this list is ranked in grams. Which foods are top contributors for calorie? And that's what we're gonna see here, top 10 foods for average daily calorie intake for that forty nine day period that corresponded to test number three in 2023. And note that these data are, generated with Cronometer, and I tracked my diet with Cronometer. And if you're interested in tracking your own diet with Cronometer, there'll be a discount link in the video's description. So atop the list in terms of calorie intake, the food that contributes most to my daily calorie intake is sardines. And then for the other 10 foods, it's the same 10 foods that I also had for test one and two in 2023, albeit albeit in a somewhat different order. Alright. So what about macronutrients and calorie intake? So first, in terms of calorie intake or energy intake, my average daily calorie intake was twenty one seventy four per day, which is tied for my lowest average daily calorie intake since I started tracking diet in April 2015. Note that 21.77 was my previous low and I'm not intending on going lower yet. I'm getting away from my body weight to plateau before deciding to make a further cut. Alright. What about macronutrients? So first, starting with protein intake, 96 grams per day. When multiplied by four calories per gram, we get that protein intake was about 18% of total calories. What about fat intake? So average daily fat intake was about 82 grams of fat per day and when multiplied by nine calories per gram, that yields about 34% of total calories. If you're interested in how that fat, breaks down including monounsaturated, polyunsaturated, omega-three, omega-six, saturated, trans fats, and cholesterol, that data is all provided there. Alright. Next up is intake that corresponds to test number three in 2023. So first, we can see that total carbs were 300 grams per day, and that might seem like a lot, but note that net carbs equals total carbs minus fiber. Average daily fiber intake for this test was 85 grams per day, and when subtracting that from total carbs, we get a net carbs of 216 grams per day. When multiplying that by four calories per gram, we get a net carbs of about 40% of total calories. Now within total carbs, note that I also track total fructose intake, including total fructose, but then also sucrose because half of sucrose is fructose. Now I eat a lot of fruits and vegetables, so that's one reason to track total fructose intake. But, also, total fructose is significantly correlated with more blood biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right, so I try to limit my fructose intake as much as possible. And I'll have more on the correlations between diet with blood biomarkers in an upcoming video, if not a live stream sometime in the summer. So for this test, total fructose intake was fifty eight grams per day, which might seem like a lot, but that's close to my lowest fructose intake since starting diet tracking in 2015. And my lowest was 57.5 grams of fructose total fructose per day. Now note that I've had fructose intakes that are double that amount since 2015, so that it's half that for this test is progress, albeit not perfection. Now, note that for fiber, fiber provides calories, 2.2 calories per gram. And that's because within fiber, it's comprised of insoluble fiber, which is not, provides no calories both by human digestive enzymes or gut bacteria, but also soluble fiber, which degrades fiber, which gut bacteria degrade soluble fiber, thereby yielding that 2.2 calories per gram. In other words, soluble fiber is fermented by gut bacteria into short chain fatty acids or SCFAs. That provides 187 calories when multiplying 85 by 2.2, and that 8.6%, which is fat converting fiber into short chain fatty acids, can then be added to total fat. And there, we can calculate my net macronutrients that corresponds to test number three in twenty twenty three of about 43% fat, 40% net carbs, and about 18% protein. Alright. What about micronutrients? How does that correspond to test number three? First, let's take a look at vitamin intake, and it's a little bit small, so you may have to go full screen to see it. And a couple of highlights for this is that note that there is full RDA coverage for all of the vitamins on this list. But then even beyond RDA coverage, note that many of these micronutrients are purposely higher than the RDA, and that's because I'm following their correlations with blood biomarkers. And, again, I'll have more info on that if you don't already know from previous videos on this channel about how I use correlations between diet with blood biomarkers to optimize not only the blood biomarkers, but then also my diet. Now a couple of notes on this vitamin list. We can see that my niacin intake, just from whole foods without supplementing, is about two and a half times the RDA. But note that there aren't any hard and fast rules about being higher than the RDA because we can see down below, my vitamin k intake is 17 times higher than the RDA. And then, last but not not last but not least is my mineral intake. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before we go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for at home metabolomics, anti dequantification, green tea, epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing. And note that the at home blood testing with SyFOX Health is different from the at home metabolomics, diet tracking with Cronometer. Or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website buy me a coffee. We've also got merch, so if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Diet Trying brand, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.