Tryptophan is converted into NAD by the de novo NAD synthesis pathway. And as we saw in an earlier video, an age related decline for vitamin b six or pyridoxal five phosphate p five p may limit this conversion of tryptophan into NAD. But there's probably another age related block in this pathway and it involves quinolinic acid or quinolineate. Quinolinic acid levels increase during aging. And that's what we can see here. Starting with data in people that had a median age of 59 years at baseline, and then eleven years later, we can see that there was a significant increase for their quinolineac or quinolineac acid levels. What about, people that were older than 70 years though? And that's we can see here and this is data in centenarians. Quinoline data in centenarians or close to centenarians that had an average age of 97 years. And when compared with their offspring, we can see that there was a 2.8 fold or close to three fold higher level of quinolineate in the centenarians when compared with their offspring. So then, we can see that quinoline acid levels increase during aging in conjunction with that age related decline for NAD. So for quinoline to accumulate during aging, the enzymes that converted into NAD must be affected which then raises the question, can we increase NAD levels by targeting those enzymes? So let's take a deeper look at those enzymes, because knowing what they are, it that's the first step in being able to biohack it or optimize it. And that's what we can see here. So this this again is the de novo NAD synthesis pathway starting with tryptophan and then we've got quinolinic acid over there. And then note that there are three enzymes. It isn't one enzymatic step as shown on the previous slide. There are three enzymes that convert quinolinic acid into NAD. The first is q q p r t or quinolinic phosphoribrosyltransferase. The second is NMN, adenylyltransferase and the third is n a d cin one or n a d synthase. So can gene expression of these three genes be increased thereby increasing intracellular levels of NAD? And interestingly, the answer is yes. Grape seed proanthocyanidins or PAC pack increase expression of QPRT. And that's what we can see here with QPRT m mRNA levels. So this is gene expression of QPRT. And these data are in rats. Young rats that were fed grape seed proanthocyanidins. And then four different diets were fed. So zero is no proanthocyanidins and then increase increasing levels five, twenty five and fifty proanthocyanidins, milligrams of proanthocyanidins per kilogram of food. And there, we can see pretty close to a dose response curve here. So as the content of proanthocyanidins in the diet increased, QPRT gene expression also increased. Now, grape seed proanthocyanidins didn't just increase expression of QPRT, it also increased expression of NAD synthase one. And that's what we can see here with NAD synthase one gene expression on the waxes, again, plotted against the content of PAK on the x. And there, in this case, the lowest dose of proanthocyanidins increased gene expression of NAD synthase one. And although higher levels of grapeseed proanthocyanidins increased NAD synthase one gene expression, we can see that that level plateaued after five milligrams per kilogram of pranthrocyanidins. Now, increasing gene expression is nice. It's good news. But did grape seed pranthrocyanidin supplementation increase NAD? That's what we all care about. And that's what we can see here. This is NAD content and both the gene expression data and the NAD content data is in the liver. And there, we can see that although the lowest dose of proanthocyanidins did not increase NAD content in liver, we can see that both twenty five and fifty milligrams per kilogram did indeed increase NAD content. And interestingly, fifty milligrams of proanthocyanidins per kilogram food, we can see that that's about a four fold increase for NAD content. So from this study in rats, we can see that grape seed proanthocyanidins increased liver levels of NAD. Alright. So what's the human equivalent dose based on this study? So the body size conversion from rats to humans is to divide by 6.2. So when taking the highest dose used in this study, the fifty milligrams of proanthocyanidins per kilogram food which had the biggest effect on NAD levels and dividing that by 6.2, we get the human equivalent dose of eight point one milligrams of proanthocyanidins per kilogram of body weight. Now just to put it in context, my current average body weight is six about sixty six kilograms. So when multiplying the human equivalent dose by my body weight, we get a, an human equivalent dose of five hundred and thirty six milligrams of grape seed proanthocyanidins per day. Now note that this isn't the only study to show an n a d increase with grape seed per anthocyanidins supplementation. And that's what we can see here. So now we've got the relative n a d content and these are plasma levels of n a d. And first, looking at age related changes and these data are in mice starting with two month old mice and then 12 and 18 old. We can see that NAD levels decline during aging. Plasma levels of NAD decline during aging. And then 18 old mice were fed grape seed proanthocyanin extract or GSPE. And in this study, the dose was higher than in the rat study. So here, two hundred and fifty milligrams of proanthocyanin in its per kilogram body weight. Nonetheless, we can see that there was a big jump in plasma levels of NAD in response to grape seed parenthocyanins. Now, just as a side note, they didn't look at the the conversion of quinolinic acid to NAD in this study, but they did report data for, NAMPT which converts niacinamide into NMN. So the authors of this study, theorized that it's probably making crepes e parenthocyanidins are probably making NMN more bioavailable or increasing the content of NMN and then that's being converted into NAD. Alright. So just like we did for the rat study, what's the human equivalent dose? So the body size conversion from mice to humans is a little bit different, than for rats. So for this, we divide by 12.3. And then when dividing two hundred and fifty milligrams of grape seed proanthocyanin extract by kilogram body weight by 12.3, we get a human equivalent dose of twenty point three milligrams of proanthocyanins per kilograms of human body weight. And then when multiplying that by my current body weight just for perspective, we get a human equivalent dose to potentially get a boost in NAD with a little bit more than thirteen hundred milligrams of grape seed proanthocyanin cyanidin extract per day. Now note that if you're familiar with this channel, I prefer whole foods over supplements. And for those who wanna supplement, that's great. But I prefer whole foods to try to get my grape seed proanthocyanidins. So with that in mind, what's the proanthocyanin content in grape seeds? And that's what we can see in this study that looked at proanthocyanin content in seeds from 37 different grape seed varieties. And there weren't any pretty pictures, but in looking at a screenshot from that study, we can see that the average proanthocyanin content in grape seeds is about a 160 milligrams per seed. So when dividing the RAT study which had five hundred thirty six milligrams of grape seed proanthocyanins per day to get that NAD increase, When dividing that by about a hundred and sixty milligrams of per anthocyanidins per gram of seed, we get three point four grams of grapeseeds grape seed, grape seeds per day to get the five hundred and thirty six milligrams of grapeseed per anthocyanidins per day. For the mouse study, thirteen hundred forty four milligrams of grape seed proanthocyanidins would translate into eight point four grams of grape seeds per day. So note that there aren't any human studies. So will grape seeds or its extract increase NAD in people? So with that in mind, I started with six grams of grape seed powder on just a couple of days ago on June 7 and the plan is to test relatively soon to see if this works using NAD's, Ginfiniti's NAD test. So I'm gonna test about a week from now on June 19. Now, I'm open to going higher to maybe even doubling my dose of grape seed powder to about twelve grams per day. But if that doesn't work, I'm probably back to the NAD salvage pathway and trying to increase, niacin, n r or n m n. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more of my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in including discount links for at home metabolomics, NAD quantification with GINFINITY as I just mentioned, green tea, epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing with SYFOX which has a different panel than the at home metabolomics, diet tracking, Or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer agent or dye trying brand, that link and all the other discount links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. Hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.