Attempting to optimize the oral microbiome, part three. In part two, the goal was to reduce salivary levels of Tannerella Forsythia and Fusobacterium nucleatum. So the question is, why? So, both of these bacteria can impact the health and or function of conditions not only in the mouth but outside the mouth. And one of those is Alzheimer's disease. And as we can see with the list of bacteria that have been linked with Alzheimer's disease, both Tannerella Forsythia and Fusobacterium nucleatum have been linked with Alzheimer's disease. Now, also note that on this list is P. Gingivalis and that bacterium will make an appearance later in the video. So then, the next question is how? How would I reduce levels of these bacteria? So, I've been using a homemade mouthwash as a prebiotic for the oral microbiome. And as a quick side note, a prebiotic is a substance that stimulates the growth of already existing bacteria. And if you're interested in the contents of that mouthwash, I'll link to parts one and two of this video in the right corner. Now, I've been using the mouthwash three to five times per day with the goal of optimizing my salivary microbiome. So for test number three, I added clove oil to the mouthwash, but I also used another oil, summer savory oil which kit what is which has been shown to impact levels of these bacteria too. And I'll link to that paper in the video's description below. So then there are several questions that arise. Did it work? What was the impact on the rest of the salivary microbiome? And then, how will I further attempt, or how will I attempt to further improve the salivary salivary microbiome? And as we'll see, there may be a role for berberine. And to quantify the salivary microbiome, I then used bristle. Now, if you're interested in measuring your own salivary microbiome with bristle, I have a discount link and that link will be in the video's description. Now, onto the first question, which was, were levels of these two bacteria reduced? So that's what we can see here with levels of Tannerilla Forsythia and Fusobacterium nucleatum on the left. And then we've got the relative abundance. So the percentage of these bacteria and all of the microbes that were in my salivary microbiome. First for test number one, test number two, and then for test number three. So first, we can see that there was no Tannerilla Forsythia detected in test number three, which is good news. But then Fusobacterium nucleatum got worse with values of 1%, point 7% on test one and two, and then it increased to 2.2% of all of the microbes in my saliva for test number three. So from this, we can see that there are mixed results for these levels of these two bacteria. And is that the impact of clove oil being in the mouthwash or is this just normal variation? So then that also raises the next question. Should I keep or remove clove oil from the mouthwash? So for more perspective, let's take a look at the rest of the of the salivary microbiome and its composition. So first, were levels of nitrate reducing bacteria increased. And the reason I say increased is because nitrate has been shown at least in in in an in vitro study to act as a potential prebiotic for the oral microbiome. And actually, in that study, it didn't just increase levels of nitrate consuming bacteria, it reduced, levels of potentially pathogenic, salivary bacteria. So here we can see levels of nitrate reducing bacteria in my sample and they, or in my samples, and they belong to two main bacterial genera, Neisseria and Rothia. So for test number one, without any nitrate in the mouth in the mouthwash, we can see that these nitrate reducing bacteria were 53 about 53% of all of my bacteria in my salivary microbiome. And then for test number two, with the goal of increasing that further increasing that above 53%, I added four grams per liter of Potassium Nitrate. But unexpectedly, we saw that my levels of nitrate reducing bacteria went down to 46%. So then for test number three, I cut the nitrate composition in half or the content in half to two grams per liter, and still nonetheless, levels of nitrate reducing bacteria actually went down further to 35.5% of all of the microbes in my, in my saliva. So were levels of nitrate reducing bacteria increased, they were not. And note that the highest levels of these bacteria were present when there was no k n o three or no potassium nitrate in my mouthwash. So with that in mind, for the next test, I'm gonna remove potassium nitrate from the prebiotic mouthwash that I'm using you that I've been using for a while. Now, why would why would increasing the nitrate content of the, the mouthwash not increase nitrate reducing bacteria? So I'm already on a high nitrate diet and if you missed those videos, I'll link to them in the right corner. So levels of my oral nitrate reducing bacteria may already be saturated such that if I add more to a prebiotic mouthwash, where I don't rinse after, you know, brushing my teeth and then gargling and spitting but not rinsing it out, they may already be saturated such that I can't increase them further. And maybe even if I do try to increase them further with more nitrate in the mouthwash as shown in my data, maybe I'll actually increase them by some or decrease them, sorry, by some unknown mechanism. So then what was the impact of clove oil on the rest of the salivary microbiome? And there are several questions inherent in that question. First, were levels of oral health related bacteria increase and these are mostly the non nitrate reducing bacteria. But then also were levels of tooth decay, halitosis, and gum inflammation related bacteria reduced. So first, where levels of oral health related bacteria increased. And that's what we can see here, this is Bristle's definition of quote unquote beneficial bacteria, and this is mostly from non nitrate reducing bacteria with the exception of Neisseria mucosa, so the second species on this list. So for the for the first two tests, I was at about twenty one percent of all of my microbes in my saliva were from these seven bacterial species from these seven, beneficial bacteria. And then for test number three, it was still in that ballpark, 19.8% of all the microbes in my saliva. So now, we can answer that question with a note. So they were definitely not increased with the addition of clove oil in the mouthwash. Now, as a quick note, I have room for improvement with these four streptococcus species, and we'll see more on that a bit later. So from these two bits of data, from the nitrate reducers and the beneficial bacteria, we can see that the addition of potassium nitrate for the two tests and or clove oil for test number three to the prebiotic mouthwash did not increase in my case, Nitrate reducing or levels of other oral health related bacteria. Alright. So what about these reds? The tooth decay halitosis, you know, which means bad breath or gum and or gum inflammation related bacteria. How were they impacted by the presence of clove oil? So first, looking at levels of tooth decay related bacteria, and I don't wanna spend too much time because I wanna get into the berberine story. I think that's the most interesting part of this of today's video. So in terms of tooth decay related bacteria, for the first two tests, I had relatively low levels of these three bacteria that have been linked with tooth tooth decay, point three percent, zero. And then for test number three, it went back up to point 3% But that's still relatively low, which is which is good news. Alright. What about levels of bad breath related bacteria or halitosis? And there are a lot of bacteria that had them linked with halitosis as shown here on this list. Now, for the first two tests, I had in the five to six percent range, but then we can see for test number three that it got even worse. It went up to nine point four percent. So then, now we've got a, that they The levels of halitosis related bacteria didn't get better, they got worse. So which bacteria are the most significant contributors because I have no interest in having any bad bad breath related bacteria in my saliva. So, in order to get rid of them, first I need to know which ones are the, most significant contributors to the total. So it's definitely not Tannerella for sythea at least for this test as as we can see with the green arrow, they were reduced to zero and whether 0%. And whether that's because of clover or natural variation, we don't know. But the majority is coming from two Fusobacterium species, not just Fusobacterium nucleatum, but a second Fusobacterium periodont periodontica. I'm sorry. It's a hard one to say. Periodontica. And we can see 5.8% of the 9.4 is coming from just those two, Fusobacterium species. But then also, we've got the poor, and this is another hard one to say so bear with me. Porphyromonas endodontalis and P. Gingivalis which contribute another 2.7%. So we can see that from these four bacterial species, 8.5% of the 9.4%, for halitosis related bacteria are just coming from four species. So if I can get rid of these Fusobacterium and these, poor firemanas, wow, such a hard one to say, I may improve my salivary microbiome. At least that's part of the goal. And we can see that story, similarly in levels of gum inflammation related bacteria as shown here. So for the first two tests, they were relatively lower, three point eight percent, one point eight percent, but then they went up to four point nine percent. So this is also going in the wrong direction. And once again, we can see levels of Fusobacterium and Porphyromonas popping up. Fusobacterium nucleatum, Porphyromonas, endodontalis, and gingivalis contributing all of the 4.9% just from these three bacterial species. So with that in mind, for the next test, the primary goal is to reduce levels of bacteria that are coming from these bacterial genera, fusobacterium and, porphyromonas. So how can I do that? So berberine, this is where the story comes in for berberine. Berberine may be a promising approach. Now note that there are no randomized control trials that have tested berberine as, and its potential impact on the salivary microbiome. This is from an in vitro study, and and, the reason for that is there are very few RCTs, unfortunately, in people who have relatively healthy, salivary microbiomes. Most of them, if if they do exist, you know, they're in people who have advanced gum disease or or periodontitis. So, there's a paucity of data in this field. So I have to go to the in vitro data to see what may work in my case. So what we're looking at here is the relative abundance of bacteria in saliva. And in this case, the saliva was from 20 people, 10 men and 10 women that were in the thirty to fifty seven year old range. And then the controls had, P. Gingivalis was added to the saliva. So they spiked saliva on the left with P. Gingivalis. Now, this didn't didn't just impact levels of P. Gingivalis in the original saliva. It changed the composition of the whole salivary microbiome. So first, starting with, Porphyromonas in green, as shown there. We can see that relatively low levels in the original saliva went up a lot in the, controls that it was spiked with P. Gingivalis. Now, this this shouldn't be a surprise. If you add sugar to water, you're gonna have a higher level of sugar in your samples. But what is somewhat uns what is somewhat surprising is that it changed the composition of the salivary microbiome. For example, when looking at Fusobacterium in yellow, which were relatively low in the original saliva, now we can see an expansion of Fusobacterium in the controls that were spiked with P. Gingivalis, which is not Fusobacterium. They didn't spike it with Fusobacterium. But then also note that streptococcus, which I introduced earlier, which were about 20% in these, controls or in the original saliva, we can see that they were reduced by about half in samples that were spiked. Saliva samples that were spiked with P. Gingivalis. So, in terms of changing the composition of the salivary microbiome, we can see that spiking the saliva with P. Gingivalis didn't just increase its parent genera, Porphyromonas, but it also increased Fusobacterium while decreasing streptococcus. So what does this have to do with Berberine? How does Berberine or does Berberine impact levels of these of these three bacterial genera? And that's we can see here. So, BC stands for Berberine Chloride, and the last three columns, the fifteen, thirty, and 60 are low, medium, and high concentrations of adding Berberine to the P. Gingivalis spiked saliva. And and first, we can see that it had a big impact on reducing levels of porphyryomonas. As you can see, the green now has gone back down to where it was in the original saliva. But yet, these were samples that were spiked with P. Gingivalis. But in the presence of Berberine, P. Gingivalis clearly isn't able to grow. Now, a second change is on Fusobacterium in the presence of Berberine. Although, in the lowest concentration of Berberine at fifteen micrograms per mil, you can see that their yellow is still relatively high compared to the controls. At the highest content of adding Berberine to the p gingivalis spikes lab, we can see that on the right, it's almost completely absent. So adding Berberine also almost completely eliminated, levels of Fusobacterium which is also good news. And then the last bit of good news is that we can see an expansion of the streptococcus such that the highest, level of Berberine b c that was added to the P. G. And develop spike saliva, we can see that that streptococcus, the blue bar went up a lot, even higher than where it was when it first started in the original saliva. So note that each of these bacterial genera can be improved in my salivary microbiome. So before concluding that this is the, best of news, these are the, genus level data. We need to know if the species, that Berberine can impact, overlap with my bacterial species. And then if they do, that may indicate a potential positive role for Berberine on my salivary microbiome. So within which species with within each of these bacterial genera were impacted by Berberine. And that's what we can see here. So first, we're starting with Porphyromonas gingivalis, and then each of the two Fusobacterium nucleatum spe Fusobacterium species, nucleatum and periodonticum. So just going through this data, and it's gonna be a similar story to what I just showed, on the previous slide. Starting with saliva that did not did not have P. Gingivalis in it, and when comparing it with the controls, which did, we can see that there was that big expansion of each of these bacterial species when compared with the original saliva that was not spiked with P. Gingivalis. So what was the impact of adding berberine? And then we can see the three different concentrations, fifteen, thirty, and sixty micrograms per mil. And when looking at the highest dose of Berberine, we can see that levels of these three bacteria, even though they were added to saliva samples that were spiked with P. Gingivalis, the the sum 1.7%. So you can see one point two point five. The sum of these three bacteria is now 1.7% in the highest dose of Berberine, which is almost identical to the amounts that were just in saliva. But note that these samples were spiked with P. G. And givalis. So this is good news. It seems that it seems that berberine can reduce levels of these three bacterium, especially these bacterium are relatively high in my salivary microbiome. So what was the impact of Berberine on Streptococcus species? And here are four that were presented in this paper that have direct relevance to me as I also have data on them. So first, just looking at the sum of these four Streptococcus species in the untreated saliva, it was 17 and a half percent. When spiking the, saliva samples with Pigeon de Valis, it went down to 6.6%. And then after adding Berberine, it started to go back up as the Berberine content, of saliva increased such that the highest dose of Berberine increased streptococcus levels to even higher than where they were in the untreated saliva of seventeen point five percent versus thirty one point eight percent. Now, as I mentioned earlier, my streptococcus levels have room for improvement too. And here are levels of my streptococcus, the same four streptococcus species for the first three tests. So for my data, I've been in the 12 to 16% range in terms of the relative abundance of all the microbes in my saliva. Now, more specifically, I have room for improvement with Streptococcus salivarius as shown there in the study, and then also in mine. So I should note that I can't have zero even though it says zero for test number one, Because in order for that to become point 2% of all my microbes in test number two, there has to be a non zero level where it can grow enough to point two. If it was truly zero, I would have zeros across the board. It wouldn't be able to grow at all because this isn't something you're just, you know, gonna get from food or in the air. So for test number four, when considering berberine's positive effects on, quote unquote bad bacteria in my sample, the poor firemonis infusobacterium, but then also potentially beneficial bacteria, I'm gonna add Berberine, Chlorine, and I should say I've already added it. I've had it in my mouthwash for about a week now, and I've added it a little bit higher than what was in this study. About a hundred milligrams per liter, which is also equal to a hundred micrograms per milliliter, And that's my my scale. The limit of detection on my scale is point one mill, point one grams, which is a hundred milligrams. So, I can't really go lower than that. So it's a little bit higher than the dose used in the in vitro study. I'm also gonna remove potassium nitrate from the homemade mouthwash as we see. As we saw, it didn't increase. It didn't further increase nitrate, reducing bacteria in my sample. I'm gonna also take out clove oil because that clearly didn't improve my salivary microbiome. And then, last but not least, I've started supplementation with streptococcus salivarius as an oral prebiotic, and I started that two days ago. So I don't plan on taking that for long. I just wanna seed it enough so that if berberine can affect, affect positively affect my salivary microbiome, it's there thereby enabling it to grow a lot further, a lot higher than where it was at point 2%. So then, will it work? That's the big question. And, stay tuned for that in a future video. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of those discount links that I mentioned and merch. So first, discount links for oral microbiome composition as I mentioned with bristle, epigenetic testing, at home blood testing, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in that, that link will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.