A major focus of the channel is to simultaneously optimize as many health related biomarkers as possible. So with that in mind, in today's video, what's optimal for HbA1c, otherwise known as glycated hemoglobin? So to address that, we'll take a look at two studies. In the first, which included more than 6,000 people, we've got blood hemoglobin a1c levels in percentage on the y axis plotted against age on the x within the twenty to ninety year age range. In youth around 20 years old, we can see that average h b a one c values are around five percent, whereas in 90 year olds, they're significantly higher at about six percent. In the second study which included about 378,000 people and as a quick aside, I always try to look for the largest epidemiological studies to look for age related changes and all cause mortality risk. So if anyone's come across larger studies with a larger sample size, please leave it in the comments and I'd be happy to give you a shout out and use the the data, obviously, in a future video. So in this study of about 378,000 people, average h b a one c values in youth around twenty years for both women and men was about five point three percent, which then increased during aging with a peak in in the seventy to eighty year range for both women and men. But then something interesting happens, which is it declines. HbA one c actually declines, which is new to me. This is I hadn't yet seen this in the published literature. So I think this is possibly a survivor bias where people who live to older than 70 or 80 are more likely to have relatively lower h b a one c values. So if anyone's come across that story or has more insight, please leave it in the comments and let's share with the community. So from these two studies, we can see that h b a one c increases during aging. And in terms of the what's optimal question, we know that five to five point three percent is found in youth. But what about all cause mortality risk? How is HbA1c related to all cause mortality risk? And that's what we'll see here. So in this study, which in which is a meta analysis of 46 studies, we've got the pooled hazard ratio, so risk of death for all causes on the y axis, plotted against the circulating h b a one c level on the x. And when five to six percent for hba one c was defined as the referent, we can see that people who had hba one c lower than five percent had a significantly increased risk of all cause mortality risk. And we know that because the 95% confidence interval, which is the red line with the data above and below the circle, are completely above a hazard ratio of one. And we can see this illustrated numerically with the hazard ratio there, 90% increased risk. And we can see that that confidence interval is completely above one at 1.04 to 1.36. So having HbA1c lower than 5% was associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. Similarly, people who had HbA1c in the six to six point five percent range also had a significantly increased risk, sixteen percent increased risk to be exact. But then the greatest risk was for people who had h b a one c greater than six point five percent with a seventy one percent increased all cause mortality risk. So to address what's optimal when you including both the aging and all cause mortality risk data, somewhere in the five to five point three percent, range may be optimal. So that's what's found in youth, and when considering the h b a one c increases during aging, when, considering that lowest risk for all cause mortality was in the five to six percent range, we wanna be closer to five but not below five as that was associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So again, five to five point three three percent, I think that's a fair range for what's optimal, Which brings us to what's my data? Am I practicing when I'm preaching or is my data terrible? So this is for the October 9 blood test and on that day, HbA1c was five point one percent. Now if you look at the plots from that I just showed, the two studies on age related changes, my expected hb a one c based on chronological age is 5.8. And we're considering that a major focus of the channel is to simultaneously as many health related biomarkers as possible. So far so good with hb a one c as it's younger than expected based on chronological age. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for at home metabolomics, NAD quantification, epigenetic and telomere testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing with Cyphox Health, which includes ApoB, green tea, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, Buy Me a Coffee. We've also got merch, which I've got on here. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Die Trying brand, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.