In an earlier video, we saw that my biological age for blood test number seven in 2022 was about seventeen years younger than my chronological and that's using Levine's biological age test PhenoAge. Similarly, when looking at aging.ai, it was about twenty two years younger. So with that in mind, what's contributing to these data? So first, let's have a look at supplements. So in terms of supplements, I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in my early to mid twenties. So I've been taking Levothyroxine for about half of my life. And then also, in the winter for about eight to nine months out of the year, I supplement with vitamin d, a thousand I use per day. And that's it for supplements. No other supplements including gero protectors or at least for this blood test. Now, the story is gonna be a bit different for the next blood test. Blood test number one in 2023 as I've been taking glycine since mid December and an oral probiotic that's aimed at optimizing my oral microbiome. So, the supplement story will be a bit different for, this corresponding, video for blood test number one in 2023. So, that brings us to to diet and more specifically, what's the diet composition that corresponds to this blood test? And we can see that here. This is the average daily dietary intake that goes from the day of blood test number six to the day before blood test number seven. So October 24 through 12/11/2022. And for that forty nine day period, what we're looking at is the average diet, average daily dietary intake for that forty nine day period. So first, we've got seven foods that are consistently at the top of my list, and I covered that in an earlier video. The correlations are about the same. So, if you're interested in the why for the foods that are at the top of my list, that video will be in the right corner. What I wanna highlight though is that my diet isn't always clean and that's, purposefully done because if I completely eliminate junk food, that'll set me up where I'm, craving it all the time. So, I purposely intend a couple of days at the most to have some junk food so that it keeps me on track for the rest of the period. So for this forty nine day period that corresponds to test number seven in 2022, I had two separate cheat days. And on those days, I had cheesecake and also had, candy which is known as Mike and Ike. Now, if you look at the cheesecake, that's about 25 calories on average per day for cheesecake. So it was a big slice. It was about 1,200 calories of cheesecake that I had on a two in a two day period. And for the Mike and Ike, that's three grams, an average of three grams per day, so it was it was about a 150 gram box, or around 600 calories of candy. So to put those two, in put those two data into perspective, in terms of calories, the cheesecake and the candy contributed 1.7% of my total calories during this forty nine day period that preceded, test number seven or that corresponded to test number seven. Alright. So then, that brings us to macronutrients and micronutrients. How do they correspond or what do they look like as they correspond to test number seven. So, let's start off with calorie, protein and fat intake that corresponds to test number seven in twenty twenty two. So the average daily calorie intake was twenty two thirty five calories per day and I should mention for those who don't know, I weigh all my food with a food scale every day. So these are not estimates. These are as close as you can get to exact amounts. Now, twenty two thirty five calories per day is the lowest average daily calorie intake that I've had since starting since I started tracking diet in April 2015. In terms of protein intake, the average daily protein intake was about 97 grams per day. And to put that into perspective, it's about 17.3% of total calories. Now, as a last note on for protein intake, 96.6 grams of protein per day equates to 1.4 grams of protein per kilogram body weight when considering that my body weight currently is about sixty eight kilograms. So, that's important because 1.4 grams of protein per kilogram body weight is on the ascending portion of the curve for optimizing muscle mass as a result of strength training, which I consistently do. And if you missed that video, that too will be in the right corner. Alright. So then that brings us to fat, and we can see total fat and all of its individual components shown here and cholesterol. So, note that, these data, calorie intake, protein intake and all the diet data is tracked with chronometer. So after I weigh the food, I enter that data into chronometer and then I put all of that data into an excel file. And if you're interested in tracking your own diet, there'll be a discount link to use chronometer in the video's description. So in terms of total fat, the average per day, my average fat intake per day was about 83 grams or 82.8 grams per day. And that's about a third of my total calories come from fat. Now, if you're interested in the further breakdown, monounsaturated, polyunsaturated, saturated, and trans fats, Those are shown here so, you can have a look if you're interested. Alright. So then that brings us to carb intake. And that's what we can see here. So starting from the top, three three hundred and fourteen grams of carbs per day seems like a lot. But note that net carbs equals carbs minus fiber. So for this blood test, the average daily fiber intake was about 87 grams per day and when subtracting that from carbs, we get a net carbs of 228, about 228 grams of net carbs per day. Then, we can calculate its percentage of total calories by multiplying net carbs by four calories per gram and then, dividing the 914 calories that come from that by average daily calorie intake, multiply that by a 100 so we get 40.9% of my diet came from carbohydrates or net carbs. Now, note that there's a glitch in Cronometer's carb counts, and that's because when when considering that protein and fat were set about 1733% of my total calories, When we subtract that from a 100%, I should get 49.4% carbs. So regardless if I start with carbs at with, start at start with 314 grams of carbs or 228, neither of those yield 49.4% carbs. So if anyone else has come across this problem in Cronometer, please leave a comment or if anyone else uses a different diet tracking app that doesn't have this problem, I'm happy to try something else out that may be better. Also, if you leave a comment and indicate what you, what you use. So then, in terms of carbs too, I also track, total sugar intake and more specifically, total fructose because I have a tendency to eat a lot of fruit. I have a sweet tooth. So I keep an eye on how much fructose because fruit is mostly comprised comprised of fructose. So, in terms of total fructose, note that sucrose, divided by two equals fructose, because half of sucrose is fructose. So, when adding those two together, I get a total fructose of about 59 per day. Now, 59 grams of total fructose may seem like a lot but for me, this is my lowest fructose intake since I started diet tracking in 2035. So there is, good news and there is progress on that front. I've actually had, double the intake, close close to a 115 of fructose per day in the past. So that I've cut that in half over time is a is a big, big win. Alright. So what about micronutrients in terms of vitamins and minerals? So, it may be hard to see but here's the full bite, vitamin list and and how much that I take in, per day. And note that I do have purposeful targets and more specifically, those purposeful targets that I aim for are vitamin b three or niacin, beta carotene and vitamin e. So for me, in my data, niacin has a strong positive correlation with blood biomarkers, meaning a lot more going in the right direction than wrong with a relatively higher intake of niacin. So I aim for, higher than forty milligrams of niacin per day because based on that data, higher may be better in my case. Conversely, higher may not be better for beta carotene and vitamin e which in my case are strongly negatively correlated with, more biomarkers going blood biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. So, I don't aim for my highest intake, but I've been titrating those down to try to find the sweet spot where I'm not making more biomarkers worse than, sending them in the right direction. So for me, beta carotene around fifty thousand micrograms which equals fifty milligrams per day. And again, this is from whole food and vitamin e at twenty milligrams but not higher. Note that the RDA is fifteen milligrams. So I'm above the RDA but not at my highest vitamin e intake which has been close to thirty milligrams per day. And then last but not least, we can see my mineral intake and all these are higher than the RDA if we're interested in specific amounts. I don't have purposeful targets here, but I do try to follow the correlations, as they correlate with blood biomarkers. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in in terms of epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. And as I mentioned, we do have merch. So, if you're interested in that, that link will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.