Green tea is associated with the reduced all cause mortality risk. So let's take a look at that data. On the y axis, we've got the hazard ratio of all cause mortality or all cause mortality risk plotted against daily green tea consumption in grams. So grams of green tea consumed per day. And then there are three groups. The whole population, current smokers, and never smokers. So starting with the whole population, this study included about a 165,000 people. And then, in terms of what was significant, we go to the hazard ratio of one. And note that when the 95% confidence interval, which are the dash lines, when those are completely below one or above one, we have a statistically significant association. So for the whole population, we can see that green tea greater than about six grams per day is associated with a reduced all cause mortality risk. But note that there are two other groups of data on this plot including, data for current smokers which was most of this population around a 117,000 people in red. But then also, data for the never smokers. And because never smokers would be most relevant to longevity, I'm only gonna focus on that data which is the green line. So for the never smokers, we can see that green tea consumption above zero grams of green tea per per day was associated with reduced all cause mortality risk as indicated by the green lines. With the lowest all cause mortality risk being between seven and eleven grams of green tea per day. So this is just one study. Is there more data? So for that, we go to a 2015 meta analysis of five studies that included more people than the previous study about about 201,000 people. And on the y axis, once again, we've got all cause mortality risk plotted against green tea consumption on the x axis. But in this case, this is cups per day, not grams of green tea per day. And when compared with a hazard ratio of one, we can see that up to about five cups of green tea per day was significantly associated with the reduced all cause mortality risk. Now, this was 2015 data. Is there more recent data? Are there more recent studies? So in 2019, a meta analysis for green tea consumption and its association with all cause mortality risk was published including eight cohort studies and that study included more than 313,000. So the largest sample size of the two previous studies And this study had a wide age range from 40 to about 103 years. And then breaking down the data that that's with that was in this study. So in terms of green green tea consumption, it was separated into, four groups. So less than one cup, one to two cups, three to four cups, and greater than five cups of green green tea per day. And then, we can see the all cause mortality risk or the HR hazard ratio for all cause mortality risk, and then we can see the 95% confidence interval. And remember, when that data in parentheses is either completely below one or completely above one, we have a statistically significant association. And then data for men is in on the top about a 145,000 men, and data for women is on the bottom about a 169,000 women. And then, we're looking at HR two, which was model two, the fully adjusted, multivariate model. So when compared with people who drank less than one cup of green tea per day, we can see that one to two cups, three to four cups, and greater than five cups per day were each associated with a reduced all cause mortality risk. So from this, we can see that greater than one cup of green tea per day is associated with reduced all cause mortality risk in both men and women in this meta analysis from 2019. Now, if anyone's come across a larger study since 2019, please leave it in the comments. As far as I know, this is the largest study on green tea and its association with all cause mortality risk to date. Now, most of the green tea all cause mortality data is in Japanese cohorts. So with these data in mind, since 2018, I've used loose leaf Japanese green tea since 2018. And this is the exact brand that I use, the company that that I use. And, so what I do is I take the loose leaf green tea, I put it in a stainless steel ball, add boiled water, and then we get the green tea as it looks on the right with and then I add a little bit of of of lemon. So fortunately, this company just started offering discount links and I was able to obtain one of those discount links. So if you're interested in buying green tea, loose leaf, high quality, organic green tea, that link will be in the video's description. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links besides green tea, and we also have merch. Including discount links for epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing, diet tracking, or if you'd like to, support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in that, that link and all the other links, in addition to the papers referenced in the video, will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.