During aging, NAD degradation can be linked to increased homocysteine and decreased methionine. So let's check out those pathways. So first starting with NAD, an age related increase for CD 38 will degrade NAD into nicotinamide. And note that I'm just using CD 38 as an example. There are many ways to degrade NAD during aging. So an increase in nicotinamide will then be converted into nicotinic acid thereby increasing nicotinic acid levels. And this is via Le Chatelier's principle which shows that an increase in reactants, in this case nicotinamide, will shift the reaction to the right thereby leading to an increase in products, in this case nicotinic acid. An increase in nicotinic acid will then combine with s adenosylmethionine otherwise known as SAM and converting it into Trigonelline which is just a fancy way of saying methylated nicotinic acid. As you can see there, nicotinic acid now has a methyl group attached. Now that methyl group came from s adenosylmethionine which now converts that into s adenosyl homocysteine or s a h. The importance of that increase for s adenosyl homocysteine when nicotinic acid is converted into trigoneline is that higher levels of s adenosyl homocysteine will lead to higher levels of homocysteine. And that's what we'll see here. So s a h is right there. And again, by Le Chatelier's principle, an increase in reactants, in this case, s a h, will lead to an increase in the product, in this case, homocysteine. So we can see how any degradation is linked with an increase for homocysteine. Now also during the conversion of nicotinic acid into trigoneline, we have the depletion of SAM, s adenosylmethionine. And that's important because lower levels of SAM will lead to lower levels of melatonin. And we can see that reaction here. So under normal situations, s adenosylmethionine combines with five, n acetyl five hydroxytryptamine, otherwise known as n acetylserotonin. And together they combine to form melatonin. So we can see how NAD degradation links with an increase for homocysteine and also also a decrease for melatonin. Potentially linking deficits in any energy production I e n a d low levels of n a d during aging with an increase for homocysteine which links with vascular health and dementia risk and also lower levels of melatonin which could affect sleep quality and or duration. Things that are very important during aging. So with that in mind, if we specifically increase trigoneline, can we increase NAD and melatonin while reducing homocysteine? So why would I think that that's possible? So if we increase trigoneline, again, by Le Chatelier's principle, that should shift the reaction to the, products, which in this case would be nicotinic acid while consuming s adenosyl homocysteine and producing s adenosylmethionine. More on those in a minute. An increase in nicotinic acid will then be converted into nicotinamide, and then the increase in nicotinamide will then be converted into NAD. Again, by Le Chatelier's principle in each situation. So that's possible that an increase in trigoneline will lead to an increase in NAD. Now also during this process, it by converting trigoneline into nicotinic acid, as I mentioned, s adenosyl homocysteine is consumed. So with that being lower, we should expect homocysteine to also be lower. So trigoneline increasing trigoneline may also lead to a reduction for homocysteine. And then in the conversion of trigoneline into nicotinic acid, we saw that S Adenosyl Methionine levels would be increased as that methyl group would be transferred from, Trigonylene to S Adenosyl Homocysteine, thereby forming S Adenosyl Methionine. So now we would have an increase for SAM. And when SAM is increased, we should get that, leftward shift from reactants to products, thereby increasing melatonin. So will that work? And to first address that, we need to know which foods contain Trigonelline. Now there are some supplements that contain relatively low levels of Trigonelline. I prefer to get it from Whole Foods First. If others wanna go the supplement direction, that's on them. But for me, I prefer to get it from Foods First. So with that in mind, which foods contain Trigonelline? And that's what we can see here. Atop the list is coffee with twenty two hundred micrograms of Trigonelline per gram. Now, I'm not much of a coffee drinker and I can get into that into the comments. It's a side, tangent. And there aren't any major reasons, other than I prefer tea and I'm already super hydrated. I can't add that in too. So nonetheless, second on the list, chickpeas. And I often get asked on the on the on the channel, you know, why don't I include legumes in my diet? And that's also a side, answer. It's a tangent to what the the video is about. But if anyone's curious about why, legumes aren't a major part of the diet or hadn't been, I can I can fully detail that in the comments? So chickpeas have three hundred and fifty micrograms of trogoneline per gram of chickpeas. Second on the list. So with that in mind, I've added chickpeas back into the diet. I did include them for a few blood tests, a couple years ago, but they didn't move biomarkers at all. So I took them out. So I've reintroduced them or I reintroduced them a couple of days ago, which then opens a few more questions. First, will eating chickpeas increase trigoneline? And we can measure trigoneline levels, plasma levels. This is using IOLO's at home metabolomics Metabolomics Kit. I now have four data points for plasma levels of Trigoniline as shown there. And note that they're on the low side. Point two nine, point one five, point four and point one one micromolar. Interestingly, for my highest level at point four, that coincided with when I was supplementing with six hundred milligrams of nicotinic acid per day, which shouldn't be a surprise because again Le Chatelier's principle, the reactant in this case would be nicotinic acid. Some of that would be converted into Trigonelline, which it looks like it may have done. Again, I can't imply causation though. It's just one test. I would need a lot more data to show that that was causative or not. It could just be normal test to test variation. If you're interested in measuring tournalling and 600 other metabolites that are included on this test, there's a discount link in the video's description. Alright. So second, if I'm gonna include chickpeas in the diet, something's gotta case come out in order to stay calorie neutral. So what will I reduce? Two possible options are barley and oats, which in pulling up a second study, and note that all the studies in the video will be in the video's description, we can see that barley has very low levels of Trignonelline. And I should mention if I didn't already that barley and oats are already a part of my diet. These are two areas where I could remove to add, chickpeas. So barley has very low levels of Trigonelline, just point two five micrograms per gram of barley when compared with oats in this study, which had about a 112 per gram. In other words, about a 400 times higher dose of Trignelli in oats in this study when compared with barley. And also, in confirmation that oats have a decent amount of Trignelli, we can see in the study above that they had two hundred and thirty micrograms per gram. Still not as high as chickpeas though. So I can see the argument for, reducing or eliminating oats and barley for the next test and completely replacing them with chickpeas, which I may do until the next test. So then third, the question is will it work? And to address that for the next blood test, which will be, January 15 in 2023, in addition to the standard chem panel and CBC that I do for every test, I'll also send blood for NAD, homocysteine, and metabolomics including trigoneline. Now include in terms of melatonin, I'm I can't wake up in the middle of the night and draw blood. And even spitting in the middle of the night to do a saliva sample for melatonin may not be the best bet either as that may impair my sleep quality for when I'm doing that experiment. So subjectively, I'll have, you know, measures of was I sleeping better or not and I'll have the objective data of sleep duration as the fitness tracker tracks that. So stay tuned for all that data in a future video. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. Before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links that you may be interested in, including at home metabolomics, which measures trigoneline and it as I mentioned, 600 other metabolites, NAD quantification, epigenetic and telomere testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing with Syphox Health, which which includes ApoB, dye tracking, green tea, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or DIY Tryon brand, which is what I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.