Relatively higher levels of triglycerides are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk, and that's what we'll see here. On the y axis, we've got all cause mortality risk plotted against circulating levels of triglycerides on the x. And this study was a meta analysis of 14 studies that included more than 330,000 people with an average age of 48 years at the baseline visit. In this study, once triglycerides went above 1.69 millimolar or a a hundred and fifty milligrams per deciliter, all cause mortality risk significantly increased. Alright. So what about older than 48 years? And that's what we'll see in this study, which included more than 1,500,000 people with an average age of 57 years at the baseline visit. On the x axis, we've got hazard ratio or all cause mortality risk plotted against circulating levels of triglycerides on the y. And then when looking at less than 1.7 millimolar, again, or less than a 150 milligrams per deciliter, which was defined as the referent, all values above that were significantly associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. And we know we know that that's significant that each of these, quintiles is significantly associated with all cause mortality risk because the 95% confidence interval or 95% c I, the data in parentheses, are completely above one for each of these quintiles. Alright. So what about older than 57 years? So this isn't a plot of all cause mortality risk, but it is, the hazard ratio for coronary heart disease mortality, so heart disease mortality risk, plotted against circulating levels of triglycerides in milligrams per deciliter on the x. And in this study, which included almost 4,500,000 people and note that all of these studies will be in the video's description. So if you're interested in that, check it out. In this study, once triglycerides got above 80 milligrams per deciliter and looking at the fully adjusted model, the data in green, model three, once it got above 80, we can see that there was a significantly increased, coronary heart disease mortality risk. So from these three studies, we can see that relatively higher triglycerides are associated with an increased coronary heart disease and all cause mortality risk. But note that triglycerides are not a homogeneous metabolite group. When we think about triglycerides, we think of them as basically one big large group, and they're all going in the wrong direction if they're increasing. But individual triglycerides are associated with an increased odds of living to 85 years, and that's what we'll see here. In this plot, it's of longevity against all cause mortality risk. On the y axis, we've got the odds, OR being the odds ratio or probability of longevity, which in this study was defined as reaching 85 years. And on the x axis, we've got the hazard ratio HR for all cause mortality or all cause mortality risk. So where we wanna be on this plot is in the upper left quadrant as that would be associated with an increased probability of reaching 85 years and a relatively low risk for all cause mortality. So when looking at the metabolites in that quadrant, upper upper left, we can see the amino acid serine is there, and that's a story for another day. I'll probably talk about that in a in an upcoming homocysteine video. But note that we've got, at least one triglyceride as shown there, c 56 colon eight TAG. So that is a triglyceride TAG with 56 carbons and eight double bonds. Now just to introduce what that even means structurally, this is just the generic structure of a triglyceride, metabolite, which includes three fatty acids, triglyceride being three, bound to the glycerol backbone as shown there. Now these three fatty acids are all the same in this case and they each have a double bond as as indicated by that slanted, line. So this would be the, c 12 colon one because each of these fatty acids has 12 carbons and one double bond. And to get how many, fatty acids, the sum of these fatty acids, c twelve one multiplied by three since they're all the same, yields a c thirty six three triglyceride. So that's just an example. That metabolite, that triglyceride metabolite is not one that's found in the upper left quadrant, but I just wanted to illustrate what triglyceride structure actually means because we'll see a whole bunch of different triglyceride species coming up in a minute. So it's not just the c fifty six eight triglyceride that's associated with an increased probability of reaching 85 years. We can see in this plot that there are two others And not included, but they are amongst those red dots that are in that upper left quadrant, are four others, c fifty four nine and then c 56 with six, seven, or nine double bonds. So from this from this data, we can see that there are indeed longevity associated triglycerides. And I just wanna, reiterate the point. I'm not saying that we should have high levels of triglycerides, but based on this data, it would suggest that having certain triglyceride species being relatively high while keeping total levels of triglycerides relatively low may be a good strategy for reaching at least 85 years. And along those lines, five of these triglycerides that are associated with an increased odds of reaching 85 years can be tracked, which means they can be potentially optimized. And I've been doing that using IOLO's at home metabolomics kit. If you're familiar with the channel, you've seen me make a whole bunch of videos using this kit. And beyond these, metabolites, it includes more than 600, including 241 triglyceride species. And amongst those, twenty nine are linked with increased odds of reaching 85 years. If you're interested in using the kit, discount link in the video's description. So in terms of those triglycerides that are associated with an increased odds of reaching 85 years, we can see those five that I just mentioned in the earlier slide here. C fifty four nine and again c 56, which has six, seven, eight, or nine double bonds. And we can see that each of these is significantly associated with an increased odds of reaching 85 years as their 95% confidence confidence interval, again, the data in parentheses, is completely above one for each of these five metabolites. And, additionally, the p value and FDR or false discovery rate are each less than 0.05, which highlights they're statistically significant. But it's not just these five metabolites. As I mentioned, there are 29 longevity or an increased odds of reaching 85 years. So how do we go from five metabolites to 29? So that's what we'll go through here. So the first one's pretty easy, the c fifty four nine. And note that I had to put an underscore for the, c fifty four nine because if I enter it as a colon, Excel reads that as as the date, so I had to put it as an underscore. But for the c fifty four nine triglyceride, that's easy because there's just one metabolite in Iolo's kit. But for c fifty six six, we can see that there are eight metabolites that that fall under that metabolite grouping for c fifty six six. So let's illustrate how that's possible. So for the first, we can see that the triglyceride twenty two four, that's 22 carbons and four double bonds. So that's a polyunsaturated fatty acid bound to the glycerol backbone in conjunction with two other other fatty acids that have a combined 34 carbons and two double bonds. Moving forward, we can see that all of those eight species are not the same, including the one at the bottom of the list, which has at one position the c sixteen zero, which is a fatty acid that has 16 carbons and no double bonds, so it's a saturated fatty acid. And then at the other two positions, it has the sum of 40 carbons and six double bonds. So in other words, these are many different triglyceride species that fall under the fifty six six triglyceride, umbrella. So we can add them together to form the fifty six six as one metabolite. More on that in a minute. So we can see that fifty six seven has a bunch of metabolites that fall under that window, c fifty six eight, and then a few for c fifty six nine, which then brings us to what's optimal. So when considering that these triglycerides are significantly associated with an increased probability of reaching 85 years, I think it makes sense to keep these specific triglycerides relatively high if we can. And, again, while keeping all triglycerides as a net sum beyond these five, the whole net sum of triglycerides relatively low. Easier said than than done, I know, but we'll see how this story plays out in future tests. So I currently have four tests using IOLO's kit. I'm gonna send test number five tomorrow. And for test number three, I did a pretty good job of keeping these triglycerides, relatively high. But for test number one, I didn't do a very good job. Now, I haven't started calculating correlations with diet yet, but once I get to five or six tests, I'll start to look at correlations for diet with these quote unquote longevity associated triglycerides, and we'll see if maybe I can use diet to keep them relatively high with overall triglycerides relatively low. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for at home metabolomics, iolo's kit, epigenetic and telomere testing, oral microbiome composition, NAD quantification, at home blood testing, which includes ApoB, green tea, diet tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Agent or Dietrin brand, which I've got on here, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.