Telomere shortening is a hallmark of aging, and we can see that here. Telomere attrition, otherwise known as telomere shortening, is included as one of the 12 hallmarks of aging. More specifically, telomere length declines during aging for both men and women. On the y axis, we've got leukocyte or white blood cell telomere length plotted against age from 20 year olds up through centenarians or 100 year olds. And for both men and women, we can see that age related decline. More specifically, we can see that in youth, telomere length is approximately 7.75 kilobases, whereas in advanced age, it's shorter at 5.75 kilobases. Visually, we can see that represented here. So telomeres, which are the, portions of d n DNA at the end of chromosomes, are relatively long in youth, And then in senescence or advanced age, we can see that the telomeres, the portions of DNA on the chromosomes have shortened. So why is telomere length important? In a recently published study, it showed that relatively shorter telomeres are associated with an increased risk for the incidence of dementia. So let's take a look at that data. And that's what we can see here. And this study included, about 32,000 people, average age was 55 years, and it had a, a median thirteen year follow-up. So starting from the initial assessment of telomere length, what was the incidence of dementia over that up to thirteen year period? On the y axis, we've got that relative hazard for risk of dementia plotted against leukocyte telomere length or white blood cell telomere length WBC. And then when putting up our hazard ratio of one, remember when the shaded purple region is completely above one or below one, we have a significant association. And there, we can see that as telomere length increases, that that's associated with a significantly reduced incidence for the risk of dementia. Now to potentially minimize this risk this risk, we can measure and optimize telomere length. So with that in mind, what's my data? So to find out, I used true diagnostic who just doesn't measure epigenetics, but they also provide measurements of telomere length in white blood cells. And for the first test, my average telomere length was seven point o two kilobases, and note that in youth, that's we we would expect to see 7.75 kilobases. So I've got some work to do at least based on my first test. Similarly, test two and three weren't much better at seven point zero seven and seven point zero four kilobases. So we can see that I have room for improvement based on those first three tests from May through October 2022. Now, fortunately for the last two tests, data has been better. 7.13 kilobases for the January 23, January 2023 test, and also 7.13 kilobases for test number five, March 6. So last month last month's test. Now, for the last test, note that I took N M N with an average of three hundred forty milligrams per day from test number four through test number five. And also, I I took one gram of NMN for the seven day period before this test and yet there was no effect on telomere length at least for me. So, would NMN improve telomere length for others? I don't know. But for me, clearly, there was no impact. Now, with that in mind, going forward, I'll track telomere length and correlations with diet as I now have five tests and I have a corresponding diet for each of these telomere length measurements and I can start to look at correlations and try to see where I can improve my diet to potentially get closer to youthful levels seven point seven five kilobases. So with that in mind, can telomere length be further lengthened beyond where I have it now? We'll find out and stay tuned for that update video sometime soon. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that'll be in the video's description that you may be interested in including any dequantification, green tea, epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer agent or die trying brand, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.