Hey, everyone. Today will be something completely different on the channel that may superficially seem off brand from the conquer aging or diet trying model, which has been completely focused on health and longevity optimization. But conquer aging or diatronic doesn't just apply to health and longevity, but other things too. For example, do I wanna buy a house made of wood and aluminum siding, which will be demolished in a hundred years, or would I prefer a house carved into the mountain which could last thousands? That's a part of the conquer aging or die trying brand. Similarly, in terms of art, would I wanna own paintings that are a few 100 years old or artifacts that are thousands, potentially thousands of years old? So with that in mind, today, we'll take a look at artifacts that may indeed be thousands of years old or could be an elaborate fake. Either way, I think it's fun to investigate. So with that in mind, today, we've got aliencarvings.com, and we're gonna take a look at a bunch of their pieces. So let's get into it. So what do you have what do you have today for us? Well, I, I've got a a collection here that I've gathered from Mexico from different places, Tula Hidalgo, Abuelos D'Alisco. Those are the two primary ones, but also from other states like Guerrero, the, Mijohan, and Awakah areas, Lake Quixel. All all these places are producing, pieces that are coming up with abnormal results. You know? There's been carbon dating, thermoluminescent testing on ceramics. And when I say carbon dating, they they take the, adhesives that have organic material and or, for instance, resin in a pipe and and test that, not the actual stone itself. But, nonetheless, the the the results are consistent, and they're 10,000 plus years old. And, so that being said, the government, you know, says all these pieces are false, and I I purchased them as art. You know? I figured it was an elaborate hoax myself. You know, the the pieces screamed that they had a story, though, and and there was something really interesting is is going between the different places. I noticed that the story was the same. And, so I I started collecting these things and researching these things about three years ago. And, you know, now I've amassed a a good amount of them. And what was really crazy is is there was things that we started finding out, like, for instance, they had phosphorescence and luminescence. I can show you a a brief example. It's daytime right now, so it's hard to see some of them. But you you can see these pieces are inlaid with intricate, you know, luminescent and and phosphorescent type, things. And and so that that was really interesting to me because, a, the people that sold it to me didn't even advertise this, and, b, they, had no idea. When I showed them, they were blown away. In fact, they were asking me where to get the light that I had. And, so for me, that was kinda odd. Also, the fact that these people down there collect these pieces, they don't just sell them. You know, they they have full collections of these things and and are attached to them in ways that that someone that's just, you know, trying to make a buck wouldn't. So, yeah, here I am three years later, you know, and and I've hit a brick wall in terms of of research. Like, you can't just go to a university and say, I wanna carbon date this piece. It requires having archaeologists, chain of command, all all of the proper credentials and things. And so we we went through that, and and we got people of the PhD level to request the testing. You know, we found these bone skulls, and we we really wanna know because it's a lot tougher to fake bone than stone. And so that gives us a big thing. I'll show you what one of these looks like. They look very similar to the the one found in the Rodeaux Mountains back in 2001, and they've got the same type of carvings on the the skulls. We found about a dozen of these. You can see here a picture of some of the others. But, yeah, trying to get the research on this is a brick wall. The carbon dates, the the DNA testing, it it's extremely tough. You know? I I spoke with the gentleman in Peru that has the the NASCA mummies down there, and it's the same thing for them. I mean, he's been working on it for five years and are just now finally starting to get you know, they have a a a positive affirmation that they're 2,000 years old and that they're, you know, not completely human and vegetarian. And so it's cool to to see that it is possible and and it's worth, diving into. And that's where I'm at. I just research this and and try to figure out the truth because the art spoke to me in a way that that knockoffs don't. Yeah. Alright. So we got a lot to unpack there. So let's start with the most obvious, which is, carbon dating. Right? So Yep. I know on your website there, you you guys carbon dated, at least one mask. As you mentioned, the glue or the organic resin that glues these you know? So if you can hold up that one that you've got right in the middle, you know, see you can see the blue stones. So I guess where the blue stones were glued on the front. Right? The blue stones on or blue and red. Yeah. All these stones, actually. The the bottom here, that black piece is a solid piece, and then it's glued on with all these other pieces of stone. And inside of the the the cracks here is this red glue. Yeah. And that's the most abundant supply. There is a glue that holds these on as well, and this can be tested, and it has been. But the primary source is this this tremendous amount of red glue because, a, there's so much of it in the mosaic that, you know, testing different areas on there, you should get inconsistent results if someone's, messing with it, I e, grinding a mammoth bone or something into it to to mess with the age. You know? It's not prehistoric. It's not millions of years old like you would find in in synthetic glues and and modern fossil fuel glues. So it's it's interesting that it hits a consistent ten to fifteen thousand years across multiple different areas and styles and types of, adhesives. That's the other thing. The adhesive types between Tula and Awalos are completely different, made a 100% different. They look different. So it's it's really interesting, and they're both primitive type glues. There's chunks and stuff in there. It's not refined, like you would expect a modern glue to be. So So the the glues so the glues are completely different separated by, like, 800 miles or so and but yet the artifacts are similar. Like, the the overall scope of the artifacts, like, what we see being similar in terms of these stone skulls and, you know, stone depictions of maybe aliens or whatever whatever it is. So so alright. So starting with the carbon dating, so on your site, after dating the glue, I think one of them came up as 8,400 years old or or something like that, somewhere in that range? Yes. Yep. And then how how many so probably And, actually, it's eighty eighty four hundred BP. So that's before present. So I I believe it's actually more like a what is that? Like, 11,000 or 10,000 years. Oh, wow. Yeah. Alright. But then there were some that the carbon dating or, is it thermoluminescence? Am I saying that right? Yeah. Thermoluminescence. That's how they test, ceramic. They do, like, a core sample, where they can see the last time it has been fired. Right. So the on your site, there were some pieces where they couldn't even determine the age of it because either there wasn't enough, you know, because carbon will, what, degrade over time. I'm not an expert. It decays. Yep. Yeah. So they couldn't even, carbon date it because there was so little carbon left in the sample that they couldn't put an estimated, date on it, which means it could be beyond their limit. What was it? Like, 50,000 years as the limit of what a carbon date? So some of these so some of these pieces could be as old as 50,000 years old. I mean, you haven't clearly carbon you can't clear clearly carbon date everything. Right? No. No. Definitely not. I mean, I I wish I could carbon date more stuff, but the universities just won't do it. They refuse. I mean, they they say that, you know, it could be unethically dug up. They don't want anything to do with that. Even private firms, it's just they don't wanna touch it for some purpose. As soon as they figure out what it is, you know, the the people that tested the resin for the pipe, they they called the owner of the lab called Scott Woltar, who's a host of America on Earth. He was the one that submitted the test. And, and then they said, don't ever send us anything like this ever again. Yeah. Specific. It's it's I hate to say it's religion based, but I imagine some people, it would destroy their worldview if this stuff was real. Right? And older than A lot of wars and stuff have happened over religion. And you you can go back as far as to, Babylon and Egypt. You know, there's the old kingdom, the new kingdom, and quite a few, questionable things that occurred in terms of war. So I I I definitely think there's been something going on and and pulling strings at this. And and if you go back to the most ancient of ancient texts, you'll see that there's, you know, angelic type beings in in this war of of human souls and all these type of, stories that they could absolutely resonate with these pieces, you know, if true. So I I think they're I don't know. I'm not so sure. I've I've merged it into the angels and demons kind of thing, but, like, if you consider that the Bible is, like, 6,000 years old or so, and some of these pieces may be 50,000 years old or even older or in that range. So 8,000 to 50 year 50,000 years. That's a big time, you know, time gap to go from there to only 6,000, you know, ago. So, alright. Wait. So let's go back let's go back to that initial piece because the one that had the, blue and red, stones on it. So if we if you could just hold that up. Right? So you can see clearly the almond the almond eyes. I mean, this is not depicting a human character. Right? So someone's got the imagination Reptilian. Right. So it's reptilian on one side of the face and the other side isn't reptilian. Right? Yep. Yeah. So even that, I mean, but then you've got the the DNA, what we would interpret as probably DNA going down the middle. Right? But so it it's clearly something someone's either got a very vivid imagination to produce this, or maybe those things were around. I don't know I don't know what the truth is. I have no idea. Right? Because there the vivid part. The say say that again. I said, here's the vivid part. So so wait. I can be ah, I see. Wow. Wow. Wow. So you got DNA. You got something in a bubble. Right? So Looks like a a a being or a human of some form or a you know, it doesn't have the the normal shape of a gray, the head wise, so it's kinda more humanistic looking. Could be the creation of Adam, or the whole, start of of, you know, human in itself. This could be the the pre flood story, you know, Atlantis type times. Who knows? You know? Tula is really interesting. That the place that some of these pieces are found in Mexico, it's, there's there's a story about where the Atlanteans washed up, and, and that that was was in Tula. And and so it's, so it's just kinda bizarre that that goes to to Mesoamerica. You know? Yeah. And Teotihuacan, right, which is basically in in Mexico. Right? That was the city of the gods. Who's to say, I don't know. There are people who gotta roast me and think I've lost my lost my mind, but the fact is maybe some of this or all of it is real. Right? Maybe the what what was interpreted as gods was just, an advanced civilization that either lived here before or came here. And many even that even that right even that right there, I mean, the yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The I'm not a I'm not I'm clearly not a stonemason. And if there are any people who work with stone, please leave a comment. But the the ability to chisel this so precisely in three d, I mean, it's just a it just blows my mind. I've never seen anything like this. Yeah. Me neither. Hey. You know, it's just there's true beauty in it. And like you said earlier, it's a vivid imagination. And, to that that you know, if only 1% of these pieces are legitimate, it still tells a a large part of a story that that we're missing. And so the the the reason of research for me is is dramatic even if it's 1%. You know? There's things like this, though, that that are found in in, Iraq and Sumerian dissented areas that are called astrolabes, and these are pretty complex to make. And these carry a pretty, general form of the night sky. So being able to translate this is not, extremely complicated. Then you can plug in the coordinates in the North Star location and all that to to a supercomputer and and get a date of when that was the last time that it happened like that in the sky. And there's numerous of these. I mean, I've got, I think 10 of them total, and and they all have different depictions. And this one here has a a a ton of writing on it, and it was found with this piece. And it's like I don't know if it's, like, additional, data from the sky, but, I mean, it seems fairly complex in terms of just someone making a, you know, elaborate hoax. So same with on the back of this one. It's got a fair amount of it it almost looks like cuneiform, but it's it's not. It's like a protocuneiform. There are proto cuneiform pieces that have been found that are, you know, multiple different iterations, and it seems like it dates back till the the very beginning. And what's funny is, even, you know, symbols like this, this masonic symbol is found in Sumeria, like, five thousand years ago, like, way before the masons were even thought of. So So It's kinda interesting to see those symbols carry through. You know? Yeah. So the astrolabes, I mean, those have been around, though, you know, for maybe a couple thousand years. I mean, I think Five thousand is, when the night sky was of the ones that they found in Sumeria. That they plugged it into the supercomputer, and that's at least when when it was last depicted like that. It doesn't mean that it was made then. Yeah. But that's the that's the picture that they were able to put onto that disc. So Yeah. And I I think I saw someone say, history is written in stone, not on paper. So if you were if you were a civilization, you know, that had some, you know, that was an advanced civilization, like, truly advanced, maybe probably more than us, You'd wanna make it in stone. Right? You'd want it to be found. Right? Because if it's paper and wood and all this other stuff that we're using today, it's gone. It's crushed in hurricanes and floods and everything else. Stone must much less likely to, you know, to be destroyed. So Yep. Hang on. So the flute there, the, lizard flute, could you hold that? Because that's got a whole bunch of, yeah, upside down. Pipe, actually. Yeah. So you can see the writing. I mean, in whatever whatever they're trying to convey, I mean, and I think you you mentioned, you know, or someone has asked you about AI decoding this stuff. But I think that's probably the way to go where you would catalog it in pictures and, you know, screen There's over 10,000 symbols that we've cataloged. That's crazy. And there's no repetition. There's no vowels. There's no it's very bizarre. Yeah. But, yeah, this is a a pipe, and it it actually has resin still deep inside of there, which is great. I haven't tested it yet, but I've got a full excavation data on this one and and a lot of, chain of command. So, that it's good. We actually have, like, organic material in the freezer from this. It dig sites, and we try to do it as a 100% legitimate as possible. So when we finally do find a lab, we can just get this stuff done. You know? Nice. So the skull, before you before you go to that one yet, the skulls are even more, I mean, impressive because especially the one you've got right there or the one you just passed or you got a better one, I guess. No. These. So I I've see I've seen people say that these may be just cow I don't know. Cow skulls or vertebrae. I don't know. Yeah. You know, we we had a a a couple bone experts look at these because because it does have a similar spinal connection, to a cow. There are some similarities to a cow, but this is you know, obviously, a cow skull is gonna come out, here, and the the the cow skull would have to be heavily modified with saws and and, you know, all this stuff to get it. And and the both the bone experts said that when they examined these pieces, that this bone right here, if if you were to cut a cow skull open to keep this intact, is near impossible. They've never seen it before on any of the specimens, and they said that if the bone was intact, it would be so fragile that you couldn't go like this. This is super, super hard, and the bone density and mass of this specimen is not that of a of a cow. So they they say it has some relation to a cow in terms of the way it is, but it's not. And so that being said, I find it interesting that, you know, we hear of all these cattle mutilations from UFOs, and they take out the organs. Maybe they're harvesting the organs because they're closely related. So what's different too about those if they are, skulls is that you said that they're bone and that they're not stone. So you've got the stone skulls, and then you've got whatever those are as, I guess, bone skulls. Right? Yes. Exactly. Yeah. So so if if, you know, I hate to bring it to the longevity idea, but if you were a long lived society, and I don't mean, like, a hundred years, but whatever, something longer than that, and if you wanted people to find your artifacts and know about your culture, they're not gonna find bones in the ground, what with the exception of what we just saw. Right? But so you'd you'd want someone to find your replicas, and maybe these are replicas of theirs their skulls only in in stone form. Right? So and, again, I don't know if that's true, but, yeah, the handbags is also another thing. Right? So depicted so many in so many, megalithic structures. Right? And here you've got a stone. Can you just hold it up so people can see how heavy that is? Yeah. I mean, ten, fifteen pounds. What do you think? 20 pounds? I'm gonna say probably 15 12 to 15 pounds. Yeah. Yeah. And it's a the calcite dominant, stone. That's that's why it's, like that. It glows red phosphorescently, and then it has all the luminescent detail on it. But same same with this one. This one actually shattered, during shipment, unfortunately, but you can see it's a full crystal all the way through the the piece. You know? And then are are the handbag stones or all of these stones, are they found in Ouelos or in, Tula? Tula Hidalgo and Ouelos Tilesco both. I've got, bags from both. Yep. No. I mean I mean, the the the stone. Like, in where are they getting this where did they get the stone from? Like, is would you expect to find these stones? Like, just un uncut, undesigned stone in those areas? Yeah. Calcite's very common. Green banded calcite's fairly common to these areas. So it it is possible. This stone here is interesting because it's the way it's formed and the way it's put together, you know, it's very pitted and and hard to work with. And so for for that being said, you know, the these right here are legs to a table. So that has this hole right here for this crossbar to go in, and the two legs sit there and hold this large disc. This thing weighs over 420 pounds. And, you know, to to hold that up and and know that this stone would be, structurally sound is really an engineering marvel in my opinion because, a, it's super fragile in most cases, and it's very pitted. So to to be able to trust it with that kind of weight, it blows my mind. You know? Yeah. Definitely. And plus a 400 pound stone. I mean, if someone's trying to make some fakes, why are you gonna make 400 pound stones? If anything, you'd want it to be small and mobile so everybody could buy it, but it's gonna Shipping this was a nightmare. You know? Oh, I can imagine. Yeah. So alright. So we talked about problems getting the artifacts carbon dated. The Mexican government stands as you I think you mentioned that they said they don't believe any of this stuff because the Mayans didn't worship it. So that's why you're you have the ability to have it because they just don't believe that it's a real thing. It's just somebody making it up. Right? Well, they and that's that's a debated thing. So the INAA has said that they've had these pieces being turned in for over eighty years. And, but they don't have a place for them in history. So they do have a large amount of these pieces is what they said, but they don't have anywhere to display them in the museum because it doesn't fit into history. So, and they don't they don't have a way to validate that it's it's very sketchy because they they do have ways to validate it, but they're not enacting them. Yeah. I mean, if it's gonna, you know, if it's gonna disrupt history and people have, you know, invested their worldview in history, it's just hard for people to change. But It seems like disclosure is something that is being collaboratively, done at at a a proper speed and time. Like, it's not something that they're allowing to slip up very easily. That's for sure. Yeah. So just going back to that stone skull right there on just to the left, the mosaic. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So just to illustrate, all of those different colors, those are smaller stones that were glued together to make this large stone head. Right? Yep. Yeah. So even that too, I mean, what? Like, a 10 pound or so? I mean, what are we looking at there? About 10 pounds on this piece. It's very heavy. So, you know, the like, when you look at, like, the megalithic structures that are all over the world and and then, you know, potentially older civilization or younger civilizations that try to imitate it and either build on top of it or build to the sides of it. And you can see differences in workmanship where the oldest megalithic structures, like, for example, in Peru, were just, you know, basically, this the megalithic stones are so perfectly, joint Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So so there was a level of precision that was involved there that later generations couldn't replicate, and you can clearly see the difference. I mean, it looks like baboons trying to imitate, you know, some highly advanced what some highly advanced culture did. So they basically that's for that stone skull there, I mean, it it's gluing individual it it's first, it's making those individual little stone pieces and then gluing them together. And you look at it, and it's I mean, it looks from you know, I'm I'm not the, you know, trained eye, but from, you know, the untrained eye of mine, it looks flawless. You know? It doesn't look like some primitive baboon made it. Right? So No. Impressive. Yeah. You gotta think too that they they have to glue all this together, and you can't just put all the pieces and put the glue in and just expect it to set. Like, it has to be done, like, a a section at a time. Right? And then they have to sand it all and and then carve on top of it. What if you make a mistake when you're carving on top? Then the whole mosaic's ruined. I mean, it's ridiculous to carve on a mosaic like that, to be honest. Definitely. Alright. So you mentioned that they've been turned in for about eighty years. So and I think in one of your videos, you mentioned plasma cutters. So Yeah. The engraving that, is on some of these stones is so precise that one potential option is that a a plasma cutter was used. So I looked up when plasma plasma cutters I have that's super cool too, but hang on. So I looked up when plasma cutters were invented, and it was 1950. So, I mean, plasma cutters have been around for seventy years so that they've been turned in eighty years or ten years before plasma cutters were even invented. I mean, it kinda tells me that or what was what was using that level of precision to carve into these things. So Like like, this stone here is so smooth to the touch Yeah. That you would not like, if if if you were blind and you were feeling this, there's no way you would guess that this has a a mural on it. Yeah. You know what I mean? What kind of stone even is that that it's green? I mean, the the It's green banded calcite. So they were able to take calcite, which is naturally white, and somehow make it green? No. No. There's green banded calcite out there. Yeah. But you've gotta get a big enough stone. But, yeah, it's not super common in this quality. You know, the the replicas we've seen because they've they've replicated these green stones. The carvings don't look the same. It's easy to spot the symmetry and and whatnot. But needless to say, the specimen itself is is nowhere near the saturation and the quality. Like, some of these pieces I have are extremely saturated. This one here is over, it's it's close to 200 pounds. Yeah. And this is very, very big. And then even the eyes there, I think you mentioned that there that's gold leaf or it's Yeah. It's real, you know, I don't know, eighteen, twenty four karat gold, whatever it is. Well, no. That that's the peculiar part. So for instance, like, on this bracelet, there's all these different places with gold. When you take an XRF, scanner and and scan the alloy, it's not consistent. First of all, there's no purity at all. It's between 12 and and you know, some of them are 10. Some of it's 15 carat. Some of it has silver in it. Some of it has copper in it. Some of it has even rhodium. It's all unrefined, a 100%. Wow. And then I think you mentioned too that radium was found in some of the gold samples. So why is that Rhodium? Rhodium. Rhodium is, it's, like platinum, but much more rare. It's it's it's I think it's, like, three or four times the cost of gold. So to find rhodium in a gold sample is just extremely rare. So was it was it, purposely put into the gold or the No. No. You'll find it just like platinum. When you're refining gold or when you're finding gold, you'll see that there's traces of other elements, and and so it's not completely uncommon, to have, you know, that. But in modern gold, like, if I was to go buy leaf off of, you know, the web or something like that, it's all gonna be 24 carats so they can weigh it out properly and get you the correct amount. And you're not gonna find the variance there, let alone unrefined with other metals because it's not going to make as quality of a product in the end, and people want quality products if they're gonna be using gold on it. So it's, it's weird. So so whoever made these pieces had to tap that gold out themselves. And and it's not just on a couple pieces. This is, across dozens and dozens of pieces. Even on on, like, this armadillo here, his eyes are gold. Oh, wow. You can see it's not a very high purity. I think the this one was only, like, nine carats, but so it's gold. You know? Yeah. Alright. So let's take a look at that mask that you have in the in the case, the, alien mask. Because this one too, it's got writing all over it. It's a mosaic. Yep. It's a pipe. Pipe. Wow. I mean, that's just crazy. What's on the back? You know? You gotta go slow with this sort of stuff. Yeah. Also heavy. Right? I mean, that's another, what, what, 10 pound or something? No. This actually is only it's actually meant to hold up to your face and and smoke out of, so it's it's probably only three pounds. That's crazy. If there were aliens ten thousand years ago, they're get they're blazing they're blazing green or whatever they were smoking. Well, it was tobacco, is what we found in the resin samples at least. It was majority tobacco and maybe some other roots and and stuff, but no cannabis, no ayahuasca or any of the vines that that contain that sort of stuff. So, yeah, that that was obviously the question for me because some of this stuff is borderline psychedelic looking. You know? Yeah. And the saucers are even, I mean, more impressive. Like, I mean, you've got that, which is a disc, but, yeah, you've got a saucer there. Classic saucer saucer shape. This this one blows my mind here. I, I mean, this is your typical abduction scene right here. There's, like, a lady with this helmet on and, two guys standing over the top of her in a saucer. Wow. Crazy. I never thought about it like that. I just thought it was a person in the middle. I but it could be, I guess, abduction. Right? I don't know. I mean, it's weird. I've never seen a helmet like that depicted on any other piece, and the fact that her genitalia is, depicted is is interesting of why they would go through that extent unless it was of significance. You know? Yeah. And then the step pyramid, I mean Yep. What's the what and, stone balls too. Like, so, clearly, I don't know the difficulty in making a stone ball a spherical ball, but can you just grab that that ball and just, I mean, there's gotta be some level of difficulty in making these things where, you know I even have one, and I I you asked me to grab it, but I unfortunately could not grab it. It was way too deep. I have a lot of stuff in safes and things, but, one of them is a full mosaic ball like this. And that's the crazy one to me because to to create a sphere out of stone isn't easy, out of mosaic is just ridiculous. You know? Yeah. And then in the back, we can see they had rings, stone rings, and then you've mentioned that that there I mean, that one looks like a small, stone ring, but there are super large stone rings and super large pendants, like, you know Yeah. Very large. Here, I'll show you this one. This one's crazy. It's absolutely very large. Put it next to this bottle here. You can see. Yeah. I mean, it's just it's amazing to me because if there was some advanced civilization ten thousand or plus years ago, that there's still that they that they care about, you know, pendants and, you know, just fashion, things you would you would imagine would be irrelevant to a a, you know, potentially space traveling, you know, civilization. Right? So Yeah. Yeah. And that's and that's the thing. You know? Is it is it, exactly that, or or was this more of what the Anunnaki story talks about? I mean, are these grays the or or previous races, that inhabited here before Enlil's, you know, spaz? I I I don't know. But if you read those stories, there's definitely something to it. I don't take it word for word in terms of the translations, but there's definitely a core there that that seems to be really relevant to the book of Enoch. The only argument I would have against that is if it if the were, you know, subservient to the Anunnaki. So I can't imagine that a subservient civilization, even though they may have been more advanced than whatever humanity was, if if that all of that is real, could create such, I mean, masterpieces. You know? None like like I said, none of this stuff looks like it's out of place or, you know, jagged edges or, you know, created by an Advanced technology was used for sure. Just like the Pyramids, just like a lot of this stuff. I mean, there's those durete statues in Egypt that are carved to such precision to look like, you know, Imhotep and and stuff. There's just no way unless you have something advanced. I I don't think we have a way to replicate that in Durite today. Yeah. That's an interesting one there too, the cylinder. So you got basically, the top is saucer. Right? Oh, wait. Yeah. It pulls up out of there. There's three guys inside of it that that come out. They're all adorned with you can see the core is made of a ceramic of some form or a stone, and then they they glue on the top of it. So I I I never saw the inside of that. Why why would they why would they make it like what do you think? What's going on with the ins I mean, it kinda looks like a they're just frozen, you know, frozen in carbonite kind of in the middle there. Yeah. It's weird. I don't want them to fall out because, you can see they're they're yeah. One handing, that one's not possible. But, yeah, it's a it's a very immaculate piece. There's gold inlaid into this piece, as well here. Let me see. Ah, that's another one with the the I don't know what you would call it hybrid or, you know, you've got the almond eye. States of duality, is depicted in in many of these pieces. You can see, trying to find another example. Like, right here is is another one. Yeah. But but the the one thing I noticed about these is notice the eye shape and the position of the eyes is different, and and it varies from piece to piece, but but it's consistent. Some of them look human on one side. Some of them look reptilian on one side. So that's something I've noticed is is the dualities are different states. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know what to make of that. I mean, my first thought is, you know, just going back to the hybrid thing, whether that was a real thing or not, but maybe there were transit transit transitory states where someone was representing in their mask, like, I'm half this and half that. I don't I don't know. Yeah. And that's I mean, it's showing genetics, so they could absolutely be and, you know, we have scaly skin. So, that's always kinda been a mystery. Some of the things that put us together to create us or or differentiate us from, you know, primates and stuff like that. I think it's interesting, you know, in terms of, the way our chromosome mutated and how intelligence was actually born on on, you know, us versus our predecessors. It definitely doesn't seem like an accident. They've ran those odds through supercomputers, and it and it comes up with impossible odds, you know, 10 to the 500 or more, and that that's crazy. Yeah. I mean, we're 99.9 something percent, primate, you know, evolved from, you know, monkeys. Right? So, I I don't know what I don't know what the truth is. Hang on. Wait. Can you go back to that piece you just had? Because Yeah. Like, the other thing yeah. The other thing about it, if it was faked, how do you fake the weathering? I mean, the the, like Yeah. How can you make something look as old as that looks? They have methods. I mean, I've studied this a lot, and I've looked at a lot of these pieces, and I've I've identified pieces that are fake. Absolutely. What they'll do is they'll put it in a rock tumbler or some sort of, cement mixer with, certain types of sands and rocks and things, and it'll sit there and spin with it and get, naturally worn and and stuff like that. Well, not naturally wore, but, it'll look like it's old, but it's not. You know? Then they just cover it with dirt and and stuff. So, I've I've rinsed a lot of pieces off and and, you know, started from from bread and butter to see what was underneath all the dirt because that that's really important. And and then they say not to remove that stuff, and I don't on most pieces, but it had to be done just now. You know? Wouldn't that wouldn't putting it in some kind of rock tumbler, wouldn't that destroy or increase the chances of, you know, breaking some of the pieces? Absolutely. Yeah. So that would kinda argue against it because if they're gonna try to age it, you know, superficially, there's gonna be some percentage of pieces that break, and it's just a waste of time and effort, right, that that they're going through. No. I mean, I I think on the smaller pieces like this, that that no. That's not the case. Yeah. But when we're talking something like this Yeah. Yeah. I I cannot see them putting this in a tumbler, man. There's no way that you would get all the way done with the etchings and perfecting this on a mosaic and be like, yep. Let's go ahead and age it now. You know? There's just no way. I mean, I'm Definitely. That doesn't make sense for sure. Yeah. It's it's really bizarre too. You know? A lot of these pieces, I'll show you something kinda unique. You know? They have these holes drilled into them. Let's see here if you can see that like there. You see the hole there and the hole here? Yeah. Also on this this top piece here, you can see there's a hole again. And then, for instance, on this pendant, you got this pendant. The two gems have holes drilled through there. And and I just you know, you can put a light behind here, and it'll illuminate the gemstones, which is interesting, you know, because a lot of this stuff plays with light. And what what what's also interesting is is you see the Anunnaki depicted on a lot of these. And if you read through the Anunnaki stuff, you you'll read that they they had a splendor about them, in terms of a light that they put off or a halo. And and it's the same with the old people in the Bible like Methuselah. They they would light up a room just by entering is what it said. So if this was the case, what if that light had ultraviolet in it, the spectrum, and cause these pieces to naturally illuminate? And just by wearing this piece, the the eyes would illuminate by being on one of these beings with this blood of, whatever caused them to glow. You know? Anunnaki bloodline. Yeah. I I don't know. Could be any I hear you, but it could be anything. Right? It could be Oh, just theories, man. I I I have to think about this stuff because, you know, to to wrap my mind around it and swallow the pill that it's even real is really hard. So I have to really try to understand what the what what's going on here, and and, man, it's it's way deeper than I ever imagined I would go. I'll tell you that much. Definitely. And you there are pyramids too. So there there are a few pyramid stone carvings. I'll show you a really crazy one here. Let me grab my light too so you can see inside of this thing. You know, there's different pyramids like this that have pieces inside of it, little pine cones and acorn looking, calcite pieces. And we see a lot of the pine cones and handbags. But for instance, like this pyramid here, it's got, an odd shape to it. It looks more like the ones found in Sedan. Oh, actually, I can do this, and it'll look much better. I'm so sorry. I have no idea. But this has a a weird slot here you can see, and and it came with this this key. Oh. A pegged key, and you put it in here, and, it'll allow you to push this little pin up. And so you can see this this block is now locked in here. I could turn it upside down, and it's locked. And so there there is a primitive type of a latch thing. It's not a spring loaded. Let me get it out of here now. Yeah. But that's stone. Somehow, they made they made a a stone lock. Yeah. It it's it's definitely taken some practice, to to understand it because it's just so like, I just wouldn't have guessed it to be like that, I guess. You know? And then what's what's in there when you take that piece out? I'm trying to get it out of here, so give me one second. It's I'm gonna actually set you down so I can do this properly here. So give me one second here. Just don't wanna break something. You know? Yeah. I mean, you basically have it like the muse museum of alien carvings. It's great. Yeah. I mean, it's turned into that. It's absolutely crazy. You know? We got close to 600 pieces now or a little over 600 pieces. I got it out. Ah. So you can see here inside the hole. I got my light. I'll show you. It's full of carvings, a, which is incredible. Yeah. They've got this primitive lock system. You see the notch there. Behind the notch, there's a little peg. You can barely see it. That's how I didn't notice it. But that's what the key pushes in and and it pops out. And you just use the gravity of the piece to to to have it lock it in there and turn it on inside. And a whole bunch of engravings on the inside. I saw I think I see a DNA on the top. DNA in there and and aliens in there as as well as language, and it's all illuminated too. It's been inlaid with the the glowing in there as well. And then the piece here see. It almost reminds me of the the stuff on the fifth element. You know, those blocks that the they were chasing around the universe or whatever, old movie from the nineties. But Yeah. It's, it's interesting to see some of the sci fi and some of the the things that just made me really scratch my head because, first of all, you know, I got this piece from the Miho Hoon, and and I thought for sure I had them. I'm like, this is fake for sure. Look at this. K? It looks like the xenomorph. I'm like, yeah. That's that's BS. You know? Yeah. And then gen six gen six productions is down in Tula Hidalgo, you know, a place that's, like, 600 miles away. And they got full coverage, you know, dig videos start to finish of this coming out of the ground. And I don't know if you saw a recent post, but, I mean, there's a full cave system, and and there's aliens on the walls. And so it's really hard for me now to be like, what the heck? You know? Yeah. What? Is this real? Are there really xenomorphs? I mean, it blows my mind to even question that. You know? Yeah. This this this opens a whole world of, like, did they if it's real, did they come here? Did they live here? Did they evolve here? Are we products of somehow whatever they did? I mean, there's so many questions. Right? So Mhmm. Yeah. It's it's a it's a beautiful, thing to to research and to have this. I've gone into deep history of multiple religions and cultures, and I feel like I've educated myself, a lot just because of really curiosity at this point. You know? Or or or it's just somebody's brilliant imagination. It's like the Banksy of stone carvings. Right? Yeah. And if that's the case, I wanna shake this person's hand so bad because they they got me. And they and they got it so good, and they were so correct that they're they're a genius. I mean, they they really are. They deserve to be credited. And and I say that too, like, because there's you know, I'm a musician. This is a whistle. So I'll show you. I'll play this here for you real quick. It, it's it's so in tune and so just pure sounding. But, you know, you put that to a tuner, and it's it's it's right on the money. So to tune a stone skull that weighs 30 pounds, just nuts. You know? So you're saying from your musical background, that's tuned what what musical Yeah. I ran it through a guitar tuner, and and it's and it's right on the notes of, I think it was, I think c, d, and f or something like that, if I remember right. It's crazy. So some of the some of the pictures depict, beings, like, blowing into the air, and I don't know if that's them singing or maybe it's flute frequency. I I I don't know. That's a great question. There's quite a bit of it in, especially more so than Tula that I'd seen. However, in this cave system that I just mentioned, there's actually a depiction of one of the aliens blowing out the, the thing that you're speaking of. I'm trying to find a, a depiction of it here real quick so we can put it together. Too many pieces. Actually, I think it's there's one on this maybe. No. But, yeah, it's it's super interesting. I mean, you you take a piece like this, all these little circles around here are all individually cut and laid in there with with heads and and different symbols on them. And then on the back, they're all drilled. And so if you lay this up to a light, you can see here They they light I mean, it's not this isn't the best light, but you can see the light through, and these things illuminate. So it's like a What was on the back of that? What was on the back of that, I don't think I've seen that piece before. Complex little Yeah. Piece. You know? It's got this scale here. This it seems like a scale maybe, but bizarre looking. I don't know. Yeah. Some of the technology depictions and and things of that nature are are just mind blowing because I've never seen anything like it. Even just like this language, I've never seen these symbols ever. You know? And then there are some, like, stone astronauts. I think you've got a couple a few of those. Yeah. Yep. This guy here. Yeah. Any chance you can pull that out so we could take a look at what's on the inside? Because when you open it up, it's just amazing. Absolutely. I mean, it's like it's like, stone carvings for kids. Like, if you had kids and you get have these little, you know, toys, I mean, it's like stone toys. I mean, it's just Yeah. Again, it's either brilliant or just, you know, whatever. I mean, you know, I so This this helmet comes off of here. Yeah. And what's interesting, you know, is this red glue that glues all this together. You can see the inside is just caked with this red glue. Yeah. They repaired this helmet. It cracked at one point. Wow. But But it came out of the ground cracked and and repaired already. So that having traces of repairs and stuff on these pieces is also a pretty good inclination that it's, you know, in the ancient glue, because I've seen the guys locally when they break the pieces pulling it out of the ground, and it's always super glue every time. There's never been one, where it's just, you know, oh, yeah. We repaired this with the red glue. It's always super glue. You can always spot it. They're horrible with it. It kills me, as you can hear the tone of my voice. So, you know, it's frustrating when they don't do a good job. You know? But Yeah. Yeah. Another important thing, I mean, see seeing, seeing the craftsmanship and and the amount of inlays on these pieces is just it's a lot of work. Yeah. Not easy to cut stone. You know? And just to reiterate, that's a stone astronaut with a removable head, like you said, that it broke and they glued it back together. I mean, this isn't some plastic toy. This is completely carved out of stone. I mean, it's just amazing. Do you have other yeah. And then we go again with the, you know, alien iconography. I mean, it's just, There's the the thing coming out of his mouth too. Yeah. Yep. And so what we're what we're thinking or what we've been able to kinda visualize based off of seeing all this is that that it's possible that these beings are are, like, multidimensional and can maybe, you know, through the mouth, blow their soul out or something. I I mean, that's kinda what it seems because some of them actually come out, and then it shows the the the character animation into, a being with a little wispy thing behind it like, you know, something like this where it's not a there's no feet. Yeah. And yeah. I I don't I don't know if I buy the multi or trans Here we go. Here here we go. Right here. So you'll see some of them blow out the oh, yeah. It's right on here. Perfect. The guy's blowing it out, and then outcomes this. Yeah. Breathing out life. I don't know. So it's interesting because, the I don't know about these things or even whatever's going on at Skinwalker being transdimensional. I just think that Mhmm. I think it's possible that evolution speed is geared into evolution. So if you notice I don't know how closely you watch Skinwalker, but they have some, like, the fastest, cameras in terms of, lens speed, faster than the eye can detect. And then when they roll the the camera did you see that? You know what I'm talking about? Yeah. Yeah. Shit coming in and out of the mountain. And, I I mean, the the stuff that they've captured is breathtaking. I I mean, did you watch the Brandon Fugle interview, from, I think his name's Nick or something like that, but it's like a it's like a four hour interview with Brandon Fugle. And I'm I'm telling you what, I highly encourage it because he goes into details that are not on that show, and it really gives a full circle of how he got the ranch from Bigelow and and and what maybe more is going on there. I mean, you have to look that that Travis Taylor was was working with the government for years while working at the ranch getting paid by Brandon Fugel. So Brandon Fugel is basically paying a government agency person to do work at his ranch. And and so, he he's cool with it now, but the story of how Travis Taylor was given to Skinwalker or per per, proposed to Skinwalker was through the History Channel. The History Channel brought him to Brandon. And I find that interesting because Prometheus Entertainment owns ancient aliens. They own Oak Island, and they own Skinwalker. And all these shows have real truth to them, but they seem to be little breadcrumbs and a trail that never ends. You know? Oh, piece of candy. Oh, piece of candy. But it's it's like they're controlling this, like, a a a faucet, and they're not giving out the, the conclusive research. And and and I know this because I've contacted so many people from ancient aliens and talked with Linda Moulton Howe for six months and and stuff regarding this topic. And they know all about it, but it's completely lip sealed. And and my point is is if you're a u fologist and this is your passion and and you put fifty years into this, why wouldn't you try to disprove something like this that's making your subject and your passion look foolish, in reality? Because this, if it's fake, is is just hurting the alien community. You know what I mean? Well, I think I think it's easier said than done to try to you'd need people with specific expertise to try to disprove this stuff, like geologists. We've got them. And we've got them. We've got we've got geologists, forensic geologists. We've got PhD bone experts. We've got, all all kinds of people Yeah. That have the proper degrees. And and Scott Wolthor specifically has has submit and and been told no by, like, 14 or 15 different labs. Yeah. But I think Travis is I'm not I don't think. Travis is a legit scientist. Now the whole entertainment entertainment versus, you know, research, He's a legit scientist. I I play zero doubt on the stuff he's doing there. But in terms of the what I was what I was gonna say about Skinwalker in terms of cameras that have a lens you know, the lens speed that's way faster than the human eye. So I wonder if there's some aspect of evolution where highly advanced civilizations, they're not you know, they're whether it's their eye you know, their ability first of all, our senses can only detect you know, we evolved to detect things just for survival. So who's to say a million years from now, whatever humans can evolve into won't be designed for speed. Right? So Uh-huh. And, you know, so our primitive senses maybe can't detect what the full nature of reality is. So it goes back to transdimensional versus just a highly advanced civilization, maybe millions of years into the future in terms of evolution of their species, just evolving to the point of speed where, you know, what we perceive as a glimpse in time in a millisecond, to them, you know, it's it's, you know, anywhere. Yeah. It's just like the the James Webb being able to see beyond the big bang. I mean, it's it's all about how how much, or how far you can look. You know? And and seeing that there's something before that is is really relevant. You know? Yeah. So what do you what do you got here? I see the saucer. I see the Yeah. This was just a it's a really interesting piece. This piece has been out of the ground for over ten years, documented wise, and and it's, it it just you know, it's obviously this large mother ship looking thing. It's it's quite the the piece. It's got the stepped pyramid on there. The depictions are pretty amazing. But, yeah, this back piece is why I brought it out just because it's got a lot of this, you know, spaceship with with what almost looks like planets or or or, you know, this looks like the moon almost maybe. It's got big craters. I mean, spaceships pushing it with a beam or something. I I mean, or did they put the moon in position? Is that what this is depicting? Because you've got Saturn here. It's very interesting. It's almost like they're rearranging our solar system or something. You know what I mean? Yeah. So I thought about that Saturn iconography, but I imagine that the universe is filled with planets that have rings that we would interpret as Saturn, but maybe where they come from, that's their no. I I don't know. It could be anything. You know? Well, I would say that that too. However, I have documented multiple pieces that show specifically the the well, here, I'll show you one right now. Yeah. That you just can't argue it because it's got Jupiter's gas little rings on there. And, I mean, this is definitely what we got going on here. Yes. That's a man I mean, you got a person. Right? It's a person. What what are they juggling? Planets? I I don't know, man. Yeah. Your guess is as good as mine. I I have a million guesses, but it's it's definitely like you said earlier, it's it's one hell of an imagination regardless. I mean Yeah. Definitely. And so these things give off e m electromagnetic, radiation here, you know, or electromagnetic. Right? So Mhmm. So Mhmm. Yeah. Cool. The tri field. Yeah. So I I was thinking, like, have you considered cataloging, you know so I don't know. What spectrum are you are you in right now? This is just the electromagnetic frequencies on a standard level. So maybe there's a way to catalog it based on their EMF emission. What's what's odd is it changes. It changes all the time. Like, sometimes they'll they'll pop up really like, right now, this is way higher than it was last night when I did this. Wow. One eighty is really high for wow. So Yeah. It's bizarre. I have no explanation on this. There's no real scientific merit of what's going on here, but I've seen it on Skinwalker Ranch that they were getting odd readings. And so I bought a a spectrum monitor. I bought the tri field meter. I got a Geiger counter just to make sure, there was nothing radioactive considering it all glowed green, and we're clear there. But, yeah, no no real idea what it means that they produce this energy, but it is consistent. I've had numerous collectors test it. I've tested it outside. You know, I've never tested it in a Farunday cage, but that would be my next move to see, variance and and monitor them more accurately. I have used frequencies and different tuning forks and and synthesizers to produce, harmonic tones that could possibly interact with that EMF or or fluctuate it. And I haven't been able to see anything there, but it's a common question that I wanted to address. Yeah. Interesting. And then so what would your phone give off in terms of EMF, like, if you held it next to your phone? That's a good question. I, let me see if I can get it. What's a background? Background's just zero. Right? Right now I'm getting it closer and closer to my phone. You can see it's not moving at all. So no EMF. That's a you know, most people are worried about, like, Wi Fi. You know? And so, basically, no EMF coming off the trifold, very little. Oh, you're going closer to the yeah. It's crazy. We're just pulling it back towards me now as close as I can get it. You can see it's down to five or four, and you go closer to the pieces. And So do rocks give off EMF normally? I mean, is that Yeah. I I I've definitely gotten things to put off EMF. So that's why I say I don't have a scientific explanation on this specifically, but what I can tell you is that the consistency and and how you can move two inches right to left. Like, if I touch the scanner here, it doesn't show anything. But if I go just inches from one to another, you can see the dramatic difference like I was just showing. So the fact that it spikes up above a 100 and and the fact that it's that, you know, consistent to the piece, that that's the parts that definitely are are peculiar, I think. So it makes me think maybe it thinks, so maybe it's, the organization of the pieces. So if you if you align certain pieces next to others, they'll have a different EMF that they give off individually? That's definitely possible. Yeah. I I was thinking that, you know, it could be something to do with planetary, magnetic field energy as well. You know what I'm saying? Like, the planet's magnetic field is always changing. So, it could very well have to do with if we're getting hit with solar flare. Who knows? Right? But Yeah. But like this piece here, for instance, it it shows this guy with this pendulum. And I I found numerous pendulums, and and I found numerous depictions of them. And what's really crazy is there's a guy that I interviewed in a way, Los Dileysko, when I first started before I ever seen any of these pendulums, and he said when he was 12 years old that he had contact with with aliens. Right? And they taught him how to go and find these pieces. And and so what's interesting is they've been finding these pieces for a long time. Georadar and GPR has only come onto the scene in the last few years, and I think that's why this is exploding so much now is because people are getting it more cost effectively, and you can afford it, you know, to do it down there. Before, it was 20,000 plus dollars, and it was out of range. But, but I I think that that's a big factor that he he said that the the the beings taught him how to use this pendulum. They gave him a pendulum. It looks like the all seeing eye. I've seen it. It's got gold on it, and, and he'll take it on a string and go out there and and look for areas of cactuses or rock formations. He'll hold this thing over there, and and sometimes it starts tugging on him. And I thought he was just BSing, but, I mean, he he keeps bringing the pieces. So it's very strange now. So my point of that is is, okay, if these things really are producing an EMF and there really is something in his, pendulum that he has that that could interact with that EMF, It's possible it could have some sort of I don't know. Right? But interesting on a science level. Right? Yeah. So maybe the EMF is linked to the luminescence. Right? Because when you hit the black light on them, I don't know. We haven't done that. It doesn't affect it doesn't affect the, EMF with the black light now. And, like, in these pieces here, I'm not gonna be able to show you, but but but these here will will have a phosphorescent glow. They won't glow green. I can show you they don't. You know? There's no green on them, but they will still emit a phosphorescent glow after you turn the light off. And, and that's more of a geological thing. I think it's because of the amount of calcite. They they seem to use calcite in almost every one of these pieces. Obviously, not the quartz or the jade, but, in almost every piece, there's calcite. And I I think there's something really important there because, you know, you've got this this pineal gland or this eye depicted everywhere. A lot of people call it the pineal gland because it's got the proper things coming off of it, and it looks just like it. If that's the case, you know, you look at that gland and what it produces chemically for your body in terms of dreams and and all kinds of things, it it definitely depicted on on these pieces as like a portal. And, so if that's the case, there's a recent study about the pineal gland. And when using Ayahuasca, they were able to see that there's microcalcite crystals in the pineal gland that harmonically resonate when, put in in, under the influence of of DMT. So it's bizarre that there would be calcite in our body like that, let alone, all these pieces have to do with this type of, you know, ritual type stuff. So I'm I'm gonna look more into that. That's the first I'm hearing about it. So, yeah, I'm gonna definitely look more into that. Some crazy weird pieces and and stuff. I'll I'll bring these over so you can see me a little bit better. The e m in terms of the EMF and the, you know, the the the green and the, you know, chemiluminescence or or whatever the luminescence that comes off of it. What I'm try I'm not trying to say that the EMF will go down or up because of that, but maybe you the green color is because of what whatever's emitting the electromagnetic, you know, radiation. Right? You wouldn't see it with your eye, but once you turn the lights off, then because it's emitting that, that's what you see in terms of chemiluminescence. I don't know. Maybe I'm at a that's out of left field. But It it's definitely it's possible on the Tula pieces for sure that have that luminescence, but these pieces that don't have it still have the EMF. So that would that's the weird part. You know? Yeah. Gotcha. So the claw. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, what the heck is this? This is a piece of, like, egged. It's it's crystal. You can see, you know, again with the light. But, yeah, it's a interesting piece for sure. Very interesting. I mean, they made a lot of animal based, you know, replicas. Right? Like so I guess there's a beetle. There's turtles. Yeah. Yeah. Snakes, lizards. Scare about here. Yeah. I mean, it's like, they must that's another thing. If it was an ancient civilization, this is like the pinnacle of their civilization is to make stone artwork. I mean, there's gotta be other stuff. Right? I mean Oh oh, I mean, there's there's definitely ceramic, you know, but the the the artwork is insane. I I can only think that, you know, obviously, that that it wasn't just this, though. It's not just this. Think about what you said earlier with the stone age all over the world. Yeah. Think about India and the amount of art engraved onto their temples. Yeah. Like, this wasn't just these guys. You know what I mean? This was a worldwide thing. This is the this is the the the the dollar store. This is the dollar store, and the megalithic structures was their big grand design. Right? So Yep. Yeah. Wow. This is great. So there were coffins too. I I don't know. We saw a couple coffins, but, that's that's another interesting one. Yeah. Definitely coffins from both areas, fairly intricate. You know? Nice. So so there's got so there's a superficial where I see it a few times or more than a few times because I've checked in your Instagram and your TikTok every day looking at these things and even trying to study it and try to get the sense of what is the story here, what story were they trying to tell. But since you're actually living with hundreds of these pieces, like, what story what story do you think this tells? Well, I I think it tells the story of all of our cultures and and why we are the way we are, why there's the races that we have, why there's our genetic changes and and, all the different experiments on this planet. You know, we have all these plant species and all these species of life here, and it creates this balance. And and I think that we're seeing that that there is is, bigger things at play. I think that's the big cap here is that there is bigger things at play, tuning this planet for our inhabitants. And I I think we can see it throughout, even in our DNA today. The human DNA is evolving faster than any other species on this planet, and we have proof of that. So how's that working in that nature? You know? And and evolution, the whole Darwin's theory, you know, we we don't really see any sort of, you know, by now, we you think we'd monitor some sort of of evolution, and and it's not there. So So I heard Lou Elizondo talking about if you were an ancient civilization and you wanted stuff to last a long time, DNA would be the way you would tell that story because DNA is basically immortal. Right? So Yeah. Who so who's to say there aren't copies of whatever created this if it is real in our genome? Right? Just and we just don't know. We just interpret it as genes. You know? Yeah. We may have not been able to translate it to or or who who knows? You know? The Yeah. It's just like how they found the the, you know, Yahweh, symbols or whatever in our in our RNA. It's it's it's definitely interesting. Ah, stone watches. Right? So that too. I mean, like, what? Yeah. It's Here. I'll show you one. This one's pretty crazy. I've got one that looks just like the, the Sumerian, Anunnaki, you know, relief one. It's in the safe, but, yeah, very very interesting. And also very big. Right? Like, when you put it on your wrist, it's bigger than your wrist. This will actually fit me, fairly well, but some of them are are massive. Yeah. Like, there's there's no way. And it's the same with the rings. Like, some of them are so big that you you just even a three hundred fifty pound football player is not gonna be able to put it on. I'll show you this guy here. It's it's really impressive, the work in this bracelet. Yeah. You know, it's it's mosaic. Just to get that film to be on the inside. It's so what's on the inside? What? I can't really see. There are symbols. You can see the symbol here, and I know the focus is really, rough and zoom for some reason. I mean, I've never seen a stone wristband ever. I mean, I I don't know. I do. Even in the even in the replicas and stuff. Like, you don't see that type of stuff, let alone cups and vases. And look at this bowl. This bowl is just ridiculous. Oh, it's probably 20 pounds. Yeah. And it's got metal. You can see these metal inlays. Yep. Right here. And we see this deity deity here, which is found in Egypt as well. Yeah. Not not commonly, but it's there. And and, also, we see a lot of Egyptian symbols. Like, you asked earlier, you know, have you been able to translate anything? And and so, symbolically, yes. You know? Like, on on on some of these pieces here, like, this is really symbolic in my opinion. Because Osiris was depicted, you know, by an eagle, and this is set here, the anteater guy. But on the back of this, you have the the the all seeing eye, which is like the primordial god, and then you have the two serpents that are angels down below here. One of them is depicted with water here. This is the generic symbol for water globally. You'll find it in Peru, Egypt, all over the place. And, so I believe this is this is to depict Enki, the one son, and and Enlil, the other son of the primordial god, the angels, that supposedly came here in the Anunnaki story. Yeah. That's that's just amazing. So I think I think the eye and the pineal gland is just consciousness. I mean, it's you got that recurrent we Yeah. And then the onk being the symbol of life. So you've got the symbol of life. You've got consciousness. You've got DNA. You know, all all things that are pretty common. What what's that? This is the symbol of the pharaohs here. It's the, I forget the the specific name for it's the it's not the hook. It's, yeah, there there there there are there are, the the flail and the yeah. I'm I'm drawing a blank. But needless to say, you know, when like King Tut's, sarcophagus, he's holding these two items crossed over his chest. You'll see it in Egypt a lot. Wow. Yeah. I can't so that's what? Thoth Thoth Thoth is the one with the dog head? No. That's Anubis. Thoth has got the the the head of the ibis. Yeah. I was try do you think that was a real in Egypt is is this here, the ibis bird, and then he looks like, I'm just trying to think if I got a got a thaw somewhere handy. Oh, I know where. Giant Skull. My gosh. Yeah. There he is. Yeah. So, I mean, it's it's that's either a metaphor or real. I don't know which way. Like, you know, if you've got a if you've got an advanced civilization that can genetically engineer anything it wants into anything it wants, who's to say there couldn't be a dog head or thoth or or or you know? Yeah. Yeah. I think I think shape shifting is something that's depicted on many, many of these pieces, and, and and I believe to say that they often embody these these animal type, you know, perspectives or whatnot. If you go into Greek, Norse, like, you you'll see that they all represent animals and and constellations, you know, with the planets and Saturn, Mercury. Like, the this is common across many different cultures, so there's definitely something to that. Yeah. Like like Thoth is found in Sumeria, Greek, and Egypt. And he's known as Hermes Trismegistus in Greek, but but he's known as Thoth. Thoth and Isis are both in Egypt and Sumeria. So I think that's really important. You know? Yeah. I I just don't know what to make of it because, you know, I I can't imagine, you know, representing animals and images with animal heads and regular bodies and images. I can't imagine what the purpose of that would be unless it was a real thing or was intended to be some type of metaphor. Right? So but I I don't understand why it would just be a metaphor. Why wouldn't you just, yeah, I I don't know. No. I I think it was absolutely that these these, you know, in Genesis, it talks in in the book of or in the Epic of Gilgamesh, it talks about the angels, mating with our females, right, and and creating offspring. And that that's in the first chapters of the Bible. You know? Across so many different people believe this story that angels had sex with their or so what what were those beings? Who who you know, what what did they possess? Did they possess special powers? Were they the giants? Were they the glowing beings? Did they have, you know, reptilian and different animal type characteristics? I mean, who who knows? You know? If we're made in in his image, I mean, is all life made in his image? And so if that's the case, then, you know, maybe that's where where we have all these different animals. You know? I always wondered as a kid, like, why do we have so many breeds of dogs and stuff? You know? Everything's so there's just so much of it. And then another bit to that story could be, are they still here? You know, is this the the UAP phenomenon, and they're here, and we're just we're primitive baboons even by any standard compared to their advanced civilization. Right? So You remember that one video of the UAP that that they had going in and out of the water? Yeah. With no with no disturbance to the water. They're like mach six, right, or whatever they clocked it at? Yeah. So that video, I felt was really important, and and I don't see it very often these days. And, you know, you see a lot of aquatic type beings. Like, here he has a a type of a mermaid tail holding a trident, and and you see these aquatic type tails. You see the fish head with the, the the the tail as well, like they depict Enki. So it's very possible that these things are in the sea. You know? Yeah. So I have a hypothesis about that. So, you know, if you live in a poor neighborhood and you make some money, you move out of the poor neighborhood. You don't stay in the world generally. So why couldn't it be why couldn't it also be true from an advanced civilization scale? If we're primitive baboons just shooting spears at each other, why would you wanna live around that? You wanna live away from the primitive idiots who are blowing themselves up with missiles every day. Right? So if you're deep in the sea and, again, I don't know if it's true or not. But if you're deep in the sea, who's gonna come bother you unless you can actually go in the sea to visit. Right? So Exactly. It's just like Antarctica. You know? There's a lot of hypothesis that there's stuff going on down there. The Nazis were really interested in it. Yeah. You know, the whole World War two thing, I I keep going back to it in my mind because, you know, he was chasing around the ark of the covenant and all these these sacred things, you know, developing UFO looking ships and crazy technology. What the heck did he know? Or or thought he knew and was working towards. Right? Yeah. Exactly. Or being deceived and and and yeah, man. It's it's quite the story to think about for sure. Like the, Indian, Vimanas. Right? So, I mean, they were talking about that stuff for thousands of years. Even they were carving stuff in the you know, the the temples that are carved into mountains. This this same idea of carving out of the stone, you know, goes back thousands of years. Right? So Hechira and yeah. It's it's crazy. Yeah. Turkey, I mean, you know, even when I see Gobekli Tepe, to me, that looks primitive, and that's 12,000 years old. Compared to this stuff and, you know, the Peru and and, even, you know, the the one that's in near Singapore that was in, Graham Hancock's movie, the non Medall or maybe I'm saying it wrong. Yes. Yes. It could be up to 60,000 years old when they, you know, were doing the carbon dating deep into that thing. So Mhmm. You know? Yeah. Yeah. I I think there's definitely something to that, and, I mean, time will tell. Yeah. Alright. So good stuff. Of course. So aliencarvings.com. You're on TikTok. You're on Instagram. Anything we didn't cover that you wanna put out there? No. I think we we definitely got a good cover. Cool. Alright. I I I wanna say thanks and then your name, but, you know, I I know you wanna stay anonymous. So thanks, Alien College. Stay anonymous for now. You know? They they keep talking about this this congressional thing. That's something we didn't talk about. But, I I you know, I've got a a two year old and a family, and and this is a side thing for me. I I researched this purely out of hobby and passion. So, it's all independence, and I'm not trying to to bark up the wrong tree or anything like that. And and so right now, it seems like there's a a quite the cover up. You know? And if that's the case and this stuff really is real, I I wanna proceed with caution until congress grants this immunity for people to be able to talk about this. You know? Like Yeah. There's a reason that people from Area 51 and all these different programs are are are silenced. And, so until we can do it safely, yeah, I'll probably stay quiet. Makes sense. I don't blame you. I I have a, you know, a daughter too, so I totally get it. Yeah. So Yep. Gotta stay safe. You know? It it's Absolutely. We try to anyways. I mean, I I can't let it go, though. You know? My gut tells me to push forward with it, and, so here we go. We appreciate it. So thanks, alien carvings dot com, and, see you later. Alright. Ciao. Yep. Have a good day.