In an earlier video, we saw that tryptophan is converted into NAD by the de novo NAD synthesis pathway. But an age related decline for vitamin b six and more specifically, pyridoxal five phosphate or PLP may limit conversion of tryptophan into NAD. So with the goal of increasing intracellular levels of NAD and reversing the age related decline, how can we gain more insight about this pathway? Now, the first step would be to measure intracellular levels of NAD, and I've done that by sending blood samples to to G infinity now four times, and I put the latest video in that series in the right corner. Many commercial labs measure plasma levels of vitamin b six. So so that's another option. And similarly, many commercial labs provide measurement of tryptophan. But what about kynurenine? So with that in mind, last month, I sent blood for at home metabolomics with IOLO, which provided data for kynurenine and tryptophan, but also data for more than 500 metabolites, including metabolites related to aging and longevity, including polyamines, bile acids, and many others. And I'll have more on that in future videos. If you're interested in using iolo for at home metabolomics, there'll be a discount link in the video's description. Now, back to our story for kynurenine and tryptophan. And that's important because kynurenine to tryptophan ratio increases during aging and is associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So let's have a look at that data. And that's what we can see here. The kynurenine to tryptophan ratio or KTR increases during aging. So in this study of about a thousand people, people that had a median age of 59 years at baseline provided a blood sample, their KTR was calculated. And then eleven years later, they also provided a blood sample, KTR was calculated and there we can see a significant increase for the kynurenine to tryptophan ratio during aging. And that's potentially important because a higher ratio for kynurenine divided by tryptophan is associated with an increased all cause mortality risk and that's what we're going to see here. On the y axis, we've got the hazard ratio or all cause mortality risk plotted against the KTR on the x. And then, we put up our hazard ratio of one where we can see that lowest all cause mortality risk was associated with a kynurenine to tryptophan ratio of 15 to 23. And more specifically, we can see that the stars, the green stars are completely below one. So the shaded region, that's where the shaded region is completely below one, so we have a statistically significant association when the kynurenine to tryptophan ratio is 15 to 23. Conversely, the shaded region is completely above one in this case or increase all cause mortality risk when the kynurenine to tryptophan ratio is greater than 26. So with that in mind, what's my kynurenine to tryptophan ratio? Based on Iolo's data, my circulating levels of kynurenine were 0.74 micromolar. My circulating levels of tryptophan, 31.57 micromolar to get a ratio of 23.4 nanomolar per micromolar. Now, to put these data onto this chart, I would be somewhere there. So at best, a small but significant decrease for all cause mortality risk at best. At worst, no association with all cause mortality risk. So my data could be a little bit better, and that would be by reducing the kynerony to tryptophan ratio somewhere towards the middle where you can see that that will be associated with lowest all cause mortality risk because somewhere around twenty for a KTR. So how will I do that? Well, when considering that B6 may be the block in converting tryptophan through kynurenine into NAD, if I increase, if I further increase vitamin B6 intake and I'm currently at about thirty five milligrams per day, three times higher than my last, test for NAD, if I further increase my B6 intake, will that reduce the kyurnine to tryptophan ratio and correspondingly increase NAD? So stay tuned for that data. I plan on testing in a couple of weeks, so that data should be out sometime in June. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for at home metabolomics, NAD quantification, green tea, epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing with Scifox Health, and note that their panel of 17 biomarkers is almost exclusively different from at home metabolomics, so they're complementary tests, diet tracking with Cronometer. Or if you wanna support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Die Trying brand, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.