In the last video, we saw that my biological age when using doctor Morgan Levine's biological age calculator, PhenoAge, was seven about seventeen years younger than my chronological. Similarly, when using aging.ai, it was about 20 three years younger. So what's contributing to these data? So first, let's take a look at supplements. And if you're familiar with the channel, the first two shouldn't be a surprise as I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in my early twenties, early to mid twenties. So I've been taking levothyroxine about a hundred and forty micrograms per day ever since. The second is vitamin d. I supplement with vitamin d eight to nine months out of the year when I'm unable to get full body sun exposure. For this test, it was a thousand IUs per day which I've I've since increased and I'll have that in an upcoming video for the why. So note that I supplemented with vitamin d for 20 of the forty nine days that corresponded to this test. So what does that mean? So the forty nine days that corresponded to this test are from August 21 through 10/10/2023. And why specifically those days is because August 21 was the date of test number five. So immediately after test number five through the day before test number six which was on October 8, that's a forty nine day period and that lines up with the blood test data for blood test number six. Alright. So for the third supplement, I supplemented with methyl b twelve, a thousand micrograms per day for forty six of the forty nine days that correspond to this test to try to reduce homocysteine as the serine plus vitamin b six experiment didn't work and I'll have that data in an upcoming video. I also supplemented with fish oil EPA plus DHA two point one grams per day for eighteen days to potentially impact NAD. And if you missed that video, I'll put it in the right corner. Now note that that was early in this forty nine day period from August 24 through September 10, and it didn't work. It didn't raise NAD, so I took it out of the approach. And then last for supplements but not least, I supplemented with nicotinic acid again, only this time a far lower dose than the six hundred and fifty milligrams per day that increased my NAD very high to 67 micromolar. This time, I used a 10 times lower dose of sixty milligrams per day, and I did that for thirteen days, and later in this period. So, from September October 4. And I purposely ended it a few days before the blood test because I'm not yet sure if niacin itself is messing up my epigenetic pace of aging done eating paste. So I ended it a few days early before the test because I didn't wanna mess up my epigenetic spot pace of aging. Still waiting on those results for NAD. So we'll see if even a small dose of niacin was able to increase NAD. So stay tuned for that in an upcoming video. Alright. So that's it for supplements, which then brings us to diet. So what diet composition corresponds to this test? And that's what we'll see here. This is the average daily dietary intake over that forty nine day period that corresponds to test number six. Now note that I weigh my food every day and I record that data in Cronometer and then log all of that into an Excel file. So these data are as close to one can get as exact in terms of how much I was eating for each of these foods. Now I rank the foods based on the left from one to 25 and on the right from 26 to 50. So I ate 50 different foods, and these foods are ranked in terms of amounts in grams with the exception of green tea, which is in ounces. And if you're familiar with the channel, the foods that are at the top of this list have been purposely consistent in 2023. That's because after 45 blood tests since 2015, this diet including macro and micronutrients is consistently associated with relatively youthful biomarker data with a few exceptions, of course, Horvath's epigenetic age, homocysteine. But for the most part, it's a mostly youthful biomarker profile. Now I did make a few changes for this test in terms of dietary intake relative to test number five and that's because I tried to alter my oral microbiome by changing some of the foods that are associated with bacteria in my mouth that can reduce serratia marquesins or potentially can reduce serratia marquesins. So those foods included increasing red bell pepper, increasing yogurt, and increasing pistachio. Not big increases, very small increases, as I don't want to blow up the system for one variable, the oral microbiome and mess up potentially mess up blood biomarker. So I made very small increases to follow the correlations with bacteria again that can potentially reduce serratia marquesins. And then those are the foods that I increased, but I also reduced a few foods including mushrooms and onions under the same premise that these foods were associated with a bacterial profile, an oral bacterial profile that may have been able to reduce serrateumarcassins, which is 95% of my oral microbiome, which is just outrageous. But it didn't work and I'll have that data in an upcoming video. Now, to meet my total fat goal of about 80 grams per day by increasing pistachios, that means I had to reduce something else. And the, in this case, it was almonds. So I made a small cut to almonds to accommodate that small increase for pistachios. And I also added in two eggs per week, one each on workout days with the premise that, if I increase dietary choline intake, especially from from eggs, eggs are a rich source of choline, that might be able to help reduce homocysteine to get it away from my age expected data where it currently is and to get it to more youthful values. And just as a quick aside, my foliate intake is 2.5 x the RDA. I'm supplementing with vitamin b twelve. TMG in the past, trimethyglycine, didn't work up to three grams per day to reduce homocysteine, and the serine plus vitamin b six experiment three times three different doses didn't work. So choline could be one area where I can increase, potentially increase it to reduce homocysteine as I'm generally only around the RDA for that nutrient. Alright. So the diet isn't always purposefully clean. I try to include no more than two cheat meals per dietary period that corresponds to each test. As if I go above that, it can start to lead to an obsession with junk and then that can trigger a binge and that's I'm trying to completely avoid that. So two is my limit. Two, I try to make no more than two chi meals per dietary period. And for this test, it was chocolate chips mixed with peanut butter as a homemade Reese's peanut butter cup. I'm addicted to it. What can I say? Tastes great. So on the immediately after test number six and the day after, I mix the chocolate chips with peanut butter so that 4.7 gram per day average isn't every day. It's exclusively on two days. And when calculating the calories from chocolate chips, it was about 1,200 calories, which equates to 1.1% of my total calorie intake for this period. So 99% clean, 1% junk. Alright. So this list is ranked in grams. What about foods ranked in terms of calories for top contributors for the, test number six? And that's what we'll see here. So note that these data are tracked with Cronometer, and if you want to measure your own diet with Cronometer, that link will be in the video's description. So atop the list, as it's been for many tests now, are sardines. So I get the sardines are my number one food in terms of where I'm getting the majority of my calories from. And then in terms of the remaining foods on the top 10 list, nine of these foods are the same as they were for the first five tests in 2023. With the exception of coconut butter, which didn't make the this list at 89 calories per day. Just, you can see the top 10 is 93 calories per day. So coconut butter just barely missed the cut. And then what entered into the top 10 for this test are collard greens. Whereas for test number five, they're at 85 calories per day. For this test, 97 grams per day. And I did that on purpose, following following correlations for vitamin k with collard greens being a great source of vitamin k with HDL. And that may actually be one reason why my HDL has now been higher than 50 for four consecutive tests. Again, I'll have that data in an upcoming video too. Alright. What about macronutrient composition? How does that correspond to test number six? So first starting with calorie intake, it was 21 2,115 calories per day, which you may have seen me say this a lot, but that's my, again, my lowest average daily calorie intake since I started tracking diet in April 2015 with twenty one twenty two for test number five being my previous low. So I've been trying to make very small cuts to calorie intake over a very long period of time with the goal of sustaining whatever fat loss that I've or whatever fat that I've gotten rid of over the past year or so. Alright. In terms of macros and protein intake, I average 95 grams per day, which is another quick aside is about 1.5 grams per kilogram body weight with 1.6 grams, of protein per kilogram body weight being close to the maximum of what's been reported to maximize muscle mass as a result of strength strength strength training. So I'm pretty close to that at 95 grams per day. I may go a little bit higher though but that's where it was for this test. Protein intake accounted for about 18% of total calories. Alright. So what about fat intake? And that's what we can see here. Average daily fat intake was about 81 grams per day which is about 35% of total calories. And If you're interested in how total fat breaks down including mono, polyunsaturated, omega three, omega six, saturated, trans fats, and cholesterol, all of that data is listed there. Alright. So what about carb carb intake? Carbohydrate intake? That's what we can see here. So total carbs are about 290 grams per day which superficially seems like a lot but note that net carbs equals total carbs minus fiber. Average daily fiber intake for this test was 83 grams per day and again this is a forty nine day average not the day before the test but for all forty nine days in between test number five and test number six. So fiber was 83 grams per day and when subtracting that from net carbs, we get, total carbs, we get a net carbs of 207 grams per day. Multiplying that by four calories per gram, we get that my diet for this test was about 39% net carbs. Now note that fiber also provides calories as soluble fiber within total fiber is fermented by gut bacteria into short chain fatty acids. So some percentage of the total fiber is converted into fat. And for this test, it was a 176 calories. So it's about two calories per gram coming from the fiber, intake that can be added to the total fat. So that, just to note that total fat by total fiber contributed about 8.3% of the calories of total calorie intake. So now we can calculate my net macros by adding the 8% to the 35% for total fat to get to yield a 43% fat for average fat intake every day, about 39% net carbs, and about 18% protein. And note that I didn't start off on this path with those percentages in mind. I've let the blood biomarkers guide what the diet should be, and I've settled on this diet because it seems to yield the best biomarker profile. Alright. So within total carbs, I also track sugar intake and more specifically, total fructose. So fructose and sucrose. Note that sucrose is half fructose. So when dividing that by two and adding that to fructose, we get a total fructose of about fifty eight grams per day for this test. Now, that may seem like a lot but that's, once again, I should say close close to my lowest fructose intake since starting diet tracking in 2015 with 50 seven point five grams per day, my lowest fructose intake, And I've had fructose intakes that are double that. So I've mentioned this in other videos, but 50 eight grams per day is actually a small win compared to my normal or my usual or what I would normally eat, if I wasn't trying to quote unquote restrict, somewhat restrict fructose intake. Alright. What about micronutrient profiles? So we'll start off first with vitamins and this may be hard to see. So, I'd recommend going full screen if you haven't already. So I won't highlight everything but I just wanna note that I've got got full RDA coverage and that many micronutrients are purposely higher than the RDA as I'm following correlations with blood biomarkers. And just to highlight one of them, vitamin k, you can see is more than twenty three hundred micrograms per day. An adequate adequate intake or what the RDA is is somewhere around a hundred micrograms depending on if you're a man or a woman. So I'm 23 x the RDA for vitamin k and not by any random luck. It's following correlations with the blood biomarkers and that amount seems to be, again, part of the approach for correlations within overall blood biomarker profile that's mostly youthful. Alright. So next up is, mineral intake. And if you're interested in how my mineral intake looks, I've listed it fully there. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, including daily data for food intake, macro micronutrients, and food composition, I post that daily on Patreon. We've also got discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for at home metabolomics, any dequantification, epigenetic and telomere testing, or microbiome composition, at home blood testing, including APOB, including a panel using Cyphox Health that's different from the metabolomics, so they're somewhat complimentary kits, dye tracking with Cronometer, green tea, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch, so if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or dye charting brand, as I've got on here, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I Hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.