A major focus of the channel is to optimize biomarkers of as many organ systems as possible. So with that in mind, what's optimal for telomere length? And that's what we'll see here. On the y axis, we've got telomere length plotted against chronological age. And this is true diagnostics cohort. So in youth, we can see that telomere length is 7.6 to 7.75 kilobases or kb. And then at advanced ages older than 80, we can see that telomere length shortens to less than 6.6 kilobytes or kilobases. So we can see that telomere length declines during aging and in terms of what's optimal, avoiding an age related decline while attempting also to keep it relatively youthful as close to 7.6 kilobases or longer is the goal. So with that in mind, what's my data? So to address that, I sent blood to TrueDiagnostic. Discount link will be in the video's description. And this is telomere test number five's data for 08/21/2023. So it takes four to six weeks to get, the data back once you send it to true diet true diagnostics. So I just got it a few weeks ago. And with that in mind, data for the October 2 sorry, October 9 test, still waiting on that as, again, it takes a few weeks to get the data. So for telomere test number five, it was once again 7.1 kilobases, which if we look at the plot on the left, would put me exactly at age expected based on my or what's expected based on my chronological age, so not great as my goal is to have everything relatively youthful relative to my chronological age. But there is some good news. So for that, how does 7.11 kilobases, which is what I had for this test, compare with previous tests? And that's what we'll see here with telomere length on the y axis, the twenty twenty two data on the left versus twenty twenty three on the right. So over three tests in 2022, average telomere length was 7.04 kilobases. Whereas in 2023, so far, over the first five tests, it's 7.13 kilobases. Now rather than looking at averages from year to year, we can evaluate these data to see if they're statistically different by using a two sample t test. And when I do that, we can see that I've significantly increased 2023 data relative to 2022 as the p value is less than 0.05. So what may be contributing to these data? Which factors may impact telomere length? So in my data, the most likely, factor is calorie intake. And if you're familiar with the channel, you've seen me look at correlations for calorie intake before. After I get the data for every test, I reevaluate the cal correlations to see what may still be significant or now is newly significant, and then try to follow that as best I can. And I'll get more into that approach as we go through this video. But for now, the strongest one of the strongest correlations with telomere length is calorie intake in my data over the eight tests. So on the y axis, we've got telomere length plotted against the average daily calorie intake. And note that this isn't the average daily calorie intake on the day of the test. This is from the previous immediately after the previous test to the day before the subsequent test. In other words, if there's a sixty day period in between tests, I track my daily diet by weighing all my food, I then log that data into Cronometer, discount link in the video description. And then because I know my daily intake, the average dietary intake for that sixty day period corresponds to the latter test. And for every blood test, it then lines up with a corresponding dietary intake and I can then look at correlations and then attempt to follow the correlations with the goal of optimizing biomarkers towards youth and health. So with that in mind, the correlation for telomere length with calorie intake, which we can see is a significant inverse correlation. In other words, a relatively higher calorie intake is significantly correlated with a shorter telomere length in my data, whereas a relatively lower calorie intake is significantly correlated with a longer telomere length. But calorie intake doesn't tell us much about which factors within the diet may be contributing. So what about diet composition? To address that, let's first start off by taking a look at correlations for macro and micronutrients with telomere length. And we can see here what we can see here are the nutrients that are significantly, correlated with telomere length. In other words, nutrients that have a p value less than 0.05 as the threshold for statistical significance. And note that I looked at, 42, correlations for 42 macronutrients, and those that are on this list are the ones that had a p value less than 0.05. So I should mention that the r, little r, that's the correlation coefficient. When it's positive, that's higher levels of the nutrient are significantly correlated with a longer telomere length. And conversely, when the value is negative, relatively higher levels of the nutrient are significantly correlated with a shorter telomere length. Now note that these are unadjusted correlations. As I mentioned, calorie intake is significantly correlated with telomere length, which then raises the question, are these correlations still significant after accounting for calorie intake? And that's potentially important because if I have a relatively higher or lower nutrient intake in concordance with a higher calorie intake, is it the nutrient or is it the calorie intake? So by adjusting the models for calorie intake, by including calorie intake in the models that look at correlations with telomere length, we can address that question. So after including calorie intake in the model, now vitamin b one is just outside of significance with a p value of 0.06. Similarly, selenium is no longer significant with the p value of 0.11, And then total fructose has a p value of point one two. So in other words, after adjusting for calorie intake, that most or the the variables that are most strongly correlated with telomere length are no longer statistically significant. And if I went through the rest that are on the list, they too wouldn't be statistically significant as if the strongest correlations aren't significant, then the weaker correlations certainly won't be significant either. So looking at macro and micronutrients is kind of a rough way of looking at diet composition as we attempt to reduce the, you know, the foods that we eat into, you know, these defined variables of protein, carbs, fat, etcetera. So with that in mind, what about foods? How are foods related to telomere length, at least in my data? So to evaluate that, I looked at correlations for 48 foods with telomere length, and the ones that are statistically significant again with a p value less than 0.05 are shown here. But just like we did for the macros and micros, note that these are unadjusted correlations. So once again, are these correlations still significant after accounting for calorie intake? So to address that, let's start off by by taking a look at the correlation for Parmesan cheese after adjusting for calories, and we can see that model here. So we've got the coefficient, the beta coefficient on the left and its corresponding standard error and then the p value. And you can see that the model includes calories, calorie intake, and then after adjusting for calorie intake, we can see that parmesan cheese's p value is less than 0.05. In other words, after adjusting for calorie intake, a relatively higher parmesan cheese intake is significantly correlated with a shorter telomere length. Alright. So let's do the next couple of foods. Low fat yogurt. After including calories in the model, now we can see that low fat yogurt also is not I shouldn't say also. Also in addition to the macros and micros, just outside of significance with a p value of 0.06. So, not not significantly associated with telomere length after adjusting for calorie intake for low fat yogurt. Alright. Let's do one more. Cacao beans, which I used to make homemade chocolate. So I mixed the cacao with, dates, Medjool dates. So after including calories in the model, we can see that cacao bean intake is not significantly correlated with telomere length as the p value is just outside significance at 0.13. So for low fat yogurt and cacao beans, after adjusting for calorie intake, they are no longer significantly correlated with telomere length. So with that in mind, when considering that Parmesan cheese is the only one of everything in this video that was significantly correlated with telomere length after adjusting for calorie intake. Will will reducing it will will reducing my intake of it, my daily average daily intake of it, will that impact telomere length? And to test that, telomere length test number seven in in 2023 is scheduled for the November. And when considering it takes four to six weeks for the data to come in, that video should be ready sometime in January. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to buy hack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for epigenetic and telomere testing, NAD quantification, at home metabolomics, oral microbiome composition, green tea, at home blood testing with Scifox Health including ApoB, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or DIY Tryin brand as I've got on here in red, That link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.