In the last video, we saw that inspiratory muscle training reduces blood pressure. And that was true regardless if the study was performed in young, middle aged, or older adults as shown by the green arrows. So with that in mind, the topic of today's video will be, was my blood pressure reduced as a result of using a lung training device? Alright. So, let's start off with systolic blood pressure before lung training. And this data is over a three year period from September 2019 through October 2022. And that's sixty individual days of data for systolic blood pressure. And there, we can see that my average was a 123.1 millimeters of mercury or a 103, 23 for short. Now, note that I measured blood pressure five to six different times around the same time of day so around noon. And then, I took the average of those five to six measurements and recorded them in an excel file. Alright. So, let's put these data into perspective. How does systolic blood pressure change during aging? And based on this plot, it should be pretty clear that systolic blood pressure increases during aging both for men in green and women in blue. Now, what's expected based on chronological age for someone of my current chronological age would be a systolic blood pressure of a 125. So, I guess it's all right that my systolic blood pressure average over the past three years has been one twenty three, which is a little bit below what's expected. But we can see that for someone that's around 18 years, so, youth. We can see the systolic blood pressures at least for men is somewhere around one eighteen. But is that optimal? What's optimal for blood pressure? Well, in one study that was published in 2021, optimal blood pressure keeps our brains younger or is associated with having a more youthful brain age. So in this study, they saw that people who had systolic blood pressures less than one fifteen had significantly lower brain ages as determined by MRI scans of the brain. So that's the goal. To get it lower than a 115 for systolic blood pressure. What about diastolic blood pressure? And that's what we can see here over that same three year period before lung training, my average diastolic blood pressure was 74.6. So, let's put that data into perspective by having a look at how diastolic blood pressure changes during aging. And in contrast with the systolic data, we can see that there's an inverted u for diastolic blood pressure changes during aging. So, based on what's expected, based on chronological age, somewhere around 77 for diastolic blood pressure is what I would expect for my 50 years of chronological age. Now, in terms of putting my data on this plot, technically, it could be found in someone that's 30 average values for someone that's 35 to 40 years, but also, 65 to 70 years. So the age related plot for diastolic blood pressure isn't really helpful for determining what's optimal. So for that, to figure out what's optimal for diastolic blood pressure, let's have a look at that, screenshot from the study that looked at optimal blood pressure and how it relates to brain age by MRI. And there, they found that people who had diastolic blood pressures less than 75 or actually the combination of systolic and diastolic of less than one fifteen over 75 had significantly lower brain ages. So that's the goal. To keep it below 75. So technically, although I'm just a bit under it, I I'm I should be good in terms of slowing brain aging with having a relatively lower diastolic blood pressure, but I think I can do better. So now to the question of the day, did lung training in affect systolic and diastolic blood pressure? So starting with the data on the left which is my three year average, one twenty three. On the right, we've got systolic blood pressure, first with the lung training device and then without the lung training device. So first, using the lung trainer device which was the breather fit, we can see that my systolic blood blood pressure was a 120.3. And then when comparing these two groups of data with a two sample t test, this was a significant reduction. In other words, when I used the Breather FIT, the lung training device, there was a significant reduction for blood pressure when compared with the earlier data on the left. Now, if the lung training device caused this reduction in blood pressure, if I remove the lung training device, I'd expect to see an increase in blood pressure. So is that true? Is that what I saw? So to test that, for the next seven weeks, I didn't use a lung training device post breather fit. And over that time, my average systolic blood pressure was essentially the same, one twenty point five. So systolic blood pressure did not increase after stopping the lung training device Which then raises the question that if blood pressure was maintained without lung training, it suggests that something other than the lung trainer impacted blood pressure. So, more on that in a second. Let's then take take a look at diastolic blood pressure. So on the left, we've got pre long training again with 74.6 average over that three year span. And then, with the long trainer and without the long trainer on the right. So when using the breather fit, my average diastolic blood pressure went down to 72.1. And when comparing that with the data on the left with a two sample t test, this was also a significant reduction. So once again, there's a significantly reduced blood pressure, in this case, diastolic when using the lung training device. Again, if this is a real effect, if the breather fit caused the blood pressure reduction, when I remove it, I'd I'd expect to see a blood pressure increase when I stopped using it. So, I tested that. And post breather fit, we can see that diastolic blood pressure did not go up. In fact, it was 71.2, but that without showing the p value, that's not significantly different from 72.1. So that diastolic blood pressure didn't go up when stopping the lung training device. Again, suggests that something other than the lung trainer has impacted my blood pressure. So which other factors could impact my blood pressure? Now, one that may be playing a role is body weight. As body weight is significantly correlated with blood pressure in my data. So here, we take we've got, a look. We're taking a look at systolic blood pressure plotted against body weight, and this is from September 2019 through February 2023. And that's a 120, sorry, a hundred and two days of data. And there we can see a significant positive correlation for systolic blood pressure with body weight. In other words, a higher body weight is significantly correlated with a higher systolic blood pressure and vice versa. So, when my body weight has been lower, my systolic, blood pressure has been lower. Alright. What about diastolic blood pressure? So here we can see similar data. As diet as body weight increases, that's significantly correlated with a higher diastolic blood pressure and vice versa. As my body weight has been lower, that's been significantly correlated with a lower diastolic blood pressure. So with that with this study in mind for the optimal blood pressure of less than one fifteen over 75, that suggests that if I can continue to move my body weight towards one forty eight and lower, that I should be able to get my systolic blood pressure consistently less than at the an or an average systolic blood pressure consistently less than one fifteen over 75 which may slow brain aging. At least, that's the goal. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in including discount links for NAD quantification, green tea, epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the conquer aging or diet trying brand, that link and all the other links for the discount links and papers will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.