For blood test number five in 2023, when using doctor Morgan Levine's biological age calculator PhenoAge, we saw what looks like an outlier, especially when compared against the last eight tests, as this test was about five years worse than that previous eight test average. Moreover, it's been about 20 tests since I had a data point that was as bad as this test going back to 2020. So with that in mind, what's contributing to these data? So first let's take a look at supplements that corresponded to this dietary period for blood test number five so if you're familiar with the channel I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in my twenties so I've been taking levothyroxine hundred and thirty seven and a half micrograms per day since then. I've I also supplement with vitamin d, a thousand IUs per day in most of the for most of the year in Boston. For this test, for 19 of the forty seven days that correspond to this test, I supplement with vitamin d. Now, more specifically for that forty seven day period, it started on July 5. So that's immediately after blood test number four and it lasted until August 20, the day before blood test number five. So for that forty seven day period, I'm gonna show averages for dietary data and supplements in this video. Alright. So over the first nineteen days of that dietary period, I supplemented with niacin and tryptophan to potentially impact NAD. Eight hundred and twenty eight milligrams per day of niacin, Seven hundred thirty seven milligrams per day for tryptophan. And that didn't raise didn't further raise NAD relative to niacin alone. And if you missed that video, it'll be in the right corner. But then I tried nah, tryptophan alone, taking niacin out for twenty eight days before the test. I only supplemented with tryptophan two grams per day and no supplemental niacin. And I'll have an update video on that coming relatively soon in terms of whether or not it, affected NAD. Now my tryptophan intake from food is about one gram per day on a hundred grams of protein per day, and that data is generated by a chronometer. So this additional two grams of tryptophan per day brings my total to three, which is about a 300% increase relative to my baseline. In other words, that's a super physiological dose. Could that have negatively impacted my blood biomarkers thereby resulting in a worse biological age score? Now, I also supplemented with serine, the amino acid serine and vitamin b six or paradoxal five phosphate p five p for this test for that forty seven day period it was five point seven grams of serine per day and about twenty six milligrams of vitamin b six per day and I use that combination to potentially reduce homocysteine again I'll have an update on that coming soon. Update video for that coming soon. Now, my dietary serine intake is three point eight grams per day. Again, data generated by a chronometer. So with supplementation, adding that five point seven grams per day brings me to, or brought me to, nine point five grams of serine per day. Per day brings me to or brought me to nine point five grams of serine per day which is a 2.5 fold increase above baseline in other words a 250% increase above my normal non supplement and intake for serine. So that raises the question, did too much supplemental tryptophan and or serine mess up blood biomarkers for this test? Especially when considering that my data is not generally very variable. This is this data is looks like an outlier. So why trying to get towards why that could be the case, so I can learn from it and potentially minimize this occurrence going forward. That's the goal. So to address that, we'll need to take a look at diet and more specifically what diet composition corresponds to this test. And that's what we'll see here. Average daily dietary intake for that forty seven day period that corresponds to test number five with the first 25 foods listed here. So I rank them in order. So so from one to 25 in terms of grams with the exception of green tea at number 22, which is in ounces. But then what's different test over test? So for that, we'll pull up test number four and note that test number four has a seventy seventy two day period in between blood tests. So test number three was on April 25 twenty fourth. Test number four was on July 5. So there's 72 in between blood tests. And then we can compare with the two sample t test, the forty intake for the forty seven days versus the seventy two days to see what might be different test over test. So when doing that, first we can see that watermelon intake was significantly different test number five versus test number four. But note that that's only a two gram difference higher for test number five resulting in a 1% difference statistically significant test over test. But this is a minor change relative to the 250 to 300 increase for serine and, or tryptophan. I also increased almond intake by about three grams, which is a 14% increased level of almonds in test five versus test number four. And I did that to try to impact DHEA sulfate and I'll have a little bit more on that later. I also increased flaxseed intake to get more alpha linolenic acid ALA. So ALA has been shown to activate p r alpha which may impact NAD. So for the close to the end of the test, that increased flaxseed intake, which is why we can see that it was significantly higher test over test. But note, even with that small increase, it's still only 21% higher. Again not within the magnitude of the differences for serine and tryptophan and then I purposely reduced walnut intake following correlations with my dietary data for omega six with blood biomarkers showing which shows suggest that too much omega six in my diet may be bad for more biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. So I reduced walnut intake, but again, that's about a 21% reduction. Still 15 times lower than the magnitude of the tryptophan increase. And again, these are minor changes relative to the amino acid supplementation for serine and tryptophan. So this is the first half of the diet. What about the other half? Now we can see the other 25 foods as shown here. And again, ranked in grams. But we want to know what's different test over test. So let's take a look at test number four's foods for 26 that were ranked 26 to 50 for that test. And then in terms of what's different test over test, Brazil nuts are right at that border of statistical significance with that p value of 0.05. But note that that's a point one gram difference, 7.4 versus 7.3 grams. Again, a very minor dietary difference test over test. I also included jalapenos for test number five versus test number four didn't have any. So that's only one about one gram per day. Very minor, dietary difference test over test. And then there were foods that were only for test number four or only for test number five. First, grape seed powder was only found in test number four as I was trying to impact any d levels and that didn't work. That video will be in the right corner if you missed it. I also had peanut butter as a part of my cheat meal for that dietary period. Peanut butter was not in test number five, but in contrast, I included cashew butter as a part of two cheat meals, but more on that in a second. So you can see that so far there are minor dietary differences at most around 20%. Still nothing within that magnitude of 250 or 300 increase as we see for or soft for serine or tryptophan. And we can see that difference for serine just look at looking at test over test. Five point seven grams versus four point one grams. So even just looking at the one point six gram increase, that alone is a 40 about a 40% increase more than for any food in either higher or lower. And similarly, tryptophan at 1.1. And note that I didn't have tryptophan for a a small period during that forty seven day period. But again, exactly two grams for the twenty eight days before this test. It it wasn't included in test number four, and that's why we see that the p value is less than 0.05. Now my diet is not always clean. I do include cheat meals. I find that if it's always clean, if I try to have it always clean and no cheat meals, that can lead to a binge and I'm trying to avoid those as much as possible as too many calories may be the worst thing for blood biomarkers. So for this test on those two separate days, it included cashew butter mixed with M and M's on one day, and then cashew butter about a 100 grams mixed with Reese's peanut butter cup on the other day. Now, when calculating the sum of the calories from M and M's and peanut butter cup, that's 834 calories, which is less than 1% of all calories for this forty seven day period. Another word, the diet is usually around 99% clean with just a little bit of junk. Now this list is ranked in grams. Which foods are top contributors for calories? And that's what we'll see here. So starting it off, note that these data are tracked by Cronometer. And if you wanna track your own data, there'll be a discount link in the video's description to use Cronometer. Now in terms of average daily calorie intake, that was twenty one twenty two per day. And if you're familiar with the channel, I've been saying that for many tests going back to 2020 as I've been purposely cutting my calories by just a small amount for a very long period of time with the goal of getting lean and staying lean, not not reverting back to higher body weights. So this is my lowest average daily calorie intake since I started tracking diet in April 2015 with blood test number four's average twenty one forty five being the previous low. So in terms of the top contributor for calories, once again it's sardines. And then without going through everything on the list, note that nine of these top 10 foods for my calorie intake were the same as for test number four. So no major differences in terms of where I'm getting my calories from test over test, which could implicate Serine and tryptophan once again as the potential, factors that negatively impacted this blood test data. Alright. So what about macronutrients? We've gone through calories. How about protein, carbs and fat? So starting with average daily protein intake, it was about a 101 grams per day. 19% of total calories. And for test number four, that average was about 99 grams. So we're using a two sample T test for the forty seven day period for test number five, and the seventy two day period for test number four. These differences were not significant, so protein intake was similar test over test. You can see the p value is 0.18. When it's less than 0.05, that's statistically significant. At least nominally without adjusting for multiple comparisons. Alright. So some have asked where I'm getting a 100 grams of protein from, so I decided to include that for this video. So which foods contributed to protein intake? And that's what we can see here. It shouldn't be a surprise that the top contributor is sardines, as they're the top contributor for calories. And then I get a good amount of protein from collard greens, from yogurt. You can see serine contributed about six grams per day. Almonds, mushrooms, flaxseeds, beets, steel cut oats, and carrots. Alright. So what about fat intake? How does that compare test over test? And that's what we'll start off with here for test number five. So we can see that the average daily fat intake was about 81 grams per day, 34 and a half percent of total calories. But again, how does this compare with test number four? If we're gonna see if diet was different test over test to potentially implicate serine and or tryptophan as the confounding factors for this blood these blood test results. And as we can see here, so daily average daily fat intake for test number four. Where fat intake, average daily fat intake about 80 grams per day. 33.6 of total calories. And rather than rather than just looking at averages, we can see that based on the p value, although it's relatively close, they're not statistically different. So 81 grams versus 80 grams, no difference basically for fat intake test over test. Investigating further, fat isn't just one homogeneous type of fat. There's monounsaturated, polyunsaturated, trans fats, etcetera. So how does that compare? So we can see that monounsaturated fat was about two grams higher for this test and significantly higher. But note that again, two grams higher on the backdrop of test four. Test number four, eighteen grams. That's an 11% difference. Still not within that ballpark of what was what what what was higher for serine and tryptophan. And then going, we can see that omega three was higher for this test as I purposely increased it. Towards the end of the test, getting more flaxseed with the goal of increase any or potentially increasing NAD through PPAR alpha activation. And again, update video on that coming relatively soon. And that was a significant difference so significantly higher omega three. But to reiterate, that's less than one gram on the backdrop of test number four is nine grams. You know, that's again 11% different different. That's not a 250 or 300% difference. Very minor difference. And then we can see that omega three was less by less than one gram again. So this is a less than 5% difference, although it's significant test over test. Minor dietary difference. And then, so total, polyunsaturated fats were not different. Test over test neither were saturated fats, and I don't track trans fat because I basically don't eat any. Total cholesterol, dietary cholesterol wasn't different test over test either. So once again, we can see that there are relatively small dietary fat changes test over test. So but to so note that although there are some changes, I do intend to try to bring total fat back to 80 grams, omega six back to 16, but I'm gonna have omega three go higher as I'm trying to increase NAD through more omega three. But this time I'm not gonna use flaxseed which is a source of ALA. I'm gonna use EPA and DHA. So expect to see that omega three higher than ten grams per day. But I am gonna go to nine point two grams per day with sardines and flax. So anyway, the point here is I'm gonna get it to about eleven something grams per day with an additional two grams coming from omega three. Hopefully that doesn't mess up whatever tryptophan and serine messed up, so stay tuned for that in an upcoming video. Alright. Next up is carb intake. So first test number five, and then test number four. Total carbs two eighty six for test number five, which seems like a lot. But remember, net carbs equals total carbs minus fiber. Average daily fiber intake was 83 and a half grams per day. And when subtracting that from total carbs, gives a net carbs of 203 grams per day. When compared with test number four, that's significantly lower for test number five. But again, that eight gram difference on the backdrop of 200 and about 12 grams is again less than 5% difference. A minor dietary change test over test. Also, I track total fructose intake as I tend to eat a lot of fruit and vegetables on this on this diet. We can see that total fructose for this test was 58 and a half grams per day. And for test number four, it was 58.1 grams per day. Not significantly different test over test. And then, although fiber was on the border of significance or close to significance, 0.08 is close to 0.05 for a p value. That's still about a two two gram difference on the backdrop of 86 grams. I mean again, that's a less than 5% difference, even if it was statistically significant, which it's not. But it's a less than 5% difference test over test. These dietary differences don't come close to the magnitude that I was able to impact with supplements for tryptophan and serine. Alright. What about vitamin or mineral intake? Could those factors have impacted, my blood test data for test number five? So total vitamin intake and it may be hard to see. So if you haven't gone full screen already, I'd recommend doing that. Vitamin intake test number five and test number four. So just highlighting what was different. We can see that niacin was significantly higher for test number five versus test number four. But this is a little bit misleading because as I mentioned, I did supplement with niacin for the first nineteen days of this test. But for the remaining twenty eight days there was no niacin. And I find it hard to believe that four weeks of no niacin or the first nineteen days of niacin are gonna affect the test four weeks later. I find that hard to believe. But nonetheless, it's a potential factor. Similarly, vitamin b six was significantly lower by about 10. But note that both of these are still up above my baseline of three gram three milligrams per day. I find it hard to believe that b six impact negatively impact on my data because b six has been at least eight times higher than my baseline for the last two tests. So it's been in the ballpark. I find it hard to believe that would be a contributing factor to the, potential outlier data for blood test number five. And then vitamin d was significantly lower. Test five versus test number four. But I account for that by getting sun exposure, in Boston as much as I can whenever there's sun. Full body sun exposure. So I doubt that, this reduction of about 600 IUs per day made a dent as as again, I'm getting full body sun exposure. Vitamin d was significantly different but again, that's a point five milligram increase test over test. And I did that on purpose because in my data, I was trying to get a boost for DHEA sulfate as vitamin e was one of the, is one of the dietary variables that has the strongest correlation with DHEA sulfate in my data. So I try to increase it by a little bit. So that's where you get the additional point five milligrams per day. But none nonetheless, that's still a less than 3% difference test over test. I find again, and I know I'm repeating myself, I find it very hard to believe that minor dietary difference would have affected the overall blood biomarker profile. Alright. So that's it for vitamins. Nothing else was significantly different test over test. What about minerals? Next, we can see here test number five minerals, test number four mineral intake. And here, for each of these minerals that are shown, the p value was greater than 0.05 for all comparisons. In other words, mineral intake was not different when comparing test five versus test number four. So cumulative sorry, cumulatively when looking at macros, micros, and in individual dietary intake in terms of foods, we can see that there were minor changes at most around 20% different. Whereas the differences for serine and tryptophan, if I haven't hammered that home by now, were 250 to 300% higher than my baseline. So I think those are the most likely factors and correspondingly, for the next test which I've scheduled for sometime in October, I've taken out tryptophan, I've taken out serine, and I've taken out vitamin b six. So if those were negatively impacting this most recent blood test, we'd expect that my data should go back to those, further reductions for biological age for test number six. But, also for the next test, I've added omega three, two grams per day and methyl b twelve as a means for reducing homocysteine. Hopefully, it won't mess up other biomarkers, but stay tuned for that data in a future video. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for at home metabolomics, NAD quantification, epigenetic and telomere testing, oral microbiome composition, green tea, at home blood testing with Syphox Health, and note that their panel is different from the at home metabolomics. It includes ApoB, dye tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website buy me a coffee. We've also got merch, so if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or dye trying brand, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.