Aging and disease are biochemical processes that happen over many decades. And if we track and optimize well established biomarkers of organ and systemic health, can aging and disease risk be slowed? That's the central premise of this channel. And with that in mind, two weeks ago, I blood tested for the third time in 2023. So what's my biological age? So here, we're looking at data using doctor Morgan Levine's phenotypic age calculator as a metric of biological age. And if you're interested in measuring your own biological age using Levine's test, that link will be in the video's description. So when using this test, I get a biological age of 34.2 years, which is sixteen years younger than my chronological. Now note that for the tenth consecutive test, Quest's high sensitivity c reactive protein measurement was less than point three milligrams per liter. So CRP could be lower than point three milligrams per liter. And rather than looking at blood test data entered into a spreadsheet, screenshots of the blood test report will be included later in the video. Now in terms of weak spots where I can improve, creatinine was higher than my average of 0.95 milligrams per deciliter since 2015. And similarly, glucose is now in the 90s again for the second consecutive test. So going forward, I'm going to work on bringing those down and potentially not impacting the other biomarkers. Now, note that this is just one test. For more context, let's have a look at biological age results since 2018, and I have 28 blood tests over that period. And that's what we can see here. So from 2018 to 2019, I only tested three times with an average biological age using Levine's test of thirty six point one years. Then in 2020 and 2021, collectively, I measured 12 times with an average of thirty five point six years over that two year span. And then in 2022, over seven blood tests, I significantly reduced my biological age using this test to 33.8. If you missed any of those videos, they're on this channel, so check it out. And then in 2023, we can see that most recent test of thirty four point two years. And thus far, over three tests, my average pheno age is 33.3 years. So, doing pretty well relative to 2022. Now this isn't the only biological age test that I use. I also use aging.ai. And when entering the 19 biomarkers that are found on aging.ai, I get a biological age, a predicted age of 33, which is seventeen point two years younger than my chronological. And just like we did for Levine's test, this is only one test. For more context, let's let's take a look at previous data for aging.ai age, which is what we can see here. I have 40 blood tests since 2009 for aging.ai. When I first started tracking over three tests over a five year period, my average aging .ai age was 32 years. And then starting in 2016, I started to test more often, trying to get a more representative view of where my, systemic biochemistry was, testing 34 times over a seven year period. So about five tests per year. And my average aging dot ai age over that seven year span was 29.8. Thus far in 2023, we can see the most recent test with that 33 of aging dot ai age, which is worse than the first two tests in 2023 of twenty '8 and twenty seven years. But note that '33, '27, and '28 are still within my range of around twenty six or actually of twenty six to thirty four years since 2016. So, although it got worse, it's still within my normal range. And with that in mind, in 2023, my average aging.ai h, thus far with those three tests, is twenty nine point three years, which is decent compared to the average of twenty nine point eight years from 2016 to 2022. Now, in terms of room for improvement, glucose and creatinine are also on the aging.ai list, but my triglycerides were higher than my average since '58 and red blood cells were below my average of 4.85. So going forward, those four biomarkers are front and center for attempting to improve them without affecting potentially affecting anything else. Now, at this point in the video, I then asked the question, what may be contributing to these biological age reductions including diet and or supplements? And that will be in a future video. I've already got it ready to go so coming sooner rather than later. But for now, let's dig into the full blood test report. Now, notably absent on this first page is homocysteine. So note that I started serine plus vitamin B six with the goal of reducing homocysteine, and it was two grams per day of serine and eleven milligrams per day which was about three and a half times higher than my previous intake of about three milligrams per day for vitamin b six. And I supplemented with serine and vitamin b six for forty four of the forty nine days that corresponded to this blood test. So, I'll actually have this data in in in the next video. So did serine plus vitamin b six reduce homocysteine? And that will probably be midweek, next week. For page two, notably absent is DHEA sulfate. And for that question, did vitamin b six impact the NAD concentration, my blood levels of NAD? And correspondingly, did higher NAD affect DHEA sulfate? And I covered that in an earlier video why I expected that to be the case. And, fortunately, Genfinity just got my blood sample two weeks after mailing it. Those those samples should be good for up to a month, so I should have my NAD results sometime soon posted first on Patreon. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for NAD quantification, green tea, epigenetic testing or microbiome composition, at home blood testing, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch, so if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Diet Trying brand, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.