What's my intracellular level of NAD? To sort that out, on 01/23/2023, I sent blood for analysis to Ginfinity Precision Medicine, and we saw that my NAD level was 25.6 micromolar, which then raises the question, is that value youthful or aged? So when using Ginfinities data for how NAD levels change during aging, we saw that it was in the aged category. So with that in mind, I supplemented with three hundred milligrams per day of NMN for the next twenty one days as soon as get as soon as I got the data after test number one, retesting on 02/21/2023. And if you're interested in why I used NMN instead of Niacin, I covered that in an earlier video, which will be in the right corner. So then, using three hundred milligrams per day of NMN, we saw that my intracellular level of NAD was essentially the same. 25.3 micromolar. So no effect. So I decided to further increase NMN going with one gram per day or one thousand milligrams of NMN per day for one week. And I retested on 03/05/2023. So what was the impact on NAD? And here, we can see that I finally got an increase for my interest level of NAD as it went up to 39.3 micromolar. And now, I would be close in the close to youthful range as values greater than 40 micromolar would be expected to be found at people younger than 30 years old. But now for the caveats. First, a higher NAD level because I sent these data, on the same day that I did a full blood panel. There was no change for blood biomarker based biological age including Levine's test and aging.ai. In contrary to an earlier hypothesis that I pitched in in a separate video where I thought that having higher NAD could potentially impact DHEA sulfate, there was no impact on DHEA sulfate as it was a 129, micrograms per deciliter, which is within the range of where it usually is. But if there is a reason for hope, it's possible that higher NAD impacted my epigenetic age as I sent blood for epigenetic analysis to true diagnostic on the same day that I did this test. So it's possible that having higher NAD impacted my epigenetic age. So I don't yet have that data. I expect to have it either late this month or early in April. So stay tuned for that, update video coming soon. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in including, discount links for NAD quantification as covered in this video, green tea, epigenetic testing with true diagnostic, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So, if you're interested in wearing the conquer aging or diet trying brand, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.