A paper was published yesterday that identified taurine deficiency as a driver of aging. So let's take a look at some of that data. First, serum levels of taurine decline during aging in mice. On the y axis, we've got serum levels of taurine plotted against age in weeks. And then, we can see that significant age related decline for serum levels of taurine. We're considering that taurine declines during aging with supplementation then extend lifespan. So that's we can see here with survival data for female mice and for male mice on the right. And then, in terms of survival, we can evaluate median survival. So that's the line at the fifty percent survival. That's the time when half the colony has died and half is still alive. And then, notice the rightward shift for the taurine supplemented mice. In other words, taurine extends lifespan in both female and male mice. Alright. So what about data in people? Does taurine decline during aging in people? And that's what we can see here. Serum levels of taurine again on the waxes plotted against age and in this case, the age is up to around 60 years old. But the age related decline is similar in humans and mice as you can see by the red lines which then raises the question to potentially increase lifespan, should we be supplementing with taurine? Now, to that question, I think blood testing is a first step. So with that in mind, what's my data? So I used at home metabolomics with iolo and if you're interested in using at home metabolomics yourself, there'll be a discount link in the video's description. So for my first test using at home metabolomics, this was in April 2023. My circulating of taurine was a 173.1. So to put that on the chart, that will put me somewhere around there relatively youthful. So I don't think it makes sense to supplement for me for, with taurine yet, but I'm gonna keep an eye on taurine going forward in future blood tests and if I start to see an age related decline, I'll change my diet and potentially supplement. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in including discount links for at home metabolomics, NAD quantification, green tea, epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing with Syphox Health and note that their panel is different from Myolo's, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Die Trying brand, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. Hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.