If you're familiar with the channel, biological age testing is a big part of the approach for potentially slowing aging. For example, there are many videos on the channel using doctor Morgan Levine's biological age calculator, PhenoAge, but also aging.ai. But can biological age be be predicted without blood test data? So in today's video, we're gonna take a look at AnthropoAge, which attempts to integrate body composition measures into the estimation of biological age. And potentially more importantly, no blood tests are required to assess biological age. So a first and obvious question should be how does how good is anthropo age? How does anthropo age compare with pheno age? So as we'll see, anthropo age is as good as Pheno age for associations with all cause mortality. And these data were generated using the NHANES three and four studies, which included more than 17,000 people. So first, in looking at all cause mortality risk as shown there and when evaluating two different anthropo age measures including anthropo age NS or simplified anthropo age and I'll have more on that in a minute, and comparing those two measures against pheno age, we can see that the hazard ratios for both anthropo age measures were, above one and also the data in parentheses, which is the 95% confidence interval, that two was above one. In other words, anthropo wage is significantly associated with all cause mortality risk as is Pheno wage. So we can see that that's also true. The hazard ratio is above one and the data in parentheses, the 95% confidence interval, also above one. So both measures, anthropol wage and PhenoAge, are both significantly associated with all cause mortality risk in the NHANES three and four studies. Similarly, anthropo wage is as good as Pheno wage for associations with cause specific mortality too. And for the cause specific mortalities, those included cardiovascular disease, diabetes, stroke, cancer, influenza or pneumonia, kidney related issues including nephritis or nephrosis, deaths related to Alzheimer's disease, and chronic lower respiratory disease. For each of these outcomes, we can see that anthropo age was significantly associate associated with them both in terms of their hazard ratio and again for that data in parentheses, the 95% confidence interval was completely above one as was PhenoAge. We can see the data in parentheses and the hazard ratio both completely above one. So from these data, we can conclude that anthropo age is as good as pheno age for associations with all cause and cause specific mortality. So with that in mind, what measures are included in anthropo age? So let's start off with the simplified or s anthropo age, and I've put my data here just to illustrate. So first, we'd have to enter chronological age, height, so one would need a tape measure, weight or we'd need a body weight scale, waist circumference, so once again, the tape measure. And then you would enter your sex, race, or ethnicity. And then we need to make sure to toggle the only estimate s, anthropo age, to toggle that to the right. Then you click on submit, and you get your predicted anthropo age or anthropometric age. In my case, it's 48.73. So then anthropo age subtracts that from my chronological age, and I get a value of negative 1.47, which means that anthropo age acceleration is not accelerated. And what that means is that my ten year mortality risk would be lower than expected based on chronological age. Alright. What about the full anthropo age? How can we calculate that? To calculate the full anthropo age, we would need to use the tape measure for thigh circumference and then also the upper arm circumference, so midpoint of the arm for arm circumference and midpoint of the thigh for thigh circumference. For women, they would need a skinfold caliper, and that would be used to gauge this, skinfold thickness on the back of the upper arm behind the triceps and also subscapular skinfold thickness or just below the scapula on the back. And then we would need to toggle the only estimate S anthropo age, toggle that off so that we get the full anthropo age estimation, and then click submit, and we get a similar number, 40 07/1988, which that too, because it's less than 50.2, my chronological age, is non accelerated. Again, that non accelerated means it's a ten year mortality risk that is lower than expected based on chronological age. So as a last note, anthropo age is free to use and I'll put the link for the, for anthropo age in the video's description. So if you're interested in using it, check it out. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including NAD quantification, green tea, epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer agent or dye trying brand, that link, as all the other links, will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.