What's my intracellular level of NAD? To address that question in January and using Ginfinity's test, we saw that my NAD level was 25.6 micromolar which then raises the question, is that youthful or age? So using Ginfinities cut offs, we saw that my 25.6 micromolar falls into the age category at least based on how intracellular levels of energy change during aging. In contrast, having values higher than 40 micromolar would be youthful. So with that in mind, as soon as I got these results, I started NMN supplementation, three hundred milligrams per day. And for those that are interested in the brand, I was able to get some from Nootropics Depot. Now, if you're interested in why NMN and not niacin, I covered that in an earlier video. So that will be in the right corner. Now, two days later, I switched to Ginfiniti's brand of NMN, under some concern for product purity. I don't know how pure Nootropic Stipo is. If anybody does, please leave a comment. But, Ginfinity, ensured that their NMN was highly pure. So I switched two days later, again, to three hundred milligrams of NMN per day. So with that in mind, for test number two, was there an impact of NMN, three hundred milligrams per day on my intracellular level of NAD. So, twenty one days later on February 21, I retested and we can see that my intracellular level of NAD was essentially the same. 25.3 micromolar. So my NAD levels are still low, relatively low despite having N. E. D. As a supplement. So, as soon as I got these data, I then switched to one gram of NMN per day, and I started out on February 28. And my next test for N. E. D. And everything else that I usually measure will be on March 6. So I'll have one week of one gram per day of NMN, and we'll see if it makes an impact on NAD, but also on the full spectrum of blood biomarkers that I commonly report on this channel. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in including discount link for any dequantification, green tea, epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch, so the this link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.