In an earlier video, we saw that supplementing with six hundred milligrams of niacin per day, more specifically nicotinic acid, increased NAD to 67 micromolar, which is about two to three times higher than my baseline of at most around 25 micromolar. But on the same day as that test, I sent blood for epigenetic analysis and we saw my worst epigenetic pace of aging as measured by Dunedin Pace at 0.98. So with that in mind, can low dose nicotinic acid raise NAD and potentially not mess with the epigenetic pace of aging? So to test that, I supplemented with a ten times lower dose, sixty milligrams of nicotinic acid for ten days. I then sent blood to Ginfiniti for NAD analysis. And if you wanna measure your own NAD levels, there'll be a discount link in the video's description. And then for an October 2 test, we see we can see that my NAD levels were 38 micromolar, which as we'll see in a minute is above my baseline of, again, at most 25 micromolar. But But where the story gets interesting is that sixty milligrams of nicotinic acid per day increased NAD as much as a thousand milligrams of NMN. And that's what we'll see here. So I've tested NAD levels in twenty twenty three so far 11 times. And when I first started without any precur NAD precursors, NMN, NR, niacin, we can see that my baseline was twenty five point six micromolar. I then supplemented with three hundred milligrams of NMN per day, which didn't move the needle in terms of increasing n m NAD levels. But when supplementing with a thousand milligrams of, NMN per day, we can see that that increased it to thirty nine micromolar, which is in the same ballpark of what I saw with just sixty milligrams per day of nicotinic acid. So if there's an NMN ban, no problem. Low dose nicotinic acid, at least in my case, just sixty milligrams per day increases NAD. Now I mentioned that above, about 25 micromolar is my upper limit for my baseline. And we can see that I've got six tests below 25 micromolar without NAD precursors, but I've been able to get NAD above 25 micromolar for, five tests. We just saw the thousand milligrams of NMN per day. We saw sixty milligrams of nicotinic acid. And then there are three other tests where I was able to get it above twenty five micromolar. For one of those tests, it was supplementing with vitamin b six, nine milligrams per day. And I may go back to that since that's a relatively low dose that didn't mess with other biomarkers. And then for the other two, it was high dose nicotinic acid, which six hundred milligrams per day, which we saw raised it to sixty seven micromolar. And then again, six hundred milligrams of nicotinic acid, but then I added tryptophan, trying to maximize NAD production through the de novo NAD synthesis pathway. Alright. So what I don't yet know, even though I know that low dose nicotinic acid can increase NAD, I don't yet know if that NAD rise and that low dose of niacin can impact done Eden PACE. So stay tuned for that data. I'm gonna send that blood for analysis at the November. Results probably sometime in January. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for NAD quantification, epigenetic and telomere testing, at home metabolomics, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing including ApoB, green tea, dye tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you could do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or DIY Tryin brand, including the one I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.