In today's video, we'll see that slow wave sleep percentage loss over time is associated with an increased dementia risk. But first, let's do a quick introduction including which sleep stage is SWS or slow wave sleep. And that's what we can see here. This is a sleep histogram. So starting from being awake, we pass through REM sleep. After REM sleep is stage one and stage two sleep, which is considered light sleep. And after that, we go into stage three and stage four sleep which is slow wave sleep. Now, in the first half of the night, most of the slow wave sleep happens there as you can see by the green horizontal arrows. And in the second half of the night while asleep, you can see that slow wave sleep is considerably less if at all, whereas the majority of the time that was spent in slow wave sleep is now spent in REM sleep. So with that in mind, note that slow wave sleep percentage which is defined as slow wave sleep, the total divided by the total sleep time, that declines during aging. And that's what we can see here. This is a meta analysis of 65 studies. If you're interested in any of the papers that are referenced in this video, they'll be in the video's description. So on the y axis, we've got slow wave sleep percentage. Again, the slow wave sleep amount divided by total sleep time. And that's plotted against age on the x. And this study included, people from five years old up to 90 years old. And here we can see that slow wave sleep in youth is about an average of twenty five percent. Well that's in five year olds. So for about a 20 year old, it's about twenty percent. But note that age related trend line, you can see that it declines during aging such that a 90 year old, the average value for SWS percentage is only 8%. Now the importance of the age related decline for slow wave slow wave sleep percentage loss is that it's associated with an increased dementia risk as I mentioned earlier. And that's what we can see here. This is in a recently published paper. So on the y axis, we've got the cumulative dementia incidence. So it's not just incidence of Alzheimer's disease related dementia. It's also vascular dementia and any other dementias. And that was plotted against follow-up time. And you can see that starting from the initial assessment of slow wave sleep, about seventeen with an average seventeen years later, how how many people had were diagnosed with dementia or not. So when compared with people who exhibited a slow wave sleep percentage decrease over that seventeen average seventeen year period, they had a higher incident risk of being diagnosed with dementia when compared with people who had a SWS percentage that was stable or actually increased over time. Now note that a major focus of the channel is to optimize biomarkers of as many organ systems as possible. And apologies apologies if I said that. You've heard me say that a billion times over the last few videos, but that's also a major premise of the channel. So with that in mind, slow wave sleep percentage can be tracked. And one way to track it is by using fitness trackers. Now I've got Whoop up here, and I'm gonna show Whoop data in comparison against polys polysomnography, PSG, which is a gold standard for sleep studies. And I'm not here to promote Whoop. That's not the point of the video. The if there are other fitness trackers, Oura, Apple Watch, Garmin, Fitbit, etcetera, that have been compared against PSG for their ability to quantify individual sleep stages including slow wave sleep and total sleep time, please post those papers in the comments, and I'll be happy to compare and potentially include that data in a future video just focusing on other fitness trackers and and their ability to quantify slow wave sleep and total sleep time. In this video, I'm only gonna focus on whoop data as I've worn that for more than five years. So let's see what the data has has to show. So here we're gonna look at individual sleep stage data in terms of minutes per night. And again, this study, I'll put this, direct the link to this paper in the video's description. And And we're gonna compare WHOOP against PSG. Again, polysomnography, which is a gold standard for sleep studies. And that's in part because we, people get all electrode ed and and strapped and and devised up. You can see see on the finger it's pulse oximetry. And the net sum of these electrodes monitor brain waves but also eye and muscle movements, heart rate heart rate breathing, respiratory effort, and oxygen saturation. So again PSG, long story short, is that it's the gold standard for sleep studies in terms of quantifying individual sleep stages and total sleep time. So how does WHOOP compare? So what we care about with focus on this video is slow wave sleep duration. So WHOOP in this study was able to quantify eighty minutes, an average of eighty minutes per subject, whereas PSG calculated it as eighty four minutes. And we can see looking at the p value that those two groups of data were not significantly different. So what that indicates is that WHOOP is as good as the gold standard PSG for detecting and quantifying slow wave sleep. But what about total sleep time? Because we'll need that to calculate the slow wave sleep percentage. So that's we can see here. WHOOP calculated three hundred and fifty nine minutes per person on average. PSG calculated three hundred and fifty, about three hundred and fifty minutes per person on average. And these data too were not significantly different. So from this plot, we can see that WHOOP's slow wave sleep and total sleep time calculations are as good as the gold standard for sleep studies, which is PSG. Now where WHOOP is not great is for, quantifying REM sleep. And we can see that WHOOP in this study calculated a hundred and four minutes on average per person, whereas PSG calculated eighty nine minutes on average per person. And this was a significant difference. In other words, Whoop overestimated REM sleep, it overestimated it by about 15 what do we got there? It's, sixteen minutes or so per person. So if the goal is to track REM sleep over time, Whoop may not be the best bet for that. But But in terms of slow wave sleep and total sleep time as good as the gold standard PSG. So with that in mind, what's my data? As I mentioned I've been tracking I've been wearing WHOOP for many years so I have data for slow wave sleep and total sleep time so I can calculate slow wave sleep percentage and we can see if I've declined or not during aging. So here we're gonna take a look at again slow wave sleep percentage from May 2019 through early November twenty twenty three, and you can see that little n is this is more than sixteen hundred days of data, which is what we'll see here. So I'm only gonna go through year by year averages, but note that each dot refers to an a single day's worth of data. So in 2019, average slow wave sleep percentage was 21.2%. In 2020, the average full year average twenty one twenty one point three percent. And rather than just looking at year to year averages, superficially they don't look different, we can evaluate that with a two sample t test. So when doing that, these two groups of data, 2019 versus 2020, not significantly different. So at least no age related decline year over year 2019 versus 2020. In 2021, average was, twenty one point five percent. And again, using that two sample t test, not different from 2020. So no age related decline for at least two years starting with the 2019 as my baseline. But then in 2022, I was able to increase it to 24.1%, And that's significantly better than twenty twenty twenty one. And similarly, thus far in 2023, I've been able to increase it a bit further to 24.8. And again, when evaluating it, statistically, two sample t tests, the p value is 0.002, so less than 0.05. In other words, twenty twenty three's data is, significantly longer than twenty twenty two's data. So the net sum of this these data is that I've significantly increased slow wave sleep percentage since 2019, which is potentially good news, especially in terms of dementia risk, which for people that exhibited a slow wave sleep percentage decline over time, they were at a higher risk for being diagnosed with dementia relative to people whose slow wave sleep percentage was stable or actually increased over time. So then the next question is how. So one variable that may be underlying these data is body weight. And here we're going to take a look at correlations for slow wave sleep percentage with body weight as I have daily body weight data that corresponds to slow wave sleep percentage over that sixteen hundred day or so period. And that's what we can see here. So so on the y axis, we've got slow wave sleep percentage plotted against body weight in pounds. And note that, my fasted body weight, I record that every morning after using the bathroom. So what we can see on this plot is a significant inverse correlation. You can see that p value is less than 0.05 and the correlation coefficient, the little r, is negative. And what this suggests is or what this shows is that a relatively higher body weight is significantly correlated with a lower slow wave sleep percentage in my data. It may be different for others. Conversely, a relatively lower body weight is significantly correlated with a higher slow wave sleep percentage. And over the past two or two and a half to three years, I've been slowly reducing body weight, which may be one factor that's underlying the improvements, in slow wave sleep percentage over that three or so year time span. Now even within body weight, we can further subdivide that into calorie intake because maintenance of body weight is gonna involve are you in a caloric excess, caloric, you know, deficit? But then we can further subdivide calorie intake into diet composition. Composition that may correlate with slow wave sleep or does it at all? Maybe it's just calorie intake and body weight. And then also inherent in the body weight cap calculation is daily activity levels. So I intend on covering each of these in a future video, correlations with slow wave sleep percentage, so we can really get after is it body weight, is it calorie intake, is it is it total activity levels. Stay tuned for that in a future video. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more of my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for at home metabolomics, NAD quantification, epigenetic and telomere testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing including ApoB, green tea, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website buy me a coffee. We've also got merch, so if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Diet Trying brand, which I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.