A major focus of the channel is to optimize biomarkers of as many organ systems as possible as a strategy for potentially slowing aging. So with that in mind, what's optimal for testosterone? Well, testosterone declines during aging and to illustrate that point, we'll take a look at three studies, and these studies are done in men. In the first study, which included about 1,200 people, we've got total levels of testosterone on the y axis plotted against age on the x with 24 year olds, two forty to forty one year olds included in the study. And then in youth, we can see that testosterone levels were about 650 nanograms per deciliter, whereas in people older, the forty to forty one year olds, it was lower at 580 nanograms per deciliter. But what about older than 41 years old? So that's what we'll see here and this is a study of about 2,500 people. On the y axis, we've got total testosterone this time in nanomolar. No worries. I'll convert that into nanograms per deciliter in a second. And then that's plotted against age on the x, but this time from birth through 80 year olds. And here, we can see that testosterone levels peak in youth in the teenage years somewhere around 30 nanomolar or 865 nanograms per deciliter. But then there's an age related decline such that 80 year olds have about half that level, 435 nanograms per deciliter. In the third study, we'll see similar data. And note that this is a study of about 3,200 people, and these are this is morning testosterone, and that's important because testosterone levels measured measured later in the day are lower relative to morning values. In this study, it went from 25 year olds to older than 75, and we can see that testosterone levels decline from 18 to about 15 nanomolar. And note that these are not the absolute concentrations. You can see that it says geometric mean. So these are concentrations adjusted for covariates, age, BMI, etcetera. But nonetheless, we can still see that there's an age related decline for testosterone, which brings us to what's my data. So this is for the October 9 blood test that corresponds to blood test number six in 2023 as I also measured total testosterone. And on that day, it was 746 nanograms per deciliter. So to put that into perspective, we can see that from my chronological age, I'd be somewhere there, which would be an outlier above the range expected for my chronological age. An argument can also be made to that this is what one would expect to find in youth. Now I'm not gonna make that that much of a big claim. But at the worst, it would be higher than what's expected based on chronological age, which would be somewhere around 550 nanograms per deciliter or 19 nano nanomolar. Now I can already hear the comment section blowing up. What about free testosterone? And I didn't measure that for this test. That'll be on the next test, which will be in late November. So stay tuned for that data in an upcoming video sometime in December. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for at home metabolomics, NAD quantification, epigenetic and telomere testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing, which includes ApoB using a complimentary profile, Syphox Health, to the at home metabolomic kit, green tea, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer agent or DIY Tryin brand as shown here, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.