Mitochondrial dysfunction is a hallmark of aging, and we can see that mitochondrial dysfunction is included as one of the 12 hallmarks. With that in mind, outside of a muscle biopsy, can we evaluate mitochondrial function? So in today's video, we'll see that circulating levels of acyl carnitines can be used as an index of mitochondrial function. So first, what are acyl carnitines? So the simple definition is that they are fatty acids bound to carnitine, and we can see that represented here. Now there are many different acyl carnitine, short chain, medium chain, dicarboxyl, etcetera. Just to illustrate one of them, we'll go to the long chain a c acyl carnitine group and I've circled the carnitine part of the acyl carnitine and then that's bound in this case to palmitate, the six c sixteen, sixteen carbon fatty acid, FA palmitate, and then together that makes palmitoyl carnitine. Now I mentioned circulating levels of acyl carnitines can be used as an index of mitochondrial function. So why is that? Within the mitochondria, if there is a an a blockage to beta oxidation, that leads to an accumulation of acocarnitines, but also fatty acids, which together contribute to lipotoxicity in tissues such as the heart, liver, skeletal muscle, and brain. And then lipotoxicity, that lipotoxicity as induced by acylcarnitines and fatty acids, induces an alteration in mitochondrial morphology. So alterations in size and shape, bioenergetic dysfunction, so a decreased ability to make ATP, induction of the permeability transition port, the mitochondrial permeability transition port, so more stuff leaking in and out of mitochondria, and it induces oxidative stress. So with that in mind, which acylcarnitines are related to health and aging? And potentially more important more importantly, can we track and optimize acylcarnitines? So let's get into the data. So first, acylcarnitines are associated with an increased incident risk for having a major cardiovascular event. And major adverse cardiovascular events or MACE were defined as having a non fatal stroke or myocardial infarction. So stroke or a heart attack that didn't kill the person, peripheral vascular surgical procedures, and cardiovascular death. And then, in this study, they used principal component analysis on 49 metabolites, which group the metabolites, statistically group the metabolites into seven principal component containing factors. And then in a study of 85 year old 85 year olds, which metabolite containing factors were associated with having a major adverse cardiovascular event three point five years later. And that's what we can see here. So first we've got the HR hazard ratio. Next to that we've got the 95% confidence interval. And remember that when the data in parentheses is completely above one or below one, we had a significant association. And that's true for the two of the seven principal component cont or metabolite containing factors. The first would be factor seven, which with a 2.18, hazard ratio, so almost doubling of the risk for having a major cardiovascular event. If, and that's in association with factor seven which contained primarily the amino acid alanine ALA. But this is an acylcarnitine focused video, so you can guess what was also associated with having a major cardiovascular event And that was factor one, which had there there was a seventy seven percent increased risk of having a major cardiovascular event for relatively higher levels of the metabolites that were found in factor one, which were medium and long chain acylcarnitines, c two, c six, c eight. Those fatty acids bound to carnitine. Now I should mention just to just to nitpick, they the authors of this study define that group as medium and long chain acylcarnitines, but c two or acetylcarnitine, c six, hexanoicarnitine, these are short chain fatty acids. So technically, that group description should be short, medium, and long chain acyl carnitines and one could even get more nitpicky and say that they they include unsaturated, acyl carnitines too. The fourteen one, twelve one, those are unsaturated fatty acid containing, acyl carnitines. Alright. So acocarnitines are also higher in Alzheimer's disease patients when compared with health healthy controls, and that's what we can see here. So we've got eight different acocarnitines, and these data are in controls in Alzheimer's disease patients, AD. And for each of these, circulating, acocarnitines, these are plasma levels of acocarnitines, we can see that each was significantly higher in the AD patients when compared with healthy controls. Now note that almost all of these acocarnitines were also higher, associated with having a higher, MACE risk for having a higher risk of having a major cardiovascular event and that's without with the exception of the c 18 acylcarnitine. So the other seven in this study were also associated with having a, a higher risk of having a major cardiovascular event. And that's potentially important because replication across studies suggests that these specific acylcarnitines may be related to poor health. So some of these acoclonitines are also associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. And that's what we can see in this paper, the association between plasma metabolites and future risk of all cause mortality. And I should mention that all of the papers mentioned in the video will be in the video's description. So if you're interested in, checking out the paper for yourself, it'll be in the video's description. Alright. So then in this study, they identified three acylcarnitines on the left, c 14, c 16, and c 18, the unsaturated versions of those fatty acids in association with all cause mortality risk. Now this study included two different studies, so an internal replication. The first included, the MDCCC study, which had about 3,800 people, an average age of 58 years, and then a twenty two year follow-up. So starting with the initial assessment of metabolite levels, how was that associated with all cause mortality risk twenty two years later? And then the findings for that study were replicated or attempted for replication in the MPP reexamination study, which included a smaller sample size of about 1,500 people. They had an average age of seven years and a 11 follow-up. And then we put a red line at that hazard ratio of zero, and we can see that for each of these three acocarnitines, they were significantly associated with an increased all cause mortality risk for both studies, thereby highlighting or potentially highlighting their importance as markers of poor health, especially when considering that they were associated with having a major adverse cardiovascular event too. So how did these acylcarnitines, the ones that were associated with having a cardiovascular event, are higher in Alzheimer's disease patients and all cause mortality, how do they change during aging? And that's potentially important because are these acocarnitines markers of just a pathological state or do they also increase during aging? Which, if that's the case, then the age related changes are potentially related to the underlying path, pathology that's related to, having a major cardiovascular event and or Alzheimer's disease. So first, in terms of age related changes, let's take a look at one of the three that's above there, the c eighteen one, carnitine, and these are age related changes within the 45 to 85 year age range. And for both studies, the NDCCC and the MPP reexamination, we can see that there was a, an increase for the c eighteen one acylcarnitine, increase during aging. Alright. So what about the, other acylcarnitines? How do they change during aging? And that's what we'll see here. We've got 14 acylcarnitines that were associated with having a cardiovascular event, Alzheimer's disease, or all cause mortality on the left, And then we've got data for people that had an average age of 97 years, almost close to centenarian status, you know, so you gotta be older than a 100 to be a centenarian or defined as a centenarian. Their offspring plus spouses with an average age of 67 years. And then when analyzing these data, only one was not measured, and that's the c eighteen one, which I just highlighted increases during aging from the 45 to 85 year age range. Unfortunately, in this study, it wasn't measured though. And then of the 14 acylcarnitines on this list, only one wasn't significantly higher in the older age group and that's the c eighteen two octadecadienylcarnitine that wasn't significantly different between the different age groups. But then for the other 12 acylcarnitines, we can see that each was significantly higher in the 97 year olds when compared with the 67 year olds and that's because we can see that the p value and false discovery rate are both less than 0.05. So that's a potentially important finding because the having the the, acylcarnitines that were associated with having a major cardiovascular event associated with Alzheimer's disease or higher in Alzheimer's disease and or all cause mortality, those acylcarnitines also increase during aging. So with that in mind, can we track and potentially optimize levels of these acylcarnitines? So acylcarnitines can be tracked using an at home metabolomic kit. And if you're familiar with the channel, you've seen me talk about this kit in many videos so far. I've used it to, measure levels of taurine and polyamines, which increase lifespan in rodents. It includes kynurenine and tryptophan as markers of the de novo NAD synthesis pathway, EPA and DHA, the fish oil fatty acids, which decline during aging and lower levels are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. CEs or cholesterol esters which are associated with epigenetic age. It includes metabolites related to oxidative stress. And now, in this video, acylcarnitines and it includes 38 acylcarnitines. So beyond just the vid the the metabolites that I've listed there that I have videos on the channel and I'll put some of those in the right corner, this kit includes more than 600 metabolites. So I've got more videos, coming to go through almost all of them. And if you're interested in using your, using it yourself, that link will be in the video's description or a discount link will be in the video's description. Alright. So what's my data? So putting up the 14 acyl carnitines, which is what we can see on the left, I have data so far for three tests and I'm waiting on results for test number four, which then brings us to what's optimal. Well, when considering that these acylcarnitines increase during aging and relatively higher levels are associated with an increased risk for having a major cardiovascular event, are higher in Alzheimer's disease or are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk, I think it makes the most sense to of try to avoid an age related increase for these acocarnitines. All acocarnitines are not the same for how they change their aging or for their potential effects on health. I'll also have that in upcoming videos, so stay tuned. So in terms of how I'm doing, I'm taking the sum of these acocarnitines. And once I get to five tests, I'm gonna include them in my big picture biomarker list which includes a standard chem panel and then start to look at correlations with diet with the goal of keeping them towards the low end of my range. So how am I doing so far with that? And it's only three tests so far so I wouldn't take this data very seriously as I don't know if my dietary and supplement interventions or just normal test to set test to test variability is what's impacting these data. But for the first test, that was my best test so far based on keeping them relatively low at 15.2 micromolar as the sum. But then for the next two tests, they were a little bit higher, seventeen and eighteen point eight micromolar. So again, the goal is to keep these relatively low. For the last two tests, they went in the wrong direction. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for at home metabolomics, NAD quantification, green tea, epigenetic and telomere testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing, which includes APO b, that's not included in the iolo kit, so they're complimentary tests, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conqueror Aging or DIY Tryon brand as shown here, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.