Lung function as defined by the FEV one declines during aging. So first, what is the FEV one? So the FEV one is how much air can be forcefully expired in one second. Now, on to the data. On the y axis, we've got the f e v one in liters of air per second, plotted against age in people that were younger than 20 up through older than 80. And what we can see when looking at data for healthy non smokers for median values, is that there's a peak for the FEV one around 20 years old and then there's a precipitous decline during aging. Now that's potentially important because the FEV one is a top predictor of chronological age And this is in data for a pre preprint so it it has not yet been peer reviewed that was published last year in 2022. So when looking at the data for men and in women and when looking at the each of these biomarkers contribution to chronological age c a prediction, we can see that the FEV one is third in men and second in women for their contribution to the prediction of chronologically age in this study. Now also, before moving on, note that the top predictor in this study was systolic blood pressure. And I'll have more on that later in this video and in tomorrow's video. So when considering that lung function declines during aging and that the FEV one is a top predictor of chronological age, can be age related decline for F e v one be slowed and or prevented. So to test that hypothesis in September 2022, I started using a lung training device with the goal of optimizing my F e v one. So first, which lung training device was used? And I went with the Breather Fit. I'm not sponsored by them, I don't have an affiliate link, that's just what I used. So then, how and when did I use it? So, for the Breather Fit, it this was a seven week study. I also used it before and I also used it after, but I'll get more more into that in a second. So, the primary study was from October 17 through December 8. Again, it was a seven week study, where I used it six days per week, and I started with five minutes per day of continuous breathing and then I worked up to eight minutes per day by week seven. And note that this isn't just breathing into a device device with no resistance, I use the highest resistance settings for both inspiration and expiration. And in terms of testing, I tested then my FEV one three times per week, and then on each of those days, I tested it nine times and I recorded the best attempt of those nine attempts for that day. In terms of testing, I used this exact spirometer. And the reason I picked this spirometer, again, not sponsored by them, don't have an affiliate link, is that this spirometer can be used at home. In this paper that I've referenced here, Gelb Gelb and Reed, which will be in the video's description along with all of the other paper papers referenced in this video. This spirometer had a 0.96 which is almost perfectly linear when compared with spirometry that was performed in the physician's office. So it may be a pretty good spirometer for measuring the FEV one. So with that in mind, we're F e v one and or blood pressure, and we'll see why I've included blood pressure here in a second, where they improved as a result of the lung training. So we're about to take a look at F e v one data from September 2022 through February 2023. So, before using this lung training device, the Breather FIT from September 20 through 10/16/2022, over twelve days of data, my average FUV one was 3.25 liters. And then, when using the Breather FIT for that seven week study duration over 21 tests, my average was 2.98 liters. Now, besides just looking at, two groups of data when comparing them with a two sample t test, we can see that this is actually a significant worsening, not an improvement. When using the lung training device, my F e v one got significantly worse. Now, if this is a real effect, when I remove the breathe the lung training device, the breather fit for the same seven week period, if it has a real effect on reducing my F E V one, I'd expect it to go back up after not using it for the same seven seven week period over 21 measurements. So, for the post breather fit data from December 9 through 02/02/2023, we can see that's exactly what happened. My F e v one average over those 21 tests went up to three point o nine and that was a significant increase when using a two sample t test. So from these data, it looks like I was over training when using this lung trainer and that may have resulted in a worse F E V one. Now, I should mention that the published studies that have looked at lung training devices used six days per week and at least five minutes per day. So in my case, that seems to be for whatever reason, over training at least in terms of the F E V one. So, if I'm gonna go back to using the breathing device, the lung training device in the future, I'm probably gonna cut the, six days down to three days and again, work up to eight minutes per day using the, highest resistance settings for inspiration and expiration to make sure I'm getting a training stimulus for my inspiratory and expiratory muscles. Now, you can see in this question, I asked were F e v one and or blood pressure, improved as a result of the lung trainer. And we know that obviously, the F e v was wasn't, but why would I expect that blood pressure would improve? Well, inspiratory muscle training has been shown to reduce blood pressure. So for people that use lung training devices, and here we're looking at systolic blood pressure on the y axis. And regardless of the age group that was studied, so in terms of studies in young adults, middle aged, older adult older adults and middle aged and older adults that had obstructive sleep apnea, we can see that systolic blood pressure was improved significantly improved in each of these studies. Regardless if the systolic blood pressure was relatively higher, so around 135 in middle aged and older adults, or even relatively lower in younger adults around somewhere around one ten, there were significant improvements in systolic blood pressure as a result of using the lung training devices. So with that in mind, was blood pressure improved as a result of lung training? And the I'll present that in tomorrow's video. So if you're interested in that, come back to the channel and check it out. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in in terms of any dequantification, green tea, epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, discount links for at home blood testing, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the conquer aging or dye trying brand, that link and all the other discount links and the papers reference in the video will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.