For blood test number four in 2023, I sent blood to true diagnostic for epigenetic analysis, and we saw that my epigenetic pace of aging as identified by Dunedin Pace was 0.98. To put that into perspective, for every one year of chronological aging, that's one year of epigenetic aging. And you can see I've got that color coded in red, which is going in the wrong direction for someone whose stated goal is to break the human longevity record. So blood test number five results just came in. Although I sent that sample in August or 08/21/2023, it takes four to six weeks to get results. So did I have a bounce back test? And we can see that my Dunedin pace for the August test was 0.75. So indeed, I had a rebound in in the in a good way, in in the right direction. In other words, for every one year of chronological aging, that's 0.75 of epigenetic aging. Now where the story gets interesting or potentially interesting is that without that 0.9 a test, my average Dunedin pace over the past three tests is 0.77. And that's potentially important because it would put me into the top nine overall in the rejuvenation Olympics. More specifically, for people who have donated PACE scores, at least three donated paces over six plus months, that will put me into a tie for number nine. So if you're interested in measuring your own epigenetic age, discount link in the video's description or epigenetic aging rate. Now where the story gets potentially interesting for a second time is that I also sent blood for NAD analysis on July 5 at the same time when I sent the sample for epigenetic analysis and with the standard standard chem panel. So I sent that sample for NAD analysis to GINFINITY, also discount link in the video's description. And on that day, NAD was 67 micromolar. Now that's in green because my baseline levels or or that's in green because that's generally high based on age related trends for Ginfinity's cohort, but also relative to my baseline over many tests. Baseline NAD is 20 to 25 micromoles, so that's a two to three fold increase for NAD on the same day as that test. Now, what about NAD levels on the August 21 test? I also sent blood on that day for NAD analysis. And there, we can see that NAD went back to my baseline of about 22 micromolar, which is relatively low based on age related or or what's expected based on chronological age. And note that I didn't take, nicotinic acid, n a or n a d any other n a d precursors prior to that test. Whereas on the for the top test, I I took nicotinic acid, which is how I got that big bump. So these data raise the interesting or at least interesting to me question, is NAD or intracellular blood intracellular levels of NAD, is that significantly correlated with Dunedin PACE? I now have five blood tests that correspond. So Dunedin PACE and NAD measured on the same day. So is there a direct correlation? And that's what we can see here. So there is. It's significant. You can see that correlation coefficient is 0.97 and the p value is less than 0.05. So in other words, a relatively higher blood intracellular level of NAD is significantly correlated with a higher Dunedin pace, and that's going in the wrong direction for the epigenetic pace of aging. Now, I wouldn't take these data too seriously. This is only five blood tests. We'll have to see how this story plays out over time. But it does indeed suggest that having any D levels that are too high, may be bad for the epigenetic pace of aging. Although that one test may be an outlier driving the the whole correlation. Now it also raises a question, is 40 micromolar for NAD the upper limit to not mess up Dunedin paste? And you can see that I've highlighted that with that red arrow as Dunedin paste was still around point eight or less. So that may be the upper limit. And in future tests for NAD and Dunedin paste, I'll explore whether whether that's the upper limit. Maybe it's 35 micromolar. What's the what's the limit for or what's the optimal NAD where I can optimize mitochondrial and potentially cellular function and not mess up epigenetic and, epigenetic and other biomarkers? So stay tuned for that in upcoming videos. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for epigenetic testing, any dequantification, at home metabolomics or microbiome composition, green tea, at home blood testing with Syphax Health, which includes ApoB, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Agent or Die Trying brand, which I've got on right now, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.