During aging, the de novo NAD synthesis pathway is dysfunctional, and that's what we'll see here. So first, we know that NAD levels decline during aging, and so do tryptophan levels. So that at least suggests there's an attempted increased flux through the de novo NAD synthesis pathway. In support of that, kynurenine levels increase during aging, so more tryptophan is converted into kynurenine. Similarly, quinolinic acid levels increase during aging, and that quinolinic acid levels increase but NAD levels decrease during aging. That suggests that there's an age related block potentially in the conversion of quinolinic acid into NAD. So let's take a deeper look at that pathway and that's what we can see here. So quinolinec acid is converted by QA, quinolinec acid phosphoribosyltransferase, QAPRT, into NAMN and then after two more enzymatic steps is converted into nad now there's probably a dysfunctional qaPRT it's probably dysfunctional during aging and I'll explain more in and explain why in a second now fortunately there are backup pathways for increasing nad First, the price handler pathway which nicotinic acid, NA, is converted also into NAMN and then those same two enzymatic steps, nicotinic acid would then be converted into NAD. Now, personally, I've had a big bump in NAD levels more than doubling using nicotinic acid, but I've yet to have success through the de novo NAD synthesis pathway, which further implicates QA PRT as potentially being dysfunctional, at least in my case. Now in addition to the price handler pathway, there's also the salvage pathway, including NAM, niacinamide, NMN, and NR, which are also converted into NAD. However, taking these precursors, nicotinic acid, nicotinamide, NAM, NMN, or NR doesn't address the age related problem with the de novo NAD synthesis pathway. So with that in mind, can we increase QA PRT activity thereby increasing NAD? And this will be my second attempt at that or my second hypothesis in that realm. The first being grape seed proanthocyanidins which failed. So let's see what the most recent hypothesis is. And that involves clofibrate which increases QPRT activity. QPRT being quinolinate phosphoribosyltransferase the same as QAPRT now for a quick intro onto clofibrate it's a lipid lowering drug so the importance of clofibrate is that we can see that it increases QPRT activity. And this is a study done in rats that were fed point two five percent clofibrate in their diet for two weeks. Controls who were not fed this clofibrate in white, and then the clofibrate treated rats are in the shaded, gray gray bar. And there, we can see there's an approximate doubling of QPRT activity. This is in liver in rats that were fed clofibrate. Now, more importantly, liver levels of NAD increased in rats that were fed clofibrate, and that's what we can see here with that approximate doubling of liver levels of NAD. So with that in mind, should I use clofibrate to try to increase NAD? So I have a different plan, and one reason for that is because my approach tries to focus almost exclusively on whole foods. I try to stay away from prescribed medications and supplements as much as physically possible. So with that in mind, clofibrate is a known activator of PPAR alpha which is peroxisome proliferator activated receptor alpha. Now, can other PPAR alpha activators be used to increase NAD and potentially maybe even more safely as it's maybe there aren't there are ways to increase it without having to use a prescribed medication. If so, which ones? So to address that, let's take a deeper look at PPAR alpha's location and function in the cell. So it's right there, PPAR alpha in the center of the nucleus. And then, ppar alpha activation induces gene expression. And for a short list, we can see that here highlighted by that box. And just to highlight one of them, we can see that ppar alpha activation increases levels of FGF21. Now, the importance of that gene or protein is that FGF21 overexpression increases lifespan at least in mice and if you missed that video it'll be right there in the right corner now note that PPAR alpha also activates QPRT which isn't on this list so So in terms of PPAR alpha activators, they include fibrates which clofibrate is in that class but also a compound known as WI14643. And we can see that here as these are ligands or activators of PPAR alpha. And just to highlight their ability to, impact PPAR alpha activation, that's what we'll see here. So on the bottom on the y axis, we've got three different compounds, Wy14643 and then two different, fibrates, ciprofibrate and clofibrate. Now, note that clofibrate is indeed a PPAR alpha activator as shown here with a 16 fold activation in the presence of clofibrate. So once again, we can see that PPAR alpha activation especially by clofibrate may be a mechanism for impacting NAD. Now, even better is ciprofibrate which has about a 21 fold increased activity or increased activation of PPAR alpha but the best of this bunch is WI14643. We can see a 26 fold induction of PPAR alpha activation but there are also other things that can activate PPAR alpha and we can go away from these prescribed medications including polyunsaturated fatty acids or PUFA which activate ppar alpha. And we can see that there as PUFAs are ligands and activators of, again, ppar alpha. And we can get them from the diet. So can including more PUFAs in the diet increase PPAR alpha activity thereby resulting in higher NAD? If so which polyunsaturated fatty acids? So to address that we'll see this data here first on the left on the y axis starting with PPAR alpha activation and then we've got the gold standard WI14643 again in this study it was 25 fold induced in so WI14643 induced PPAR alpha activity 25 fold. Alright. So what about the polyunsaturated fatty acids? So we can see that there's a group of four that had pretty decent PPAR alpha activation with the best of the bunch being alpha linolenic acid with about a 15 fold induction of PPAR alpha activation. And note that this is an in vitro study. This is done in cells. Whether these data will be true in people is yet to be determined but I'm I'm going to do that experiment and we'll find out. Now, alpha linolenic acid then raises the question, if I eat more of it, can that increase, NAD? And alpha linoleic acid or ALA, foods that are rich in that fatty acid are flaxseeds and chia. So I already have flaxseeds in my diet. It's a relatively easy jump to include more to further increase alpha linolenic acid intake as a means to potentially increase NAD. But that's not the only PUFA that can increase PPAR alpha activation. You can see that there are three others that aren't as good but still relatively good in the 10 to 12 fold, ppar alpha activation range including linoleic, gamma linolenic, and arachidonic. Interestingly, in contrast, note that there was no or weak PPAR alpha activation for saturated fatty acids or SFAs including medium and, or relatively short and medium chain saturated fatty acids going from c eight to c 14 for the carbon chain link. Now, I get the majority of those fatty acids in my diet from daily coconut butter so it's a relatively easy switch to reduce that by a little bit and increase ALA. But also note that c 16 or stearic acid didn't really much have an impact on PPAR alpha activation either and I get a pretty decent amount of that from cocoa beans. So for me, I'm going to cut those down by a little bit not eliminate and then further increase ALA to test this hypothesis. But these aren't the only polyunsaturated fatty acids that activate PPAR alpha. Fish oil fatty acids including EPA and DHA also activate p par alpha. And that's what we'll see here. And once again, this also is an in vitro study that was done in cells. So one whether this data will be true in people, there's no way to know without testing. So, again, that's what I'm that's what I'm aiming to do is to directly test this by measuring NAD and, first, increasing these PUFA levels in my diet. So at the top, we've got percent PPAR alpha activation. And then when these cells were not induced, just basal levels of PPAR alpha activity, it was 21% activated. But then, for each 50 micromolar increase of each of the compounds that I'm gonna show, p- alpha the percentage of p- alpha activation was evaluated and first that gold standard for activating p- alpha wy14643 we can see that there was a nearly five fold increase in p- alpha activation 99% p- alpha activation but But what about the polyunsaturated fatty acids? So first, starting with the same or some of the three that were in the image on the left linolenic acid, linoleic, and arachidonic, we can see that these are pretty good in a head to head matchup with the gold standard for inducing PPAR alpha activity, WY14643 as those three PUFAs also activated it to a 100% or more. In other words, a five fold activation over non induced cells that didn't have P-four alpha activators but then what about the fish oil fatty acids EPA and DHA? So first, EPA may not be the best of the bunch because we can see that it's P-four alpha activation was 92% but still that's about a four and a half fold increase over basal levels so still a pretty good increase in p par alpha activity but the best of the bunch is DHA and we can see that that's about a seven fold increase above non induced, cells that didn't have p par alpha activators and even better than that gold standard for activating P-four alpha, WY14643. Now, to further illustrate the importance of these polyunsaturated fatty acids as a potential means for activating P-four alpha and increasing NAD, levels their levels circulating levels decline during aging and that's what we can see here so we've got four of those fatty acids DHA, EPA, linolenate which could be the alpha or gamma and arachidonate And then there's circulating levels in 67 year olds, in 97 year olds, and then whether there were significant differences between the groups, p value and the false discovery rate FDR. So we can see for each of these four polyunsaturated fatty acids, they were higher in the younger group when compared with the older group and significantly higher as the p value and FDR are both below 0.05. So that then raises the question and hypothesis. If I eat more fish and or fish oil in addition to alpha linolenic acid, can I further activate PPAR alpha and increase NAD? And to test that, I'm gonna send an NAD sample or a blood sample to Ginfinity who does the NAD analysis sometime in September 2023. So Sorry. So stay tuned for that data in a future video. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in including discount links for at home metabolomics, any dequantification, epigenetic and telomere testing, oral microbiome composition, green tea, at home blood testing with Sciflex Health. Note that their panel is almost exclusively different from IOLO's kit including ApoB, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel you can do that with the website buymeacoffee. All these links will be in the video's description. We've also got merch so if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Agent or DIY Tryin brand this link and all of the other links again will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. Hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.