The omega three fatty acids, EPA and DHA have a positive impact on many adverse health related conditions. And we can see that visually represented here. And without going through all of the conditions, EPA and DHA have been shown to reduce inflammation, reduce insulin resistance, and aspects of aging. In this study, which was done in rats, it increased neurogenesis. But EPA and DHA decline during aging, in particular, in centenarians. EPA and DHA are lower in centenarians when compared with younger ages. And that's what we can see here. So starting at the top, we've got EPA on the left, DHA on the right, and these are relative circulating values. These aren't actual concentrations. And here we're looking at levels for centenarians or close centenarians 97 years old and their offspring 67 years old. And there, we can see that the younger age group had higher levels of EPA and DHA when compared with the centenarian group. In terms of, percent reduction, centenarians had 23% lower levels of EPA and a 15% lower levels of DHA. And all of these values are significant as looking at the p value and FDR false discovery rate, can see that they're both less than 0.05. Now with these data in mind, could lower EPA and DHA in centenarians be good for health? And the answer to that is probably not. So let's take a look at why that's the case. So here we're gonna take a look at a meta analysis of 17 studies that included more than 42,000 people for circulating levels of EPA and DHA. First, all cause mortality risk. And first, when taking a look at EPA, we've got the hazard ratio or all cause mortality risk on the y axis plotted against the concentration and here they use percentile ranks with lowest being 10 percentile and highest level of EPA at the ninetieth percentile. In terms of what significant, we put up our hazard ratio of one. Remember where the shaded gray region is completely above or below one, we have a significant association. And where that's true is for very low levels of EPA as shown there with the red star. And then as we go higher than the tenth percentile, we can see that all cause mortality risk decreases as circulating levels of EPA increase but not very high levels of EPA. As you can see, a little bit greater than the ninetieth percentile level of circulating Level for circulating levels of EPA, that shaded gray region overlaps with one. But for most of the EPA data, relatively low circulating levels were associated with an increased all cause mortality risk whereas relatively higher levels but not at the highest level was associated with a decreased risk. Alright. What about for DHA? So here, when putting up that hazard ratio of one, we can see that once circulating levels of DHA get to about the fiftieth percentile, higher levels are associated with a significantly reduced all cause mortality risk. So for D H A, intermediate and relatively high circulating levels are associated with reduced all cause mortality risk. Now, in this meta analysis, they also combined EPA and D H A and looked at all cause mortality risk and we're putting up our hazard ratio of one. It's somewhat similar to the EPA data where very low levels were associated with an increased all cause mortality risk, but now we can see a close to a linear trend in terms of relatively higher levels being potentially better for reducing risk. As all values higher than the tenth percentile were associated with a reduced all cause mortality risk. So from from this study, from this meta analysis, we can see that relatively high circulating levels of both of these fatty acids, EPA and DHA are associated with reduced all cause mortality risk. And this is potentially bad news for the centenarians who had relatively lower levels of EPA and DHA when compared with their offspring. Alright. So what's my data? So to address that, I sent blood for at home metabolomics and if you're familiar with the channel, you've probably seen this kit, IOLO's kit a lot. They include data for 500 metabolites and I've got a few more videos in the queue. So they'll probably be a few more, coming soon. But the importance of this kit is that we can see data for kymyrrhinine and tryptophan as components of the de novo NAD synthesis pathway. I've also made videos on taurine and polyamines which extend lifespan and then also, metabolite ratios as an index of oxidative stress. So this kit is a gold mine of metabolites and information in terms of health and potentially longevity. Discount link if you wanna use it on your own in the video's description. Alright. So in terms of what's my data, we can see that here. I now have data for two tests, in April and May and I sent blood yesterday for test number three. So we'll see how the next batch goes for EPA and DHA which are shown here in micromolar concentrations. We can see that my levels are two point six and six point seven micromolar for EPA and DHA respectively, which then raises the question, what's optimal? Now, in full full disclosure, I think for most metabolomic studies, I as IOLA is a metabolomic kit, defining a precise reference range is tricky because most published metabolomic studies are untargeted which means that, the one group is just compared against another group and the actual concentrations aren't determined. So to define an, a range based on a metabolomic hit, I think is a little bit tricky but what is fair to say is avoiding age related decline for both EPA and DHA when considering where my values are now as a baseline, I think that's a fair bet especially when considering that relatively low levels were associated with an increased all cause mortality risk and EPA and DHA are lower in centenarians when compared with offspring. So avoiding that age related decline. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more of my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for at home metabolomics, NAD quantification, green tea, epigenetic testing, but also telomere testing, TruDiagnostic provides that, or microbiome composition, at home blood testing with Cyphox Health, and their panel is almost exclusively different from iolo's kit including ApoB, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Diet Trying brand, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.