Oral bacteria have been previously linked with Alzheimer's disease, and we can see that visually represented here, including Porphyromonas gingivalis or p. Gingivalis, Fusobacterium nucleatum or f nucleatum, and tanerella forsythia, t forsythia. Now for my fourth oral microbiome test, the goal is to reduce salivary levels of these bacteria by adding berberine to a homemade mouthwash. So why berberine? In an earlier video, I showed data that adding berberine to P. Gingivalis spike saliva reduced levels of Porphyromonas and Fusobacterium, and that's what we can see here. On the y axis, we've got relative abundance of salivary bacteria, and then to a control saliva sample, P. Gingivalis was added. And there, we can see that there was an expansion of Porphyriaemonis where P. Gingivalis is found, and also Fusobacterium. Now, berberine was added also added to P. Gingivalis treated saliva at three different doses, low, medium, and high. Fifteen, thirty, and sixty micrograms of b c berberine chloride per milliliter. And in the presence of berberine, we can see that porphyromonas was almost instantly reduced. You can see that the green bars are now very small. And also, fusobacterium, although it wasn't reduced at the lowest, dose of berberine, we can see that at medium and higher doses for berberine in the spike saliva sample with peach and develis, we can see that fusobacterium also went down. So with that in mind, did it work? Did having berberine in my homemade mouthwash reduce levels of these oral bacteria that have been linked with Alzheimer's disease? So to address that, I sent saliva samples to Bristol. And if you're interested in measuring your own salivary microbiome and quantifying that, there'll be a discount link in the video's description. So full disclosure for oral microbiome test number four, adding berberine to the mouthwash was a disaster. So let's take a look at why that's the case. So here we can see levels of those three bacteria that have been linked with Alzheimer's disease, and then my levels for the first three tests, yielding a three test average of two percent of all bacteria. In other words, these three bacteria, for these three bacteria, they their sum was 2% of all of my salivary bacteria. Now, for test number four, the good news is that P. G. N. De valis did go back to zero, but I've also had for test number two, no or zero levels of P. G. De valis. So whether that was because berberine or not, I'm not sure. But the story for Fusobacterium nucleatum and Tannerilliformiscythea is not so simple. So there, we can see a dramatic expansion of both of those bacteria way above levels that I've had for the first three tests, such that this their sum, just for those two bacteria, was 17.2% of all bacteria. In other words, an eight point eight point six fold increase for Fusobacterium nucleatum and Tannerella Forsythia with berberine in the homemade mouthwash relative to my three test average of 2%. So then the question is why? Was it just too much berberine in the homemade mouthwash? Now note that for the in vitro study that I just showed, the highest dose used sixty micrograms per milliliter of berberine as the highest dose. Now my scale, the lower limit is a hundred milligrams. And in one liter of water, that equals a hundred milligrams of berberine per ml, so that's higher than the highest dose used in that in vitro study. So it's possible that I overshot the berberine concentration. Nonetheless, I took berberine out from the mouthwash, so we won't we won't be seeing that in my oral microbiome test anytime soon. So even with daily toothbrushing, flossing, which I've been doing for years, and the homemade mouthwash, which I covered that concentration in an earlier video, my salivary microbiome needs improvement especially with regards to these three bacteria. So how will I reduce levels of oral bacteria that have been linked with Alzheimer's disease? Now, I don't yet have data without the mouthwash. So after four tests, that mouthwash, which as I mentioned, in an earlier video include included xylitol, sodium bicarbonate, and peppermint oil. So I don't know if my salivary, microbiome is improved without it. In other words, I don't have a control with no mouthwash for any of the first four tests. So I could just use water for a mouthwash, for some period of time, but would that be too boring for test number five? Now, note that salivary bacteria can originate from below the gum line. And with that in mind, I've been flossing daily for years so that I have levels of bacteria, that have been linked with Alzheimer's disease still in my oral microbiome. It suggests that daily flossing, at least with string floss, may not be ideal for dislodging bacteria from these sub gingival crevices. So what might be better? So in in April, after a long time of trying to figure out what I was going to do to optimize or try to optimize my oral microbiome, I went and bought a Waterpik, and I'm not affiliated or sponsored with this brand. This is what I bought. So note that salivary bacteria can also originate from the tongue. So I also bought bought a tongue scraper. Nothing fancy, just a simple one that you can get anywhere at stores, you know, that that sell these things. So for test number five, we'll see if or how the combination of daily tooth brushing, tongue scraping, and water pick use, if that impacts the salivary microbiome so stay tuned for that data in an up upcoming video alright that's all for now If you're interested in more of my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you be may be interested in, including at home metabolomics, NAD quantification, green tea, epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing, which is a different panel from the at home metabolomics, diet tracking. Or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Die Trying brand, that link and all of these other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. Hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.