Hey. Welcome, everyone. Today, we've got Luigi Fontana, who is a physician scientist and who is currently a professor of medicine and nutrition and is the Leonard p Ullman chair in transitional translational and metabolic health and is the director of the Healthy Longevity Research and Clinical Program at the University of Sydney, Australia. Luigi has author author doctor Fontana has authored 240 peer reviewed papers that have been cited more than 30,000 times. And just to put that in perspective for my, you know, modest academic career, I've got about, 4,000 citations, so 7.5 x more citations than me, and two commercially available books, including the path of longevity, how to reach 100 with the health and stamina of a 40 year old, and the manual of health, healthy longevity, and well-being, a three step plan. Luigi also has a YouTube channel and is active on social media, and all those links will be in the video's description. So with that, welcome, Luigi. Hi, Mike. Thank you for having me. Alright. So let's jump right in. So I think what you're most known for or I should say, I think you're probably one of the most underrated scientists in longevity and aging. I mean, there are other popular names, but for whatever reason, the field just doesn't know about you as much. And I think, hopefully, starting here, we'll we'll start to change some minds. So I think what you're most known for is calorie restriction, especially calorie restriction studies in people. So what can you tell us about your work on the calorie trial and some of the important findings? And, yeah, what can you tell us about that? Well, before starting the the calorie study for many years, I've been studying the the cronies. So, basically, these are members of the Color Restriction Society. Some of these people, they have been practicing color restriction for fourteen years. Of course, you know, this is a cross sectional study, where we compare, again, these people that have been practicing calorie restriction without malnutrition for an average of fifteen years with age and sex match endurance master athletes and and, agents sex matched control sedentary controls, eating, consuming, typical Western diets. This study by itself has generated lots of publications that are complement complementary to the CALORI study that instead of is a randomized clinical trial. But in CALORI phase one, we just we started people 50 to 60 years old overweight. Instead of in calorie phase two, that was a multicenter study, we studied people between 20 and 50 years old. So younger individuals with the idea, with assumption that calorie restriction in animals has been studied in young animals than for for the rest of their life. And, BMI was between 22 and 28. So, basically, slightly overweight. So, basically, again, we starting to start calorie restriction in 2004, with the studies on the Cronies, and then I we we we we follow-up with calorie phase one and phase two. And it's remarkable, you know, what we discovered because, you know, the assumption was, does calorie restriction in humans cause the same metabolic molecular adaptations that we have noticed in in in in in animals, in in in rodents? And the answer is yes with very few exceptions. So wait. Alright. So so let's backtrack. So you started off cross sectionally, not, looking not doing the RCT, which is the calorie study, the current calorie study that's going on now. And in the cross sectional study where you looked at people who are on a calorie restricted but optimal nutrition diet, you compare them against age match controls who are on a standard western diet, and you saw improvements in the or differences between those two groups in terms of metabolic markers like, glucose and lipids. So those yeah. Yeah. It's like, you know, if you are comparing, I don't know, someone who's exercising, it's like if you're comparing the physiology of a master athlete with a sedentary person. Yes, it's not an intervention study but, you know, immediately, you know, you can see that, you know, if you are studying someone who is running, I don't know, 80 kilometers per month, his VO2 max is going to be higher. So, there is no doubt about it, you know. And there is no doubt, you know, they're going to be a better insulin sensitivity, glucose tolerance. They're going to have less visceral fat. So, we understand the limitation of a cross sectional study. However, a fifteen years long random masculine trial is impossible. And, again, in the in in the chronies, we have data on people that have a BMI much lower than those that we obtained. So, for example, in calorie phase two, as I said, you know, we started from population of 220 people with an age between 20 and 50 and BMI twenty two, twenty eight. So on average, the the baseline BMI was twenty five. At the end of two years of color restriction, the, average BMI was twenty two point five. That is very far from the average BMI of nineteen point six of the kronis. Nice. So you mentioned that there were, some so the animal studies were replicated are replicated in the cronies, basically, metabolically and lipids. So with few exceptions, what were some of the exceptions in the human data versus the animal studies? Well, the only the only exemption is IGF one. So, basically, in the Cronies, we saw exactly the same, hormonal adaptations with the reduction in t three, reduction in, in, in testosterone, estrogens, leptin, increase in adiponectin, increase in cortisol. We saw an increase. I haven't published it yet, you know, but we we we we have data on a significant increase in IGFBP one and BP two, but no change whatsoever in IGF one. And that's been confirmed by the CALERI study where we don't see a change. We see a significant sustained increase in IGFBP one, but no change in IGF one. Instead of one of the hallmarks of, calorie restriction in rodents is the reduction, the significant reduction in IGF one. In in conjunction with an increased lifespan. So, lower IGF one longer lifespan in rodents. So that's that's an interesting, you know, observation because in people, IGF one levels in youth in about 20 year olds is about 200. And then, you know, it declines during aging. And then if you look at the meta analysis data, it's, somewhere around, you know, 200. If there's, like, a u shaped curve, too little being bad in terms of all cause mortality risk and also too high being, you know, bad in terms of, increased risk too. So would that favor, you know, the youthful levels? Do you wanna make sure you don't go above 200? You know? So what's your take? Because I know I've seen you talk about idea of one a lot, and especially not seeing a difference in the CR group. Would that kind of invalidate it as a potential marker of longevity in people, or what's the optimal No. No. It it it's not like that. You know, the the probably, you know, you know, when you look at this data on, IGF one, testosterone, DAGA, and other hormones that are typically peaking. So, basically, when you are born, you know, you have very low IGF one of testosterone, and then, you know, you peak around 18, 20 years old, and then there is a a decline. The the the if you look at the standard deviation, there is a huge difference among, let's say, normal people in peak IGF-one. So 200 is just an average, but there are people who have much lower and people who have much higher. And data suggesting that the decline, for example, of testosterone is driven by disease. So, basically, there are some studies in Australia showing that if you remove people who have chronic conditions, there is a minor reduction in testosterone. So, possibly, the reduction of IGF-one that is linked with increased more increased mortality is due to basically reverse causation. So basically to the fact that, you know, for some reason, as you accumulate molecular damage because you have overactivation of the insulin pathway and other hormonal pathways including testosterone, estrogen, other insulin, basically, that these are all growth factors that are stimulating not only the, PSC AKT mTOR pathway. It is also stimulating the p 66 SHC pathway. There are also been shown by, Pelichi to be linked, you know, with, with the longevity, you accumulate more damage. And so, basically, then, you know, this is causing a failure of the hypothesis to secrete growth hormone and therefore to stimulate IGF IGF-one. So it is a bit complicated. But to make a long story short, you know, now we have plenty of evidence from multiple animal models, you know, dietary genetic and pharmacological with rapamycin that whenever you down regulate the insulin pathway, you extend lifespan and health span in in in animals. So, again, the question is why in humans, calorie restriction does not reduce IGF one. So that's the the the major question. Okay? Because, you know, again, you know, we see an increase in IGF BP one, BP two, an increase in sero hormone binding globulin. Therefore, we know that there is a reduced bioavailability of IGF one, testosterone, estrogens that are all playing a role in cancer in the most common type of cancer, breast cancer, prostate cancer, colon cancer, all of these hormones, they are deeply implicated. We as as I said, you know, we we we published there is a significant increase in cortisol, adiponectin, high molecular adiponectin. We saw a reduction in in, as I said, in leptin in T3 that is typical of calorie restriction and also of the dwarf long lived dwarf mice. So all the and it's amazing if you think about it. You know, these are the four major hypothalamus hypothesis axis and a simple dietary intervention is able to markedly change all of them. So, basically, you are regulating all the four apart from prolactin and we did a measure. You are you are modulating all the major hypothesis, hypothalamus, hypo hypothesis axis that are really major function of our organism with with a simple dietary intervention is is pretty amazing. And then on on top of that, you know, we saw major reduction in inflammation, cholesterol, increase in HDL cholesterol, improvement in insulin sensitivity, reduction in glucose, at least fasting glucose. And, and then, we perform biopsies of the skeletal mass or colon mucosal biopsy of these individuals. And so we we we have shown that there is a a a a down regulation of the insulin enter pathway with increasing FOXO with. We we also in Maslow, discovered there is a 30 to 50% reduction in phosphorylation of AKT. Therefore, there is a real downregulation of the insulin hydrophone pathway from a from a with a western blot. We we with Gokronata Majili, we published that there is a significant increase in H2 proton 70, in Becklin one, LC three, so autophagy, and and and and and chaperones like the HCV proton, 70 pathways that is important for misfolded proteins. And with Marco de Maria, we have shown that there is a reduction in p 16 and p 21 interleukin six that are markers of cell senescence. So, again, I think, you know, with this cross sectional study, we really, proven that, you know, both at the metabolic, hormonal, and the molecular, level, there is a similar similar adaptations, as we had demonstrated in long live, CR animals. So that raises two issues. One is okay. So, there is no age related decline for IGF one in the cronies cross sectionally. So one could argue No. We don't know that. We don't know. We don't we don't know that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Sorry. Yes. There is If you if you compare, you know, age by yeah. There is no reduction in your front. Yes. Sorry. Sure. Yeah. So with that in mind, then one could argue that CR is better able to maintain, you know, or, resist No. No. Don't. If if you if if you want, I'll tell you what I think is happening. So when you do calorie restriction in animals, in reality, the binding study are the strategies, you know, they they didn't reduce calories every day. You know, as you know, basically, first of all, when you do calorie restriction in animals, you typically feed them once a day, and so, basically, they fast for twenty to twenty two hours. Twenty twenty two hours for a mice is probably like three days for a human being. You know? Two days of fasting in mice is deadly. So if you fast animals for more than two days, you know, all all strains of mice, they they die of starvation. Even you and me that, you know, probably we have a a BMI around I I have a BMI around twenty one, I can go for a month without eating. A mice can go mouse can go for for for two days maximum before dies of starvation. So, again, one day, twenty two hours of of of of fasting is basically probably three, four days of, fasting in a human being. And we know there are beautiful data in humans that, you know, with two days of, fasting consecutive fasting, you have a probably a 30% drop in IGF one. And by day five, you have a 50% reduction in IGF one. So what I think and and, again, you know, the binder protocol was basically they were not only 30% calorie restriction, but one of his post doc that now is in Japan, it was in Japan, you know, before COVID, he told me, you know, basically the protocol was that, you know, they were feeding 30% every other day. So it was 30% plus every other day feeding, so that was a massive fasting. Okay? So what I think it happens that, you know, the reduction in IGF-one in rodents and we don't see in humans in my people on calorie restriction, even they were severely calorie restricted because of BMI of mean BMI of nineteen point six, it is because my people, they were eating three times a day, instead of the the the mice, again, they they are doing even if you are feeding them every day 30% less because they are they are very hungry, they eat everything in a couple of hours, and then they fast for twenty two hours. But, again, the classical protocol of vine drug, it was every other day feeding. So that was huge fasting for for rodents. Could that limit human longevity if IGF one plays a role in human longevity as it does in animal models that we would need to even further reduce calories even for people on a CR diet and have very long and or long fasting periods? No. No. No. We have data that, you know, we are now submitting for publication with some of these, DNA methylation clock, suggesting that in those chronies who were overdoing calorie restriction that had a BMI less than nineteen, the, biological clock was aging faster. So in those with a BMI higher than nineteen point six, you know, they had a 2.5 years, biological age younger. But in those who were too severely calorie restricted, there was an increase in in in biological age. So, I think, you know, we need to develop these biological clocks that is gonna allow us to fine tune what is the optimal caloric protein exercise, whatever intake that is good for you because if I remember, you know, Edward Mazzaro. I I don't know if you met Mazzaro. I didn't meet him, but he was the head of the department when I was in Texas. Yeah. Ed Mazzaro, basically, from if people didn't know, was basically one of the basically pioneer of calorie restriction. He was basically working mainly in rats instead of Beindruk and, Wolford in mice. And I was he was a very good friend of mine. And, he told me, you know, basically that in some experiments, he put rats on 60% calorie restriction. So they were eating only 40% of of of, at least two calories. And many of them, they died of starvation, but he told me the one who survived, they were living very, very, very long lives. Again, suggesting that even within inbred strain of rats or mice, there is something that we understand that basically it's a it's a it's a has a peculiar optimal caloric intake. And if you're overdoing calorie restriction, you're killing them. And and, as you know, Rafael de Cabo has published, you know, this paper showing that, you know, if you take some of the strains that on 40% calorie restriction, they leave shorter, then you put them on 20%, now they live longer because for those strains 40 is like 70% for other strains, it's excessive. And yet, Rafa told me that basically those animals who live shorter on 40% from a health point of view, they when they when they did the necropsy, they were perfectly healthy. But it was too much. So which too much calorie restriction, but then you should be able to see that pattern of ill health, you know, systemically somehow. So, you know, that makes me wonder what markers it maybe it's not glucose, lipids, IGF one. Is it immune cells? Your high you know, your neutrophils go up, lymphocytes go down? Like, what Probably, you're starving a ways. Like, you know, if you if you if you do a you know, let's do you're doing fasting and and and, you know, and let's say, you know, I start to do fasting now and presumably healthy, you know, if if, you know, when I approach, you know, my forty, fifty days of fasting, even I'm super healthy, I'm gonna I'm gonna I'm gonna die because, you know, basically, you are in a starvation in a starvation situation. And so probably these animals on on on on on on, like, the Mazzolo 60% rats or or these strains of mice on 40%, basically, you don't have enough energy to support, you know, the basic metabolism. So, basically, probably probably, autophagy. Maybe you are killing yourself because you are digesting everything you can, you know, to produce enough energy to to keep going. And that's what happens, you know, with prolonged fasting. You know? Basically, the body at the beginning is trying to slow down the, destruction of muscle mass by using fat, you know, to produce keto bodies. But, eventually, when you get rid of the fat, then you're gonna start to use the the the the the muscle, the heart, you know, all these, and basically, you're gonna fail. Yeah. But you are eating you are eating yourself. You are eating eating yourself, you know, to produce energy for the Krebs cycle of all the even if you slow down metabolism by reducing t three, eventually, once you get rid of all the body fat, you know, then you know you are Muscle. Cutting muscles. Yeah. Especially the respiratory muscles because if you're degrading respiratory muscles, you just don't have the strength to breathe literally in that. Exactly. At least that's only at the heart, you know, probably and then you start to have, you know, problem maybe in in your conductive system, you know, because, you know Yeah. Starting to do arrhythmias. Yeah. So then that gets to the question of what is the optimal CR potentially in humans. Right? So and even then I know. Define it. We don't know. We don't know. We need we we need to develop biomarkers. Yeah. So what is, you mentioned in the beginning, what is, I would say, disgusting out there? There are a lot of people that they claim to be expert of longevity, health, and stuff like that, and they they they say a lot of stupid stuff. You know, I was the other day, I was watching YouTube YouTube YouTube video about, you know I don't want to mention the neighbor. I said, you know, exercise the most powerful antiaging intervention that, you know, we have. No evidence whatsoever. No evidence whatsoever. You know, John published several papers because he won't he he was convinced, you know, exercise was the the leading antiaging exercise. And he did several studies with hundreds of rats showing that basically exercise is increasing median lifespan, but only calorie restriction that animals who were weight paired, you know, with the exercise animals were living longer in terms of maximalized spend, not only average and maximalized spend. And and there are data just published on the European Heart Journal where they compared lifelong master athletes with people who were healthy but were moderately exercising and sedentary. And, basically, the the long lived master athletes, they had many more atherosclerotic plaques in the coronary arteries with multiple coronary involved and and significantly bigger atherosclerotic plaques. And so this idea that exercise has an antiaging effect is wrong. There is no data to support that. So who claims that is because it's not knowledgeable enough. And, and, again, exercise is important. We don't know exactly how much exercise. I think a lot of people out there, they are overdoing exercise, and there are now lots of data showing that, you know, there is a u shaped relationship. If you're overdoing exercise, you are and, you know, when I was working at Washington University, you know, we we we studied people who are master athletes, but they were consuming a typical American diet. They were firmly convinced that, you know, exercise you know, you you know, you were like a like a oven where, you know, you were you were burning your calories and doesn't matter what type of calories you were putting in, you know, you were burning it. And and and when we were putting these people on a treadmill, you know, it was in the older people, it was a disaster. You know, you you you your blood pressure was skyrocketing to two fifty, lots of arrhythmias, ventricular, arrhythmias. You sometimes say, you know, let's stop it because, you know, if this this guy is gonna drop dead, you know, then, you know, we're gonna be in trouble. And and and, and and and, therefore, this idea that, you know, you can do whatever you want and then you exercise and exercise the power of full antiaging intervention, again, has no scientific evidence whatsoever. So I agree a 100%, and I've gotten some, pushback from people in the YouTube space because of those those comments. The only caveat I would say is that, as you mentioned, you know, the, John's, rat study where you get an increase in the median lifespan. So there is some and even in in human data, clearly, there is a health span, you know, improvements as a result of regular exercise training. But No. No. No. Look at me wrong. Exercise is essential. Yes. But so I'm just contesting that exercise by itself is Longevity. Longevity Yes. And that exercise, without proper nutrition or or even as this guy was mentioning that, you know, basically exercise the most powerful. No. Exercise is not the most powerful, but it's essential. It's complementary in the right amount of endurance, resistance, flexibility, posture. You know? So, again, longevity. So when we do studies in animals, humans, we are forced, you know, to study one intervention at once, you know, because we want to understand what is doing what. But in reality, longevity, healthy longevity, is a combination of multiple factors. It's like, you know, if you say, what is the most important part of a car? I don't know. The the the the the cylinders. So, you know, the the regular easy thinking is, okay, if the pistons are the cylinders are important, let's have 20 cylinders. Let's have 20 wheels. Let's have 20, whatever. No. An efficient car has to have the right amount of, cylinders and wheels and whatever, you know, to be efficient. You know? By having many more, you know, you're not making a a a Ferrari. You're making, I don't know, an an inefficient car. And so that's what we are trying to do in science to understand what is doing what, how much important, and and and what is the right amount. And so far, unfortunately, as I said, you know, we don't have biomarkers of optimal energy intake, of optimal protein intake, of optimal essential, like, ancient amino acids or sulfur amino acid, you know, we know are extremely important for longevity. We don't have, you know, biomarker that is telling us if we are exceeding in exercise. There is an interesting paper published in cell metabolism last year showing that, you know, when you are overdoing exercise, there is an impairment in glucose tolerance. For example, therefore, maybe a CGM could be a way, you know, to monitor if you are overdoing exercise because that ink that impairment in glucose tolerance was linked, you know, with impairment in mitochondria function. Yeah. So just so just to just to reiterate, exercise is essential to the process, but the idea that you're gonna get to maximum longevity or beyond, there's no data that supports that, not in animal models, not in human. And I came across a study where it was a forty year longitudinal study, and this supports the hypothesis that people with a median age of about 55 at baseline that had exercise, you know, that moderate to vigorous exercises as a part of their approach, had an increased odds of getting to 95, but 95 was basically the upper limit. So you're basically enhancing your ability to get past the average lifespan, but there's there's some so which raises the issue. There's something simultaneously good about exercise to improve median lifespan, you know, and, of quality of life and all these things. But then simultaneously bad that it limits your ability to get to the maximum, which goes into potentially exercise dose. As you mentioned, most people probably overtrained and overdoing it. Right? So I think one great way to look at Apart from that, you know, apart from that, you know, because we have been studying people who are exercisers, you know, we don't see, basically, the increase in cortisol. We don't see the reduction in t three. We don't see the reduction in IGF-one, of course. So there are many of these important hormone adaptation, you know, we were discussing before that they don't they are not triggered by exercise. And if anything, exercise increasing testosterone is increasing, IGF one, especially resistant exercise. So that's the problem. You know? You know, exercise is essential because, you know, with exercise is a massive improvement in insulin sensitivity, more than more than calorie restriction. Exercise more power than calorie restriction improving insulin sensitivity. We have we have published that, you know, in in in a couple of papers. Exercise does increase HDL cholesterol like CR, but probably more powerful reduction in triglyceride. Inflammation, I don't think, you know, is as powerful as calorie restriction. Blood pressure, the acute effect of exercise, yes. But, you know, we have data showing that as you get older, if you are on a typical American diet, you know, you'll get hypertension even if you are exercising constantly instead of calorie restriction, the effects of on calorie restriction with optimal nutrition, not with malnutrition, on on blood pressure is amazing. You know? You know, the people on on CR with optimal nutrition had a blood pressure of 100 over 60 when even when they were 70 years old. So, again, there are certain metabolic adaptations that are typical of CR and others that are typical of exercise, like like the GLUT four or the or the BDNF and other ones, you know, they are peculiar of exercise, that are essential as we discussed for health span. But there are others that are not triggered by exercise that they they they don't, and that's why, you know, basically, it doesn't doesn't slow down aging because it doesn't trigger some of these important adaptations. Which then gets the issue of dose. Like, how much exercise and what magnitude of calorie restriction to get to the maximum and even beyond the maximum. Right? So so I think I think I so I track, heart rate variability and resting heart rate. And knowing that heart rate variability declines during aging and the resting heart rate increases up until about 50 and then declines, knowing that data, you can well, at least I do. I titrate my workouts so that I'm not overtrained. Whereas when I started on this journey five years ago, those data looked chronically overtrained. And most most people think more is better, which, again, goes into that beginning of the, you know, the the u shaped curve. So another aspect too is is the masters athletes, even though they're, you know, obviously, their fitness is elite, you know, cardiovascularly, Most people, even in, you know, endurance athletes, you would think they'd wanna be, you know, put the best fuel in their engine. You know, it's like pizza and cookies and case, which goes to your point about, I'm I'm exercising, so I'm burning it off. Yeah. But what are you doing systemically by eating a suboptimal nutrient, you know, poor diet? Right? So that could be some of the reason why there's only about a three year increase, for Absolutely. Absolutely. You know, we I don't have, you know, strong data, but, you know, in in in the people who have been studying, that were master athletes at Wushu, you know, I think, you know, I could see, like, a like, a phenotype metabolic phenotype of those few people who were exercising but eating a healthy diet compared to the great majority that as we discussed, you know, they thought, you know, they could eat whatever they wanted because the McDonald's, whatever they wanted because basically they were exercising a lot of hours. And so they said, okay. You know, I'm I'm I'm I'm running 80 miles per per week. Therefore, then I can eat whatever I want. And and, and, and then, you know, we know that, you know, when you are overdoing exercise because you are constantly stimulating the pathway, that is also very important for longevity. AC five knockout animals live longer, and AC five is the transactional pathway for a catecholamine signaling. So this constant, exposure to high catecholamines is causing fibrosis. You know? There are lots of data showing that basically when you are overdoing exercise and endurance exercise, basically, you are causing fibrosis in the heart, and that's why, you know, I was telling you some of these people were were testing for VO two max. These master all the master athletes, you know, they had all these ventricular arrhythmias because, basically, these patchy fibrosis of the heart, if if it basically hits, you know, the conductive system, then, you know, it's causing these dangerous, potentially lethal, arrhythmias. And so and plus the joints. A lot of people who were studying, you know, when they were 50, 60, a lot of them had to have joint replacement, you know, hip or or or or knee replacement because, you know, if you if you're running, running, running, running on the on these joints, especially with a bad diet, your your cartilage and your bone, they are wear off and and and, eventually, these people, they have to stop running or they have to use, you know, put, you know, a replacement, you know, hip replacement or or knee replacement. So what what what would you recommend as a dose in terms of calories, calorie restriction, and then even exercise? And so to maximize health span and longevity. Again, we don't know. So I think you the the the best is to avoid increasing wasted confidence. Yeah. So you what I'm trying to do is to, now I'm 54, and I'm trying, you know, basically to to to keep my abdominal fat, you know, by being short of fat as low as possible, you know, by combining regular exercise, but not excessive exercise with, with a healthy diet where, you know, you control calories. At least I control calories by by eating high quality, high fiber high fiber food, you know, so, you know, it's without becoming extreme. Because, again, not knowing what is optimal, calorie intake, you know, again, some of the cronies that like the exercisers were thinking that, you know, more the better. This new data, you know, we have, we're gonna submit for publication soon using the DNA methylation clause. They show, you know, these people, they are they are they are killing themselves. So, basically, they're getting older than, you know so they are trying to minimize calorie intake, you know, at a almost phobic manner. And the result is not more longevity, but is less longevity. So for the time being, not having reliable biomarkers, you have to be moderate. Yeah. So along those lines, I there are multiple biomarkers that you can measure, and I you frequently post your blood pressure. You know, it's almost always a 100 over 60. Your resting heart rate is, like, 46, or maybe it's even lower. That's just what I remember. So at least monitoring blood pressure, glucose, lipids, that would be a good start to know that you're on the right track. Assuming that they would start to go haywire if you were cutting calories too low and, you know, your duration and frequency of exercise was too much. And, you know, having a fasting glucose less than around 85, eighty, eighty five milligram disease. A lot of people, as they get older, you know, they have a steady increase in in fasting glucose. It's 85, ninety, ninety five, 99, 100, and then it goes, you know, in the prediabetes, range. And you you you people need to understand that, you know, well before your your glucose goes from 85 to to ninety ninety five, you have compensatory hyperinsulinemia. So the first thing happens is insulin resistance. So, basically, you get insulin resistant, and then, you know, your glucose start to climb. You know? And and and, probably so as clinician, we say, you know, typically, when you have someone with a diagnosis of type two diabetes, probably it has been for ten, fifteen years in with diabetes or prediabetes. And I think, you know, this guy has been for twenty five, thirty years with insulin resistance. Now you have to think about it. You know, as I said, you know, the insulin hydrophone pathway is one of the most important pathway for regulating aging. There is lots of data supporting that. So because most people, they are always in a postprandial status because they wake up in the morning, they start to eat, and then they keep eating all day long, you know, chocolate and this and drink. You know, they always have, you know, this cup of soda in their hands. You know? So they are always in a post pandeal state. And therefore, typically, for example, the master athletes and the cronies, they in the fasting state, they had two micro units of insulin per ml. K? So most people, most normal people, without, you know, diabetes, they have, you know, eight. So it's, like, basically four folds higher than, than, the the the cronies or the master athletes. That's in the fasting state. But when these people, they start to eat, their their their insulin goes to one hundred, one hundred and fifty micro units. And so you have to think about, you know, these the the cells of these human beings, they are constantly bombarded. The insulin receptor of these people, they are constantly bombarded with this huge amount of insulin. So this is like to be exposed, you know, to a constant it's like smoking cigarettes, you know, because as as I said, you know, if you have, you know, this constant binding of the insulin to the insulin receptor in these big ways, you know, basically, you have a constant activation of the PA three AKT pathway, and therefore, you have a inhibition of boxotranslocation with an inhibition of autophagy, with an inhibition of DNA repair pathways, with an inhibition of antioxidant pathways like catalase and and and SALT2 and with the massive activation of cycling d one, d two, d three. So, basically, you have more cell proliferation. And when you have more cell proliferation, you have more random mutations. If these random mutation, they are hitting the oncogenes, you have cancer. If they are hitting the non oncogene, you have cell senescence. So basically, you have to imagine basically, like, you know, this having this constant hyperinsulinemia that translates into a reduction in IGFBP1, BP2, and sterol homo bindigliobulin with an increased exposure to, IGF one, testosterone, estrogens that are massively driving cancer, and they are massively driving basically this accumulation of molecular damage because you are now regulating the auto for GDNA repair, antioxidant cellular pathways. And so people that don't realize that, yes, smoking getting exposed to smoking is bad. And the more cigarettes you are smoking, the more risk the more damage you are causing. Being exposed to alcohol and other, you know, of these stupid, you know, marketing ideas that, you know, alcohol is good, you know, because you have resveratrol. Alcohol get metabolized into acetaldehyde and acetaldehyde is a cancer molecule. Today, there was a paper that I just posted in my YouTube channel showing it was in rhesus monkeys. So, basically, exposure chronic exposure to alcohol intake caused basically damage of the with an increase in monocytes and and and macrophages and massive pro inflammatory effect that lasted for one month. So basically, after, you know, there was an accident for one month and one month of absence still there was a pro inflammatory effect on top of, you know, the risk of cancer induced by, again, acetaldehyde and, and and and and other diseases. So, but I think hyperinsulinema is even more powerful than these two factors. Adding a little bit. Yeah. A 100% agree. The others, sides of that story where, you know, people's glucose levels could be a constant. And as you're mentioning, they have hyperinsulinemia. The other aspect of that is chronic hyper hyperinsulinemia. Eventually, you'll have beta cell failure where now insulin levels drop, and then you'll start to see that glucose age related or an exacerbation of that glucose related rise. So, measuring insulin is important, but, seeing that your glucose levels are rising during aging, definitely not a good thing, you know. So But but that's, again, ten, fifteen years. When you start to see your glucose raising, you are ten, fifteen years, of overexposure to, elevated insulin. Definitely. Yeah. Alright. So in terms of the alcohol, so just going to that. So the And glucose is not as important in, you know, basically what's his name? I forgot his name. Carter. Oh god. Now I have a lapse. But, anyway, so, basically, he did a study where he created some animals that were group four ex expressor overexpressor. So so he compared basically ad libitum fed, white animals with ad libitum fed, GLUT four overexpressors and and then both of these on calorie restriction. And what he found that, you know, basically, GLUT4 overexpressed that, you know, had twenty four hour lower glucose did not live longer, but both the control wild type and the glucose glucose overexpressed on calorie restriction, they did longer. And so these data are suggesting that glucose by itself is not the driver of aging, but again is because in this case, glute overexpressedor was not really caused by insulin resistance. Instead of is the hyperinsulinemia, the insulin resistance that precedes glucose that is causing of course, high glucose levels are causing glycation of proteins with the and the glycation of proteins is causing damage to the artery, to the heart, to the kidney. We know that, but it's that's a different that's not touching the primary aging, the the the accumulation of molecule. This is kind of disease related, the the the increasing glucose. So what I think it happens is that it's not really the glucose that is the major determinant of aging, but it's the many years of compensatory hyperinsulinemia and higher IGF one bioavailability that is the main driver together with many other factors, you know, of aging. So there's human data that supports that too. There's a study in people who are 85 to supercentenarian status, so older than 110. And when looking at all cause mortality risk, HDL, LDL, h b a one c is a marker of glycemia not associated with an increased all cause mortality risk within that age group. Right? Essentially, we're looking at longevity. But albumin, so higher relative levels of albumin, lower CRP, and lower creatinine as a marker of kidney function associated with all cause mortality risk. So higher albumin, lower, CRP, and lower creatinine, which suggests inflammation, potentially liver function and or inflammation for albumin and, and kidney function, right, as as drivers. But alright. So, so the alcohol story is an interesting one, and, so I I agree, and in part because it messes with my, sleep and quality of life. You know, next day, hangover, it feels terrible, even small amounts. So I haven't had alcohol for a long time, ten years maybe. But, it the Mediterranean diet, you know, that's a big thing. You know? And granted, the Mediterranean diet, I I still have huge issues with it because compared to the the typical American Western diet, it's which is terrible. A Mediterranean diet probably better, but the red wine is promoted as a big part of the Mediterranean diet. So what are your thoughts? But that's but that but that's not true. I mean, this is, like, shortcuts. You know? You know? These are, again, you know, marketing marketing ideas. You know? My my my my my my parents, you know, my mom is from South Italy. She was born in South Italy. So back then, people, they they didn't have money, you know, to to buy wine and drink wine regularly. So, you know, yes, maybe, you know, they they were they had, you know, maybe, I don't know, 10 bottles of wine per year, you know, what they were drinking, you know, during the festivities, you know, a glass of wine, you know, but it was not, you know, they were drinking wine at lunch and dinner, you know. That's not the case. It's like, you know, the story of Okinawa and they were eating a lot of fish. It's not true. When I went to Okinawa to see the centenarians with, with Craig, Wilcox, basically, I've been talking with some of these nonagenarians, and back then, fish was consuming maybe a couple of times per week, you know. So the rest was basically the sweet potatoes with a lot of tofu and vegetables and some fruits and and and some, nuts. You know? So there is a lot of marketing strategies, propaganda about the Mediterranean diet. So the classical Mediterranean diet was basically I can tell you because that's what my grandmother was telling me. It was basically homemade bread and pasta. So they had, you know, the durum wheat, you know, from South is fantastic. You know, it was basically nailed fresh with the germ and everything, and then they were doing basically the bread and the pasta with, chickpeas, lentils. There was a lot of vegetables, fresh vegetables, some fruit, some nuts, you know, some fish, you know, but it was mostly sardines and, the small fish, you know, they were preparing, for all year long, you know, with spicy tomato spicy pepper and, fantastic, you know. And then, you know, they had all these eggplants and pepper and tomato sauce, you know, from organic tomatoes. So fantastic stuff. So, basically, it was mainly a plant based diet with some, eggs from, basically, chicken that they had, you know, in their in their garden and and and and some cheese, mozzarella and some cheese. And, probably, they were eating meat twice a month, you know, and, and that's the diet. The the real Mediterranean diet has nothing to do with the Mediterranean diet nowadays. You know? It's nothing to do. Which also, another, I think, overhyped. And maybe we'll disagree here. I don't know. But olive oil is another one that's overhyped. And I think when you think about olive oil, most of the data is not compared against the whole food, olives. Like, if you had a, quote, unquote, Mediterranean diet or any diet, and you fed an equivalent amount of calories from olives versus olive oil, I don't think olive olive oil would win. So what are your thoughts on olive oil as a part of or in in amounts? Or Again again, olive oil, you know, back then, it was basically a family. Maybe they were having, like, one liter per month for a family. Very little. So you guys it was a very small amount. You know, they didn't have liters and liters and liters of olive oil. Right? Right? Like now, people that are using, you know, one tablespoon of olive oil is one and twenty calories. So if you are using too much olive oil, you know, easily you put 700, 800 calories of pure oil in your diet. But by the way, even if it's most mostly monounsaturated fatty acids, there is a percentage of saturated fatty acids that, you know, it adds up, you know, at the end of the day. So if you are consuming a lot of olive oil because you are dressing everything with olive oil, you have an excess calories and you have an excess of saturated fatty acids. And if you have an excess calories, you're gonna gain visceral fat. And because you're gonna gain visceral fat, you're gonna become insulin resistant. You're gonna have hyperinsulinemia. You're gonna have inflammation. You're gonna have, you know, this hypodemia, all these stuff. So, I mean, again, a small amount of olive oil is okay, but it's a small amount. It's not, you know, the more the better. Yeah. Alcohol, meat, very rarely classic Mediterranean diet. That's some of that is in your book. That and the exercise versus CR in terms of longevity for people who who wanna check it out. So the other thing I wanna ask about is so in one of your books, you wrote that death is unavoidable. So what are your thoughts? Yeah. Yeah. I still believe, you know, that that's an is is unavoidable because, first of all, let's say, you know, you know, I don't think so. But, you know, let's say, you know, that, you know, we're gonna find, like, you know, Albert de Grace suggests, you know, negligible death. So we're already 8,000,000,000 people on this planet. Without people dying, you know, we're gonna quickly become thirty, forty, 50,000,000,000. It's impossible. There is not enough food on on this planet. You know, we're gonna kill each other. There is no doubt about it. You know, There is you know, we are already at the limit. You know? I think, you know, there are data suggesting that, you know, we're already consuming more than twice, you know, the resource that is on this planet, especially because a lot of people now in China, everywhere, they started other meat, you know, like, you know, we in Western countries do. And so, you know, we are burning the Amazon, you know, to produce, meat, you know, for for China. And, so it's it's a disaster. That's part of the problem. I don't know if you have been watching today. I was watching, you know, the my major typhoon in Greece. You know, they're basically there is a third of the of of Greece underwater, you know, of the land of Greece underwater. In in Hong Kong, there's been a typhoon that has been basically Hong Kong was underwater. You know, it's it's a disaster. You know, there is it's and there are fires everywhere. And so, definitely, you know, there is something that it's strange even if you don't believe in global warming, these extreme events. And people did not realize that, you know, let's say in Greece now, one third of the arable land is underwater. So basically, the crops, they're gonna fail. When food is gonna become scarce, you know, because, you know, withdrawals and and and and and flooding, you know, basically, you don't have enough food to feed the people. People, they're gonna start to kill themselves, you know, because when when there is no food, you know, people, they're gonna take the gun and they're gonna go and get the food where they can. So people, they don't realize what's going on. And so they think about, you know, negligible aging when there are most more important. So as you know, in my books, you know, I'm talking about philosophy because I think, you know, one of the problem of our society, you know, you know, we have completely missed the connection with our spiritual life, with nature, with, you know, the real meaning of life. And, you know, if you study philosophy, at least certain type of philosophy, you understand, you know, the beauty of life and the beauty of being on this journey in life. And when you are dying, basically, you are just moving into other energy and other life. You know? There is no death. You know? Everything is is in circles. So, you know, the the idea that you are dying is just a misconception of what's going on in the universe. You're just basically right now an aggregation of atoms, like, you know, if you take, you know, water, you know, if it's cold, you know, the water is gonna become ice and depending where, you know, the eye the water was located, you know, gonna have a certain shape. And then eventually, when the temperatures increase, you're gonna become water and maybe water vapor. But you're still water. You're still h two h two o. Okay? And so I think, you know, this journey is a beautiful journey. What we should do is to optimize our health to be in in harmony with the laws of nature, where, you know, for example, I was on a on a major documentary last last, you know, on on Wednesday, the Italian TV, basically. When I was in Italy now this summer, the the Italian TV, producer, Duilio Giammaria, Basically, he came to interview me in different part of Italy. But interesting, there is this professor that is called, Silvio Garatini, who was the head of the Marionette pharmacological institute, '94, still working in the institute. No disease, no medication, perfectly brilliant. Every day, he walks six kilometers high speed. He drive his car 94 years old. So that's what we need to achieve, you know, basically, you know, having a long healthy life where you can still at 94 is still, you know, mentally capable of going to work and be engaged in what other young people are doing and, you know, with his wise attitude, you know, he he can help, you know, people too. So that's what I think is important. You know, this obsession with a longer life doesn't at least for me, it's not important. So for you, it's it's getting to the oldest age you possibly can in as good of health as you can and getting beyond the 120 years not so important because the population size will get too big, people start killing each other, it's a it's a madness. That's that's where you're on. Maybe one twenty, one thirty. We're not based on the monkey study, Sherman basically if we if we if we assume that, you know, the average lifespan of of a monkey is 26 and the average lifespan of a man right now is 80, So Sherman live forty four years. This is like one hundred and thirty five years of a human being. So it is possible that, you know, some human beings could leave to one forty. It's possible. But beyond that, no interest. Death is unavoidable. There's no way. Beyond well, beyond that, you know, it's possible, you know, you know, with some technology you can make it maybe, I don't know, I'm just now 200. But past that, you know, the fact, you know, the oldest human beings that are gonna live forever is impossible for the planet. There is no way that, you know, twenty, thirty billion people can live on this planet. There is not enough food. I I agree with that. What, can help get around that is if your lifespan is now two hundred years or longer or some amount beyond one twenty, now you've got an extra time period to learn other stuff to potentially potentially get you off this rock. Now maybe this planet becomes too overcrowded. But if you've got a hundred years to study, you know, aerospace engineering and quantum physics and all of these things that may be linked with interstellar travel, this is beyond the philosophy, I guess. You know? That's where I see it. Look. Look. Anything look. Anything is possible. You know? If you think, you know, you know, what we achieved right now you know, right now, basically, we are on Zoom. You are in US. I'm in Australia, and we are discussing and recording. If if, Caesar Julius Caesar, you know, you you are asking, should do you think, you know, that in in in one hundred years or one thousand years, it's gonna be possible to to to talk, you know, via Internet, you know, say, are you crazy? So everything is possible. Based on what we know right now, if there is another planet like planet Earth is so far that there is no way, you know, we can reach it, you know, with more than tech modern technology. Yeah. But then the question is but then the question is how long do you need to live where science is caught up to get around that problem of it's just too far away and using conventional methods and bending space time and Right now, I'm right now, I'm more concerned on on, my concern right now on this planet that is under under attack. You know, if if the the the the you know, people that don't realize that, you know, this is just the start, you know, this this massive flooding and fires and stuff like that, you know, that are happening more frequently and more frequently is just the beginning. Again, if this trend is real, the problem is not gonna go like a hurricane that is gonna destroy your house. Is failure of crops. In Greece, right now, one third Under what? Of demand is underwater. So for a year, no food. If, you know, there is a third less food. So probably because, you know, we are interconnected, they can import some food, you know, from from from somewhere else. But if if this, you know, massive increase in flooding, drought, you know, is becoming is exceeding then, you know, there is not gonna be enough food. So that's, I think, you know, what we're not right now as human being, you know, we should concentrate our energy, you know, to say, okay. You know, what can we do to create a a a a wall where, you know, we protect the environment? We create a wall, you know, where there is no war, you know, where we live, you know, in in a constructive way. We use all the technology we have, you know, to create, you know, energy efficient houses and cars and everything. So, you know, we don't we are not polluting where, you know, basically, you don't have to fight, you know, for oil because you you you don't need oil anymore because, you you know, you can extract energy for the sun, the wind, the the geothermal, and everything where, you know, instead of having millions of people who are sick, health care system are unsustainable. In US right now, we are spending you are spending, not anymore me, but you are spending basically I think in 2,013, it was $3,200,000,000,000. In 2021 it was $4,100,000,000,000. So basically in ten years, you know, it's almost $1,000,000,000,000 increase with a two point five years decrease in lifespan expectance in the last three, four years. You have a massive epidemic of obesity, you know, forty percent of these individual, thirty percent overweight, you know, metabolic syndrome is a disaster. So you are spending 4,000,000,000,000 plus $4.04 more than 4,000,000,000,000 with shitty results. And, and, and this is unsustainable even even here, even in in Italy because, you know, this idea that, you know, you are treating disease once they have occurred, to me is like to say, you know, I buy a new car, a new Ferrari, and then I I have no idea when I have to change the oil, the tires, the brake pads, and so I say, you know, I don't care. So most people say, I don't care. You know, I want to live my life without any problem. I want to eat whatever I want. I want to drink. I don't care. Yes. You know, you can do the same with your car. You know, you can buy an expensive Ferrari and say, I don't care. I'm not gonna change the oil. I don't care. I don't I'm gonna change the the the the tires on the brake pads. You know what happens? You know, probably when 15,000 k, the car is is is dead or you're gonna have an accident. Yes. You can do it, but it's unsustainable for for the planet, you know, because, you know, for the for the economies because unless and so it's crazy what what what most people are thinking. Instead of, you know, we have the knowledge to have many people living like Aratini, 94, without diseases, without medications, you can free trillions of dollars from health care to spend in technology, science, and maybe, yes, with advanced health spend and and lifespan. Do so, do you think that so this gets the issue of the individual versus the collective. And I know it's I I I don't like to be a pessimist. I'm generally an optimist. I I'm not negative. I try to stay towards the positive, but I'm generally not bullish on, global society changing climate change anytime soon. I think there's too much money invested in the people who are in the old school thought of coal and all the other things that pollute the environment and too much meat, whatever it may be. So we don't No. No. I'm positive. I think, you know, you know, that in the in in the next couple of years, we're gonna start to see, these major events like, you know, now, Hong Kong. Hong Kong is basically super advanced. Carbon neutral? No. But it's super advanced, you know. So, you you know, basically, it's underwater. You know, there is a it's a there is a major destruction. And so if you start to see New York or major, you know, London or Rome or major towns, you know, underwater or with major failure, then I think, you know, they're gonna act. And we have the technology and the knowledge, you know, to quickly, you know, change gear and, and and and and reduce pollution very quickly. So I think, you know, we still have they're gonna be damaged, but I think, you know, once, you know, people and politicians, they're gonna start to because right now, you know, there are a lot of people say, ah, that's not true. There is no global warming. It's just, you know, normal fluctuation. You know? It happens. You know, there is, you know, these up and down of, you know yes. That's true. But, you know, the frequency now is so frequent and so extreme that, you know, it cannot be just normal fluctuation. It's it's something more. And so I think, you know, if in the next couple of years, it's not gonna take long. You know, couple of years, if you're gonna start to see major problems, you know, when, you know, you have major cities, that are underwater with, you know, a lot of people dying and stuff like that, I think, you know, they're gonna change. So just to play the just to play the pessimist role again, unfortunately. So here in The States, you know, there's a big problem with gun violence, even, like, pre k you know, schools getting little kids getting murdered. You know? So they can't even pass legislation or don't want to for background checks, things that you would assume would reduce gun violence tremendously. Right? So for something as, you know, localizes that when compared with the environment, you know, can't pass laws to, you know, have moderate gun control. And I'm not talking about taking away people's guns. But you are the only country because, for example, in Australia here, there was, like, I don't know, fifteen, twenty years ago, a massive shooting. And then, you know, basically, the government say, okay. That's it. Yeah. They bought all the guns. And right now, there is nobody with a gun here in Australia. There's, you know, more I mean, the the average people doesn't have a gun, you know, in in Italy, in my country, basically, that the nobody has a gun unless, you know, you go to the where you say when you to the Shooting shooting range. Shooting. And and and and you have to have a special permit from the police, and you have to tell the police I'm going from home to here. If the police is you you you you it blocks you, you know, away from this path, you're gonna be in jail. Yeah. But here, there's, like, so many people that are against that. It's, like, taking I mean, think it's it's a decades long problem hasn't been fixed. US has to change. US US has to change in many aspects, you know. I think, you know, you under you are under the spell of, these major lobbies who are basically brainwashing people and, For money. For the for money. Literally. I don't understand. You know, they are eating crap. You know, they they are they have guns. You know, they they have they are have addiction with opioids, with anything, you know, with and it's a it's a society that went too far in a materialistic way, and the consequences are awful for, metabolic, mental health, spiritual health is gone. It's gone. Everything. Everything. Everything. I mean, it has to be rebuilt. You know? It has to be rebuilt from scratch. So is part of the answer just moving to a farm, self sufficiency, don't you know, where you can take care of yourself. Right? If everybody's got that self determinism to take care of their own health, it kinda gets beyond the societal, you know, sick care and and pollution. Right? Is is, going off grid part of the solution? Is that I don't know. So you you went from the state you went Italy to states and then to Australia. So was that Yes. Was that part of the thought I don't know if it was, but, Well, look, you know, I I I I went I arrived in 2001 in in in a in a in a in US at Washington University because I was interested in in color restriction. So when I was studying medicine, I remember, you know, this professor, Octavio Gozello, who came to one of the lectures and he was talking about color restriction in animals and said, wow. So there is an intervention in mammals that is able to extend lifespan and health span. My gosh. That's fantastic. So there is something real. And so basically then, you know, one once I finished my residency in internal medicine, I started my PhD in metabolism. I started to look around and I said, you know, who is working on calorie restriction in humans? So I wrote to Richard Weindrig. I said, you know, look, you know, I'm I'm working on annuals. But there is John Hollozie who just got an NIH grant, a calorie grant, to study calorie restriction. Why don't you write to him? So I wrote to John and John said, you know, fantastic. Come to work with me. So I took my luggage and I I I moved to to Saint Louis, and I worked with John, for eighteen years. Then, you know, once I was at the end of John retired, you know, then he got sick, and then I said, you know, what should I do? And I started to there were some friends who were basically close to Bloomberg, and Bloomberg basically was potentially interested to fund a longevity center at Wushu, but the dean and you know, we talked with the dean, he was not interested. And so I said, yes. Okay. I understand. You know, this is a model based on disease. So, basically, the more sick people you have, the more money you do. That's the the the American model, you know, because that doesn't exist in a public health care. So, basically, this private hospital, you know, if you have a department of cardiology, you want to have a lot of sick people or because, you know, the more you cardiac surgery you do, the more More money. And you put, the more money you do and the more budget you have for your department. And so I said, okay. That's enough. Enough of US. John, basically, he was in a in a nursing home and, I said, you know, it's time for a change. And so I had an offer to go to work for Singapore, Germany, London, and Sydney. And then at the end of the story, because I think, you know, quality of life is important, I moved to Sydney because here, the quality of life is fantastic. Very little pollution, high quality food. You know? In Sydney, the weather is fantastic, beautiful beaches, beautiful nature. And so I said, you know, why not? Let me go to Sydney and, enjoy the nice weather, the nice, low pollution, low crime, zero crime. Here, you know, I can leave my we leave our door open. You know? Nobody's touching you. So instead of when I was leaving Saint Louis, morning and evening, you were saying, okay. Now I'm gonna call the security to go to work or not. So So alright. So then, that was great. So that was how basically you got into aging and the and the the path that where you are now. So then going forward, I I think I saw you have a a study on atherosclerosis and and reversing atherosclerosis, but current studies and then future projects, future goals, what do you where do you stand there? Oh, we have several study. One is on, combination of diet, five two pescovagenerian diet and exercise meditation, you know, to see if we can reverse atherosclerosis, by CT scan and, in the in the atherosclerotic plaques. And, we'd also do a stress MRI to see if we can change microcirculation in the heart plus, you know, all the metabolomics, proteomics, gut microbiome, FMD, and many other measurements. Then, you know, we have a study on defects of fasting with a ketogenic diet in, in with acute modal leukemia to see if we can basically protect the normal cells from the damage of chemotherapy in humans in AML. We are just starting a study on three days of fasting with or without exercise to see if we can increase autophagy because there are no data in humans about autophagy. A lot of people, they again, a lot of propaganda say, you know, fasting is inducing autophagy, but there is no single paper showing that in humans, there is an increase in autophagy flux. So now we are we are starting a study, to see, you know, if three days of fasting, water only fasting plus exercise, plus or minus exercise, can induce autophagy DNA repair and other and other pathways. Plus, you know, we just started I'm I'm I'm I had, you know, beginning of the year, I I've been promoted as the scientific director of the Charles Perkins Center RPA clinic. And so, I've now I I got some philanthropy money to hire a chef in residence and exercise physiologist resident, and the hospital just approved, you know, the these lifestyle medicine clinical service. So now we have a healthy for life program with a clinical service on lifestyle medicine, another one on education in schools, and we are now doing workshops in high school. The idea is this one that, you know, a lot of colleagues of mine also say, you know, you have the lipid clinic, you have the obesity clinic, you have the fatty liver disease clinic, the breast cancer oncology clinic. Typically so if someone comes to you with hypercholesterolemia, you're gonna give a statins of the p sixty nine p six PCS nine k inhibitor, and that's it. But as we said, you know, these people, they have hyperinsulinemia, oxidative stress, inflammation that are not pharmacological treated. So the idea is that, you know, these people they are taking the medication for lowering cholesterol, then they're gonna come to our lifestyle medicine clinical service where with a chef, they're gonna learn how to cook healthy, tasty food, and the exercise physiologist that is not just exercising a couple of days per week because, you know, people that say, you know, the exercise, for example, does not reduce body weight. Yes. Because people, they are exercising two, three times per week. With John, you know, in calorie phase one, we have shown that, you know, you can achieve 8% weight loss with exercise only, but to achieve 8% weight loss and 40% reduction in visceral fat by MRI with exercise only, you have to exercise one hour a day, six days a week at 72% of max heart rate. Without changing calories? Without changing your calories? Without changing calories, if you exercise one day a week, six days a week, one hour per per session at between 6080% on every 72% of max heart rate, you burn 40% of visceral fat in one year. But that's an overweight overweight people or It's where fifty to sixty years old men and women, BMI twenty five to thirty at baseline. Yep. So for people who had a lean b have a lean BMI closer to the 22 ish, range, that would probably be too much. Right? I mean, if, they probably have less Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Absolutely. Absolutely. So longevity clinic focusing on nutrition, educating on nutrition and exercise? Yeah. In a in a mechanistic way. So, you know, you can it's not just, you know, eat, you know, Mediterranean diet, you know. There are certain parameters, you know, you can measure and see if your intervention is basically inducing the metabolic molecular changes that we know are important in regulating the accumulation of metabolic molecular aging based on all the study, you know, that, you know, we have been discussing or at least, you know, some of those we have been discussing. Of course, you know, the the the in the future, if I have more money, I would like to hire someone who is gonna help us, you know, to do some mental, emotional health reframing because I think, you know, one of the reason why people, they are not changing their lifestyle because they don't have, you know, the right mind frame. And so I think, you know, we need to work on that in a more systematic way. And we are also developing a e platform, e health platform with an app, you know, where you have an app, you know, that is helping us, you know, to monitor. Then, you know, in the future, we can link, you know, the CGM and other sensors. So, basically, where, you know, you can monitor how your intervention on you, not on a group, is gonna change, you know, what you're doing, how much is gonna change your glucose. And eventually, we're gonna develop other sensors to measure, you know, maybe some amino acids, you know, twenty four hour a day. And, yeah. So that's, because I'm convinced that, unless we are gonna incorporate this new model of lifestyle medicine clinical service into primary practice, there is no we're not gonna change. It's gonna be unsustainable. So my idea is that in the future, you know, you you have, you know, maybe 20 GP, you have you have a clinic of 20 GPs. At the center, you have basically the met up the chef in residence with with the exercise physiology, maybe one of these, you know, mindfulness, whatever, emotional health, you know, health professional. And so as you as as a doctor, you say, okay. This is the medication for your blood pressure, for your glucose, whatever. However, I strongly suggest, you know, you're gonna do some workshops, you know, with these people to improve your overall metabolic health. And eventually, based on the data we have, you're gonna go off medications. Nice. And plus, it could be a small scale model of what we can replicate, you know, in a society on a society wide, you know, to to reduce the sick care, you know, and flip it into the That's not right now, if I have to tell you, this is my main interest right now. Because I think, you know, we know enough we have enough knowledge, mechanistic knowledge to prevent ninety percent of the chronic disease we see in our hospital. And if we prevent ninety percent of the disease we have in our hospital, we can free so much money to invest in research to advance what we were telling to develop biomarkers, you know, to measure optimal calorie intake, exercise, stuff like that. And potentially, you know, to extend even further health span and lifespan. So, you know, maybe to to get, you know, to your real max. So the other side of that is, you know, beyond the big food companies and big pharma who stand the profit as you mentioned from everybody being sick and overweight and unhealthy. The the mindset and the, you know, behavioral aspect of it is important too because, like you said, there may be a maybe half the population out of some large number that likes eating their chips and cookies and cheeseburgers and that would never adopt the, quote, unquote, healthy lifestyle because to them, being alive means I'm gonna do whatever I want, eat whatever I want, raising the cost for all of us. So it's almost like we have to go to war with that segment of the population who is making it bad for all of us in terms of health care costs and, you know, filling up the hospitals. It's a tough battle. Right? Yeah. But it's educational. Again, you know, apart from this, as I said, you know, one is this lifestyle clinical medical service and the other one is basically the concept, you know, that I try to summarize in my book, the life the the the path of longevity should become mandatory teaching starting in primary school. So, you know, you should have my book made simple for for for for for for primary school students. And so one hour per week, like, you teach math and gram and history, one one hour per week, you should teach them, you know, they should start to understand, you know, all these concept, you know. Then, you know, in in second in high school, you you're gonna become more sophisticated. And then in in university, even if you're not a doctor, but if you're a lawyer, if you are an economist, you should have, you know, like, an exam on these topics that is mandatory. This is gonna transform society because, you know, these concepts, they're gonna become so ingrained that, you know, you're gonna move the the Gaussian curve on the right and then, you know, basically, the new the new generation of journalist, the public officer, economist, engineer, doctors, they have this mentality and therefore, basically, people that are gonna be like, again, Cindy Garatini, 95 years old, no medication, no, no impairment, no disease, still active mentally, physically, that's achievable. He's not genetically lucky this guy. This guy has been doing moderate calorie restriction, with optimal nutrition, exercise, all his life. Alright. So yeah. I totally agree. That's the way it should be. Yeah. From starting young. Right? So they're learning the right way. Nutrition isn't taught in schools here at all. It's so it's and then they grow up. You know? Lunchtime is chips in the soda, so it's ingrained for the duration of their life. And then anyone who's outside of that box eating a real food diet is the, why are you eating healthy? Like, what? This is real food. What are why are you eating unhealthy? Right? So we need to flip that mindset. So that's a a great A little. And then you have also to flip the mindset, you know, that, you know, eating healthy is untasting. You know? Eating healthy is tasty. Yeah. When when rarely, I need to go to the restaurant, when I go back home for a couple of days, I feel shitty. Yeah. So that's a that's a great point because I don't know if you remember, and I think I mentioned to, this to you in a message, but when we went to dinner, I you, me, Holly, Arlen, back in the day when I was a grad student, that was when I was, in the gym a lot more. Protein intake probably close to double what it is now. And you said to me, you said, you're too heavy. You're just too big. And I was only a hundred seventy pounds, five foot seven. So now I it's funny because you said, you know, my BMI, you, twenty one and a half. So my current body weight, one forty one this morning, so about sixty four kilos, and still still have the muscle. So or not as much. So, it took me a while to get on that path, but I'm grateful that you you, you know, were honest honest enough to tell me tell me the truth. So, Art, is there anything we didn't cover that we should we should, No. I think, you know, I think, you know, we we we we we we we we we had a nice discussion of over an overview of, again, look, you know, we acquire so much knowledge. Of course, there is a much more, you know, we have to learn as I said, you know. But, you know, we already have enough knowledge, you know, to prevent in most people or to markedly reduce in most people the development of ninety percent of the most common chronic disease we we see in our hospital. We can massively increase the probability of someone to live a long and healthy life without medications. It's really possible. It's possible. This needs, you know, to become a crucial topic, not only medical schools, but in every school in in society. And we had to reframe, you know, our educational health care system. Right now is a sick care system and, an educational system and is not really targeted, you know, to health, human and environmental health and flourishing. And, again, you know, we we need, you know, to to to to talk about it. And and as as you said, you know, it's it's amazing. You know, I wrote, you know, a couple of books that, you know, they they sold, you know, a decent number of copies, but nothing compare, you know, to a lot of stupid books out there, you know, that are totally wrong and, you know, they they they got it wrong, you know, easy fix, you know, the fight to die and, you know, the keto died, the paleo died, you know, the Atkins died. Millions of copies of books, you know, that are increasing mortality and, and disease and, and and they got it wrong. It's completely wrong, you know. It's, it's a easy fix, that people love, you know. Give me one simple thing, you know. But I don't want to change more than that. So, your your current book may or books maybe not, you know, as as high as you want but I'd say don't give up there. The cream always rises to the top. It's only about No. No. I'm look, you know, I'm not concerned, you know. It's just a consideration. Look, you know, I wrote this book because I thought, you know, look, you know, after all these years of salaries paid as a professor from basically public money because in in US, my salary was paid by NIH funding, and here is paid by the by by the government in Italy as well. I think, you know, as as an academic, as a scholar in in one topic, I think, you know, you should not only publish papers in Nature and New England and stuff like that, but, you know, you should try to to also write someone for the people who really paid our salaries. And that's why I decided to write a book, you know, for people to, you know, summarize, you know, in an easier way, my thinking and my knowledge, my experience of thirty thirty years of well, thirty years as a scientist plus another twelve years as a doctor and a specialist in internal medicine. And, so I don't care, you know, if I don't sell it. But it's just a consideration that, you know, some, I think, you know, wrong and simple minded books. You know, they sell millions of copies and, you know, something that is really summarizing the best signs out there. With limitation, I'm not saying, you know, that, you know, we even you, you know, we don't know everything, you know, but I think, you know, we are at least, you know, summarizing the best science in a kind of holistic way and having good perspective, the biology of aging that is revolutionary because, you know, we are not focused on obesity, cardiovascular disease, or cancer. But, you know, because we are coming from the biology of aging field, you know, we have this idea of, global health and, and the molecular pathways that are re really regulating longevity and lifespan and health span. And from the perspective of nutrition, I mean, I don't wanna name names, but there's a person who's out there who's basically an MD, but is on the pharma side of trying to get you to, you know, maximize lifespan, which plays little, you know, but with little emphasis on whole food and well, not little emphasis, but, not as much as it should be. For example, like, total cholesterol levels and cardiovascular disease. I mean, a statin is the easy way to go to drop your LDL, but the fact is it doesn't address the problem, which is unless you have hypercholesterolemia, is easily addressable by diet. You know, a very high fiber diet will drop LDL and total cholesterol very quickly in a couple weeks. But most people, as you know, don't don't eat much fiber at all. Right? So I I haven't seen that approach in the, you know, the public space. It's just take the Yeah. Yeah. You wonder if these people, they are just, my is is is a is is a sensation. It's a feeling. But I think, you know, these people, they are set up, you know, by these companies. Could be. Could selling certain ideas and products. So Or or or they lack the perspective and just think that that's the only way because they lack the perspective. It could be that too. I think I think more. I think, you know, they lack the perspective, but still, I think, you know look, you know, this big corporation, they invest, you know, 2% of their money in propaganda. Yeah. Could be. They they choose their influencer, and they pay for their campaign, you know, and they they pay for space on socials and, they become famous. They have hundreds of thousand of people following them with money. So if you want you know, if you have a new product, it's not the new product. It's the marketing that is costing. If you are a company, it's the marketing that is costing, not the the you you can have the best product whatsoever if you don't have the power of money to buy the publicity space, you know, the social space. There's on socials, you know, it's very difficult to to to to to to reach many people. Yeah. Definitely. Alright. That was great, Luigi. I appreciate it. K. Thank you. Talk soon. Bye, Mike. Bye. Bye, Luigi.