In terms of longevity, in an earlier video, we saw that serine plus vitamin b six may be the best way to reduce homocysteine. And if you missed that, let's do a quick recap here. Starting with dietary intake of folic acid, that's converted into serum folate, which in combination with vitamin b twelve will convert homocysteine into methionine. Similarly, dietary intake of betaine, otherwise known as trimethylglycine or choline which is converted into betaine will also convert homocysteine into methionine. But decreasing homocysteine to increase methionine may not be a good strategy for longevity as methionine restriction extends lifespan in animal models. Whether that's true or not in people, nobody knows yet. In contrast, adding serine plus vitamin b six can convert homocysteine into cystathionine which in the presence of adequate b six will further convert cystathionine into cystine which can then be incorporated into GSH or glutathione. Now, there are videos on the channel where glutathione restoration in older adults, clinical trials in older adults, improve the whole bunch of adverse health related outcomes and extended lifespan in mice. So I think serine plus b six or I have thought, we'll see how the data looks, maybe the best way to reduce homocysteine. So for my fourth blood test in 2023, did serine plus b six reduce homocysteine? So to recap that journey, for the second test, I didn't supplement with with any serine and my normal dietary intake of vitamin b six three milligrams per day resulted in a homocysteine of 11.1 micromolar. Then, for the April test, I started supplementing with serine about two grams per day, increased my b six intake through supplementation. Eight milligrams supplementation per day to eleven milligrams per day and that started a push or normal variation, I don't know but homocysteine went in the right direction for that test. For the most recent test in July, I further increased serine levels to about four grams per day and then tripled my b six intake again through supplementation where it's 12 x higher than where I started for the March test. But unfortunately, homocysteine did not go in the right direction. It went back towards where 11.1 where it was for the second test. So then the question is, why didn't it work? Why didn't serine plus b six reduce homocysteine? So then the first question could be is, did nicotinic acid supplementation increase homocysteine? So I started niacin in, supplementation nine days before the July test and that increased my NAD but it may have pushed homocysteine higher and why that's true can be shown here. On the y axis, we've got plasma levels of homocysteine and this is a study done in young adults, twenty to twenty three year olds, relatively small study of 30 people. So after three hours, being fed, water which was the control what was fed to controls, we can see that there was no increase for plasma levels of homocysteine three hours after consuming the water. But for young adults that consume three hundred milligrams of the other b three, vitamin b three or niacin form, niacinamide, we can see that there was a big increase for homocysteine from 11, around 11 to 16 micromolar after one one and a half hours of supplementation. And then three hours after the supplementation, homocysteine went up even further to about 18 micromolar. What about nicotinic acid? That's what I was supplementing with. I wasn't supplementing with niacinamide. So that data is shown there for people who were supplemented with three hundred milligrams of nicotinic acid. Although it wasn't a significant increase, we can see that homocysteine did indeed move in the quote unquote wrong direction towards higher levels after an hour and a half which plateaued from an hour and a half to three hours. But note that I wasn't taking three hundred milligrams of nicotinic acid per day. I was taking double that around six hundred milligrams per day. So it's possible that supplementing with nicotinic acid with which raised my NAD may have pushed homocysteine in the wrong direction. Alternatively, besides reacting with homocysteine, serine can be converted into other metabolites including cysteine and glycine. So is that what happened? So in terms of a recap of why that could be true, serine is converted into cysteine without affecting homocysteine as I showed on the previous slide and we can see that here. So starting with cysteine on the, sorry, serine on the left in the presence of acetyl co a, it's converted into o acetylserine and then then in the presence of h two s, otherwise known as thiosulfate, that's converted into cysteine and note that's without affecting homocysteine in these two enzymatic reactions. Similarly, serine is converted into glycine also without impacting homocysteine. So starting with serine in the presence of h four folate or tetrahydrofolate, that's converted into glycine. So again, is that what happened? Now, I have metabolomic data which includes data for serine, cysteine and glycine so we can address or attempt to address that question. And if you're familiar with the channel, you've seen me use this kit which is a gold mine of metabolites and metabolite data for kynurenine tryptophan as part of the, parts of a part of the de novo NED synthesis pathway, taurine and polyamines which extend lifespan, cysteine and cysteine, methionine sulfoxide divided by methionine as markers of oxidative stress. Metabolite ratios as markers of oxidative stress, EPA and DHA, fish oil fatty acids which decline during aging. And as I mentioned, this kit is a gold mine. 500 plus metabolites and data for that much. Discount link in the video's description. Alright. So, on to the data. So I have two blood tests so far using the iolo kit in April and May, and for those two tests, I supplemented with, two grams and four grams respectively of serine per day, and then below that, we've got blood levels of serine, cysteine and glycine. So starting with serine, we can see that there was a 70 micromolar drop despite doubling my serine intake. So that's either variability in the test itself or it was consumed. Somehow, that 70 micromolar was being consumed somewhere. Definitely not to reduce homocysteine though. Now, it wasn't Serine wasn't converted into glycine as we can see that my glycine levels were pretty close to stable from three thirteen to about 301 micromolar. If serine was converted into glycine, we'd expect to see an increase in glycine for that second test but that's not what happened. In contrast, there is an increase for cysteine and again, I don't know if this is normal variability test to test just from the iolo kit but that cysteine level went up by about 80% and granted, that doesn't make up for the about, 60 drop from one seventy to one ten for serine but it's as it's only about an eight micromolar increase for cysteine but it does suggest that some of the serine could have been converted into cysteine without affecting homocysteine. Now, with that in mind, I haven't given up on serine yet. For the next test, I'm gonna go higher. Six grams per day. I've been supplementing with that for, a few weeks now, and I'm gonna continue with vitamin b six. So I'm gonna give it one more chance to reduce homocysteine. Only this time, I'm gonna take niacin or nicotinic acid out completely. So if serine plus b six has any effect, very high dose serine has any effect on homocysteine, we should see it on the next test. And if we don't, I'm gonna take it out of the approach. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for at home metabolomics, NED quantification, green tea, epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing with Cyfox Health, and note that their panel is almost completely different from the at home metabolomics including ApoB, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Die Trying brand, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. Hope that you enjoy the video. Have a great day.