Welcome to the Everything Epigenetics podcast, where we discuss DNA regulation and the insights it can tell you about your health. I'm Hannah Wendt, and I'm the founder of Everything Epigenetics. Today, my guest is Michael Lustgarten. This is a really great episode for anyone who is interested in biohacking their own health. Michael's goal is to live longer than everyone that has ever lived, and his brand goes by the saying conquer aging or die trying. We talk about his history, what led him to this goal, how he defines aging, and if he considers it a disease. We also talk about how he optimizes his diet, physical activity, sleep, and body weight, and how that actually affects all of these biomarkers that he's measuring. We talk about his DNA epigenetic methylation results, which include measurements of the Horvath, Hannem, Denieden Paste, and telomere length test. We also chat about what he prioritizes, what he's not measuring, and how he uses a methodology where he only changes specific variables at a time. A little bit of background into Michael. Like I mentioned, his long standing goal is to live longer than anyone that's ever lived on this earth. He actually plans on using the best available science to biohack his way to super longevity. And he makes videos about this and other anti aging related topics on his YouTube and on Patreon. You'll actually get more exclusive information that he doesn't post on any other social media platforms, including daily updates for fitness metrics like RHR, HRV, sleep data, and diet, including food amounts and nutrient content. You'll also find early looks at videos in progress, including the papers that he references in different slide to slide setups and updates. Michael Westgarden is a scientist on the nutrition, exercise, physiology, and sarcopenia team at the HNRCA, and his research currently focuses on the role of the gut microbiome and serum metabolome on muscle mass and function in older adults. Michael has been a guest lecturer at the Friedman School of Nutrition Science and Policy on topics such as the gut microbiome, serum, metabolome, oxidative stress, exercise, and sarcopenia. He has contributed to over 31 publications in leading peer reviewed journals that have been cited more than 4,000 times, including 17 manuscripts as the first or last author. Now for my guest, Michael Lescartman. Welcome to the Everything Epigenetics podcast, Michael. I'm excited for you to be here today. Thanks for joining. Hi, Hannah. I know we were just chatting offline. I feel like you're my closer friend or colleague or whatnot. I know we've been chatting back and forth via email probably for a couple years now, which seems crazy to say, but this is the first time we're actually talking, you know, I guess, face to face, camera to camera. So really excited just to learn more about you and really your biohacking over the years, how epigenetics has played a role in that. So we'll get right into it, and we'd just love for you to introduce yourself to really me, my guest. I know you have your PhD from the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio. So go ahead and take it away. Yeah. So, hey, everyone. My name is Michael Lustgarten. In my day job, I'm a scientist at the Tufts Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging. And then in my, side job for, you know, both of these roads are a passion, obviously. But in my side job, as Thomas Anderson well, as Neo Well, I don't know. That sounds sounds weird. But my goal is to live longer than anyone that's ever lived. So in my side job, I've been, quote, unquote, biohacking, trying to optimize my blood biomarkers, blood pressure, oral microbiome, you name it, for probably the last eight plus years. So, yeah. So that's, I guess, what we're gonna dive dive deep into. More people care about that than my actual day job as a scientist, which is really interesting. So Well, I'm I'm gonna pick at that a little bit. I'm curious. When did you, I guess, start getting interested in more of, like, the biohacking space? You said it's been around eight years, but it's really hard to juggle two separate positions. I I feel that way sometimes with everything epigenetics because, you know, I don't really work on this in my nine to five unless I'm actually physically recording, and I'm doing editing and everything outside. So how did you start to balance that or realize that, hey, I'm really passionate about this. This is something I wanna spend more time on. Yeah. So this has been a journey. It's been an evolution for a long time. It actually goes back way past eight years. So I started probably 2008, so fifteen years, where once a year, I had the idea, alright. Every time I go to the doctor, I'm gonna record everything in a spreadsheet, and I'm just gonna track it over time. And I didn't understand that, you know, the, reference range is probably not what's optimal for health and longevity. It's just a population based average, rather too low or too high. I didn't get that. Like, I was the probably like most people where it was, you know, hey. I just got my blood test back and, you know, my data is right in the middle of the range, so I'm good. So back in 2008, I had that mentality. It was only testing, like, once a year, but I thought it was better than nothing. Right? So, then sometime but then the story goes back even further than that because, so I have two university degrees. The first one was in English literature, and I wasn't there are no scientists in my family. Nobody college educated in my family. I wasn't exposed to any doctors or scientists, so I really didn't have that as a career goal as a kid. So after my first university degree in '94, it was it was like, what am I gonna do with my life? So I basically spent five years just roaming The United States without a clue, without a passion. And then I came across, Roy doctor Roy Walford, famous calorie restriction scientist, who wrote a book called beyond the hundred and twenty year diet, which basically detailed calorie restriction and its impact on lifespan and animal models for, like, fifty years. So also in that book, he had, he had, biomarker data because people who were in the biosphere experiment where they were self enclosed and they were growing their own food, trying to replicate what it would be like to live on Mars, They were they were studying blood biomarkers over that two year period and improved a whole bunch of blood biomarkers. So that was in his book too. And I was like, wow, that's really fascinating. Blood biomarkers and aging and, you know, living past one twenty, I'm in. Yeah. So then I made so my because my first degree was in English lit, I had to go back to school, because I didn't have many science courses. I had astronomy one and two and physics one and two, but I didn't have biochem. So I had to go back to school for biochem, you know, to to pursue this as a career. So, anyway, so I did that and then, picked an aging, you know, related lab, for my graduate work. And then yeah. So, anyway, in 2008, that's when that's when the whole biohacking as a side project, started with probably the goal of it maybe being a full time thing. Seeing people like Seamland do it and, Brian Johnson doing it full time. So there is there is a yeah. Well, that that's awesome. That and, you know, we'll we'll talk about your platform, your YouTube channel, and how informative your videos are. But the way you present the information, now it makes sense that you have that English background because you do such a great job at explaining what I think can be very complicated, you know, mechanism of actions and the biochemical based pathways. So I really like how you break it down. So I can see where that English degree comes from, but you have to be pretty brave to go back to school for biochemistry as well. Yeah. So a couple a couple things there. One is I have very strong idiot genetics. And what I mean what I mean by that is, like, in the class, you there you have when you don't know something, you have a choice. If you stay quiet, then now you're for sure on the idiot track. Whereas if you ask, now you're evolving out of that. So, so I know what it feels like to feel, like, poorly educated. So because it's a big part of me. Like, it's funny because when I was younger, I used to just goof off a lot and Mhmm. People didn't really see me academically. Like, my friends at the time would, like, just see me goofing off, and they would think, wow. You're just an idiot. And I'd be like, you don't you don't get it. There's a whole other side of me. So so knowing that I I I I I know what it feels like to not understand something. I try to make it as easy to understand as possible, but I still get people saying, like, this is too dense for me. You know? But I'm trying to make it as easily, you know, easily distilled as possible. And then there was something else you said that I was gonna go on, but I forgot. Going back to school, maybe? Yeah. So when I went back to school, like, when I went back for biochem, I I wasn't messing around. I didn't go out. I I didn't do anything aside from study, exercise, and that's it. Because, I knew that I was gonna get some pushback, like like, kinda like you mentioned. Like, it's, you know, why are you going back to school? How do we know you're not gonna flake out? So one of the, faculty members who interviewed me basically brought that up and said, look. You've been out of school for five years. How do we know you're not just gonna flake and just do something else? And I told him, I was like, look. You don't I I got almost straight a's in biochem. Like, when people were getting 50 fives in organic chem and that was a c based on the curve, I was getting a, you know, nineties and then saying, how come I'm not getting an a? Why are you giving me an a minus? Yeah. When the class average is 55. So so, but I basically said that, look. You don't go back to school and get almost straight a's in biochem. I I at that time, I was all in. I was fully committed. You know? So I saw I saw basically where I am now for, like, twenty years earlier, and I I kinda mapped it out. You know? How do I get to that road? So We have to be proud of that. Congratulations. I mean, looking back, you know, I know you're a person who, hey. I I still have a ways to go or whatnot, but even just kind of laying that out and talking about those accomplishments, that's that's great. And Yeah. You know, we got kind of the story of how you went back to school and and where your interest actually peaked in some of these this biomarker based tracking, and you have that goal to live longer than everyone that's ever lived. And now you have this organization, Conquer Aging or Die Trying. So when did Conquer Aging or Die Trying actually become a real organization? Yeah. I don't know how real of an organization it is. It's just the motto it's just the motto my motto of the channel, and I mean every every word of it. You know? So, at some point, you know, the channel name was just my name, and then I was like, I need something catchy. You know? Yeah. So, you know because so many people online have these just, you know, so and so health maximalist or, you know, so and so wants you to and that's their handle. So I was like, alright. Let's put it down. Conquer aging or dot trying. You know? So Well, it's super catchy. I really like that as well. And, of course, you know, with our rejuvenation Olympics, I think it's, like, it's the same exact saying, but saying in different ways the race you never want to win or whatnot. Right? But I think yours is a little bit, easier understood and and upfront. So I really like that. But it could it could turn some people off because, you know, it's, hearing the or die trying, I think, can trigger some people where they're just like, I don't wanna it's just too crazy for me, but it is what it is. You know? So Yeah. You have to be all in. Right? And I know your central premise as well is that, hey. If we have these well established biomarkers, not only have them, but if we're actually using them and we're able to track them of different organ systems, systemic health, other, again, mechanism of of actions going back into those biochemical pathways and using probably what you learned when you went back to school, you know, can aging and disease risk be slowed? So that's kind of the question that you're answering. And just to ponder on that, you know, what do you how how would you define aging yourself and maybe talk about if you would consider as a disease as well? Yeah. So, it it it's just the just the simple definition. It's the progressive deterioration with organ and systemic function over time. Right? So Mhmm. And then in terms of of it being a disease or not, so I actually wrote a paper a few years ago. You know, so somebody published a paper, trying to classify aging as a disease. And then at that time, my academic work was leading me towards the gut microbiome and a potential influence on muscle, like gut muscle axis. So I started doing a deep dive into the impact of just all of the microbiome, mouth, skin, you know, gut, everywhere, and published a paper, you know, saying, hey. If aging is classified as a disease, don't forget about the microbes. And that was before that, you know, the microbiome was even considered as one of the hallmarks of aging, which in latest update it is. So, is it a disease? I don't know. This gets into semantics and, like, when people debate debate that stuff online, I I kind of run away from it because, you know, they're they're the types who wanna just debate semantics all day. And then there are the types like me who just, like, I wanna get in and actually try to do something about it. So I think it is a disease. You know? Yeah. We didn't evolve. You know, humans haven't haven't lived long enough to evolve the genetics to basically of more immortality. I guess that's the easiest way to put it. And but fortunately, we've got the, you know, the the brain capacity to develop tools to, to overcome that. Right? But it's just a question of can you can you overcome the genetics of not having immortality coded in your genome? You know, can you use the, you know, the human brain capacity to get around that within a seventy year time span to push human longevity forward, whereas the genetics won't do it for who knows how long. Right? So Yeah. Yeah. Well, I agree with you for for what it's worth. Yes. Not gonna get caught up on the semantics and what it means if agents define as a disease for society or grants or or whatnot. But I I really do. I think everything else, these diseases we see, type two diabetes, mel metabolic, disease, even things like kidney, liver, or different organ system diseases, and even cancer. You know, if we attack aging head on first, it actually mitigates those diseases too. So, hey, let's take a step back, figure out step one, which is aging, and then slow those progression of those diseases as well. So, even even if you've got the healthiest lifestyle, just like you said, aging is underlying all all of these diseases. So maybe I'll delay it for fifty years. Right? I won't get it I won't get type two diabetes at some age. It'll just be some later age. Like, I'm sure you know centenarians have delayed onset of diseases by, like, twenty or thirty years. Right? So Yeah. So it's coming for everyone no no matter what. Right? So for sure, the the, you know, the foundation foundation roots phaging to actually study and optimize. Yeah. For sure. But there is another central premise of my channel besides track and optimize, and it's basically self empowerment. Like, we don't have to wait for RCTs and other people. We don't have to wait for animal studies that may or may not translate into human longevity. We can test ourselves and often, you know, I think most take most people take that for granted. Like, so many people are taking supplements, and they never actually see, like, is this a net benefit neutral or detrimental to my actual health? So that that's probably, you know, the third rung of the, premise, essential premise, like, track, test and track. You know? Yeah. Don't take something based on hope. What is the date what does your own data say? So Exactly. And and I I talk about that day in and day out. I feel like now there was a keyword there that I really liked you said, which was you kinda corrected yourself. You said track your data. Track your own data. Right? Yeah. And I think that's really important, and we'll get into exactly what you've been doing, which is is great and amazing proof of concept. But even with the epigenetic DNA methylation testing, a lot of people see, oh, well, there's this clinical trial, and there's still very few clinical trials as we know. Right? It's it's very new technology. And they'll go to something based on that clinical trial, and I'll say, well, wait a second. Sure. You can use that as a guide, but we still don't even know if that works for you. So every single clinical trial is still gonna be biased in the sense that they're testing a very specific population, and you have your own biological makeup. Yep. So I really do encourage people to track all sorts of biomarkers, epigenetics not being the only part of the picture. Just gave that example because of course my platform and what we're talking about today. So, you know, what I wanna know now, Michael, is what are you doing? Tell me tell me what you're tracking you. You know, I see age biomarkers. I see, all sorts of other biomarker testing. But tell me a little bit about what you're doing. Yeah. So I started with the standard chem panel, the CBC. And, so I started with that, which is a $35 test. And most people, it's probably the most underrated thing that can be done to, quote, unquote, optimize health because it includes not just glucose and lipids, you know, metabolic health. It's got markers of kidney and liver function, immune cells, red blood cells. I mean, all things that change during aging. So, I started with that. So I've got basically a, quote, unquote, big picture panel of about 20 to 25 biomarkers that cover all of those organ systems. And then I added once Morgan Levine published her or doctor Morgan Levine published her, you know, I get so casual. Everybody to me is just, you know, the name without the the, you know anyway, so without the authority part. So then when she published her pheno age, I added in high sensitivity c reactive protein. But even that, I mean, they're like I'm sure you know there, you know, there's, like, immune age, and it's like a whole panel of immune biomarker but biomarkers that aren't commercially available, though. I mean, I'd I'd happily measure all that too. But I so HSCRP. And then, you know, it's funny because, like, epigenetics is not my background. It's not my forte. Like, my forte was on this you know, all all the basics, the standard chem panel CBC. And then, Ryan was gracious enough to Ryan Smith, for those who don't know, was gracious enough to say, hey. If you want some epigenetic kits, you know, I'll send them to you. No problem. And I I I was like, okay. But I didn't even think anything of it. And then they just sat in my, you know, my apartment for a couple months. And I was trying to because you've gotta know what you want to measure. You've gotta understand. And epigenetics was so new that I really did and then as I started doing deep dives, I was like, oh, I see. I get it. I get it now. Right? So yeah, so then I added that in, and you guys do telomere testing too, so that's part of the approach. So but then I've expanded it even further to oral microbiome because I've had issues with oral health my whole life. Probably most of it's self imposed because, you know, I wasn't I grew up on a junk food diet. I didn't floss. So I've I've optimized that as much as I can now. But it it's it's a similar approach to what you see Brian doing, Brian Johnson, who's popularized it, you know, which is basically trying to optimize every organ system that exists. And, you know, it and, you know, just going back to back to that central premise, if you if you know what it looks like in a youthful state, at least in terms of biomarkers, you could potentially slow it, delaying disease, maximizing longevity, and then hopefully living long enough to live forever if that's within the next seventy years or so. Mhmm. Absolutely. Yeah. And and, you know, I'm I I don't know if I would would consider myself a quote, unquote biohacker, whatever you'd like to call it. There's a lot of different terms out there, and I know some people don't like the word biohacker. But, obviously, I care very much about my health. I'm I'm tracking it. I'm using some of those actual biomarkers to get a baseline, do certain animal experimentation, and then track afterwards as well to see if it's hopefully a positive change, maybe a negative change. In terms of what I do, I don't think I've ever talked about this before, but I have a longevity health care provider. I get my labs done, all my hormones, everything done, probably includes that CBC panel that you mentioned. About every six months, I've been a little bit bad and I waited too long this time, but I'm going in the next two weeks over to Quest, you know, fasted in the morning, get it over with. So I'm happy to to track those even, and get kind of my values and see how am I deficient in magnesium? Do I need to take more vitamin d or or maybe certain hormones as well? So I think people don't realize how simple it can be too. Like you mentioned, the $35.50 dollar range somewhere in there. For the for the basics. Yeah. So Mhmm. I wish I had been as rigorous earlier. Like, if I could go back and so instead of, you know, kind of blazing the trail and not knowing what I'm doing and only tracking once a year, I wish I was doing it, you know, seven times a year now, but in my twenties. And the reason I say that is, like, when I see like, it's funny because sometimes I'll see someone in their eighties, and I'll be like, what do they look like when they're young? And, you know, even even, like, for someone who looks relatively young in their fifties, you can still see that there's some and even relatively fit people, you can whether it's face structure or maybe it's hormones. So and even for myself, I mean, hair not, you know, withstanding, you know, granted shave, not not alopecia. But, anyway, so what I'm trying to get at, I think hormones may be the, you know, androgens and estrogens respectively for men and women. I I didn't track that at all for a very, very long time. But I wonder if keeping them at optimal levels from youth to fifties and beyond, like, would retain some of that youthful look at advanced stage. Because you could have it's I think it's relatively easy to have optimal markers of kidney and liver and immune cells. I think that's relatively easy. But I don't know that that drives the youth the quote, unquote youthful look as much. Yeah. That's that's an interesting take, and it'd be great to have that data. Of course, at TruDiagnostic, we usually test people between their forties and sixties just because that's who our health care providers are seeing. Right? And we always encourage people to do this testing in your twenties or thirties just to, again, get that data profile, that, information about oneself set up. Now I will say the one recommendation we make to those health care providers and the one thing that's been proven, in an interventional trial is just hormone replacement therapy in, women, who have gone through menopause. But, again, delaying the onset of menopause can have some really great aging effects as well. I will say that most of the patients that we treat are probably on some type of hormone replacement therapy, and we have a very, very healthy population. So I do think there's probably some correlation there. I don't wanna say definitively because it's very, very subjective is what I'm saying. But we can run a massive analysis and again, see which, products are better correlated with, of course, better aging. Or even, like, age at at onset of menopause. Like, I'm I'm I'm betting that the women who had the the, you know, most delayed onset of menopause probably have, like, the youngest either Horvath or Dunedin Paste. You know, and then I wonder how that translates if they're able to keep it up, you know, for longevity. Right? So Yeah. Yeah. Definitively. And and we'll I think we'll learn more about that as as time goes on as well. It's it's weird to me. I I, have had someone ask me this question. I'm curious to see what you think. So of course, we know men age quicker than women. Right? And they die younger compared to women because of that sex paradox. So this is kind of the the topic we were talking about. Yet, we know pregnancy really, really advances, women's age and we go through menopause. Right? So why do you think that men still age quicker and die younger when women are going through these really drastic hormonal based changes? And still live longer. And still live longer. Purely speculation that obviously, you know, wasn't on our little agenda or talking points here, just kind of going with this conversation. Do you have any thoughts about that? I don't. So, what do you got? Not much. Just that, you know, there have been a couple papers by Jesse Poganik out of, Harvard, under Vadim Glatashev's lab who did look at different stressors and how biological age is affected. And pregnancy is one of those stressors, but it can be corrected once the stressor is gone. It can be restored essentially. The biological age, past even baseline if they're doing things that can better their health health. But, yeah, I I still don't know. I I think that still doesn't account for, like, the physiological, I guess, part of pregnancy that we go through right in the healing of the body. So I don't know. Just wondered if you had any other snippets. I mean, I'm thinking about it some more. Just to play devil's advocate. Maybe Yeah. Maybe, men are more likely to have a poor diet and smoke. I I don't know that this is the case. But, but then I'm thinking animal studies, you know, even then, do female mice live longer than male mice on a calorie restricted diet or any intervention? Sometimes some interventions are sex specific, but I don't know that, like, female animal models would necessarily live longer. I guess it depends on the intervention, but it's a tough human study to do. My first thought is just women are have women have evolved for longevity and the men, you know, the men are more disposable, I guess. Right? So Yeah. No. I I forgot. It it was like a curve ball. And, yeah. We really did ask some colleagues and didn't really get anywhere. Had a couple thoughts like like you and I are having right now. But if anyone listening wants to, you know, drop a comment or or talk about this and maybe give us some reasons, that'd be great. So to follow-up, so Yeah. I only mentioned the the blood testing side of it. Right? So the other side of that is I'm not just testing up to seven times a year. It's, I'm tracking, you know, diet, fitness metrics, sleep. And then I've looked I so I basically, have tracked so that hardcore approach of tracking almost literally everything. The food goes back to 2015. So that's eight years. The fitness metrics is about five years. And, so for every blood test, I have an average dietary intake that corresponds to that blood test. So if you test on day one and you test on day 60 for the fifty nine day period in between, you have an average dietary intake, and you can line that up with every with every blood test. So I've been doing that since 2015. And and based on how so after every test, I've been calculating correlations. And then, you know, so most people have the idea, like, just in standard academic studies. You have two groups, and you give one group an intervention, and the goal is to only change literally one thing or in an animal model. Right? But that's almost completely impossible in human studies. So then even for someone like me who's highly motivated, who tracks their diet, who weighs all my food, you know, there'll still be little things that'll be off, whether it's a vitamin or mineral, whatever it may be. But so what I'm trying to say is after each test, I recalculate the correlations, and then I modify my diet to try to push the net effect of biomarkers in in a given direction. So, you know, it's easy to say, alright. I don't wanna optimize glucose and lipids and forget about completely everything else. For me, it's when I'm optimizing, glucose or lipids, it's how does that look like? How does that intervention look like in this in the net effect of all of the other biomarkers? So if it makes glucose lower but makes seven other biomarkers worse, that's not gonna that's not and that for just as an example, like, total fat, you know, for me, for whatever reason, a very high fat diet, which is when I go above about 40%, more blood biomarkers start going in the wrong direction than right. So using that approach, I've been able to find the fat amount, find the protein amount, find the vitamin and mineral amounts that are, you know, associated with, the most most youthful biomarker profile. And I hate to say it, but that's kind of the reason why it's only a matter of time before I'm at the top of that rejuvenation leaderboard, and everybody's looking at me trying to because it's completely objective. It's not like I take a 100 I don't take a 100 supplements nowhere close. Not to put anybody on blast. We know what I'm talking about. But I'm a big fan of him. I'm not trying to put put him on blast. But, eventually, everyone's gotta come around to this approach and track literally everything and then look at, you know, how does this impact that within the full context? So, Yeah. I mean, that's phenomenal. I mean, we need a calculator from you. Right? Yeah. We need your kind of, the your type of approach there. The weakness though is just going back to that, you know, one change at a time, one intervention at a time. So, you know, for a given panel of biomarkers, I may have, you know, 20 things in my diet that send the net effect positive and 20 things that send the net effect negative. Right? So I'm not following one thing. I'm not following the top thing or the bottom thing. You know? I'm trying to literally follow them all. So in other words, if my if my correlative score for protein is negative five, I eat below my average intake, and that would be expected to have a better effect on biomarkers than if I went higher for protein. So Okay. Like so the I have scores for every macro and micronutrient and even for individual foods, correlative scores with the blood biomarker. So I try to follow literally them all. So it's for me in in working with clients, I see that as the best approach because, you know, it isn't one thing. You know, it's just like genetics where it's to say that one gene, even though sometimes one gene can affect, you know, a whole organism. But, you know, when it comes to longevity, it's probably gonna be thousands of genes working together, if not more. So I kinda try to have the same approach. Alright. I'm gonna follow all of the positive correlations and follow all you know, minimize the foods that are all of the negatives without knowing which one or which group is actually doing it. And I'm probably losing some information using that approach. But if I was gonna take the truly academic approach of this one at a time thing, it would take me years just to figure out. And who has that time? Right? So I mean, literally, who has that time? Yeah. Right? Yeah. You're gonna be dead. Die trying. Right? So, no. I I still think that's a wonderful pro approach. And, again, there's gonna be some pros and cons with each approach. That one's gonna take a a long time. Again, we don't have the time. We have to do what we can with what we have right now. So that's that's just amazing. I mean, it's so hard to change one thing before and after, but I encourage people. I mean, I spend most of my time every single day, Monday through Friday, even on the weekends, speaking with health care providers and saying, hey. I know you have your EMR or your certain tracking system, but really track everything. And it's just so hard. I mean, they're, you know, prescribing all sorts of different things at the same time. And I'm saying, wait a second. Maybe you're taking way too much. Maybe you're not at some metabolic homeostatic level and, you know, we're not able to actually know what's being affected. So slow down, maybe take some things away. I do have an app, just called Way of Life where I'm tracking, like, three little daily habits. And I think I meditate, you know, every day before I go to bed. I think I do these things, and then I actually track it and I'm like, oh, crap. Oh my gosh. I haven't meditated in three weeks, right, or whatnot. So when you actually see it too, that's at least helped me, and and it's more about that that habit building and that repeatability. Yeah. Definitely. Just along the lines of, you know, trying to get, doctors, to track, like or the medicines for their patients or whatever it may be in the context of a patient's health record. So, you know, statins, as you know, for lowering, total cholesterol. Right? So I've worked with people who their cholesterol levels on statins will be very low, what you would expect. But then other things in the, you know, like, whether it's kidney function markers or liver, markers will be elevated. And so I've gone into the published literature to see, alright. Can, you know, can statins impact these things? And sure enough, there is evidence that statins can negatively affect the liver and negative negatively affect the kidney, even muscle to release creatinine into the blood to make it look like a kidney function problem when it could be muscle damage. So I wonder how much medicine is actually considering the full context rather than, alright, you've got high cholesterol. We're gonna you we're gonna give you a statin. We're not gonna even measure or look at the other stuff. And if the other stuff is even in the high end of the range, we don't care because we wanna bring your cholesterol down, which is I mean, it's a Yeah. Terrible approach. Right? So It yeah. It it's pretty insane. Just a side note on that real quick. I'm gonna give a shout out to my grandfather, actually. He was on a, a stat and then started to get, yeah, some, you know, muscle atrophy and and some issues and and whatnot. So it was so funny to watch him because he does does not have a science background, but to go down this path. And he started googling, and he started saying, why is this happening to me? And, you know, was asking me all of these questions about his health. So I just thought that was super interesting and, funny that you bring that up anyways. There's actually one epigenetic methylation marker where if you take a statin, it's the ABCG one gene, that gene is actually shut off, and your type two, diabetes risk skyrockets. So if that gene is shut off, you're affecting your insulin sensitivity. And we see people who take statins have that increase in type two diabetes because that gene is shut off. So that's where you get more into the crazy pharmacoepigenetic world and space. That'll be its own field in probably the next decade or so, but we're starting to find more and more of those correlations and connections as we do deeper literature drive, dives just like you mentioned. Then it becomes like a a modulation of risk kind of thing. Right? Because if you actually have, you know, cardiovascular disease and atherosclerotic plaque, then it's obviously the most imperative to reduce your lipid levels because that that's like gold standard. I mean, you know, CBD. Right? But then, you know, it's if you don't die from heart disease, but now you're increasing, like you said, type two diabetes risk and and whatever else may come with that. You know, how does that what's that trade off? Right? You don't die from CBD, but now you end up with liver liver cancer. Right? So yeah. It's hard. So, Michael, going back to what you're doing a little bit, you know, I I heard you say, that you're, like, measuring your food and you're doing all of these things. So with I think too, we don't have to get into the specifics of your biomarkers. If anyone wants to look into that, please, please, please watch his videos. They're absolutely great. But, give me your secret sauce. Tell me what you're doing from you know, let's get into diet, physical activity, sleep, body weight, and then I would like to talk about those epigenetic methylation markers and just where you see your aging going and what actually triggers those two. Yeah. So in terms of diet, just to keep it, easy breezy, it the profile that makes my, quote, unquote, biomarkers look the best for now or that's associated with the best profile is about and this includes, so fiber is converted to short chain fatty acids. So fiber can be considered, fat. You can add that to the fat category. So total fat's about 40%, total carbs or net carbs about 40%, and then, proteins, about 18%. So and, again, I didn't start I didn't haven't settled on that just based on epidemiological studies that's following the, you know, correlations of biomarkers. So body weight, I've been trying to get as lean as possible for a very long time. I grew up, you know, looking at bodybuilding magazines and always trying to be lean and ripped, thinking how could you ever die, you know, if you're if you're high highly lean and highly functional. So, I'm slowly trying to get towards 6%. I'm probably at about eight or 9% now, which was higher in the past, so about 12%. And that may actually be what's driving my Dunedin pace because as you know, it's the only epigenetic clock in that head to head matchup of, five other epigenetic clocks that showed a epigenetic age production, right, for people on CR for two years. So my done eating pace has actually been coming down since I started, sequentially, almost every test. And the only thing that's I haven't made major changes to my diet, but I've been purposely reducing my body weight and my body fat percentage over that time. So that maybe the the the factor that's driving it the most. And in support of that, you know, people like Seamland and Brian Johnson who have relatively low scores, they're also very lean compared to the average population. So I don't know. That would be my hypothesis for that. I track fitness metrics, which help me, titrate how much exercise, how often, even which days I should be training versus not. Or I see the treadmill on the background too. So you have to be doing some some cardio there. Well, for for cardio, it's I haven't done the treadmill so much these days. The I do mostly low intensity cardio, but this the core of my workouts is an eighty minute workout with, compound movements, you know, overhead press, pull ups, some deadlifts. If I if my I have a herniated disc in my lower back from eagle lifting as a kid, which, you know so I have to be very careful there. But, compound movements, calisthenics, some taekwondo related stuff, some mobility balance and flexibility. All you know? So the goal is to be, you know, so there's also a gait that's associated with, age. Right? If you look at someone's gait and how they move and even how they're able to move, you can see that someone looks old just based on their movement pattern. So, yeah, my workouts, tailored so that I don't or I minimize that as much as possible. I don't wanna ever look at me and someone's like, why? You move like an old person. Right? So, so, yeah, it's like an eighty minute workout. But the fit when I started tracking the fitness, stuff, heart rate variability, resting heart rate, I was chronically overtrained. I mean, I was doing workouts that were way too long. These cardiovascular fitness metrics look like someone who was sedentary, which was ridiculous. I was walking 15 to 20 miles a week, doing three hour weightlifting workouts once or twice a week. I mean, I was highly trained. So, you the fitness metrics to me are essential for, knowing when to train, how much to train, how often. But it that even that too was a big a bit of an ego hit because, Yeah. I mean, I've said it before. I like throwing heavyweights around like a gorilla for three hours. You know? It's what it's I love the challenge, but it it's just murder for me in terms of, my recovery is too slow. I feel terrible for a week. So yeah. Tracking that with Whoop or a wearable or something like that? With Whoop. Okay. You're using Whoop. Gotcha. But but any fit any any wearable, I think I think most of them most of them are pretty good where they they give that basic information, heart rate variability, resting heart rate, the average daily heart rate, which even knowing it took me a while to figure that out too. So, if if it's a workout day, my my heart rate for that day would be relatively high. And it took took me a while to figure out that I do best in terms of, quote, unquote, recovery for the next workout, in terms of performance in during that workout, if my heart rate the next couple days is purposefully lower. Now if I wasn't tracking that, it's very easy for me or, you know, I don't know other people, but it's very easy for me if my heart rate on that day is 58 beats per minute on a workout. It may be sixty, sixty two. And then now I'm not recovering as fast because I'm still chronically stressing myself. So seeing the data has really helped me hone it in such that this morning's data, it was, eighty one forty one for heart rate variability, resting heart rate. I mean, that's, like, almost endurance athletes that are, you know, elite cyclists. It's, like, a 140. And I'm not nowhere near that, you know, so that I can kinda, quote, unquote, biohack my way towards that direction. I don't know. For me, impressive. Yeah. But and then No. That's that's great to hear. And and, again, people are just like, what do I do? What do I do? Someone show me the data. And first and foremost, you need to start tracking these things yourself. But, I think we actually see that a lot in more of those Horvath related epigenetic age clocks, those first generation kind of chronological age ones. Again, getting closer to chronological age, but still trying to measure an epigenetic methylation process. And we see in people who are more of the elite athletes or, you know, Olympians that they actually have those faster, more intrinsic or Horvath related epigenetic ages. So I think that's really interesting. I think, you know, Kristin McGreevey has a has an interesting algorithm called DNA methylation fit age. True Diagnostic is getting ready to release a version of that soon based on our omic age data set that we've done. And that's gonna give you your fitness your your biological age based on your fitness levels too. So I'd be curious to see how that tracks because we're gonna do VO two max, FEV one, grip strength, and gait speed as well. Wait. Wait. So you were saying that people who are more active would have older Horvath ages or I interpreted that wrong? Yeah. Yeah. Usually, we see that trend. Yeah. So people come back and, it's funny to speak with, like, their these health care providers who, oh, hey, this person was, you know, an elite cyclist or just, just ran just performing a triathlon or or whatnot and trained this much. And I and why do they have these really bad intrinsic epigenetic ages? And what we believe it's due to some or some obvious compounded oxidative stress that may lead to inflammation, that may lead to a cascading negative fall of events and and affect those epigenetic methylation patterns. So it's just ever so slightly. We want to see more of a variety of movements, I like to call it, rather than, you know, working exercises. So so walk, lift weights, you know, good rule of thumb, lift weights at least a couple times a week. Right? As we age, we lose that muscle mass. Do the yoga, do the Tae Kwon Do, different things like you were saying as well. Because, again, your body's not getting used to this one movement. You're not putting as much stress on it. So what you're saying this is why I like speaking with you. What you're saying from the biomarker perspective in all of these wearables is literally matching the data that I know from an epigenetic space. Nice. So the the elite athletes or the athletes would have older Horvath ages, I mean, it it could be just overtraining. I mean, it's maybe it's not that Oh. Yeah. Correct. Yeah. Yeah. But it's just funny that, you know, all of my other so my Horvath age right now is right at my chronological age. But if I wanted to spin that a different way, it's been as high as, like, 56. So it's like, technically, I could say over the last three or four tests, I've reduced it from 56 to 50, but I don't know that I would Yeah. Make that, you know, exaggerated claim. But, yeah. I yeah. Anyway. No. Absolutely. That's that's great. So, now you went over diet, the physical activity. What about your sleep? Are you you're tracking that with WHOOP as well? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Sleep sleep is probably the hardest one to track or not track, but to optimize. And Okay. You know, so there there are some base so I should preface by saying my sleep has always been bad going back to maybe teenage years, or sleep quality and duration not been great. Now sleep hygiene is a real thing. Maybe I didn't believe it at some point in the past, but I believe it now. And I've been in that boat of go to sleep at the same time. I bought some stuff to black out most of my, windows so that I don't get residual light coming in because I'm right on the street in Boston. So, like, even though my shade is pulled closed, if the if the wind blows the shade a little bit, I can get a ray of light. And I've been awakened by a ray of light hitting my eyes while I'm asleep, which is crazy. So, so going I I literally go to sleep at the same time every night. I black out the room as much as possible, sleep with the earplugs to because it's busy, you know, and I it wakes me up in the middle of the night if I don't. But and then, I also, I my my eating window is relatively short, and it doesn't necessarily impact my blood biomarkers. But stopping the eating window as early as possible for me on a, at home workday, it's around, 01:00, almost all of my calories. On a, in person workday, it's a little bit later, maybe 03:00. So my bedtime's around nine, so I've got about a six hour window at least where there's no food, very little water. So the majority of it is earlier in the day, and that, helps because then I'm not waking up two, three, four times during the night, which, that was in the past. You know, that's how, it was. There were even times when I'd eat one meal a day and fast all day, eat from six to nine. And I mean, I was every hour I'd wake up. And then the next morning I feel awful because waking up every so often. But like I said, sleep for me is the hardest thing to optimize because even with all of those little tricks of the trade that have helped my sleep immeasurably, well, I shouldn't say immeasurably, but Interesting. So I had a sleep study done, ten ish, twelve something years ago where where I went for the gold standard, polysomnography, where you actually sleep in a, you know, climate controlled room, and they gear you up with electrodes. At that time, only 5% of my total sleep time was in deep sleep. Deep sleep declines during aging. So 5% is something you'd expect to see in, like, an 80 year old. So and that was when I was in my early thirties. So now whoop has been compared against, PSG. And, you know, for deep sleep, it's been found to be comparable. So I'm actually getting a lot more than 5%. I'm actually up to 20 to 25% deep sleep. So yeah. So it can be improved. Now with that said and I mentioned, you know, it's probably the hardest thing to optimize because how can you stay asleep when you're asleep? You know, falling asleep? I mean, it's, you know, just gotta get into a little meditative zone for me. So but, like, like clockwork, I'm up three to five hours after I go to sleep. And then Yeah. Within the last two or three hours before, waking up, it's sometimes every hour. Last night, maybe it was because I was like, alright. I gotta get to work into work at a certain time, so I gotta leave at a certain time to be back here. But I was up. It was, like, every twenty minutes from three to five, which Oh, wow. You're excited for this podcast. Sure. For sure. It's like There you go. It's just but other nights, it's like that too where it's, you know Yeah. I'm up three or four times. What I mean, I'm up and conscious, and I actually have to, like, tell my I have to calm myself down and, like, literally have to meditate myself to sleep. Most nights I can do that, but every so often it doesn't work. So, you know, then that gets into, you know, is it a melatonin issue? Is it so optimizing that, I'm still I'm cooking up some biochemical pathways and, you know, see what I can do. Nice. We'll we'll Well, I'm excited to see what comes. I'm gonna send you someone I like for sleep too. I'll give a a shout out. Her name is Molly McLaughlin. I think it she just got married. It's Molly Eastman now if you follow her and and whatnot. Her content is really, really good on Instagram and stuff too. I think I've checked her out. I don't know. I think I that name sounds familiar. Yeah. Yeah. I'll I'll send it to you afterwards. But that's interesting. I'm funny enough, sleep is actually the easiest thing for me probably. When I wear my WHOOP down, it's like hundred, hundred, 100. And then I I'll look at the metrics too to make sure I'm getting enough and REM, deep sleep, etcetera. I probably fall asleep too fast. Like I can fall asleep in the movie theaters type of thing if I'm tired enough. So that's something, you know, I probably need to work on. But if I could go to bed at, you know, 6PM, I'd be in bed. So I usually try 08:30, nine, wind down, put the phone away, no screens, you know, stop eating hours ahead of time, all that good stuff. So, no, I'm really excited to, yeah, to have heard about what you're doing. Now, do you prioritize any one of those or any biomarker, or would you just say sleep because that's the hardest for you right now? So, they're all important. You know, I don't wanna put one above the other, but sleep is probably the most important of of them all. Because if my sleep quality is bad and I'm up a few times, it not only can that so there are times when I'm so wide awake at two in the morning, and I try to minimize these occurrences as much as possible. But I'm so wide awake, and then I'm just laying there in bed for, like, an hour that I'll eat my breakfast at 1AM. And then within, like, an hour or half an hour, boom, I'm asleep. So it could be some aspect of CR that's impairing my sleep quality at that point. But Interesting. But that kills my my data, my heart rate variability, resting heart rate. And then knowing that I'm ready, I'll I'll have overtrained data because I ate so late or so early. I'm not training on that day. So if that was a scheduled workout day and I ruined it by my poor sleep quality, now I gotta push that another day. So, sleep is essential. You know, even for me, like, even like a thirty to sixty minute sleep debt over a couple of days, it can start to affect my mental and and, you know, physical performance. So, Absolutely. Yeah. I I know when I wake up in the middle of the night or this this has happened more recently when I'm, like, traveling because I'm I'm not an anxious flyer. I'm I'm fine when I'm in planes or cars or traveling. But just the fact that I'm, like, oh, I set my alarm for, you know, 4AM to head to the airport. I'm, like, you know, up, and I think anxious and just a little stressed out, and I'll wake up and check, you know, the clock and go back to bed. So it's, like, you kind of just start getting a little bit of a that acute stress where the wheels start turning and then you're up, and, you know, you're thinking about all sorts of things. So I I can I can definitely work on that? So, Michael, what aren't you tracking? Is there anything you're you're like, I just I why didn't I start tracking that earlier, or are you not tracking one thing, that you can think of? Yeah. So it was hormones. I wish I I went back and tracked hormone levels earlier, especially like DHEA sulfate, which declines during aging. And I have this in a video where my levels were youthful fifteen years ago, and I didn't track it at all. I just forgot about it. It's It's not under standard chem panel. And then once I started tracking it last summer, I have 20 plus tests now, and all of them were pretty low. And granted, it's not reference range low, but it's just low relative to my own and then relative to, you know, what youthful levels look like. So how do you you know, it's almost like if your if your organ function, you know, it's like it's if you're bleeding to death and you give someone, you know, a transfusion of blood transfusion, it's hemorrhagic shock. They can they can die anyway. You know, it's just you hit this point of no return that you can't you can give someone that's hemorrhaging blood, and they're gonna bleed to death anyway, because they just lost. They've lost so much blood. So right that that's not the case for my adrenal glands, where, you know, it's it's they've aged or whatever it is. And it's almost like no matter what I do, I can't rejuvenate them back using, you know, my standard diet and exercise or whatever else. Yeah. Yeah. So so in terms of what am I not doing, I mean, I I can see a road for the gut microbiome. I've done it a few times. It's hard. Not that it's hard. I wouldn't say that. But, Mhmm. You know, you you just you need it's more than just who's there, and then it's more than just, you know, in terms of so 16 s is what, you you would get the species that are there. If you're using or whole genome sequencing, you would get the species. If you use something like Viome, you're gonna get what's the active gene expression. So I would kinda need both who's there and what's the active gene expression. So now I'm getting too much into the weeds, you know, almost. Because the reason I say that is, you know, you could have changes in the gut microbiome, but you'd expect to see something reflected physiologically at least in the blood. Right? So so if I tweak various levels of of certain species in the gut and don't see any changes on, you know, in my, circulating biomarkers, whether it's metabolome or or, proteins or cells. Sure. So so I don't wanna get too lost in the details of the microbiome there, but That makes sense. Yeah. And, yeah, I would agree with that as well. Whole whole body MRI? I mean, that that's something that, you know. Yeah. I'm hearing more and more about that as well and some some, like, health optimization based groups I'm in, and that the wait list is, like, months even. Mhmm. If it's I forget what the company is is called who does it. If it's not just like at a health care provider or longevity, I can dig it up and and send it to you later. But, yeah, you know, I think, Michael, what at least to me, I think everything you're doing is purely evidence based. Right? Like you said, you're looking at these biomarkers, and I think that's the the take home here is, hey. Even if we're looking at your biomarkers, it could mean diff something different to someone else. So I encourage everyone to to follow along and and really look at, Michael's Michael's videos and and check out his kind of profile and and what he stands for. So, getting more toward the end here, but, also wanna know what your most surprising find was when tracking biomarkers. Does anything stick out? So there's an idea that some biomarkers are, they aren't malleable. For example, lipoprotein a, which is thought to be, you know, you only have to test at once. That's not my words. That's like, you know, health professionals. Just measure it once or once a year or whatever it is because your levels are genetically determined, and they won't change. So I thought that for a long time. And, you know, back in the two thousand eight days when I was testing once a year, I thought, I'll never reduce this. Right? And then I started to look at studies and try various interventions. And sure enough, it was pretty resistant to to change. I couldn't change it. But then once I started calculating those correlations with my diet, I figured out, alright. This dietary composition cuts it in half. You know, I could probably get it even lower, but it goes back to that, you know, the bottom of the u shape where if I if I if I do the things that bring it down to, you know, 75% reduction, other stuff other stuff goes in the wrong direction. So I have to be, you know, comfortable with that 50% reduction from the peak while not messing up a whole bunch of other biomarkers. So, I think all of the biomarkers are malleable, and, it's just a matter of figuring out your own recipe to to, to affect them. With that said, you know, once once I get the Horvath, data into the forties, people are gonna be like, wow. You reduced it so much. It's only a matter of time. But I'm hot on the trail of the, like I said, the DHEA story because even though it's been 20 plus tests, if or once I'm able to reverse that trend and get it going in the right direction, there's there are no RCTs on, you know, usually, if someone's got low DHEA sulfate, you're just given DHEA. You just take it as a supplement. That's like the standard of care. But, you know, I I part of me is arrogant as as arrogant AF, and I'm like, look, I'm gonna I'm gonna show you. Right? Now whether or not I can do it, whether or not I can do it, maybe it'll be 50 tests. I don't know. But with enough data, I think I'm gonna discover my own recipe without messing up anything else to figure out how to start pushing that back towards the right direction. I actually have another video coming pretty soon on, potentially impacting DHEA sulfate. So Yeah. Yeah. Well, no. I'm excited. I'm I'm very, very excited. So, I I just the the list of questions I wanna ask keeps growing and growing. So I have one more as well. Do you you mentioned at the really, you know, very beginning of this podcast kind of how you spend your time and, that you do this a little bit on the side. Do you ever see it becoming a full time job? Is that something you've kind of started to look at at all? So the answer is yes. I Okay. I I do work with clients, you know, on the side in as much free time I have outside of making videos and academic work. Yeah. I you know, it's a scary thing because, one of the last things that seem Seam Land and I talked about was, you know, he's completely doing it on his own. And, my channel, I don't think is big enough, at least from YouTube, the YouTube side, in terms of payment to sustain me on my own. And I do the the client work does bring in a decent amount of revenue, but, you know, a consistent revenue where I wouldn't have to worry about it. Not just it's just not yet, you know. But then, that could change because, you know, I see I see, like, Morgan more doctor Morgan Levine wrote a book, and Adi has got a book, and everybody's got a book. You know, Fontana, Luigi Fontana. There's at least a one book in this whole approach, you know, just documenting their progress, you know, even just on a, blood biomarker quote unquote Bible for what's optimal for health and longevity without my own individual data put in there is like a book. Right? So, the alright. Then the question is, can book sales be enough to sustain me? Right? Yeah. Can I get a book deal and the, advance will sustain me for a few months long enough to write the book? Is that I don't even know how that process works. I don't I don't even know that that's possible. So it's a little bit scary, you know. It is. It's all about just, you know, security. And again, knowing kind of what's what's gonna be there, I think, is is the hard part. And it's it's hard to create content sometimes. Right? Like, I'm sure maybe you you have a bigger passion for it than I do, but, you know, I'm, with that English background of yours too. Sometimes it's I do think it takes one of the best skills is taking, you know, something that's a very, very, very complex subject and breaking it down for the layperson. And, again, you do a really good job at that. So, you know, maybe it's not if it becomes a full time job, but when or if you really want that to happen. No. I definitely do. I definitely do. And in terms of content, I see that all over YouTube too where people are, you know, you can tell when someone is dying for some content. I I have no shortage of that. Like, I I have I have so many tabs that are open that, like, stuff that I'm gonna, you know, the but I just don't have the time. I have to, you know, it's, you know, I have it's limited time. Right? But then the other side of that is if I'm out of academia, some of those papers papers that I have access to, how am I gonna have access? You know? So, there's that side of it too. But there you know, I'm even thinking about ex so the conquer aging or diatribe brand doesn't just apply to health optimization. There are whole other sides, which maybe it gets into weird fringe, but, I I have visions of expanding beyond just the health stuff, which could help because there's a broader interest. You know? There'll be people in the channel that are here for health. There are people here that are here for other stuff. And I don't know if I wanna say it yet. I I don't know. You'll you you know, maybe I'll get judged, but I don't care. It's the other stuff I'm passionate about and really Oh, yeah. Really cool stuff. Well, I think as people follow you along, I mean, you'll see this with a lot of, like, celebrities, famous actors, singers, and whatnot. As people follow along, you'll realize that it's yes. Sure. Maybe initially, they got interested because of the subject, but they're going to stay because they like you. Right? And they wanna know your opinion. So, I think that's huge. I mean, you know, you can say it with, like, Taylor Swift, for example. Right? You have these Swifties, and they're just like they probably don't like all of her music, but they love her. And that's why she's, like, had $5,000,000,000 to the country with her tour and whatnot. So, you know, that's kind of a a wild example there. But, yeah, I'm excited to follow along and see what you come up with Yeah. Because, you know, I'm I'm here for for you and and what you're doing, but obviously became interested because of the scientific perspective that you're taking and approach. It kinda goes to the idea of diversification. Like, imagine if True Diagnostic only focused on Borvath Hannum and Danita Pace. Like, you guys have, you know, like, we've talked about. Like, you've told told me and I won't say anything about what may be coming, but they haven't released yet. But, like, you guys are on that cutting edge, and I know that that's cutting edge because some of the same stuff we're talking about, I'm studying in my own stuff academically. Right? So, it's just broadening broadening the horizon, so now it attracts the wider like, if you only focus on epigenetics, there may be a very small window of people who are interested in in that. Yeah. Now you branch it out into these other metrics too, and now you're engaging a wider audience. So it's kinda it's kinda like that too. Like, for I'll give you an example. Exactly. I'll give you an example. So, and this there are gonna be people who are like, man, you've lost it. You know, you're too old. You're talking about crazy stuff. When I No. I wanna hear it. Yeah. When I see houses, like, you know, I'm thinking about buying a house. Boston's crazy expensive. It's ridiculous. But, anyway, you look at these houses, and they last maybe a hundred years. Like, a really good well constructed house, if you're lucky, a hundred years. Some of the houses that I've seen, they're like sheds. You know, the the a hard wind comes and it looks like it'll blow the house down. Right? So, you know, if you go back far, and I I can't say when these things were constructed, but if you looked at, like, temples and I I'm not even talking about Egypt, but, like, in India and all these these, you know, the kind of crazy stuff that Graham Hancock is on about, you know, these megalithic structures that are carved out of the rock, out of the mountain. This to me is a longevity mindset. Like, whoever did that stuff, whether it was people a thousand years ago or way older than that, that mindset was we're gonna construct something that that exists for a very long time. That's the conqueror aging of that trying mindset. So, I have ideas to maybe start interviewing people who are who are, looking into those kinds of things. You know, I I probably will be more interested in more than later. Yeah. And I'd be interested. I'm just saying. Yeah. My opinion matters at all. It does. But, no, that's that's great. So everyone who's listening, you know, check out doctor Michael Lefscartan. He has his YouTube channel, and a lot of other ways that you can connect it with him as well, you know, all these social media platforms on conquer aging or or die trying. The one question I ask everyone at the end, Michael, is if you could be any animal in the world, what would you be and why? Man. So my favorite I have two favorite animals, monkey and elephant. And well, three, octopus. Okay. Okay. I don't know if I could be an animal. I mean, how about how about, so, technically, we're all animals. Right? I mean, all of us. Yeah. Yes. For definite should be if you could be another animal. So, I mean, it's all perspective. Right? So if you take so, you know, Michael Rose, you've you've got the, fruit fly stock and you selectively allow the longer lived ones to breed with each other and the shorter lived ones breed with each other. And before you know it, 2,000 generations later, you've got the long lived flies and the short lived flies, but they started from the same founder stock. So if I could be any animal, I'd be the, you know, 2,000 generations from now version of whatever humanity is relative to this version of me now. Wow. I love it. No one's answered that. That's a great way to put it and bring it back to your platform. No. That's that's awesome. I love that that answer. And then about you, you know, where can people find you if you just wanna reiterate that again? Yeah. All over the interwebs, conquer aging or die trying, Facebook, Twitter, Instagram Yep. YouTube, Patreon, LinkedIn. Yes. Everywhere. I'm everywhere. Everywhere. I even respond Awesome. I'm I'm responding to comments everywhere too because, you know, unlike, I don't wanna put other people on blast, but I'm a man of the people. I'm here to serve on a, you know, every every video I make, I'm responding to comments. Even Seam Land's video that we did on his channel. Yeah. I went to his channel, and he didn't respond to any of them yet. I was responding to people asking questions. So, Yeah. I'm everywhere. I'm No. That's great. Reddit. And and I feel like I get told this, and I do this, but, you know, I respond to emails fairly quickly. I think you respond to emails very quickly as well. And I'm like, yes. You know, and you know, I know you're you're busy, but you really do prioritize the relationships Yeah. And your your interactions with people as well. So I I definitely appreciate that. Just real quick. There there are scientists who are terrible at emails, and I'm sure you know. I I I'll never be like that. Even with, like, papers, you know, you get, like, a paper and you have two weeks to review it. I try to review it as fast as possible because I don't wanna be the person that keeps it holding it up for two weeks. So somebody's gotta set the good example. So that's I mean, I I say it humbly. I'm just, you know, trying to lead a good example. So Absolutely. Well, thank you so much, Michael. We've come to the end of this amazing podcast. Remember, for those listening who want to connect, you can reach out, Google his name. And again, thank you for joining us here at Everything Epigenetics. Remember, you have control over your epigenetics, so tune in next time to learn more. Thanks everyone.