NAD declines during aging, and that's what we can see here. Activity or levels of NAD plotted on the y axis against age on the x. And there, we can see that NAD levels are relatively high in youth and then lower in advanced age. Now, to counteract the age related NAD decline, n r, niacin, and NMN are popular. And we can see that by taking a look at NED synthesis pathways as shown here. So starting from n r nicotinamide riboside, or niacin as nicotinic acid or nicotinamide, we can see that nicotinamide and n r are converted into NMN, which is then converted into NAD. Similarly, nicotinic acid is converted by a series of enzymatic steps on its own into NAD. Now, what's potentially underappreciated about NAD synthesis is that there's another branch that leads to NAD synthesis as shown here, and it involves the amino acid tryptophan, which is commonly found in almost all foods. Tryptophan is converted also by a series of enzymatic steps into NAD. Now, is an age related blockage in the tryptophan NAD pathway limiting conversion to NAD? That's what we'll go over in this video. And to investigate that question, let's take a deeper look for how tryptophan is converted into NAD. And that's what we can see here. So starting from the top, we've got tryptophan and then we've got NAD at the bottom of this pathway. Now, first, tryptophan is converted by one of two enzymes, IDO or TDO into kynurenine. TDO is convert converts dietary tryptophan in the liver into kynurenine. Whereas, IDO, indolamine dioxygenase, converts tryptophan into kynurenine in the presence of pro inflammatory cytokines or immune activation. For example, interleukin six, IL six, TNF alpha, or interferon gamma would lead to immune activation and increased expression of IDO, which would convert tryptophan into kynurenine. Now, kynurenine increases during aging which is what we can see here in this study of about 2,600 people. With plasma levels of kynurenine on the y axis plotted against age and in this case, the age ranges from about 40 to 80 years. And there, we can see that there is an age related increase for kynurenine. So that we've got an age related kynurenine increase, but a decline for NAD suggests that there's a blockage somewhere in this pathway. So let's see if we can find it. So going forward, kynurenine would then be converted into three hydroxy kynurenine also known as h k. And note that b two is required for this conversion. So that raises the question, is vitamin b two also known as riboflavin is b two status suboptimal thereby limiting conversion of kymyrrhin into hydroxykynurenine and maybe that's where the block in this pathway lies. So to if that's true, we'd expect to see decreased hydroxykynurenine during aging. So is that true? Here, we're looking at plasma levels of, hydroxykynurenine, h k. Again, plotted over that same age range 40 to about 80 years and we can see that there's an there's also an age related increase for three hydroxykynurenine. So from now, we can conclude that vitamin b two is not deficient because we've got age related increases I've cut kynurenine and also an age related increase for three hydroxykynurenine. If b two is limiting, we'd expect to see, we would not expect to see an age related increase for hydroxykynurenine. So, let's go forward and see if we can find a potential blockage. Three hydroxykynurenine is should then be converted into three hydroxy and threonilic acid, H a a. And let's take a look at how HAA changes during aging. And that's we could see here, plasma levels of hydroxy anthranilic acid on the y axis plotted against age. And again, over the same 40 to 80, year age range. And here, we can see that HAA declines during aging which then raises the question and or it raises the interesting fact that vitamin b six is required for the conversion of h k into HAA. So is tryptophan conversion into NAD blocked by an age related depletion of b six, vitamin b six. So if b six is limiting, we potentially are getting a less efficient conversion of hydroxykynurenine into hydroxy anthranilic acid as a potential explanation for why declines during aging instead of increasing during aging like kynurenine and hydroxy kynurenine. So to address that question of b six potentially being the block, let's take a look at how plasma levels of paradoxal phosphate, which is the exact version of vitamin b six required for the conversion of hydroxy kynurenine into hydroxy anthranilic acid. And that's what we can see on this plot, plasma levels of pyridoxal phosphate on the y axis plotted against age. And in this study, the age range was from birth all the way up to about 90 years. And in this study, which included data from four separate studies, we can see that in each of them, there was an age related decline for plasma levels of vitamin b six. So that then raises the question, can NAD, intracellular levels of NAD be increased with vitamin b six supplementation? So with as a word of caution, the tolerable upper intake level for vitamin b six has been defined by the Food and Nutrition Board at the Institute of Medicine as a hundred milligrams per day. Now, to put that into perspective, the RDA for vitamin b six is one point three to one point seven milligrams per day depending on age and gender, pregnancy status and factors like that. But nonetheless, that's a pretty wide range that that we could potentially use to increase b six with the potential goal of increasing NAD. So with that in mind, for my last blood test for the forty two day period that preceded my last blood test, test number two in 2023 on March 6, my average b six intake was three point two milligrams per day. And for a long time, I thought that that may be sufficient because it's at least two times higher than the RDA. So with the goal of not just affecting homocysteine and if you missed that video, I'll put that in the right corner. With the the goal of potentially, increasing n a d two, I've increased my vitamin b six intake for the my upcoming test on April 24. So since the March test, I've averaged ten point two milligrams of vitamin b six per day. Now, this may not seem like a big jump but it's a three fold increase from where I was and my goal is to increase b six slowly because I I wanna increase NAD, potentially increase homocysteine and not mess up any other biomarkers. If I jump too fast with too high of an increase, I think the possibility is greater to potentially affect other biomarkers, in a negative way. So I don't wanna do that. I'm gonna take it slow and see if I can find the minimal dose that maximally optimizes NAD but also potentially homocysteine. And to do that, I'm gonna use Genfinity which tests NAD. So stay tuned for that data in an upcoming video. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in including discount links in the video's description for NAD quantification, green tea, epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you could do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or dye trying brand, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.