Resting heart rate and heart rate variability provide information about the integration between the nervous system and adrenal gland with the heart. We can see that here. So sympathetic nerve activity and parasympathetic nerve activity, more specifically the vagus nerve, in addition to sympathetic nerve activity induced adrenal gland release of norepinephrine and epinephrine impact resting heart rate and heart rate variability. So with that in mind, what's optimal for resting heart rate and heart rate variability? More specifically, how do resting heart rate and heart rate variability change during aging? Also, in this video, we'll take a look at my data as I now have more than sixteen hundred days for both of these metrics. And also, what's contributing to improvements for resting heart rate and heart rate variability? So first, how does the resting heart rate change during aging? We can see that here. So, we're looking at the average resting heart rate on the y axis plotted against age on the x. And in this case, the age ranges from 20 to 50 years. And this is whoops data as I've been wearing whoops since 2018. So for both women in red and men in blue, we can see that the resting heart rate increases for both men and women up to 50 years. Now, what about older than 50 years? So, we can see that data here and this is in a published study of more than 90,000 Fitbit users. Once again, we've got average resting heart rate on the y axis, plotted against age on the x. And in agreement with Whoops data, we can again see an age related increase for resting heart rate up to 50 years, but then we can see that the resting heart rate declines up into 80 Up up until 85 years. So we can then also see that relatively low resting heart rates are found in both young and people that are of advanced age. So, how would we know if a relatively low resting heart rate was indicative of youth or aging? And that's where heart rate variability comes in as that provides more context. So, what is HRV? So, the definition of HRV is it's the variability for the time in between heartbeats. So, what does that mean? Well, for a heart rate of 60 beats per minute, the assumption is that the heart beats exactly once per second. But that's not necessarily true. Here, we can see the time in between three consecutive heartbeats and you can see that the times are not all the same. Eight hundred fifty nine, seven ninety three, and seven hundred twenty six milliseconds, in between each heartbeat. And the variability in that data is then calculated as heart rate variability. And more specifically, Whoop uses the r m s s d, root mean squared of successive differences. So because that's what they report, that's the data that I'm gonna present going forward in this video. So with that in mind, how does heart rate variability or more specifically the RMSSD change during aging? And we can see that data here. This is in a study of more than 8,200,000 people and these are our Fitbit users. So first, and then I should mention too. We've got the RMSSD as the HRV metric on the y axis plotted against age and the age range going from 20 to 60 years. And then we've got two different curves on this graph. We've got solid lines and dash lines. The solid lines are when HRV was recorded at six in the morning, and the dash lines were when it was recorded at six at night. So at, for both of these time points, we can see that the highest heart rate variability values are found at six in the morning when compared with six at night. Now, whoop provides HRV data first thing in the morning as the average during sleep. So that's the data I'm gonna focus on. The six and six in the morning curves. And what we can see is that HRV declines during aging for both men and women. Now, to we now, we can go back to our question of is a relatively low resting heart rate indicative of youth or aging. So, in youth, resting heart rate is relatively low and heart rate variability is relatively high. Conversely, in advanced age, there there can also be low resting heart rates but also low heart rate variability. Now, I've tracked both of these metrics, resting heart rate and heart rate variability since August 2018. And as I mentioned, it's more than sixteen hundred days of data. So, what's my data? Now, based on these population based averages is up to 50 years old, my chronological or by pretty much close my chronological age, I'm gonna turn 50 next week. We can expect to see that my resting heart rate has increased but my heart rate variability has decreased. So is that true? Let's take a look. So first, we're gonna take a take a look at my average yearly resting heart rate in beats per minute. And this is from 08/05/2018 through 01/14/2023. And again, this is January of data. And we can see that we can see that here. So when I first started tracking in 2018, my year full year Not full year, but my partial year average starting in August 2018, average for resting heart rate was 50.9 beats per minute. So about 51 beats per minute. And then, in 2019, I reduced that to, a yearly average, full year average for resting heart rate of 48.9 beats per minute. Now, rather than just looking at, averages, yearly averages, year to year, we can compare these two groups of data with a two sample t test. And when I do that, we can see that I was, I significantly reduced, my resting heart rate in 2019 to 48.9 from 50.9 as that p value is less than 0.05. In 2020, similarly, I reduced the resting heart rate to 48.1 beats per minute, and again, that's the full year average. Each dot on this plot is one day's worth of data, and when using, two sample t test, this too was better than the 2018 value of about 51 beats per minute. Now, we can also look at year over year changes in addition to comparing 2020 versus 2018. What about 2020 versus 2019? And when doing that, we can see that I was able to significantly reduce the resting heart rate from, 48.9 in 2019 to 48.1. In 2021, I further reduced my resting heart rate to 47.4 for the full year average which was significantly lower than where I started in 2018, and also significantly lower when compared with 2020. In 2022, I also reduced my resting heart rate to 45 beats per minute. And again, this is a full year average, which was significantly lower than where I started in 2018, and also significantly lower when compared with 2021. Thus far, over the first fourteen days in 2023, my average resting heart rate is 44 and a half beats per minute, which is significantly lower than where I started in 2018, but just outside of significance when compared with 2022. So from these data, we can see that I've consistently reduced my resting heart rate from 2018 to 2023. That's a typo. It should say 2023. So is that good or bad? Now, if you remember our question from earlier, is a relatively low resting heart rate indicative of youth or aging? We can see that a relatively low resting heart rate is found in youth but also in advanced age. So one thing for sure is that I've definitely resisted the age related increase for resting heart rate as based on this plot. We can expect we could we could have expected to see my resting heart rate increase up up until about 50. But then, also notice that it's possible that because I've reduced resting heart rate over the past four plus years, I may be experiencing the age related decline for resting heart rate. So, how can we assess that? So, for more context, let's have a look at heart rate variability data since 2018. And that's what we're gonna look at here over that same time period, more than sixteen hundred days of data. So, when I first started tracking heart rate variability, it was 47.3 milliseconds in 2018. In 2019, I increased that to 56.2 and again, using a two sample t test to to compare these two groups of data. And again, each dot refers to a single day's worth of data. So when using a two sample t test, I was able to significantly increase heart rate variability in 2019 when compared with 2018. As you can see that the p value is significantly lower or it's lower than, 0.05. In 2020, I also was able to keep my heart rate variability relatively high at 57.8 milliseconds which was significantly better than where I started in 2018. But just outside of statistical significance when compared with 2019. So in other words, 2019 data is not different from 2020 data. 56.2 is not significantly different, with 57.8. Just outside significance with the p value of 0.07. But then in 2021, I had a regression. Heart rate variability went down to 51.9 milliseconds which although it was better than where I started in 2018, was significantly worse when compared with 2020. And note that a lower heart rate variability would be going in the wrong direction as heart rate variability declines during aging. So in 2022, a major focus was to reverse that trend and to get my heart rate variability back up to where it was in 2019 and 2020 or better. So for 2022, my average heart rate heart rate variability was 59.3 milliseconds, which was a significant improvement when compared to 2018, and also a significant increase when compared with 2021. So I successfully reversed that trend, that that I experienced in 2021. And thus far in 2023, my average heart rate variability over the first fourteen days is 62.4 milliseconds which again, is significantly better than where I started in 2018. But, just outside of significance when compared with 2022. So, 59.3 in 2022 is about the same as or is similar to my current, average in 2023 of 62.4. So for heart rate variability, we can see that I've consistently increase or not consistently increased it with that, dip in 2021, but I've increased it from 2018 to 2022 with a small amount of data in 2023. Too little data yet to make any definitive conclusions. So how did these data compare with age related changes for heart rate variability? So for that, we go back to this plot of 8,200,000 people. Now, what's expected based on my chronological age of almost 50 is a median heart rate variability of 35.1 as illustrated by that red arrow there. So at worst, fifty nine to sixty two milliseconds, my current range for heart rate variability is above the heart rate variability range for my chronological age. So that's at worst that's seemingly good news though. But at best, fifty fifty nine to sixty two milliseconds for heart rate variability is the median value for someone about 22 years younger. So it's potentially indicative of a youthful heart. So, and to go back to our question of is a relatively low resting heart rate indicative of youth or aging. Now, we can answer that question because we have the data for heart rate variability put into context. So in my case, a relatively high heart rate variability plus plus low resting heart rate suggests, as I mentioned, cardiovascular cardiovascular youth. Sorry. In contrast, based on my chronological age, a lower heart rate variability plus a higher resting heart rate, 35 for HRV, about 57 based on whoops, data, would be expected based on chronological age. Alright. So what's contributing to these improvements for resting heart rate and heart rate variability over the past four plus years? So first, what's the relationship for body weight with resting heart rate? So here, we're looking at my average monthly body weight and note that I weigh myself every morning. This is after number one and two and that's fasted. And each dot in this case is the monthly average. So around thirty days of data for each month in one dot. And then, on the right, we've got the average monthly heart rate too over that same time period. So from August 2018 to January 2023 or at least half the month of January 2023. And we can see that these two graphs look somewhat similar. As body weight has deemed decreases and indicated by the green arrows, correspondingly, resting heart rate is also decreased during those periods. And conversely, during periods where body weight has increased, resting heart rate has also increased as shown by the red arrows. Now, aside from just looking at two separate plots, we can look at the, correlation between these two metrics body weight and resting heart rate. So is body weight significantly correlated with resting heart rate? And that's what we can see here. So in this case now, we're looking at daily resting heart rate versus body weight over those sixteen hundred day plus period. So in this case, each dot is a single day's worth of data. And what we can see is a significant positive correlation. In other words, as body weight has increased, that's significantly correlated with a higher resting heart rate. Conversely, as body weight approaches a 149 pounds on the left side of this graph or of this plot, resting heart rate approaches 45 beats per minute. But what about less than a 149 pounds? As you can see, I don't yet have data, lighter than a hundred and forty nine pounds. So, a major goal of 2023 is to slowly reduce my body weight and collect that data and see if if this trend leads to even further reductions for resting heart rate. Alright. What about for heart rate variability? What's the relationship for body weight with rest, heart rate variability? And And that's we can see here. So again, we've got the average monthly body weight on the left. Now, we've got average monthly heart rate variability over the same time period on the right. And now, the two graphs don't look, to They they don't seem to overlap. They don't look as obvious as the resting heart rate trend. But nonetheless, there are some trends here still. So during periods where body weight, had decreased, heart rate variability increased. And conversely, during a time when body weight increased, heart rate variability decreased. Now, besides besides just looking at two graphs, we can then look more specifically to see if body weight is significantly correlated with heart rate variability. And that's what we've got here. This is the daily heart rate variability versus body weight over that same sixteen hundred day plus time span. And again, in this case, each dot is a single day's worth of data. So now, we can see a significant negative or inverse correlation. In other words, as body weight increases, that's significantly correlated with a lower heart rate variability. And conversely, as my body weight has approached lighter values, in this case, a hundred and forty nine pounds would be my lightest during this time span. Heart rate variability has approached sixty milliseconds. And just like for resting heart rate, I don't yet have data over that four year time span. Being lighter than a hundred and forty nine pounds, so a major goal of 2023, again, is to get a bit leaner and see how that impacts not just resting heart rate but heart rate variability. So to answer the question, what's the relationship for body weight with heart rate variability and resting heart rate? Both of these metrics approach youthful values as body weight decreases at least in my case. Now, physical activity also, obviously, impacts both resting heart rate and heart rate variability. So let's take a look at that data. So here, with the using the average daily heart heart rate as a metric of daily physical activity, let's take a look at its potential impact on heart rate variability and resting heart rate. Now, as I mentioned the a d h r is an index of daily physical activity, whole day physical activity but also, it could be indicative of stress too. And I've had the unfortunate experience of not having a workout but having a day with an average heart rate as high as a workout day just from, you know, work stress or emotional stress. And I try to minimize those days as much as I can but sometimes they're just unavoidable. So a higher average daily heart rate equals more physical activity plus more overall stress. So what's the correlation for the ADHR with next day resting heart rate? And that's what we can see here. Now, I don't have sixteen hundred plus days of data for this as I didn't have the idea, unfortunately, to track this from 2018. It took me about six hundred days to realize that this was this was an important metric and to start tracking it. So I have about a thousand days of data for the average daily heart rate and we're gonna look at its correlation with resting heart rate and heart rate variability. And what we can see here is that there's a significant positive correlation. In other words, the higher the average daily heart rate, the worse or the higher that the next day resting heart rate would be. Which means that too much daily activity and too often is bad for resting heart rate at least in my case. What about the this correlation with heart rate variability? And that's we can see here. Again, over that same time span about a thousand days of data. Now, we can see a significant negative or inverse correlation which suggests again that too much daily activity too often will be bad for heart rate variability. In other words, the higher the average daily heart rate, the worse my next morning heart rate variability. So, finding the balance between active and rest days is important for optimizing resting heart rate and heart rate variability. So what does that look like? It's easy to say but what does that look like? And I mentioned this in my last video in this series but just to show it again to reiterate. So this is a screenshot of the one week period for my average daily heart rate, and the active days are the ones that have heart rates of 59 beats per minute. So that includes my usual workout which is an eighty minute full body workout. So starting with the first 59, then you can see that there are three relatively lower overall activity days. 53, I think fifty five and fifty four beats per minute. And those are intentional. I purposely titrate overall activity down or titrated overall activity down over those three days before having my next workout thereby allowing resting heart rate and heart rate variability to more fully recover. And then, the next 59 was, so that was four days after the the first workout. But I also follow a three day, workout approach. So that was a 59 there, and then I titrated activity down for the next two days, and then I had the next workout on on, on day three. So, it's a three day, four day approach. Basically, two workouts a week, eighty minutes per session with usually light walking on the lower activity days. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch to make that you may be interested in and if you're interested in that, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.