Aging and disease are biochemical processes that happen over many decades. So if we track and optimize well established biomarkers of organ and systemic health, can aging and disease risk be slowed? So apologies if you've heard that a billion times, but for people that are new to the channel, that's the central premise of the YouTube channel. So with that in mind, earlier this week, I blood tested for the seventh time in 2023. So what's my biological age? And we'll see that data here. This is using doctor Morgan Levine's phenotypic age calculator as a metric of biological age. And if you have blood test data and wanna calculate your own biological age using this test, that link is a free downloadable link. It's an Excel file so you can use it anytime. It will be in the video's description. So when entering the nine component biomarkers and chronological age for this test, I get a biological age of 35.6 years which is fifteen point two years younger than my chronological. Now, note that for the fourteenth consecutive test, Quest so the lab that I used, their high sensitivity c reactive protein measurement was less than 0.3 milligrams per liter. So that's their upper limit of detection. They can't detect below that. So CRP could indeed be below 0.3 milligrams per liter, but not higher. So in other words, the biological age of 35.6 years could be a little bit less because CRP could could be less than 0.3 milligrams per liter. And rather than looking at data entered into a spreadsheet, screenshots of the lab report will be included later in the video. Now note that this is just one test, and it's important to not just focus on one test year to year because does that truly represent changes year over year? So for more context, let's have a look at biological age results since 2018 as I now have 29 blood tests over that period. And that's what we can see here. So in 2018 to 2019, I only have three tests with an average age of 36.1 years. And then I tested 12 times, six each year in 2020 and 2021 with an average Levine age, or phenotypic age, biological age of 35.6 years. I was able to reduce that in 2022 to thirty three point eight years, and note that I had videos on the channel for each of the tests over the past few years. So if you missed that, they'll be in playlist on the channel. So thirty three point eight year average in 2022. And then for the seven tests in 2023, it was a bit worse than 2022 at thirty four point seven years, but still better than the thirty five point six from 2020 to 2021. Now rather than looking at year to year averages, we can compare by a two sample t test whether differences between these groups of data 2020 to 2021 versus the last 14 tests are significantly different. And when I do that or when I did that using a two sample t test, the 12 tests with an average age of 35.6 years was significantly higher than the last 14 tests from 2020 to twenty twenty twenty two to 2023. So in other words, I've been able to significantly reduce it over the past 14 tests relative to the 12 tests in 2020 to 2021. So how good is this test? I haven't yet introduced that and it's been a while since I've shown that data on the channel, although there are older videos that have included it. So how good or not is this test PhenoAge for, chronological age? So to first assess that, let's take a look at PhenoAge. Again, this is a metric of biological age. How good is its correlation with chronological age? And that's what we can see here. On the y axis, we've got phenotypic age, again this is the metric of biological age using Levene's test, plotted against chronological age on the x axis from the twenty to ninety year age range. And these data were generated using the NHANES four study which included more than 11,000 people. So in terms of the correlation with we can see that it's almost perfectly linear with a correlation coefficient of 0.96. Note that for a positive correlation, a correlation correlation coefficient of one point zero is perfectly linear. So that the Levene test has a correlation coefficient of 0.96 is very strong and close to as good as it can get. Now in a second study using the NHANES three cohort, which included more than 9,900 people, the Levine test had a similar strong correlation with chronological age of 0.94. In other words, Levine's test, this PhenoAge test, again, is a metric of biological age is strongly correlated with chronological age. So to put this, 0.94 to 0.96 into perspective, this is as good as the best epigenetic clock, which is the Horvath clock for predicting chronological age. And if you missed the Horvath clock data, I presented that in a video last week including nine blood tests so far for my own data. So if you missed it, it'll be in the right corner. Check it out. Alright. So what about all cause mortality risk? How something is associated with age is part of the story is is is indeed part of the story. But how does it relate to, risk of death from all causes, all cause mortality risk? And that's what we can see here. So for every one year increase in PhenoAge, that's associated with a significant nine percent increase for risk of death for all causes. Now, what about cause specific mortality? Because all cause mortality breaks down into cause specific mortality including CVD, cardiovascular disease. So we can see that for a one year pheno wage increase that's associated with a ten percent higher risk of death from cardiovascular disease. Similarly, a seven percent increase in cancer mortality, it's not associated with Alzheimer's disease related mortality, a twenty percent increase for diabetes related mortality, and a nine percent increase for chronic lower respiratory diseases. And note that the p value for each of these associations on the right are all less than 0.05. So PhenoAge, Levine's test for measuring biological age is significantly associated with all cause mortality risk and many cause specific mortalities. Again, p value is less than 0.05 with the exception of the Alzheimer's disease related mortality. Now this isn't the only biological age metric that I use. I also use aging.ai. So let's take a look at that data. So aging.ai is also free to use. And, again, I'm not affiliated or sponsored with Morgan Levine or aging.ai. These are just easy free, tools that I use that are that are actually good in terms of their correlation with chronological age and their association with all cause mortality risk, which is why I use them. So how good or not is aging.ai? Just like we evaluated Levine's test, PhenoAge. So in terms of its correlation with chronological age, it's not as strong, 0.8, but still that's considered a strong correlation as higher than 0.7 is considered strong. What about all cause mortality risk, which is what we can see here? So in this study and note that all of the papers in the video will be in the video's description. So if you wanna check it out, it'll be in the video's description. So for people that had a at least an at least five year younger biological age using aging.ai compared to their chronological age, they had a significantly reduced all cause mortality risk as shown by that green rectangle as its 95 confidence interval, that's the horizontal line on both sides of that square, is completely to the left of the hazard ratio of one. Conversely, for people who had a five year older aging.ai age relative to their chronological age, they had a significantly increased all cause mortality risk. As you can see that the 95% confidence interval is completely to the right of a hazard ratio of one. So aging.ai, just like PhenoAge, is strongly correlated with chronological age and is significantly associated with all cause mortality risk. Thereby hide highlighting their usefulness and, potential efficacy in predicting age and potentially mortality risk. So with that in mind, what's my biological age using aging.ai? So when entering its 19 component biomarkers as shown here, and I use the North American dataset for anyone who wants to double check the numbers. I get an aging.ai age for this test of thirty years, which is twenty point eight years younger than my chronological. But note, this is just one test. So just like we did for Levine's test, for more context, let's have a look at previous aging.ai data and that's what we'll see here. So I have 44 tests dating back to 2009, but when I first started measuring in 2009, it was at most once a year. As you can see that there are three blood tests, from 2009 to 2013. Nonetheless, over those three tests, my average Aging dot ai age was 32 years. And then in 2016, I decided to start testing more often to get a more accurate representation of year to year changes, testing 34 times over that seven year period from 2016 to 2022 with an average aging Aging dot ai age of 29.8 years. Alright. So what about 2023? So for the seven tests in 2023, including the most recent test with thirty years old, my average dot aging dot ai age was 30 years old. So what we can see from these data is that over the last eight years, my aging dot ai age is stable at an average age of 30 years. So it hasn't increased or it hasn't decreased either. So potentially good news. Especially, you know, as we know my stated goal is to live longer than anyone that's ever lived. And to do that, I'd expect to be able to maintain biomarkers of many organ systems as close to flat as I can for an indefinite period of time. How long I can do that? We'll see. But I'll be detailing it with videos for the next seventy plus years on the channel, so stay tuned. So at this point in the video, I usually say what may be contributing to these biological age reductions including diet and or supplements. And in the interest of time, note that this is still a side job. If you wanna see that change, make sure you like and and, you know, share and all that good social media jazz to support the video. So I'll have the time to show that data in next week's video, exactly a week from today. But for now, let's dig into the full blood test report as I'd like to highlight some strengths and some weaknesses. So first, let's take a look at my HDL which was 56. I've shown in earlier videos that, HDL in the 50 to 60 range is associated with lowest all cause mortality risk in very large epidemiological studies. But getting HDL greater than 50 has been a challenge until relatively recently. More specifically, for the last five tests, my HDL has been greater than or equal to 50 milligrams per deciliter. Whereas for the 43 or so test before that since 2015, it was an average of 45 milligrams per deciliter. So I've made progress on getting HDL into that quote unquote optimal range and I'll detail that progress in an upcoming video, relatively soon. So many videos to make though. Alright. And then we can see the h r HSCRP at less than 0.3 milligrams per liter. Glucose is at the bottom of the page. And then moving forward to highlight a potential weakness, it would be creatinine as a marker of kidney function. So creatinine levels increase during aging in part because kidney function gets, worse at removing it from the blood. Now for the last five tests, my average creatinine level has been 1.01 milligrams per deciliter. In contrast, over the previous 43 tests since 2035, it was 0.95 milligrams per deciliter. Now that may not seem like a big difference. Statistically, using a two sample t test, you can see the p value is less than 0.05. So they are significantly different. But knowing that creatinine levels increase during aging and seeing that I do have a small but significant statistically significant increase, it's going in the wrong direction and I wanna get on top of that sooner rather than later and get that back to at least 0.95 or below if I can. Obviously without affecting muscle mass as creatinine can be is proportional to muscle mass. What I'd also like to point out are neutrophil levels for a couple of tests in 2023, they were less than 2,000. And note that neutrophils less than 2,000 is associated with increased risk of death for all causes. So I'd I wanna be in the 2,000 to 3,000 range. And with this test I am back just barely into the 2,000 range which is exactly where we wanna wanna be just above 2,000 as neutrophils increase during aging and relatively higher levels again are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. Now there were other tests that I also measured that I don't yet have data for, but that data should be coming in very soon, including free testosterone and sex hormone binding globulin. So once that data comes in, expect to see a video on the channel about that. And on the same day as this test, I also sent blood for NAD, epigenetic and telomere testing, and metabolomics. So expect upcoming videos on all of those, topics and data breakdown. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more of my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for at, epigenetic and telomere testing, NAD quantification, oral microbiome composition, at home metabolomics, which I almost said first, but it's in it's in a different order today, at home blood testing with Syphox Health including ApoB, green tea, dye tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Die Trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.