For NED test number seven, we saw my highest level to date, sixty seven micromolar and I was able to achieve that by supplementing with six hundred and fifty four milligrams of niacin per day. More specifically, nicotinic acid, n a. Nicotinic acid is converted by three enzymatic steps into NAD. So for this most recent test, NAD test number eight, I wanted to try something a little different. More specifically, to see if the combination of niacin and tryptophan could further raise NAD And that's because as shown here with the de novo NAD synthesis pathway, tryptophan is converted into NAD. So for the sixteen day period, starting from July 5, the date of the last test, to July 20, the day before this test, average nicotinic acid intake was eight hundred and sixty two milligrams per day and average tryptophan intake during that same sixteen days was 688. But note that I just started supplementing with tryptophan for the ten day period before the test, one gram per day. And similarly, nicotinic acid during that ten day period was in the same ballpark as for test number seven, six hundred and fifty nine milligrams per day. And then, I sent blood to Ginfinity for NAD analysis, discount link in the video description if you wanna do that yourself. And as we can see, my NAD level still remain relatively high at 59 micromolar which is in the same ballpark as where it was for test number seven, sixty seven micromolar. But note that there was no additive effect for the combination of tryptophan and niacin which raises the obvious question. Should I then take tryptophan out because it clearly didn't push NAD levels even higher? So for the next test, I'm actually gonna try the opposite of that. And I'm gonna see if tryptophan on its own can increase NAD without niacin and there are a few reasons for that. One is, in previous experiments, we saw that I may not have an age related block for vitamin b six or for the conversion of quinolinec acid into NAD with the grape seed powder experiment. So I still think it's possible that tryptophan on its own can increase n a d and to test that I'm gonna go, I'm gonna double the dose to two grams per day bringing my total tryptophan dose including through diet to three grams per day and I'll if I can't get that, increase with tryptophan on its own, I I'll return to niacin no problem. Probably in the six hundred milligram per day range again. I intend on retesting on 08/21, August 21, doing a full blood panel on the same day. So stay tuned for that data in a future video. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in including discount links for at home metabolomics, NAD quantification, green tea, epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing with Cyfox Health, and note that their panel is almost completely different from the at home metabolomics including ApoB, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Diet Trying brand, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoy the video. Have a great day.