Hey, everybody. Welcome to the channel. Today, we've got something, a bit different. This is the conquer aging or dive trying podcast episode one. And today, we've got Chris Mann Loomis, who is a former AI programmer, a mathematician, health and longevity researcher, and, he's the owner and operator of unaging,unaging,.com. So if you're interested in that, check out his site. So we we've got a lot to go through. And, where should we start, Chris? And we'll thank you. It's, I'm, really happy to be talking to you. We've been, talking back and forth while having great conversations. And, what I was really interested and struck by is that we have sort of a similar routine in a lot of ways. And so I think where we should start from is how, kind of what the philosophy is like. How do you decide what it is that you wanna add to your routine? If you're looking at a food or an exercise or a habit, how do you what what's your what's your benchmark? What's your weighing point for deciding what you wanna do to live the longest, healthiest life you can? So I'll put it over to you first. Yeah. So, starting with the, the five habits that get life expectancy to an average of around ninety years, both women and men. And for those who don't know, I'll link to all the papers that we're gonna talk about in the video's description. So check that out if you're interested. But those included a a BMI less than twenty five. Okay. Check. Not smoking, check. Moderate, alcohol intake, so I'm not on that, and we can discuss why. But I'm not opposed to alcohol intake. It's just it's almost everything. And then exercise exercise dose, so getting more than six hours per week. I'm just below that. I'm in the four to six hour range, so I'm just below. And then a a quote, unquote healthy diet by the, alternative healthy diet, eating index. Having a high dietary score versus a low dietary score puts you in the highest, category. Alright. So that's just getting you to 90. So as you know, the name of the channel is conquer aging or die trying. So, you know, we've gotta find ways beyond just those general recommendations to potentially push that curve out further. So where I see the two biggest places to to impact, maybe potentially three, with, you know, specifically titrating BMI is, you know, BMI of twenty four versus twenty one. That's very debatable, but we could even get into how would I or others potentially decide what is the best BMI that potentially maximizes their health and maybe, longevity. But I see the two biggest places to intervene as exercise dose and, diet quality, and even going beyond what's, you know, touted as the high diet dietary quality. So, so which which subdivision do you wanna take there first? The dietary quality or the exercise dose? Well, let's see. Let me, let me answer my own question first. Oh, by the way, as you you might notice, I have a walking desk and a a background for that. So, nice day for a walk in the park today. So, like, when I when I first started to read your stuff, I think I might even found your content, because I was looking for sort of a blood, aging, a blood test, to figure out what age you are according to your blood test results. So getting your normal, blood panel and being able to look at that. And then from seeing that, I've I've seen that in a lot of your stuff, you're looking very closely at sort of the, epigenetic, indicators or other things and the testing things. So, for myself, my background is not, I'm not a medical degree. I'm more on the analytical, doctor side or the, quantitative mathematical side of things. So what I'm looking for when I'm looking at an intervention, and I'm well familiar also with the, the five factors that you talk about, and they're a great place to start from. And so for going beyond that, how to get beyond 90 years old, I'm looking for things that will affect all cause mortality. So, this is the best sort of general criteria across the board. There's so many so much advice out there about what you can do in order to live longer, and it's really hard to prioritize. You could spend, you can make it your entire job or, like, some people like, Brian Johnson has, in fact, made it almost his entire job. Just trying to keep up with all the innovations. But without knowing which one's the most important, it's, it it does can become confusing. So I try to bring everything back into a epidemiological study of some kind that shows how much it actually increases or your lifespan by reducing premature death. And then take a look at that. So when I'm looking at my interventions, I'm always looking at what's the effect on all cause mortality. Does it reduce premature death? And if so, by how much? And then I can model that to say, okay. Well, this is more important than this, and then also put it in. Yeah. But that takes more time or whatever. And then that's how I decide what I wanna do. And I think on that one, I think we should start, to answer your question. I think we should start with the physical activity, the exercise. Wait. So before going there, I just wanna ask that, obviously, all cause mortality data is a humongous part, of my approach. But it gets to the idea of, okay, general recommendations are good. Taking that a step further, all cause mortality data. But then even taking that a step further, I integrate how a given biomarker changes during aging. So for example, before going into that, fruit and vegetable intake has been you know, in epidemiological studies shows that, risk, all cause mortality risk is maximally reduced somewhere between five and ten servings of fruits and vegetables per day. But what if your total intake of fruits and vegetables is far beyond that? What if it's 20 or 30 or whatever servings per day beyond what's been published? Right? So now you're in this, quote, unquote, healthy user bias group where there is no data. So how do you how do you push beyond the, epidemiological studies when there's no data, which gets into the also a big part of my approach, which is biomarkers and looking at as many biomarkers of organ and systemic function as possible. Now even there, there's nuance because the reference range isn't the quote, unquote optimal range because it isn't designed for health and longevity. It's just, are you in that range? And if you're outside, potentially, it's disease. And if you're below the range, it's potentially disease. But you may be getting progressively worse in that range increasing or decreasing over many years still within the range. So I look at the aging data for a given biomarker and its all cause mortality data to come up with a what's optimal. And then in addition, well, what's youth what what's youthful? And then try to push all of my data, which from what most people probably think you can't change these things or slow these things down. But the fact is they can be measured. So, I use diet and exercise and opt trying to optimize sleep and whatever supplements, right, to try to optimize kidney and liver and cardiovascular. Everything comprehensively, not just metabolic health, but with the goal of having as youthful of a biochemistry as possible for as long as possible. So, okay. With that in mind, I guess we get into the Yeah. Exercise dose. Right. So now and and that's, you're right. Like, your approach is, that's why I enjoy talking to you. One of the reasons I enjoy talking to you so much is because it gives some immediate visibility beyond what you can find the epidemiological studies for. Right? Like, you're saying, okay. For some of the those the ranges are based off of basically, are you average. Right? And we're trying to shoot for far beyond average. So so right. In the area of, physical activity of exercise, so, I think the the study that you talked about is a great example. The, the the, Harvard the, Chan Harvard public health study where they go through that and they talk about, getting a certain amount of exercise. And the people who are on the highest quintile of exercise got around eight more years of life. Right? Yep. It was the most significant I mean, after not smoking a lot, it was the most important intervention that they were able to make. But I think that that's a a good example where, the government suggestion is gonna get you average. Right? Generally, what you'll hear is you'll hear something like, you should get around a hundred and fifty minutes of, medium or high intensity exercise in a week. Right? And then that then says, okay. Well, if it's if it's high intensity, then maybe 75 or so. But, from going through the studies to say, okay. Well, what's the effect on all cause mortality? I find that there's actually, very different categories within exercise that need to be hit. Just as doing a hundred and fifty minutes is going to get you some benefit, if you actually break it down and you say, okay. I'm going to do this much strength training, I'm going to do this much aerobic training, and then I'm going to do this much high intensity interval training, I think that you can put the pieces together and get more benefit in terms of all cause mortality, specifically in reduction of premature death than if you were to just, I don't know, play soccer for a hundred and fifty minutes. Yeah. I I hear that. That's a more specific approach than just general recommendations based on how many hours of your ex are you exercising and dividing it into resistance training, cardio, etcetera. But if you look at the graded dose, on that curve where people who are in the, I think, three and a half or four to six hours and then more than six hours per week of moderate to vigorous exercise per week, which moderate includes just walking. Right? So The the four to six hour per week group was about six hours of in increased life expectancy, and as you mentioned, eight years for the greater than six hours. Mhmm. No matter how you how you cut that, it seems like there's a graded response just at least in terms of duration. But what's gonna be the, life expectancy gain for the subdivision that you mentioned when considering that, you know, we're going from six hours six years to eight years? Is it gonna be fifteen years? Is it gonna be twenty? I don't see a big jump coming from that, which then I know I I'm gonna sound like a a broken record, which goes down to specificity. How can we get more you know, I I hear what you're saying, which kinda gets us on that road towards more precise, dose. Right? But this comes down to biomarkers. Right? And and how would you how would you know what the appropriate amount of resistance training for you and, you know, cardio for you. Right? And all of the total duration few. For some people, maybe they do great on ten hours total exercise per week no matter how you cut it up. Right? Some people may be doing doing better on three hours per week, and I assume better by looking the full complement of all their biomarkers, not just strength and and v o two max, but, like, kidney and liver and, you know, inflammation, etcetera. So that's how I look at it. Now the the argument against that is there's no published data on what kind of life expectancy gain will you get by using a biomarker driven approach to titrate exercise dose. There's just no data. There it doesn't exist. Right? So this is where I'm okay to differ from everybody. And, you know, you know, so now we can have a bell bell curve distribution where my data will be an outlier because there's no no previous data to guide me on that. Right? So I'm either gonna be on the left side, which it was a disaster. I'll have an average benefit, or I'll maybe I'll have the greatest benefit. You know, maybe I'll push it to fifteen years. So we can get into specifics because people are like, what are the specifics? How would you do that? Let's do it. Alright. Yeah. So what what like, yeah. Let's do the specifics. What's your, like, in a one week? What do you do? How would you describe it? I've seen I've seen your videos, of course, but it'd be for those who haven't seen them, maybe you could describe what's your workout routine. Yeah. Well, in addition to just the workout routine, so I'm doing two work two right now, it's two ninety minute workouts per week. Those workouts include, weight lifting, calisthenics, mobility, flexibility, balance, a little bit of taekwondo stuff. Just the goal is, is to optimize muscle mass and function for as long as physically possible to attenuate any potential age related decline. The workout is completely standardized. I know exactly how many sets and reps of each movement that I'm doing. These are compound movements. I'm almost never doing bicep curls and tricep push downs, you know, these single joint movements. It's, you know, pull ups and push ups off a ball, you know, so for the extra resistance. Shoulder press, deadlifts. But so that ninety minute workout now after each ninety minute workout, because I'm tracking things like heart rate variability and resting heart rate, we've got to remember that exercise is a stressor. And for those who are gonna try to misinterpret my words, I know that there are maybe some that are out there, and I won't name names. Exercise is a stressor. Now I'm not saying that in a negative light. It's a hormetic stressor, which means in in the short term, that's chronic strep that acute stress. Over the long term, we will become more resilient against and, develop our systems to better resist that stress. Now there's gonna be an upper limit. You know? And I've used this analogy before. You know? In baseball, there are some pitchers who can throw 200 innings, 250 innings. It used to be 300 innings in the nineteen seventies. And now baseball has been, you know, reduced to where we're afraid of your injury risk, you know, based on no data. And then you've got 60 inning pitchers who try to get stretched out into 200 inning pitchers, but then they get injured. So they probably didn't have that genetics. Now the analogy of that story is, are you a 60 inning pitcher? Are you a 200 inning pitcher? Are you a high volume, exercise athlete? Are you a medium volume athlete? What body what what, what volume of exercise is best for your physiology? So this goes to the idea of stress. How much stress can your body tolerate? Now before before, finishing that road, I've seen people say, well, just do more and continuously do more over time, and your body will adapt. This is false. This may be true for a select amount of people. But in tracking my own data, even even just looking at heart rate variability, resting heart rate, even looking at, like, you know, deadlifts and squats and and volume of exercise. For me, there's a volume of exercise which optimizes strength and function over time. And and if I go beyond that, I'm increasing injury risk. I'm overtrained. And now I'm in that chronically stressed, phys you know, biochemistry where is that gonna be best for optimizing maximum lifespan? Maybe I get an increase in average lifespan because we all know about the health benefits and and, you know, average lifespan increase for exercise, but I wanna get to the maximum. So I wanna I wanna get that hormetic dose. I wanna get that hormetic benefit in terms of health and average lifespan, but I also wanna minimize any overstress above that where now I'm reducing my ability to potentially get to the max. So that that's the that's the long winded nutshell. Okay. Yeah. So so from the biomarker point of view, it's it's about tuning that kind of thing. So from my point of view, from looking at the all cause mortality, I'm very sensitive for each of those, vectors, components that I talked about for the high intensity, the aerobic, and the strength training, I'm very sensitive to when was the, longevity benefit reached and maximized, and after what point was it no longer helpful. So, you talk about some people thinking that they wanna run every inning, every game, all season long. And, actually, I think, we've had a a bit of a discussion. I'm not sure if you remember it where I've said, I think you're doing too much at ninety minutes, a hundred and eighty minutes a week. Like, my routine for exercise is actually, one is a two twenty five minute runs, and then about a four about a half hour long strength training exercise interval. And so my total time is actually under ninety minutes. Right. I'm doing weak. But you're doing more in terms of the walking on the nonexercise days, whereas on those days are, quote, unquote, recovery days for me where it's very low volume. Yeah. The the walking desk is, is key for getting a a 20,000, 40,000 step day is, pretty standard for me. So in But along those lines, on days where my step counts had been as high as that, my resting heart rate and heart rate variability take a very long time to recover. So when I first when I first started on this journey in 2018 with the tracking the heart rate variability, resting heart rate, my data looked chronically overtrained. An average heart rate variability of 47 and an average resting heart rate of 51. Now I was doing three hour workouts, and I know people are gonna call BS on that. But, for whatever reason, I I and I admit I've said this before. I have I have I have gorilla genetics where I just like throwing heavy weights around for a very long time. I like I like the challenge of doing it for a very long time because it feels good to do, like, 10 sets of squats and, you know, 10 sets of of bench or whatever. But it it was just murder on my you know? And I felt, you know, cognitively, I felt terrible for, like, a week, And then I couldn't make consistent strength gains even just maintaining strength. But if I can't train for a week, you know, strength train, that's not my optimum window just from trial and error for being able to maintain or increase it over time. So, so I've cut that down a lot now in terms of the ninety minutes now being too much. The argument against that is, pull ups, all of my strength indices have not declined, at least over the past five years, overhead press, you know, consecutive push ups off the ball, you know, the rows, all of the the the the, you know, the fitness metrics that I look at, even flexibility, nothing has declined. If anything, there's a small increase in certain areas. And, also, a big part of that too is avoiding injury risk. And I've had a history of, lower bit lower back herniations from ego lifting in my twenties. So even that, I've been able to minimize that. So so the argument against that I'm currently still doing too much is no strength chain no. Basically, I've I've maintained strength. Now people can say, oh, you're maintaining strength, but we both know you can't increase forever. You're gonna you're gonna hit that above average fitness level, and then the trick is how long can you stay there. Right? So that's one side of it. The other side of it is the heart rate variability and resting heart rate as those measures of stress are, both better, significantly better, not by a little bit, by a lot over the past five years. So if I was doing too much, the argument would be, well, your metrics of overall stress, aren't aren't great. You know? So, so that's the argument against that I'm currently doing too much. That's, yeah. So let me let me refine my my point. I don't think that you're doing enough to be harmful. I think that you could get the same benefit even if you were to if you were to tune it more finely and that you could maintain the same benefit. I have the same I've been doing the weightlifting for about, let's say, I think it's about eight years now and have the same thing, kind of reached the max and have held steady at that point, with just one weight lifting exercise, term a week for about half an hour, and I'm hitting the bigs. Like, it's deadlifts or squats, bench, incline, decline, or flat, and, back exercise, lat pull downs or rows or something else. Those are the big ones. Those are the key, and that's all you need to do. As you said, no no bicep curls. No, like, try, you know, kind of push down kind of things. But you hit the big ones, and then it takes care of it. Weight lifting, as you as you found out before, has a kind of a sharp curve on it actually for the benefit. The studies will say, as you sent over before, and we can link in the comments, that if you're exercising over two hours total time in a week, you're actually not getting any more longevity out of it. Your premature death is now the same as if you'd never walked into the gym. But if you're doing a mixture of things like you're doing where you're getting your aerobic in there, you're getting some other activities as well, your weightlifting time, it's within the right window. As long as you're under an hour, you're still getting the peak benefit out of it. Once you get over a total time of weightlifting, strength tending alone in a week, then it starts to you're no longer at peak. And once you're over two hours, now you're actually I think it's actually two and a half hours if I remember correctly. Then at that point, it's worse than if you had never gone to the gym. Yeah. I should clarify. So it's not ninety minutes of all weightlifting. It's far from that. And I as I mentioned, I've had to cut down the the training volume for the strength training portion of the workouts because there you know, it it is just not I wanna cover all of the bases and all of the movements from a variety of angles. So, you know, for example, for the for my overhead press, I'm doing a warm up set and basically two work sets. Right? So so that's essentially for all of the compound movements at most. It it's it's the same same idea. It's like a warm up set and then two work sets with kind of a pyramid. The first work set is, you know, maybe 70% of one RM and the second being 85, you know, or so 85% or so higher. So if I looked at total strength training as a portion of that, it might be forty five minutes, maybe maybe a bit less. But then even then even then, how do you quantify? Because it it's almost like a circuit training workout too where it's a ninety minute workout. And and granted, it it used to be an eighty minute workout, and I have made it close to a ninety minute workout because I'm starting to I like I've like I said, I like I like the challenge I like the challenge of pushing myself for as long as it you know? But, again, I have to follow the data and not not overtrain it. But Right. You know, if you looked at, say say I'm doing 12 work sets total for the compound movements, upper and lower body. Maybe it's 15. Whatever it is. Mhmm. Total work time in each set is maybe one to two minutes. You know? I'm not doing, like, one RMs. I'm I'm trying to get, you know, the combination of strength and endurance, like overhead press 70 times, 12 reps. Like, I'm not doing four reps or two reps. So that may take one to two minutes at most. So if I'm doing at most 15 works 15 sets total Mhmm. At one to two minutes, that's like thirty minutes of strength of of actual movement time during strength training. There's very little, sitting around and and, you know, screwing off on the computer in between. There's very little of that. I try to minimize that as much as possible. So, so, yeah, the actual strength training portion, if we really quantified it as a small part and but, yeah, that's what works for me. Other people maybe can get away with doing more often, more frequently. Now the other aspect of this, and, you know, we've talked about this before, is why not why not cut the workout up and, you know, split the routine over many days? And now I've gotta juggle with my in person you know, you know the deal, but most people may not. I've got juggle around the in person work schedule. And for whatever reason, even just doing, like, a forty five minute workout or a shorter workout, my data, you know, in terms of the fitness metrics may not be recovered enough and start to look overtrained the day after or the second day after where if I then include another workout, so on a Monday and then a Wednesday, when that Friday comes to repeat the Monday workout, I may not be recovered enough. And I'm I say may. I've I've tried it in the past where then the Friday workout, which is supposed to be the second version of the Monday workout, I've gotta push that to allow for. And when I do that, I start to throw the whole system off. It it you know, at most, day one, day five, so Monday, Friday, I can maintain strength I've that's what's worked to maintain strength over time. But if I get into six days after doing any portion of my workout, and if that's a consistent thing over time, once every, you know, Monday, Saturday, Monday, Sunday, it's harder for me to maintain strength. I start to see strength decrements. And yeah. So the long story short is I have to juggle around the in person work schedule, which dedicates some amount of, you know, heart rate increase, which slows recovery, and I'm getting no fitness benefit from it. You know, if I could make my own schedule and have my own, you know, time sheet for how often I would work out, how much I would do, I'd be able to get in hit on the on the non ninety minute workout days, and a lot more mobility work and joint work, you know, knees and ankles, flexibility wise. But in time, that's for sure on the to do list. Yeah. So so that I think that covers sort of the strength training side of it. And the aerobic is like another key one. The aerobic can be done from what I've seen in the studies and also looking specifically at the mitochondrial level where they're looking at the sort of the growth of mitochondria. The most important part about the aerobic is getting a regular dosage every week. I like, the studies seem to show that for the benefit for all cause mortality reduction basically happens at, like, after the first fifteen minutes of aerobic. And then after that, it's pretty much flat. And there are other benefits that come from the aerobic. Right? Like, there's sort of, like, the the energetic feeling of it. Lots of people just love running because they love running. But in the terms of all cause mortality, you only see the benefit for, like, the first fifteen minutes. So I I do a 25. Like, even I can't bring myself just doing the minimum fifteen minutes a week, but about the twenty five minutes of the aerobic. But that one that one, it doesn't have the sharp curve like, lifting weights. Like, you can very easily overstress your body lifting weights too much, but people can run a lot and still be still be pretty good. Like, for you, your ninety minutes, probably the stressful part of it is probably more the weight lifting than the aerobic running. Would you would you agree with that? Does that sound right? But it's accumulative. It's funny. I I took a screenshot yesterday of my, stress the, you know, the stress monitor that that WHOOP has. Right. Yeah. If you look at it during the workout, it's it's going up the whole time, you know, during my workout. Right? So the the argument there is it's it's, you know, it's a the whole workout, just the duration of it, it it's pretty I mean, I guess it's pretty high intensity. Right? So, Right. You get you're getting cardiovascular drift. That's what they call it where your heart rate just keeps on going up as you continue to run or jog. Right? Yeah. But in terms of the, the fifteen minutes, that's for that's probably for high intensity for the hit training. Right? Whereas, in terms of VO two max, it's, you know, I think half of the benefit of VO two max is association with all cause mortality. It's like after a a VO two max of 40, most of the benefit is is up to about 40. And then there's a small you know, it's like a 10% further reduction to go from a VO two max of 40 to 50, something like that. So someone who's out there saying, oh, I'll only have to do fifteen minutes a week of hit. I mean, the question is, did it get your VO two max to at least 40, to get most of the benefit? For some people, maybe that's not enough. They may need more for whatever reason. Right? So Right. The sort of a non responder issue for that. I mean, the another another point that I, that I wanna make that I kinda think of a lot is that there's oftentimes questions of, okay. Well, I don't walk as much as I think I should, or I don't do as much of the aerobic as I should, or I don't like going to the gym, but I do this other thing. Like, okay. I don't walk as much, but I run for an hour or something like that. And, from what I've read and seen from the studies, they seem all to be different buckets. So it's it's sort of like, like, each of those activities, like, aerobic exercise, high intensity exercise, strength training, and walking, those are sort of though what I consider to be the four fundamental components of physical activity. For each of them, you can get a certain amount of benefit out of doing them. And if you don't do them, you miss that benefit. But there's no there's no makeup and there's no overlap. Like, even if you're running, let's say, an hour a day, you will still get additional longevity from walking another two hours a day. Right? So each of them seem to be and and in one way, you could say that you're making up for it because some of the longevity you didn't get from that, you can get from something else. But you could have also eaten vegetables and fruits. Right? So it's, it's interesting that the the components then seem to basically be different kind of aspect of some way of slowing down the aging process so that you can get the benefit from it. So that's why you I think it's really important just to break it down and making sure that you're hitting each of the buckets and at least getting the requisite amount inside of that. The hit then is like another one, and that's like, another about 15 or so a week, like you say, when then regularly every week, we'll give you another billing for that, and the VO two max will increase in other things. So So I I prefer so this this is why I prefer greater specificity in which can kind of address that. Right? So, you know, is the combination of that approach, is that and then the amount of time spent and volume, of training, is that able to maintain your fitness level strength, VO two max, you know, whatever cardiovascular fitness metrics you wanna track, heart rate variability, resting heart rate, etcetera, blood pressure, all the things that come with exercise, is that total volume and frequency and intensity and duration, is that enough to at least maintain it over time? That's the big question. Then, so that's part of it. You know? The the other part of it is, you know, another ask you said those are the four main pillars, but another another aspect is and I think most people overlook it is mobility and flexibility training, which if most and balance. If you're not training that, that stuff's gonna get worse too. And joint, you know, joint health. Right? So the idea that you can just take, glucosamine or hyal, uronic acid or something and have, quote, unquote, good joint health. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Maybe a little bit, but we can you know, there there are you pretty good YouTube channels out there, you know, knees over toes, that whole approach where, you know, you can, do a variety of movements aimed at increasing blood flow to your joints and increasing strength, you know, in the joints, which, you know, training through a full range of motion, which unfortunately, most people probably are ignoring. And even just focusing on, like, low back hamstring flexibility, which as a former personal trainer, you know, training people in their seventies who never worked on these things that could barely flex, you know, just barely flex their their their spine at that age from a lifetime of neglect. I wouldn't just put it on strength and VO two max and, you know, running, walking. I would I wouldn't put it on that. You know? I it's it's it's mobility through a full range of motion. And what's interesting too is if you look at older people who even even mildly fit people who ignored their mobility or or or, you know, joint range of motion over time. Mhmm. You know, you can you can tell by just someone's movement pattern or their gait, you know, but from a lifetime of disuse. You for example, getting up off the floor, how some you know? And I don't mean sitting, you know, crisscross applesauce. I mean, just how how quickly can you get off the floor? You know? Someone older, chronologically older, who's never trained ever, someone chronically old older who's actually mobile and has trained those things. There's just a youthful aspect to it. So independent of the strength and and and cardiovascular, there's something about mobility balance and flexibility that there's a huge youthful component that I think most people ignore. For example, there's another guy, I think his name is movements by David, and his his catchphrase is stay flexi. And this guy's mobility is fantastic. I mean, it's like gymnast I don't even want it's like Cirque du Soleil level. And, you know, and one of his YouTube videos is, you know, I'm small, but I'm strong. And if you look at the the feats of, of mobility and calisthenics that he's doing, it's just, it's amazing. So long story short is I think that I that's why the part of my workout is is so long is I'm trying to incorporate I've always tried to incorporate some aspect of the mobility and joint and flexibility and balance. But that's an easier said than done thing because, you know, we sit at a desk all day, and long story short is the back can get tight, so you gotta do a lot I've gotta do a lot to really warm it up and strengthen it. And so Yeah. The the balance is one that definitely, degrades as you get old. And the studies on it have not looked hopeful. Like, when I've looked at the ones where they talk about your time, say, standing on one foot for the older people And older, we're talking eighties and nineties, not, not the new middle age of fifties. They they're, like, measured in, like, under ten seconds. And when they do interventions at that age, they really don't find any useful improvement. So it does seem to be something that you really need to keep in. One of the things I I can't even remember where I saw it is, brush your teeth with your eyes closed while doing the the yoga tree position. Right? So I ride my bicycle around and make sure that I'm always doing a certain amount of time riding with no hands like I did when I was a kid. Right? Just trying to make sure that I keep the balance up. For the the stretching, I I feel that I get enough of the stretching from the weight lifting. Like, good squat will help your hamstrings and other things. Right? And the studies show that, actually, they they do a head to head of stretching exercises and then strength training. And they find that, actually, they got more increase in flexibility from doing the strength training than from actually doing a stretching exercise. Just to add on to that, just to so you're you're exactly right. So doing a a weighted squat should have greater flexibility than doing an unweighted squat because you're basically pushing yourself you're forcing yourself down with extra gravity. Right? Right. There are people who will only train to 90 degrees, and that's not a full range of motion. And we've been brainwashed. Ah. We can say, hey. I hate to pull the conspiracy theory garbage, but, you know, we've we've been taught, oh, we've heard it forever that you've only gotta go to 90 degrees, and how many bodybuilders have I seen that trained in 90 degrees, but that's not a full range of motion for for the for the squat. Right? So sure you'll have better range of motion than if you didn't do any squats at all. But Mhmm. You know, there's ankle flexibility. There's, you know, shoulder flexibility. I mean, these are all things that that can be trained to their full range of motion and then adding a strength training component to it, to to which if what should further improve, flexibility in that movement. So I've got room to go for some of those movements. You know, you know, my my squats are pretty decent, but I've got an ankle problem that goes back to being tackled at high school football. You know? Almost I had a heirloom fracture, so my flexibility there isn't great. So I've gotta do a lot of work on my, squat depth, which is somewhat limited because of my ankle mobility. But, yeah, but in terms of the gain, it for me, it goes back to that, you know, that mobile phenotype. Right? Not just balance on the bike or balance with your eyes closed. You know? Just the Mhmm. It it goes back to a u having a youthful movement pattern, and that's not something you can just cut, like, Deepak Chopra and say, I feel young, so I'm young. It's something I think that has been trained for a very long time. You know, I never wanna get up off the floor and someone look at me and was like, my my my parents. Like, when I see them get up off the floor or a couch, that's an old pattern. And I'm not trying to be an ageist or or, you know, that kind of boat, but they they haven't trained it. Right? Mhmm. And I could try my best to get up and look and look spry, but without actively training it, you know, it's it's it's gonna look aged. You know? So Yeah. I try I try and do, the other, thing that I'll do is do some kind of Tabata workouts or something, sort of a very high intensity workout And something like burpees inside of that. Right? Like, a twenty seconds of, burpees, right, where you're jumping as high as you can and then going down to a push up and then jumping. And that's that's the kind of thing that really gives you the mobility, sort of the ability to dynamically react to the world around you. But, yeah, it's, I keep it as a small part of mine, but for you, it's sort of a major thing, especially if you have some injuries and things that sort of require a bit of attention to it. I can understand that. Yeah. But the other aspect of it too is, for example, like, stretching stretching and strengthening the low back while also stretching and strengthening the hamstrings. So, for example, doing, like, like an l, right, where I'm I'm basically you know, my body straight up, and then I'm leaning forward like this. Right? So it's kinda like a a good morning like that. Mhmm. So Yeah. But doing that now, I'm holding a weight. I'm holding 45 pound weight, and, you know, I'm not touching the floor. I'm just trying to hold this position for as long as I can. So So I'm getting that hamstring stretch, and I'm also getting the strengthening in the lower back and the hamstrings. But then I'll dip you know, get rid of the 45 pound weight, and I'll and then then I'll, you know, I'll do the full even, you know, standing off the chair so I can get way beyond putting my knuckles to the floor. So now I'm getting strength through a full range of motion. So a little bit is, you know, warming up back, but it's also strength through that full range of motion. You know, touching my toes, that that's not you know, that's partial range of motion. It's knuckles to the floor and and even going further beyond that, but also adding that weight to to be strong in that movement, not just flexible. So I'm bad at that stuff, to be honest. I can touch my toes, but I I'm not putting my palms on the floor at any time. Yeah. And and the argument against that, you know, you could say, well, the what's the all cause mortality data and, you argument against that, you know, you could say, well, the what's the all cause mortality data? And, you know Exactly. And that's kind of like I haven't seen it doesn't show up in the all cause mortality stuff. So I'm like, alright. You know, put some time into that, but it's not gonna be my primary focus. But for me, it goes to that to that quality of life and, and being highly mobile at any age and never and trying to avoid that aged movement, pattern that I see chronically in in older adults and haven't trained it. So, you know, and if you you are imagine you drop something on the floor and you've gotta bend down to pick it up. And if it's hard to touch your toes, that's gonna look like an aged movement pattern. I don't want that. I like you know, if I drop so if I'm at if I'm at the grocery store and I'm I'm trying trying to get, like, a pepper from the top and it falls on the floor, I can pick it up on from the floor. No problem. I'm not like, oh, no. I gotta bend down and pick it up. I'm I'm never worried about that. And maybe that seems like an inconsequential thing, but, again, this idea and I keep saying it, but age movement pattern, I'm trying to avoid that forever indefinitely. Well, it's, yeah, keeping it keeping it moving. So, should we swoop over to, anything else that you wanted to say about the exercise stuff? We got it. Okay. Should we jump over into food then? Yeah. Let's do it. What do you got? So let's see. So I'll I'll I'll start off on this one. So my diet is, somewhat less strict, than yours. And thank you for that, by the way, because, my friends all think that I'm, you know, really, very precise in what I eat. And I'm like, yeah. You think that. But, boy, this guy, doctor Loosgarten, writes down every gram he eats every single day. So, for the food things as well, I think it comes down to some fundamental categories of food. And the interesting thing is is I've gone through the all cause mortality studies is that they seem to say that, basically, it's not about the subcategory. So it's not about eating, say, bananas versus kiwis versus oranges. It's about how much fruit you're eating. It's not about eating, green salad versus potatoes. It's about how much vegetables you're eating. And so it seems that, and then and people spend a huge amount of time trying to figure it, oh my god. I need a different colors, antioxidants, or something, this kind of thing. But as I look across the studies, they say that basically they're all the same thing, and those seem to be the same bucket. Right? So if you're if you've eaten, say, three servings of, potatoes, core maligned white potatoes, that you're not gonna get additional benefit from, say, eating some cucumber and some lettuce after that. Like, you've already hit your allotment of what you could get as the benefit from the fruits. And so for each of the foods, there seems to be a very clear benefit from it or or disadvantage. So the things that are bad for you, they're sometimes bad for you throughout the entire range. But my favorite example is nuts. And, there have been several studies that have shown that a very small portion of nuts, like less than an ounce, like, if we're talking a very small handful daily, is one of the greatest reductions in premature death that you can do. It's a seventeen or so percent reduction in all cause mortality. And the funny thing about it is that that's just for that first half handful, and then after that, there's no additional benefit. So So if you like nuts, go ahead and keep on eating them. There's no harm to it, but you're not getting any further reductions in all cause mortality. And for each of the components, say, nuts, beans or legumes, fruits, vegetables, red meat, processed meat, all those things. There's very distinct curves that say this is how much you should get, and this is the benefits you'll get. And then after this, well, if you like it, sure. It's fine, but you're getting no more benefit from it. So my diet is basically to get beyond just the alternative health eating index. I really rigorously go through and try to follow those basic guidelines. But to be honest, there's a lot of room in there. I don't, I haven't been able to find studies that show the benefit of, say, eating more than even one serving of fruits and one serving of vegetables having that much of an impact on all cause mortality. And that's one of the places where we differ. I know that you're looking at the biomarkers, and you're saying, well, yeah, but my biomarker, it's got a different benefit. But when you're just going to sort of, like, where the all cause mortality comes, I have a healthy breakfast, a very healthy breakfast. I get about two or three whole grain servings, oatmeal, wheat berries kind of things. I have some, salad beans in that as well and then some hummus and some veggies and some fruit and, of course, a a small handful of nuts. And that covers a lot of what I need for the day. If I have a salad later on in the day for some more vegetables and things and some fish for dinner, which is another very healthy food, it's gonna cover most what I need. And then after that, I'm I'm, your cheat days are kind of a normal day for me. I'll I'll have a croissant or something, almost any day. I think that sugar is overly vilified in, the culture these days. It seems to like the great evil. But I that's sort of how I run it as far as the component style of it. But feel free to tell me what the biomarkers say about that. Alright. Before going to the biomarkers, the biggest the the biggest, the the I don't wanna say the lowest hanging fruit could be Yep. Total calories. What dietary approach can lead you to, us being able to take in an amount of calories that allows you to be your leanest, assuming that your leanest is gonna reflect, end up reflecting, your most youthful biomarker profile. For example, in my data, blood pressure, which is a potentially a big one for, like, dementia risk. And I think, you know, systolic blood pressure increases during aging, thereby potentially increasing dementia risk. In my data, body weight, which is largely driven by a modest calorie restriction over time as I haven't increased the exercise duration frequency or intensity. Body weight is one of the most significantly correlated with blood pressure in my data. Now knowing that calories are driving that, which that again goes back to what dietary approach can lead one to their, you know, their the the calorie intake that allows them to be the leanest. Now is it gonna be a junk food diet? Is it the Mike cheat day as the Chris' Chris' every day? Normal day. It's a Tuesday. Yeah. If I did that every day, I'd be overeating. You know? And I don't mean not overeating by a couple 100 calories a day. I mean, you know, 4,000, 7,000, whatever. I I I can't that's why I have to cut those cheat days to and a very infrequent thing because beyond that, it's it it encourages it in my brain, you know, bad behavior. So, some people you know? Now this this is where another one goes beyond the published studies. You know? I'm not a dietary ideologist, meaning, you know, vegan versus vegetarian versus even carnivore, which there's very little published data on all cause mortality risk because and, again, I'm not trying to promote any one diet. Right? So each diet can lead you to to your most satiated where you can have some amount of calorie restriction while also maintaining muscle mass, so that you can optimize and maintain function over time. That's I think that may be the biggest thing. Now how much does diet composition contribute to that formula for longevity? I don't know. But, in terms of the published research, if we're gonna go for the gold standard of longevity and the people that are, you know, exercise fanatics and, again, I'm pro exercise. I you know, like I said, pro exercise. I'm doing workouts. I'm throwing around heavy weights. I'm pro exercise. I want I don't want anyone to get the idea that I'm anti exercise by any means. But calorie restriction beats, regular exercise in terms of the lifespan maximum lifespan effect. Average in ink, recreational physical activity or even just, you know, voluntary wheel running in rats, for example, just using an animal model extends average lifespan just like in people. You know, elite athletes, and I'll put these studies in the in the, you know, the the video's description. Elite athletes have an increased average life expectancy compared to the, you know, to the general population. But where are the Olympic athletes at 115? You know, I've said this before. Where are they? Right? So there's simultaneously something good and bad about exercise. We wanna get them both. Now going back to the diet, that goes that then knowing that calorie restriction without exercise gets this an even greater increase in average lifespan relative to exercise in the animal studies and increases maximum lifespan. Like I said, the dietary approach that gets us to being able to and I don't mean a calorie restriction of, you know, your maintenance is 3,000 per day. You're gonna eat 1,500 per day. Nobody's gonna be able to sustain that. But the published study shows somewhere around, you know, 35% at most. If you can sustain that and I wouldn't just directly jump to 35%. I mean, for me, it's been a very slow gradual process over time, and I'm not trying to look like a stick figure. Again, I'm trying to have some amount of muscle mass. Right? So but but the calorie the calorie amount may be the biggest factor in in in in longevity. Right? So, alright. Now that also then gets into the body weight and the BMI component, right, of the five factors, right, Which Mhmm. Okay. Is it gonna be you know, some in the calorie restriction society think that a BMI even less than eighteen point five, which by definition is anorexia, which is not associated with improved health and longevity. Some of the CR society think that that's gonna be better. Now show me your biomarker. Show me your markers of organ and systemic function, not just metabolic health or selected cherry pick data. So, you know, the amount of CR that gets you to a BMI that comprehensively optimizes the net sum of as many organ systems as possible. So then the actual composition that in is inherent within that may vary. I mean, maybe some people do better on, I don't know, 60% fat. Some people do better on 10% fat. But, again, using the biomarkers, as the driving tool. I I hear you on all cause mortality, but there's gotta be greater specificity. Right? So, I can, you know, I can I know what works for me based on, you know, almost 50 blood tests now since 2015, but there is you know, I'll give you an example in terms of composition? Right? So I've been eating with the goal of getting spermine and erbethionine. I've been eating an average of about 300 grams of mushrooms per day, for pretty you know, maybe about a year or so. Okay. Uh-huh. And I've been doing it on, like, three days a week where it's, like, you know, seven to eight hundred grams a day on three days and then basically nothing for the other three days. Now inherent in that isn't just spermidine and ergothione, which may extend lifespan based on the animal studies or, ergothione extended lifespan in flies that aren't mouse data yet. But, besides mushroom mushrooms containing those two metabolites, they are also a rich source of niacin. Now knowing that NAD and the bioenergetics and, obviously, mitochondrial function, NAD being a big component of that as as it's in the TCA cycle. So if your NAD levels are low, you're gonna have suboptimal TCA cycle function, potentially suboptimal mitochondrial function. And we all know how mitochondrial function declines during aging. Probably is gonna be a bad thing for quality of life, average, and maximum lifespan. So knowing that mushrooms are a great source of niacin, my niacin intake has been two and a half times the RDA for a very long time as long as I've I've I've had mushrooms in the diet. So I when I measured NAD, I didn't expect it to be relatively low or, quote, unquote, age in the 20 micromolar range. You know, 20 to 25 micromolar. You know? How's that possible? My niacin intake is, you know, this much. I'm getting it from mushrooms and sardines and, you know, it's a mix of plant and animal. So knowing that nicotinic acid, which is also a, niacin you know, one of the two main niacin isoforms with nicotinamide being the other, knowing that nicotinamide supplementation in very low doses increases my NAD suggests to me that the niacin that I'm getting from mushrooms is not nicotinic acid, but potentially nicotinamide. Now another aspect of this story another aspect of this story is that, nicotinamide has been shown to increase homocysteine more than nicotinic acid. My homocysteine levels have been pretty close to age expected, which for me, that's, like, you know than that. Yeah. Not just that. For me, that's like an offensive slur hearing words, you know, beta is age expected. Right? So so knowing that my mushroom intake has been high to try to get these pro longevity potentially pro longevity substances while potentially increasing my levels of nicotinamide, which may be bad for the homocysteine. Now I've cut the mushroom intake down by a little bit. So this gets to the idea of specificity within the diet. Now I don't know what the effect does on homocysteine yet. We'll see how that goes for the next test because this is a relatively recent change. Now, conversely, because I've cut the mushrooms down a little bit and knowing that b 12 is one of the components that's been shown or it correlates in my data strongly with reducing homocysteine, and I'm just using homocysteine as an example. I'm not trying to say this is the biggest, you know, metabolite to measure. It's just as an example. So folate and b twelve combined to convert homocysteine into methionine. So knowing that, I've increased b twelve, I've been increasing my folate by a small amount, just titrating it up. And, again, my folate intake is an average of about a thousand, micrograms per day, which again is two and a half times the RDA. But it may not be enough for whatever reason, you know, background genetics, you know, whatever it may be. So, you know, just that specificity of, alright. I've cut the mushrooms down, potentially reducing nicotinamide. That should alleviate some of that potential effect of nicotinamide on homocysteine while also increasing my folate even further than a two and a half times the RDA to try to bring homocysteine firm further down. This is what I mean about the, you know, biomarker driven approach and really trying to titrate the amounts. And just the just the just the the last bit. I know I I can talk forever. But your friend's giving you a hard time about your, you know, the diet rigidity. Right? Yep. If you're a farmer, you want the best crop yield. And to have the best crop yield is gonna have a specific formula. And I'd imagine that every year, if you're a new farmer, there's probably a learning process where you're learning, you know, k. What's the soil composition? What's my crop yield? How much water is there? What's the pH of the whole system? What are the factors that are really driving my crop yield? For us, crop and everybody, the crop yield is longevity. Right? And Mhmm. I've I've I I don't wanna say stumbled, but I've through trial and error and many testing and rigorous evaluation and interventions and all this stuff, the biomarkers are mostly useful. Right? So I know the dietary composition, you know, that, correlates best with that full profile. So for me, it's I don't wanna mess it up. You know? I want my best crop yield. You know? And, so I'm happy to and and it's a diet that makes me happy. If if I if I wasn't satiated and, you know, and comfortable on it, it it would be hard to maintain forever. For example, if you said eat ground flax seeds, which basically, look and taste like sawdust every day for the rest of your life, that'd be a bit of a challenge. Right? But mix it with stuff and, you know, some days I can eat it by itself. You know? So, so so so I enjoy it, and it's and it's a part of the approach being you know, helping me to keep my body foot body weight relatively lean, and and being satiated. So that's a long story on the diet and, you know, the rigidity of it and only having occasional cheat meals. So So so it's it's interesting. So I like the, so the it's funny you say that you that, you think the diet is the most important, but then you point to something that I think is actually I I'm not sure if it's outside or it's different, but, basically, you're saying the overall calorie intake you feel is one of the key drivers. Definitely. And I've I've been watching my blood pressure as well. I'm kinda like, well, let's see. You know, one twenty five over 80. Is that great? I mean, it's probably okay now, but as you say, that's not a that's not one that goes down as you get older. But my, my useful sort of handling and the way that I control my weight is not through daily, measurements, but rather through fasting. So I follow the five two system. So on my days where I'm eating, I just eat whatever I want, basically. But two days a week, I'm on under 500 calories, and that's rigorous and done every week or so. I've been doing it for about ten years now. And, we've had some discussion before about, okay. Well, it's not exactly clear in the animal studies where they say calorie restriction leads to longer life, whether that's actually the calorie restriction or whether it's, very effectively they're getting fasting because they're only being fed during the office hours of the interns who are feeding them. And I think the the jury is still out on that one. As you pointed out, there are some studies that seem to imply the other way. But, yeah, it's it's a key thing. But, like, from the all cause mortality studies, the weight stuff seems, they're the confounders. Right? So people who are exceptionally thin and are oftentimes really skinny because they're dying. Right? So so it's it's it's hard to to clean the data and get that out. And for a while, it looked like they were saying that people actually who are kind of middleweight, like BMI of twenty five, seem to live longer, even slightly overweight. And then they said, okay. Let's take out the people who are sickly or whatever and other things. But, there was much to do about that. And when I see kind of that back and forth and kind of like, no. It's not this way. It's this way. And both of them are kind of showing it. And, basically, the line's not moving much. The The conclusion I draw from that is it's not that big of a deal. Like, there's no clear winner on that one. Right? Like So so I I can I can add more specificity to that? Right? So, yeah, there are some published studies showing that a BMI at older ages, I think it's in the overweight range, 25 to 30, is the lowest risk on that j shaped curve. Right? So Right. So I I could actually probably rationalize some some aspect of that. Immune function declines during aging. So, fat actually has an antimicrobial component to it. So fat actually releases can secrete, caphilocyanin, which is an antimicrobial, protein. So I'd imagine that for people who experience an age related or I should say, for people that experience I mean, basically, everybody will experience it right at some point, the age related immune function decline. But Right. For for that for me, it makes sense that, okay, age related immune, function decline, fat mass is potentially compensatory to help the immune system. As another factor of that, cholesterol follows the, you know, LDL and total cholesterol follows that same pattern where it increases to about midlife, and immune function declines, you know, similarly up to about well, indefinitely. But cholesterol also has an immune enhancing process, properties as it can bind to things like lipopolysaccharide, which can leak into the blood during aging. So, but then, like you mentioned, you know, then after about 50 to 60, cholesterol declines, and now you're on the road to to, you know, the slow the slow drive to death because you've got the age related, decline for immune function, and then you don't have cholesterol to potentially compensate. So an increase in body fatness, and I'm not saying that's the way to do it, but for people in that category who have an age related immune function decline, it may be that fat is acting potentially acting as a compensatory mechanism to try to help the immune system. So now now that said, what if there was a healthy control group? So from youth, you know, stayed lean their whole life. You know? That I think that's a big, you know, missing drawback is that the healthy, you know, lean lean basically since youth control group doesn't exist. So, you know, now begin going back to specificity. So, one can do the experiment to see just even at the individual level. If your BMI is twenty eight and you lose weight over some period of time, And for me, I think doing slower is better. That's gonna be the safest way. You're gonna be able to maintain those habits for a long time. If you've done it slow and steady versus you lose it all in two months, and then you what's gonna happen? Have you learned any habits, or you just you just starved yourself? Stop eating, and then you're gonna eventually need to eat again kind of thing. Yeah. Yeah. So if you looked at the full panel of biomarkers, blood pressure, all of the the full list, kidney, liver, immune, red blood cells, inflammation, metabolic health, etcetera. If you took that same person at a BMI of twenty eight, even a fit eight twenty eight. Right? Fit BMI of twenty eight. Relatively fit with some amount of body fat because I can't imagine, unless you're a bodybuilder on some amount steroids to have a BMI of twenty eight. It's gonna be very hard to be natural. I don't know. People are gonna come at me now. I'm five foot seven, two fifteen, and my body fat is 5%. I'm not talking about people like that. Most people that have a BMI of twenty eight, even with, a fitness lifestyle, probably gonna have some amount of body fat, maybe 20% for a man. Okay. Regardless. Now if you cut your body weight over time, now get your BMI to, I don't know, twenty three, twenty four, and look at your biomarkers. I bet at least seeing my own data, and I'm I'm gonna put this in a video at some point. I mean, body weight is behind almost everything. I mean, it's Wow. Yeah. It so so, but, again, does that mean eat garbage? You know, you know, some some of the professional athletes, you know, they're notorious candy eaters, and they're lean and fit. You know? But then they have maybe have short careers. Right? So, it's calorie restriction with optimal nutrition. That's the goal. But then the question is, what's the optimal nutrition? How do you define that? Which then goes to the biomarkers. Now going going to the fasting, this is a big Right? So going to the published studies, I I'm pretty sure there's no trifecta of this combination, fasting, calorie restriction, and circadian alignment in people. I don't I'm pretty sure that data on all cause mortality doesn't exist yet. But, there's a study, and I have a video on this where, like you said, the calorie restricted animals, they eat all of their food within a very short window, and then they're basically fasted for the rest of the day. And then if they were calorie restricted on that most of the day fasting approach and eat most, ate their food for mice, they are nocturnal, which means they should be eating at night, not during the day, which is when lab studies have basically bent their physiology to accommodate us. Right? We're gonna put the mice on Yeah. Keep them awake during the day, keep them awake at the day and let them sleep at night, but they actually evolve the opposite of that. So when you allow that trifecta, let them eat at night as they evolved to do, fasted about 35%, calorie restriction and fasted. They had they had about a 35%, extension of lifespan. The longest lifespan relative relative to, not circadian alignment and not fasting. So that could be a potentially big part of this too. I incorporate the fasting every day. I try to have that eating window less than eight hours. On three days a week, it's almost all of my calories. Maybe 90% is an hour and a half in the morning, and then just the remaining 10% in the afternoon. So the vast majority of it is in a very short window. So I do try to incorporate that now. In terms of biomarkers, I don't see a difference with that approach versus the way it used to be where I basically, you know, do one meal a day, you know, four in the afternoon until six. And then, you know, and so, basically, I I don't see any difference in the biomarkers there. In terms of sleep quality, it's immeasurably better, you know, trying to get that eating window and finishing it earlier in the day. And that's the main reason why I do it is it improves sleep quality for me, less nighttime awakenings. Like, if I'm eating a giant, you know, vegetable fill filled meal at at 06:00, I'm up at ten, twelve, two I mean, I'm up every two hours using the bathroom, which is terrible. So Right. Yeah. That's it's interesting that you didn't actually find a much of a difference based off the time of day or even the restriction is from the biomarker point of view. But I should I should say, though, that I've been before every blood test, I do about a seventeen hour fast, and I don't know why I settled on that. It's just for the early, blood test, you know, I noted that I it was okay. It was seventeen hours since I ate. So I basically stayed consistent with that. So it could be that for for the earlier test in twenty fifteen, even with the the later eating style and not all of my calories earlier in the day, it could be that for whatever reason before the test, it could be that maybe one day of, you know, seventeen hour window, which is longer than the standard, you know, eight to twelve hour window fasting, maybe that had some impact on standardizing the blood test data. I don't know. I doubt that that's the case, but I don't I don't see gross differences. You know? Well, it's it's, it's interesting that you point out that that shift. I mean, a lot of people when they get into the time restricted feeding, the first thing they do is skip breakfast. And it's, one of those, yeah, they say I should eat breakfast, but I don't, and it's easier and it's so great. And, the studies on that are bad. They had a study where they actually looked at the, the effects of skipping breakfast versus not. And they found, first of all, the your metabolism slows down by about 50 calories a day. Secondly, the people who are skipping breakfast reported more hunger throughout the day, so they were more unhappy. And thirdly, they reported them as wanting to eat junkier foods. Like, they want to eat more kind of chips and sort of things that you'd like to stay away from more. So that's one of the the sort of pitfalls of it. And in the short term, if you've gotten used to eating three meals a day and then you start skipping breakfast, yes, you'll lose some weight, but they find that to be short term. And if you look at people who are have been skipping breakfast over a longer period of time, they're heavier. They generally tend to be more overweight. So it's, impressive that you've shifted from, like, sort of the evening to the breakfast time and waiting it heavy there. And, that's probably one of the reasons why you've been able to keep this up for so long. Yeah. Well, it was an easy change because, sleep quality has always been an issue. Right? So, like, I did, one of my next videos coming probably Wednesday, next Wednesday, is on, slow wave sleep. Right? So deep sleep, ought to be restorative sleep. So I did a sleep study probably ten years ago, and, and I was getting terrible sleep back then. And, my slow wave sleep was 5% of the total. Now to put that into perspective, it the slow wave sleep percentage declined declines during aging. And for a 90 year old, the average is 8% of total sleep time. So under the best conditions, I got 5% of my total sleep as slow wave sleep, which is terrible. Now I'm pretty close to 25%. So Wow. And and what correlates with that too is body weight, which is crazy. So, one component. There are others. You know? So but, so the change, the shift from, you know, one meal a day, eating later in the day to getting it earlier in the day. Once I saw that, I was waking up less, I was feeling a bit better, not perfectly better, but still Mhmm. I saw improvements in my, you know, how do I feel, and do I feel more well rested? So that it was an easy shift. And plus, with the in person work schedule, you know, I don't like to eat at work. Like, so it just just and but and and the other interesting thing about this too is that so calorie restricted mice, as you mentioned, they eat the majority of their food within, like, you know, a couple hours or within a few hour window, and then they're fast the whole day. But they know the next day when their food should be there, and they're waiting and eager to eat their food. When I wake up, it's use the bathroom. It's go straight to eat, and I'm eating for, like, an hour and a half. It's an in person workday. And I look forward to it. Right? So, yeah. And and and Yeah. It's vegetables and fruit. That takes so long to eat. Oh my gosh. Yeah. That's true. Well, you know, for people who don't know, I'm not vegan. I have I've actually had, like, like, five eggs a week now for, I've incorporated that, and I eat dairy every day and sardines every day. So I'm not I'm not far from vegan. Right? But when you say all the food diet. Yeah. I get I get lock lacto ovo, I guess. That's good. Yeah. But I I'm open to meat. Right? It's just, it doesn't satiate me as much as the other animal products, and it doesn't impact the biomarkers too as as as much. So So do you see that when you take, you don't have any red meat in your your, routine. One of the things that I, your routine is very well focused, and I was trying to tell you, you should, like, mess around a lot more to get more data on it. But I know you're like, no. I I got the ship. It's steered. I don't need to, like, yank the rudder. I'm like, but there's science we would find there. Come on. Yeah. So so Jinfinity suggests that so that's, I mentioned that that's gonna be one not along along the diet lines, but so you know that six hundred milligrams of nicotinic acid, we saw my NAD go up to, like, three x higher at sixty seven micromolar. But then my done eating pace was point nine eight, which I've had nothing even close to that forever, like nine tests. So when I suggested that it could be NAD too high, he was like, no. It's probably a niacin product or nicotinic acid. Your nicotinic acid is too high. Right? So when he suggested, alright. Let's let's raise your NAD with NMN, which is also nicotinamide, in in the niacin family. This is almost like for the sake of science. For me, it's like, okay. Sixty milligrams of nicotinic acid. I got thirty eight micromolar. Let's see what it does at the need and pace. And let's see what it does to the rest of the biomarkers. For me, story closed. But to have to prove the point, I'm I'm not and don't no disrespect to to Infiniti. I'm a big fan. You know? But Mhmm. I you know, the creative, you know, the creative process is being disturbed to prove a point. You know? So, yeah, getting me to tweak around with, you know, add more this, add more that. It's gotta be dangerous. So my, my, most recent I'm not sure if I've mentioned this yet. Perturbation of my schedule for the science and to see what it does to me. So I've registered for a marathon, which is, well over the, fifteen minutes of running a week. So I I've just started a sixteen week plan actually to, get ready for it, and, I'm I'm quite nervous about it. I think my VO2 max is quite good. I've had it measured. It was about 55, which is outstanding, with a full mask on and plotting on a treadmill. And every thirty seconds, they goose the speed to see if you can keep up with it. But a real marathon's a real marathon, so we'll see. I got myself some chunky shoes. So that raises the question. Right? So with marathon training, that's gonna most likely be a volume increase. Right? Training volume increase over what you're doing now. So with that in mind, you know, you should get some VO two max increase, whether it's going from 55 to 60. And you should mention that it's not a predicted 55, like fitness tracker predicted 55. This is the mask. This was a, like, a, you know, official thing. Right? So Yep. You're probably Gold standard. Yes. So you're probably gonna get some VO two max boost. Right? 55 to 60. I don't know. Somewhere it should be somewhere higher. I'd I'd hard to believe an increase in training volume, you're gonna stay the same at what your VO two max was before. Now with that in mind, with that increase in training volume, will your improvement of VO two max, will your heart rate variability go down, resting heart rate go up chronically for that increase in training volume time? Now Mhmm. So now it raises the interesting question, which I get I've gotten criticism from endurance athletes because, you know, they'll say, well, it's VO two max. That's the most that's the most important. Who cares about your heart rate variability, resting heart rate being a bit worse? Doesn't matter. I don't care about those metrics. I care about the functional measures. So what do you think about the the dichotomy of, you know, having your your VO two max be the highest, but you may take a hit on your actual metrics of, you know, cardiovascular fitness, and and health. Right? So Yeah. It's, I'll find out some of that experientially. I've just, I just started now because of this. I'm I'm, like, fully, you know, censored up now. I've got my Whoop. I've got an Oura ring that I just bought this last week, and I've got my Apple Watch. And And so now I can have, like, votes. Right? Like, what was the most important thing? What's your actual heart rate? And it's it's a little bit of experience getting used to it. I'm thinking about writing a review or something on it. Maybe we can have that one of our discussions later. Cool. But it's, I the VO two max is they have the studies for the ACM, and they I, all cause mortality. I think I've seen it also for the heart rate, the resting heart rate as well. Right? That's another one where it's sort of a known thing. And I'd have to look into it, but I'm I'm not sure. I've I don't I don't have an answer on that one yet. So so, like, maybe in the short term on your most recovered day. Right? So say you're doing a few days of training, you know, high volume training for your marathon, and then you have, like, a recovery day. Right? So Mhmm. I'd imagine that after your recovery day, if your best resting heart rate was I think you showed me it was, like, 41 the other day. Right? If your best is 41 and then, you're doing the marathon training and then your best after recovery day is 44. Right? Mhmm. So now you're getting a potential, and this goes to that idea of exercise dose. Right? This is how I see it. You know? Sure. You may be getting some incremental increase in VO two max, but if that's at the detriment of you know? So if your resting heart rate is is going up and your heart rate variability go is going down, that's basically a sign that you're you're stressing your body to the point where your auto your your autonomic and your parasympathetic nervous system are somewhat out of whack. Now what will how will that translate into disease risk and longevity? I don't know. But I'd imagine your your your metrics of you know, you I think you'd want the highest VO two max with the, you know, the highest heart rate variability and lowest resting heart rate. You know? Does that mean training for a marathon will get you there? I don't know. Does that mean training two hours a day, two miles a day, walking, running, whatever? I don't know. It's individual. Right? But this is this is one of those places where you and I differ, or I think that, I am in the punch it and, improve it over the long run, whereas you're like, no. I'm watching it every day. My resting heart rate, if I do this, I know that the next day, my resting heart rate for you know, it'll be high for a few days. So that day when I had, a triple digit, heart rate variability, a 103, and a resting heart rate of 41, that was the day after I ran HIIT. Like, I had run, like, twenty five minutes of HIIT the day before. And it was a good run. I had new shoes, and I was super happy because I've got my marathon shoes that are really bouncy. But, I don't know. We'll it, it will be interesting to see. So, maybe we'll have a discussion about that in a later podcast. Wait. Wait. For sure. For sure. Wait. What was the then what happened the day after that? Because it went far away from a 130 to 41. Right. So, a full switch around, and I'm not actually sure. Like, I haven't I don't I haven't worn it long enough to kind of know my whoop to know what's causing that flip around. But the Oura ring agreed on the second day. So the day after that, then my heart rate went up to 51. One. And, actually, my my heart rate variability went down to from a 103 down to 37 in one day. It's like I'm a different person. So And then so then you asked me what I did. I mean, it was kind of a normal day. I went to the gym. I did my my half hour workout. I did, some heavy squats, three sets of eight reps of a 110 kilograms. Those are big, but that's not not big for me. That's a normal kind of my routine. But, I had about seven drinks that night, and that was between, like, six and 11:00 at night. So it's probably some dehydration. Alcohol alcohol is a known murder of heart rate variability, resting heart rate. That's the whole that that drove the whole ship. Like, you can't go from average you can't have an average, I don't remember what it was. Like, 40 for heart rate variability and 50 for resting heart rate. If that was your average, to that seat, a 140 to go to elite endurance athlete, no. Like, maybe if if your average is was forty fifty, maybe at your best, you'd see, like, fifty, forty six, something like that. So so so alright. So then that also raises the question. Knowing that was that your best data that you've seen so far? 100 to 40? Well, I mean, in, like, the two weeks I've had it. But yes. So with that in mind, then it gets to okay. What how many drinks can you tolerate where instead of your average I think I saw your average was, like, 60 something in in the forties for resting heart rate over the one week average. Right? So so what amount of alcohol because alcohol is a murderer, like I said, of of those data. What amount of alcohol is it two drinks? Is it one drink? Is it three drinks? Where you're not crushing yourself physiologically. I mean, you know, the the the physical enjoyment of that many drinks for sure, but the physiological detriment. Right? Mhmm. So how many drinks can you you can actually titrate the dose where you're not overstressing yourself. Right? So that you can always almost always see that 100. Because your your metrics should be better than mine chronically. I shouldn't with my exercise duration and how many steps you're taking, I shouldn't I shouldn't have for granted, the good news is at my best, I'm not too far away from where you were. Right? So Mhmm. But with some titrating and some tweaking, your your data will chronically be 100 over 40, which is amazing as as youthful as you can pretty much get. But but that day, for example, you say titrating. So I can already tell you on that day, I had a beer that evening. Right? That was my fasting day. My day where I did the high intensity interval training and then had a a one can of beer before at about six or, actually, no, about 08:00 before I went to bed. So somewhere between one and seven Yeah. There seems to be a a steep j curve in there. We'll see. I'm not, and, also, I was staying in the I was traveling at the time, so I was staying in an uncomfortable, unfamiliar area bed. So that might have also had some effect on it, but it's good to have the data. Now I just need some more data so I can figure out what the keys are. So one weakness of WHOOP is, I'd recommend tracking it in a spreadsheet because they I think they provide data, like, you know, year to year. Like, your here's your year yearly data, and you can visually see it. But if you actually wanted to track your own data over time, I mean, sure. You could go back and look at it. But to look at correlations, I don't know. Maybe you could use their journal. But if you're not manually recording it, you won't be able to go back in time like this. There's no export on it? I don't I don't think so. And and Okay. So for example, the, respiratory rate, the nighttime respiratory rate, which is on there, so I only have, like, I don't know, three years of data, but I've been wearing it for five years. It doesn't go back all the way. And there may be even be a shorter window than that where it it, you know, I wasn't recording it manually, and it's not available on their website. Right? So Mhmm. I'd record it in case it disappears. You know? So K. Right. If you wanna calculate correlations, which I I think will be super interesting. You know? Wanna see I wanna see I yeah. Well, I look to see the history too. So okay. Like, how many drinks how many drinks is it where it doesn't affect your data? Right? You know? Uh-huh. Uh-huh. If it's just one beer, clear oh, do you I wonder what it would be like no alcohol at all. If if I mean, granted, one beer could have no impact. One beer could have some moderate impact. But if there was you know, is your best truly one zero three over 41, or is it one fifteen over thirty thirty eight? I I I don't know. Right? So But that's that's where I pull back from the the biomarkers as the final arbiter. Right? I'm kinda like, you know what? I'm having beers. Like, I mean, it's funny. Right? I mean, if you look at those numbers, you'd say it was a different person. Right? Like, I should have been laid out. Like, I should have been, you know, lying on my couch the whole day. But okay. I'm I'm maybe a little tired or so, but I didn't if I'd had a workout today, I'd have done the workout just as I normally do. So I don't I don't adjust based off of what you know, this readiness thing, I'm kinda like, oh, it's interesting. But, if I have a workout scheduled, I'm doing the workout. You have the lucky, genetic lottery physiology because I can tell the difference between If my data did that, oh, jeez. Like and it maybe it's placebo. Maybe it's a real effect. But for whatever reason, you know, I wouldn't say minor deviations affect me, but, you know, knowing that my average is right now probably, sixty eight forty two. If it's, like, fifty fifty something and 45, 46, I feel that. I I know it Really? Oh, yeah. Definitely. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Cognitively, physically, even my workout. So for example, yesterday, it was, you know, I don't know. You saw it was, like, eighty eighty one thirty nine. And Mhmm. That's a great thing because I'm always aiming for that in the morning of a workout. The workout you know, the the the the struggle during a workout, which should be a struggle and a challenge Mhmm. Is always harder if my data is worse. My metrics are worse on that morning versus if they're almost completely fully recovered. So for me, there's something to it. You know? But if I saw my data cut in half like yours, jeez. Oh, I'd be on the couch. Like, leave me alone. Don't talk to me. You know? Like like yeah. So Yeah. Just went up and went on my day. I'm like, oh, that's weird. I wish I had. It's fantastic. Good news for you. So far. Yep. Okay. Alright. So we covered a lot. We could probably go on forever, but, we'll save it for, for the next time. Sounds good. Okay. Great talking to you. Ciao. Alright. Thanks.