For blood test number four in 2023, I sent blood to Genfinity for NAD analysis to test the effect of six hundred milligrams of nicotinic acid per day on NAD. And on that day in an earlier video, we saw that I raised my NAD levels to 67.4 micromolar using six hundred milligrams of nicotinic acid per day. Now note that my baseline NAD levels are 20 to 25 micromolar, which is without any NAD precursors. So six hundred milligrams of nicotinic acid per day raised NAD by two to three times higher above my baseline. On the same day as that test, though, I also sent blood to true diagnostic for epigenetic analysis. And as a quick mention, there are discount links for both of these companies in the video's description. So if you wanna measure your own NAD or epigenetic age, those links will be in the video's description. So on the same day as the NAD test, I we saw that my done either pace, which measures the epigenetic pace of aging, was 0.98 as highlighted in red. And that's my worst epigenetic pace of aging score 0.98 over 11 tests. So then that raises the question, did high dose nicotinic acid or high NAD being higher than 60 micromolar cause this 0.98 for the epigenetic pace of aging? So if I can increase NAD to higher than 60 micromolar but without nicotinic acid, will Dunedin Paste again look like an outlier? So to test that in December 2023, I supplemented with two grams of NMN per day or two thousand milligrams, and then once again sent blood to GINFINITY for NAD analysis. And on that day, in an earlier video, we saw that I, again, was able to raise NAD to greater than 60 micromolar at 61 micromolar. So then that raises the question, did high dose NMN mess up the need and pace? If yes, it's a high NAD issue. In other words, I'll have two different methods of raising NAD to greater than 60 micromolar, nicotinic acid, and NMN. So if donated pace is still messed up, that suggests a high NAD problem to n a NAD being too high. But if it's no, if high dose NMN did not mess up donated to PACE, that suggests that it's a high nicotinic acid or nicotinic acid being too high as a potential reason for why donated PACE was so high. Alright. So results from the December 11 test have come in for from true diagnostic. And on that day, the same day as the 61 micromolar for NMN, we can see that my donated pace was 0.74, which is my lowest donated pace donated pace over 11 tests. So that's good news for NMN for those who use NMN relative to other NAD precursors. So to answer the question, did high dose NMN mess up the donated pace? It certainly did not. And that indicates or suggests that this is a high dose nicotinic acid problem in terms of messing up the epigenetic pace of aging. Now with that in mind, in earlier videos, we saw that I've used sixty milligrams of nicotinic acid per day, and that did not mess up dunida and paste. So I'm sporadically taking very low doses of nicotinic acid on workout days, which is when I, posit that I may need the NAD boot NAD boost the most relative to other days. Now I wish this is where the story ended, but but unfortunately, there may be bad news for NMN. That's because high dose NMN may have messed up telomere length. And it's important to mention that true diagnostic doesn't measure telomere length like other methods, including qPCR or FISH. It uses a DNA methylation estimation of or it's a DNA methylation estimation of telomere length. In other words, it's an it's an epigenetic measurement, of telomere length. So I have 11 tests for telomere length. All of them are shown here. And on the same day as the 61 micromolar, telomere length the estimated telomere length based on DNA methylation was seven point o six, seven point zero six kilobases. Now note that for eight tests in 2023, that's my lowest value. In fact, none of the other seven tests in 2023 were less than 7.1 kilobases. So that's a little strange to start. Now it's also in the same ballpark as my worst three or worst first three telomere length measurements, which were all also less than 7.1 kilobases. Now did NMN cause this? Is this just random fluctuation or random noise? I don't know. But with that in mind, I'm off high dose nicotinic acid, and I'm off high dose, NMN. Currently gonna use, as I mentioned, the low dose nicotinic acid, sixty milligrams per day or less. But then also, if you've been paying attention to the channel and you're a familiar watcher, I'm gonna use things like trichonyl or one methyl nicotinic acid in relatively low doses to try to impact NAD. And I just ordered, fenugreek seeds, which are have actually the highest concentration of one methyl nicotinate or trichinelline. So we'll see if that will increase NAD in future videos. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for epigenetic testing, any dequantification or microbiome composition, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Cyphox Health, which includes ApoB, green tea, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or DietTri brand as I've got on here in every video, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.