Two weeks ago, I blood tested for the eighth time in 2024. And note that this is test number 56 since 2015. So with that in mind, what's my biological age? That's what we'll see here. This is using doctor Morgan Levine's biological age calculator PhenoAge. And if you have blood test data and you wanna calculate your own biological age using this test, there's a free downloadable link in the video's description. Alright. So when entering these data, I get a biological age of 34.7 years, which is 17.2 younger than my chronological of 51.9 years. So note that the maximum reduction for biological age relative to chronological age using this test is about twenty years. So seventeen years is a pretty good result. But this is just one test and I'm more interested in tracking year to year change. So with that in mind, let's take a look at biological age results since 2018 as I have 37 tests over that period. And that's what we'll see here. So in 2018 to 2019, I have data for three tests. Average pheno age was 36.1 years. But three tests over a two year span probably isn't representative of full year averages. So with that in mind, I started testing more often. Six times each in 2020 and 2021. An average biological age using PhenoAge was 35.6 in each year. So this is a, probably a closer representation to a full year average relative to three tests over a two year span. So then I increased the testing frequency to seven tests in 2022 with an average female age of 33.8, my best year to date. It got a bit worse in 2023, again, over seven tests to thirty four point seven years. And after all eight tests in 2024, average pheno age was 34.8 years, about the same as last year. So at worst, we can see that I've avoided an age related biological age increase. And inherent in that measurement is that even if all the biomarkers stay the same, the nine biomarkers that are contained in this test, PhenoAge increases by point nine years per year of chronological age. In other words, starting from 2020 where I had six tests, again, probably a closer representation to a full year average relative to three tests over that two year span 2018 to 2019. Point nine years times four years after 2020 would be three point six years added on to 35.6, which is thirty nine point two years expected biological age in 2024. But it's thirty four point eight years for that eight test average. In other words, I've been able to improve biomarkers over the past four plus years. Now rather than just looking at data entered into a spreadsheet with any which anybody can do, let's take a look at screenshots of the lab report and do a deep dive. So that's what we'll see here. This is page one of three. And note that to generate these data, I don't go to my doctor eight times a year, which would be a nightmare in trying to convince them. At least historically, it's been a nightmare. I go to altalabtest.com. I pick exactly the test that I want. I print out the form for all the tests. I bring that to Quest Diagnostics. Pay the $9 blood draw fee and then I get the results relatively quickly. Here, we can see that I tested around 07:30 in the morning and had most of these these results. I think for except for four biomarkers, CRP, homocysteine, lipoprotein a, and I think candida IGG. But the rest of these biomarkers are already fifteen hours later. So if you test yourself, if you're into blood testing like me and you'd wanna support help support the channel, there's an affiliate link in the video's description. Alright. Onto some highlights and lowlights or room for improvement. So first, HDL at 64 is close to that optimal range in men for 50 60. And that's based on all cause mortality risk. And I had videos on the channel. So if you missed that, I would just do a search for HDL and check it out. So the importance of this 64 in my case is that it's now 13 tests in a row where HDL is greater than or equal to 50 milligrams per deciliter with an average HDL over that period of 56. Now that's potentially important not only because it's in that optimal range finally, but for the previous 43 tests that go back to 2015, average HDL was 45 milligrams per deciliter. So I've been able to improve it over time. And just taking a look at those two averages doesn't really tell the full story. I've had HDL values as low as low as 28. So we can more than double our biomarkers at least in this case. And I've done that by following correlations with diet and other metrics, which have led me to the higher, chronically higher now 13 tests in a row for HDL. Similarly, h at CRP at point two milligrams per liter is now 21 tests in a row where I'm at the the lab's detection limit, so point three milligrams per liter or less. And note that I'm not just it's easy to just say, okay. Well, 21 tests in a row, This is pretty good. I don't have to measure anything else for inflammation. But HSCRP is just one pro inflammatory measure or one measure of inflammation. Two others, as I've indicated here, are TNF alpha and IL six. And these are important because they are produced by senescent cells, which as I'm sure we all know, senescent cells increase during aging. So for the next test in January coming up in a few weeks, I'll be measuring TNF alpha, IL six, and h s c r p. And I may actually include TNF alpha and IL six for every test going forward with the goal of keeping them relatively low for as long as I can with the goal of slowing aging, at least slowing inflammation. Alright. And then, on to some weak spots. Homocysteine at 10.7 micromolar is a weak spot. And, you can see that it's lower than the reference range which is less than 11.4. But based on all cause mortality data, values closer to five may be optimal. Now, this isn't a genetic issue. I've had values around five, five to six around twenty years ago. So homocysteine is definitely a weak spot. And then I'm sure there will be many in the comments that are saying, TMG supplement with trimethylglycine. I've done that, experiment. Four grams of TMG per day. That that link is actually on my blog, michaeldustgarden.com. So if you are interested in seeing that story, check it out. But it didn't make a dent unfortunately on my homocysteine. I've also tried high dose serine plus b six, high dose methyl folate in b six, glycine. B twelve does work by about 10%, but it may mess up other biomarkers. So I've strayed from that approach for now. Now for the next test though, I've I'm gonna try something else and that's N Acetylcysteine, which in at least two studies has been shown to reduce homocysteine. So I'm starting with a relatively low dose, one to one point five grams per day. I started that on December 24. So I'll have have around three weeks before testing to see if it'll make a dent on homocysteine. Alright. On to page two. Glucose went in the wrong direction from 90 on the last test to 95 and that's now just outside the optimal range of 80 to 94 based on all cause mortality risk. Now, to put glucose into further perspective, my 54 test average since 2015 is about 90 milligrams per deciliter. So we can see that that 95 is definitely going in the wrong direction. Now, note that h b a one c may be a better measure of long term glucose levels. And it's been a while since I included that, in the approach. Actually, October 2023 when it was relatively low 5.1%. So for the January test, I'll include h b a one c and actually, I'm gonna include that for every test going forward as I think we should be measuring both glucose and h b a one c as an integrated approach for metabolic health. So we'll see where my h b a one c levels are in a few weeks. Onto the kidney function markers, creatinine at point eight seven is good news because my 56 test average since 2015 is point nine five milligrams per deciliter. Creatine levels increase during aging up to a point and I'll have more on that in a second. But that it's point eight seven lower than my average is good news relative to the aging data. Now, on the other hand, at very old ages, creatinine may not be a good measure of kidney function. And that's because of two competing variables that are going on. Kidney function declines during aging which leads to an increase in creatinine. But on on the on the other hand, creatinine is proportional to muscle mass which declines during aging, thereby leading to less creatinine in the blood. So at older ages particularly over 65, creatinine may not be a good measure of kidney function. And with that in mind, I've measured cystatin c in the past which may be a better better measure that too will be on the January test. But even without that, for now, there are other measures that we can use to get an indirect assessment of kidney function, including blood urea nitrogen, which increases during aging in part because kidney function, declines during aging and the kidneys become less good at removing urea from the blood. So when considering that blood urea nitrogen increases during aging, that it's eight on which is relatively low, this is potentially good news. And for those of you who are serious hardcore biochemistry nerds like me and into the biomarkers and have studied the all cause mortality data, a blood urea nitrogen of eight milligrams per deciliter is actually associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So how do you square that circle where bun increases during aging? And so lowers generally better but not too low? Well, at advanced older ages, liver function declines and urea is produced in the liver. So the the rationale for having very low levels of blood urea nitrogen being associated with an increased all cause mortality risk is likely linked with liver dysfunction. And we'll take a look at my liver function markers in a minute to see if that bun is actually relative, risk, related to youth or potentially liver dysfunction. And then a third marker that can be used as an indirect assessment of kidney function is uric acid. And we can see that the lab flagged it as low, but I covered in a couple of videos or a couple of videos ago. Why I'm not worried about that? Particularly because uric acid levels increase during aging and in terms of all cause mortality risk, three point six milligrams per deciliter is close to lowest risk. So I'm not worried about the reference range flagging that as low. So when considering that uric acid levels increase as kidney function declines and that it's on the lower side, at least of my range, this suggests good kidney function because if kidney function was suboptimal, I'd expect higher levels of uric acid. So collectively, these three markers suggest that kidney function is youthful and not suboptimal. But let's take a look at those liver function markers. And before we go there, as a quick shout out, if you're into the biomarkers, I've got a biomarker specific tier coming on Patreon that'll cover what's optimal based on aging data, published aging data and all cause mortality data for 27 biomarkers and that's just the start. It's gonna be a whole tier dedicated just to what's optimal for biomarkers. So if you're interested in that, check it out on Patreon coming very soon. So in terms of the liver function biomarkers, I could start with albumin and alkaline phosphatase which are relatively youthful and optimal based on all cause mortality risk. But a more specific measure or what's thought to be a more specific measure of liver health and function is AST and ALT, aspartate and alanine aminotransferases. So it's optimal for those two liver specific or they're mostly found in the liver enzymes. Our values in the high teens, low twenties. So we can see that in both cases, I'm I'm pretty close to low twenties. So good news there. But both of these enzymes can be tricky because they're all cause mortality associations follow a j shaped curve. In other words, too low is suboptimal. Optimal is again in the high teens low twenties and then as the values increase from the high teen or high teens low twenties into, you know, high twenties and thirties, all cause mortality risk increases. So with that in mind, defining what's associated with all cause mortality risk in terms of how low is too low, even though somewhere in the 15 range for both enzymes is suboptimal, a more direct measure maybe GGT, gamma glutamyl transferase. And that's in part for two reasons. One is that there are studies that show it's more strongly associated with liver disease mortality relative to AST and ALT. And two is that it's pretty close to linearly associated with all cause mortality risk with low levels being better and higher levels being higher risk. Easier to interpret and a potentially better marker in terms of liver disease mortality. So in my case, g g GGT is on the lower side. So liver liver health and function seems to be close to optimal and youthful, which argues that that blood urea nitrogen being eight milligrams per deciliter is not related to kidney, liver dysfunction, which then collectively brings it back to, it being a marker of good kidney function. And that if kidney function was suboptimal, blood urine nitrogen would be higher, but that's not what we see. So anyway, moving on. So what I'd like to highlight next are globulins, and this is probably a dramatically underrated aspect of biomarker tracking. So globulins refers to immunoglobulins, but this isn't just one specific protein. This is a mix of many different proteins. For example, one of them includes alpha a one antitrypsin. And if you saw the aging by auto digestion video on the channel, a few weeks ago, that could be a good marker of, protein digestive enzymes leaking into the blood and alpha one antitrypsin being elevated to help counteract that. I may measure that coming up very soon, so stay stay tuned for that video. But why I'm interested in the globulins is more specifically because of immunoglobulin g, which comprises the majority of the globulin fraction, around 44% in my case. So immunoglobulin g increases during aging. In a recent study, and I'm trying to get the authors of that study on the channel to present that their data, if they're if they don't come on the channel, I'll present that data likely at some point in a video on my own. But immunoglobulin g increases during aging and interventions that are known to improve health span and lifespan, specifically exercise training and calorie restriction, lead to lower levels of IgG in the blood. Additionally, in that paper, when they experimentally reduced IGG levels in blood, it extended median lifespan. So IGG is now on my radar. I'm gonna include it for every test going forward probably forever. Now I can't say what's optimal in terms of a 56. What I'm planning on doing is, although there is some published data on how it changes during aging, the actual number what may be optimal, may be variable depending on inflammatory status and a whole bunch of other factors. So what I plan on doing is tracking it with every test and then looking at correlations for IGG with my other biomarkers to see an actual value for what may be optimal. Is it 800? Is it 600? Is it around ten fifty which is what we have here. So stay tuned for that story that'll probably be coming, you know, over the next two years as I collect data, 16 tests or so to start making those videos on IGG. I'm also tracking thyroid hormone function. For those who are familiar with the channel, I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in my twenties. So So I've been taking Levothyroxine for most of my life, and actually thyroid hormones specifically, inactive thyroid hormone t four and the active thyroid hormone t three. Maybe two of my most, my biggest weak spots of all my biomarkers. So t four is actually aged. If you look at how t four changes during aging, this is what you'd expect to find someone of of an older chronological age. And my t three levels are also aged. Again, you'd more likely to be found at older ages relative to younger ages. So with that in mind, when when looking at the free t three to free t four ratio, and that's important because free t four is converted into free t free t three. During aging, that conversion, that conversion worsens. So in my case, that ratio is point one eight, which is actually what is more likely to be found in 90 year olds relative to someone of my current chronological age around 52. So, I'm working out the recipe, if I can based on correlations with both f t three and f t four, to see if I can improve them. I only have, I think, six or seven tests. So I'm not convinced that I can actually improve them with considering that my thyroid gland has atrophied or at least it was in my twenties, and I don't imagine it's gotten any better. I may have to take, you know, bite the bullet on this one and just switch my my, approach from supplementing with t four, being prescribed t four to taking specifically t three if my conversion can't be improved. Also note that lipoprotein a was flagged, and this isn't, unusual. Lipoprotein a generally in my case is almost always flagged as being outside of the reference range. How far outside of the reference range is another story. Now a few things about lipoprotein a. One is that it's thought to be resistant to any type of dietary or supplemental or even prescription med changes. So with that in mind, I've had values and I think I have more than 30 tests going back to 2015. I've had values as high as a 145 nanomolar. So 80 nanomolar is a big improvement relative to a 145. So this idea that lipoprotein a can't be improved or, modified is false. And I'm not taking any specific drugs or prescription meds to try to alter that. And even more recently, for the last test, for the October test, it was 90 nano nanomolar. Now, it's 80 nano molar. And that's by tweaking stuff in my diet. And I've got the correlations for lipoprotein a on the correlations tier on Patreon. So if you're interested in that, check it out. But taking this a step further for lipoprotein a is that it contains ApoB. So when lipoprotein a is high, one would expect a relatively high ApoB and correspondingly high cardiovascular disease risk. So in my case, at least for the October test with that Lipoprotein a when it was 90 nanomolar, Apo b was relatively low at 68 milligrams per deciliter. Now I didn't measure Apo b for this test, but it will be on the next test. So we'll see where that stands with a relatively lower Lipoprotein A. Alright. On to page three. Highlighting first, hemoglobin. At 15.1 is now back to, close to youthful status in my case. And that's potentially important because hemoglobin hemoglobin levels decline during aging. And I started to see that pattern, at least a small amount in 2024 over those eight tests with an average hemoglobin of 14.8, which is different relative to my 53 to the test average since 2015 of 15.1. Now, this might not seem like a big change, but I think this is how aging starts. Maybe 2024, average hemoglobin is 14.8, and then 14.7 the year after, and then so on for about a decade. Now, I'm looking at average values of 14. So when I see even small decrements, I try to intervene based on the correlations with diet and in any supplements that I'm taking to try to get back to youthful values if I can as quickly as possible. Alright. Another potential weak spot is the MCV. This is the average red blood cell volume which increases during aging with, lower values being more likely found in youth. And when considering that it increases during aging, bigger bigger red blood cells are found at older ages. So in my case, 93.1 is not the lower end of my range. The lower end of my range is somewhere around 89. So this is a current weak spot. I've had values that are recently higher, so I've had some progress in bringing it down from around 95. Now, why I'm not too worried about that though is that I'd be more worried if the RDW, which is a measure of the standard deviation of the average red blood cell volume. In other words, do you have lots of small red blood cells, a mix of small, medium, and large red blood cells, or lots of large red blood cells, that variability is the RDW. So the RDW also increases during aging. So if the MCU is high and the RDW was high, I'd be more worried. But that the RDW is youthful and associated with a low all cause mortality risk based on its current level of 11.7, not too worried about the MCV, at least for now. Neutrophils, seventeen seventy eight. If you look at what's optimal in terms of all cause mortality risk, that's two thousand to three thousand. So in my case, seventeen seventy eight would be an increased all cause mortality risk. But again, I'm interested in looking at year to year change. So for over the eight tests in 2024, average neutrophils were nineteen seventy two. Now granted, that's just outside that 2,000 or 3,000 range. But when considering that neutrophils are pro inflammatory, closer to 2,000 is probably probably more optimal relative to closer to 3,000. So I'm happy to be around seventeen, eighteen hundred as long as it's not something, you know, fifteen, thirteen then, maybe I'd work on trying to increase it by a bit. You know, I don't wanna have too many immune cells to fight off potential microbes. Right? And that could be one of the consequences of having too too low for neutrophils, monocytes, or lymphocytes. DHE sulfate, declines during aging. And in my own data, going back about twenty years, I've had values that are much higher than the higher than this, around 300 micrograms per deciliter. Now, unfortunately, I also supplemented with DHEA back then. So I don't know what my baseline values were in youth and I don't know if DHEA is the reason why I had values around 300. So 01/28 is relatively low relative to where my data was. And knowing that it declines during aging, it could be a weak spot. But if there is good news to that story, my 18 test DHEA sulfate average, which spans the past twenty eight months, is a hundred hundred and twenty five. So at at least for this test, I'm pretty close to my average over the past two plus years and resisted any age related decline over that over that period. If I can resist an age related any further age related decline or potential further age related decline because again I don't know what DHEA sulfate was in my youth, but if my values are a 128 for the next fifty years and I avoid that age related decline, For me, that's a win because I've resisted an age related change. Granted, I'd like to have it higher, but how high is also debatable. And then last but not least, candida IgG, which is a subdivision of total immunoglobulins that I showed on the last page. This too has been elevated or just outside the reference range, for all of the tests. Seven tests in 2024. What it indicates is that my immune system has to produce antibodies to help keep candida somewhere in my body in check. Now, I prefer to have lower values and I'm working on, you know, following the correlations with diet. And that's one reason that I used rapamycin to try to bring down candida IGG, but it didn't make a dent. Whether I can make a dent by diet and moving stuff around, I'm not sure. But, stay tuned for that story as I'll be tracking this for every test going forward. Alright. So the next step in in this journey is what's the diet and supplement approach that are associated with this 17 year younger biological age? And I'm working on that video. I hope to get it out by Wednesday. If not, next Sunday. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more of my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where I offer blood test consults and I've got that what's optimal for biomarkers tier coming very soon. Before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links and other things that you can use to help support the channel while also working on testing yourself or using things that can be, used in an approach for optimal health. And they include ultalabtest.com, which is where I get the majority of my blood test, clearly water fill Clearly Filters water filter, which I have in my house and I use every day, at home metabolomics, oral microbiome composition testing, NAD testing with Genfinity, epigenetic testing, at home blood testing with Scifox Health, which includes April B, but also GrimAge, green tea, diet tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or diet trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. Hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.