For blood test number five in 2024, when using doctor Morgan Levine's biological age calculator PhenoAge, we saw that my biological age was 17 six years younger than my chronological. So what might be contributing to these data? So let's start off with prescription meds. And if you're familiar with the channel, this won't be a surprise. I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in my 20s. So I've been taking Levothyroxine one hundred and thirty seven and a half micrograms per day every day since then. Alright. So what about supplements? So one supplement that's a general staple in the approach for eight to nine months out of the year, the non summer months, is vitamin d. Albeit a relatively low amount of a thousand IUs per day. And I supplement it with that for twenty three of the fifty nine days that correspond to this blood test. So what does that mean? Where am I getting this this fifty nine day period? Well, it starts immediately after blood test number four which was on May 28 and it lasts through the day before blood test number five which was on June 25. So that's a fifty nine day period. Alright. So then a question that we can ask is is infrequent vitamin d supplementation as I only took it for, less than half of those days, less than half of the fifty nine day period, plus sun exposure and there too was somewhat infrequent. I've only been able to get four days of full body sun sun exposure and only up to about thirty minutes each session. So is that combination sufficient to optimize circulating levels of vitamin d? So to find out, I blood tested more specifically for circulating levels of 25 hydroxy vitamin d, which is the metric of vitamin d status or systemic circulating vitamin d status. And to do that, I used Ulta Labs. So for those who don't know, I don't go to my physician and basically beg them to run tests every two months or so. I've been using Ulta Ulta labs where I order exactly what I want. I print out that form. I bring it to Quest. If you live in The States, you can do that too. And then I got the results within twenty four hours. So it's a pretty great deal if you ask me. So if you want to do that too and you're a regular blood test user, you can help support the channel when you blood test. So for the on for blood test number five in 2024 while measuring all the other stuff on the same day as those results circulating levels of vitamin d were 38 which then raises the question, what's optimal? So to address that we'll take a look at a meta analysis of 32 studies as shown here. On the y axis is the hazard ratio. This is all cause mortality risk or risk of death for all causes. Plotted against serum levels of twenty five hydroxy vitamin d, so circulating levels of vitamin d. In terms of what's significant, we put up a red line at a hazard ratio of one. And in this case, when the vertical lines are completely above and below the black, diamonds, we have a significant association. And we can see that that's true when vitamin d is twenty to twenty nine nanograms per mil. And actually, anything lower than twenty nanograms per mil is also, significantly associated with an all cause increased all cause mortality risk. So just to rephrase that, vitamin d levels circulating levels of vitamin d twenty five hydroxyvitamin d less than thirty nanograms per mil is associated with a significantly reduced risk of death for all causes. What about greater than thirty nanograms per mil? Well as you can see by the 95% confidence interval at all values greater than thirty nanograms per mil that overlaps with a hazard ratio of one which shows that it, vitamin d levels circulating vitamin d levels greater than 30 is not significantly associated with all cause mortality risk when it's greater than 30. So in terms of what's optimal, anything greater than thirty nanograms per mil which gives me a check mark at 38. Now there is a more specific way to ask the question for what's optimal for vitamin d And that would be is if I was measuring twenty five hydroxy d on the same day as all of the other blood tests, for every test. And then I could look at correlations for circulating levels of vitamin d versus all of the other biomarkers. For example, is is vitamin d circulating levels of vitamin d? Are they significantly correlated with glucose, creatinine, hs CRP, etcetera? And because we know how those biomarkers change during aging and what's optimal in terms of all cause mortality risk, I can get at a more specific circulating vitamin d level that may be optimal. So it may not be 38 or 30 nanograms per mil. It could be 60, it could be 45. I haven't collected that data yet. I don't think the ROI on doing that experiment is greater than just being higher than thirty nanograms per ml. If others want to do that experiment, I'd say go for it but I don't see a further return on investment for measuring circulating levels of vitamin d at every every test. Alright. What about other supplements? So I also supplemented with nicotinic acid fifty to sixty milligrams per day and I should mention that I bought a bulk powder for nicotinic acid and then I dissolve it in water so I make my own stock solution and then drink a very small amount to get fifty to sixty milligrams per day. So it's not pills or capsules which has other fillers that I'm hoping to avoid. So I took nicotinic acid for 30 of the fifty nine day periods potentially to potentially increase NAD. And just like the vitamin D story we don't have to hope that we can, you know, increase circulating levels of whatever metabolite that we're interested in. We can measure it. So to measure it, I sent blood to Ginfinity for NAD analysis. Discount link in the video's description if you want to do that yourself. And on the July 26, the same day as blood test number five, NAD levels blood intracellular NAD levels was 27.8 micromolar. Not too far away from my, average of around 30 micromolar. So not too bad. My lowest has been less than 20 micromolar. So that's actually a nice jump, with just fifty to sixty milligrams of nicotinic acid per day. I also supplemented with five grams per day of branch chain amino acids but you can see that's only for one day out of the fifty nine day period and that was because I did the experiment for test number four to see if branched chain amino acids five grams per day could impact homocysteine through the gut and there's a paper in a Parkinson's animal model that suggests that could be true so I decided to test it. Homocysteine was not reduced in response to five grams per day, an additional five grams per day in addition to dietary intake, so I removed that from the approach once I got those results. So once I got the results after supplementing for one day and after blood test number five I took it out when I saw that it didn't work. Alright, so notice that's it in terms of supplements. No other geoprotectors or senolytics and that's for now. And if you follow me on patreon that's not going to be the story you already know that's not going to be the story for blood test number six as I have included a JIRA protector for a very specific reason. So we'll see that story probably sometime after blood test number six in 2024 which is scheduled for September. Alright. So what about diet? And in the interest of time, we'll cover that story in the next video. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and affiliates that you can help support the channel if you blood test and use the links on your own including Ulta Labs, epigenetic testing, NAD quantification, oral microbiome composition, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Scifox Health, which includes ApoB but also GrimAge, Green Tea, dye tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel you can do that with the website buy me a coffee. We've also got merch so if you want to wear the Conquer Agent or dye trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.