Alright. So, hey, everyone. My name is Michael Lustgarten, and, today, we're gonna go through my data driven personalized approach for optimal health and potentially longevity. And this is a small snapshot of what I do. I post weekly videos, sometimes most of the time more than once a week. So if you want more, if you wanna see more, it's my that's my site, conquer aging or die trying. So risk of death increases as chronological age increases, and that's what we'll see here. So on the y axis, we've got death rates plotted against age from birth until 95 years. And you can see that death rates are very high for newborns, after which, mortality rates decline rapidly until we're about 10 to 14 years old. And then you can see that, mortality risk increases pretty close to linearly for every year that we're alive after that. So the the big the big idea or the idea that I'm interested in is what if we could flatten mortality risk? Instead of seeing that linear increase over time, what if we could flatten it and and keep it relatively low for as long as we physically can? We could we optimize health and potentially lifespan in doing so? So then the big question is how? So aging and disease are biochemical process that happen over many decades. It's not something that just happens out of nowhere. You don't just wake up one day and you're age. That's a biochemical process that's been happening for a very long time. So if we track and optimize or attempt to optimize, well established biomarkers of organ and systemic function, can aging and disease risk be slowed? So that's my central premise. I say it almost in every video, but that's that's the root of the video. So then what should we track? And I'm not gonna go into everything here. I'm just gonna keep it tight. I could go on and on about what we should track, but the foundation of it is trying to track as many biomarkers, biomarkers of as many organs and systemic function as possible, and trying to keep it as youthful as possible. So defining what youthful data looks like, and, you know, data that's associated with reduced risk of death for all causes. So keeping it in that space for as long as physically possible, and then can we flatten mortality risk and optimize our life health and lifespan as a consequence of that. So one example that, potentially extends lifespan is beyond blood. And so I I should say that my folk my my my goal isn't just focusing on optimizing blood biomarkers. There's a hierarchy to this. And at the top of that hierarchy is physical and cognitive function, the body composition, so muscle mass, visceral fat, bone density. These are things that change during aging, and not for the better. And then we can subdivide that into what's under the hood. So blood biomarkers are one aspect of what's under the hood, and we can further subdivide that into cells, protein, metabolites, epigenetics, and I'm tracking levels I'm tracking portions of each of those stages. So young blood. So it extends lifespan in old mice. How do we know that? So in in this study, prolonged heterochronic parabiosis, decreased biological age, and promoted longevity. So then the obvious question should be, what is heterochronic parabiosis? So that's when two animals are surgically connected. Their bloodstreams are surgically connected. So these animals basically share a blood supply for their duration of their lifespan, and in this case, old attached to young. So what was the effect on lifespan? So on the y axis, we've got percent survival plotted against age in weeks. And then in terms of median survival, we look at fifty percent survival. That's when half of the mice were alive and half had died. And relative to two control groups, the the old mice that had a, blood supply that was surgically connected to a young mice for the duration of their lifespan had a significant extension in median lifespan. So that shows that young blood has some factors in it that can extend the life span of old mice, but it doesn't tell us which blood factors might be responsible. So, evidence for that comes from a different study, and this is brought pretty recently, published last month, where fasting and the combination of fat, calorie restriction, CR, and fasting extended life span. So there were five groups in this study. Ad lib, they ate as much as they wanted, and these are female mice. And this is a very large study. It was 960 mice in total, a 192 per group. And then one day of fasting, two days of fasting, 20% CR, 40% calorie restriction. In terms of lifespan, we go to that point five percent survival, that's median survival. And then for both fasting groups, we see an increase in median survival. Calorie restriction, twenty percent did better, but then the best of the bunch was forty percent CR. So that that this shouldn't be a surprise. This has been shown in other studies, but what's interesting about this study is that many mice live past thirty six months. So the median lifespan in the, forty percent CR group was thirty six months. But you can see that there were even mice in the ad lib group who lived past thirty six months, and other groups too, not just the CR groups. So the office of this study asked, what might contribute to a longer lifespan, at least in mice, independent of group assignment? So that's what we can see here, and I'm only gonna focus on a couple of the biomarkers that are here. I mean, we can do a deep dive into all of them, but the the two that I'm focused on here is our lymphocytes, which are a type of white blood cells. So white blood cells are not a homogeneous group. They're comprised of generally, pro inflammatory neutrophils, hematocytes, and lymphocytes, which also are a part of, you know, the immune system. So having relatively higher levels of lymphocytes when the mice were 16 of age was significantly correlated with a longer longevity or with with longevity, independent of which group group that the mice were in. So, it didn't matter if they were 20% CR or in ad lib. If they had higher levels of lymphocytes at 16, they were more likely to have an extended longevity and live past 36. On the other hand, the RDW, so the red blood cell distribution width, which is a measure of, the the the variability in the size of your red blood cells. Red blood cells who are young are very small, small, and during aging, they increase. So the RDW is a measure of, do you have lots of small red blood cells, or do you have a mix of small and large, which is more variable relative to having all small red blood cells? So having a higher RDW for significant correlated with a short shorter, shorter lifespan. And again, that's independent of which group. So even even mice that were 40% CR, they had a higher RDW, they lived shorter relative to other 40% CR mice that had a lower RDW. Now where this story gets interesting is that, this is also this this pattern is also found in in humans. It's not just in long lived, mice. So if RDW increases during aging, and that's what we'll see here, so RDW on the y axis plotted against age, and we can see that age related increase. And the importance of the RDW increase during aging in people is at relatively higher levels are associated with an increased risk of death for all causes. So as I mentioned the the beginning, this is, you know, my data driven personalized approach for optimizing health and potentially lifespan. So what's my data? So I've been tracking not just the RDW, but the standard chemistry panel in CBC, which is about 25 to 30 biomarkers that represent many different organ systems, metabolic health, inflammation, etcetera. So I've tracked for the past ten years, as you can see, I've got 51 blood tests, which is an average of five per year, but I've since bumped it up to eight, and I'll probably continue doing eight blood tests a year, for going forward indefinitely. So in terms of RDW versus chronological age, that's what we've got here. And then we can see that there's a significant inverse correlation for the RDW with my chronological age. So in other words, I've resisted or reversed the age related RDW increase. So in the longevity space, there's a lot of hype and there's a lot of over exaggeration, and this is, I guess, kind of the point where I could say, hey, I've reversed this aspect of aging and superlatives. Right? But I I don't see it like that at all. This is just one biomarker, and the fact is, I can't control what happened for the first forty years. What I have done is, though, potentially slowed mechanisms that may be related to a shorter shorter lifespan and potentially worse health with a higher RDW in association with a higher RDW. All I can do for now though is try to maintain that at relatively low levels indefinitely. And if I could do that, going back to the central premise, can I flatten my mortality risk using the same approach, not just for the RDW, but for all biomarkers? Alright. So that was one biomarker. What about lymphocytes? As we saw, they are significantly correlated with, a longer lifespan, at least in mice. So here too, the data is similar in people and in the long lived mice. So lymphocytes decline during aging with lymphocytes on the y axis, plot against age, and then we can see that age related decline. So in at youth in youth, average values around 2,000 are more likely to be found. And that's important because the age related decline for lymphocytes is associated with an increased risk of death for all causes. So which then brings us to what's my data. Again, over those 51 tests, so now we're looking at lymphocytes plotted against age, and unfortunately, we can see an age related decline. So, you know, I can't, you know, I could easily show one biomarker and say, hey. I'm I'm kicking ass everywhere. But the fact is, this data shows that, I've succumbed to some age related decline. Whereas I prefer for it to be flatlined over time. Right? To try to keep that mortality risk, potentially flatlined for the for the duration of my my lifespan. So then the big question is, can I get it to to to, you know, to on that flatline level? And then the big question is then, what's the approach? How can I get it back there? How can I reverse or try to reverse this age related change? So in terms of the approach, I've weighed all my food, and it just doesn't apply to food. This applies to fitness metrics, sleep, days I've worked out, and I'm tracking basically everything, but I'm only gonna focus on food for now. So weighed everything with the food scale since 2015, entered that into Cronometer, which is a diet tracking app, and then I take that data and I put it in a spreadsheet. So I've got macros, micros, individual foods. So then each blood test has a corresponding average dietary intake. So if there's fifty days in between blood tests, because I'm tracking everything in diet, I can take the average dietary intake over that period and line it up with the latter blood test. So now every blood test has a has a bunch of dietary and other biomarkers that I can run correlations on, and I can see how much fat, how much protein, how much, you know, fiber, micronutrients, supplements, what may be optimal for optimizing my biomarkers towards the most most useful values that they can possibly be. So then I calculate those correlations. I try to follow as many as possible, which then brings us back to what can I do to potentially increase those lymphocytes? So I don't have time to go through all of the, you know, the factors that are associated with higher, correlated with higher lymphocytes, but one factor in my data is calorie intake, which is what we can see here. The lymphocytes plotted against the average daily calorie intake over those 51 tests. So each dot corresponds to the average dietary, calorie intake from test to test. And then we can see that significant correlation. So that suggests that in order to flatline, the lymphocytes at relatively youthful levels and resist that age related change, that I should potentially increase my calories somewhere up to around 2,800 based on extrapolation of that trend line. However, more recently, I'm around 2,100, and that's on purpose because calorie restriction may improve more of my biomarkers relative to others. So then that raises the question, so what calorie intake might be best for lymphocytes? Knowing that my most recent data, I had three that were pretty bad and are probably pulling the correlation down, making it making my lymphocytes look more aged than following that age related trajectory. But if what calorie intake may be best for the lymphocytes without messing up other biomarkers? And that's important to say because it's easy for me to just focus on one or two or three biomarkers, but my goal is to optimize everything across the board. It's not just one organ system or one aspect of health. It's do an intervention and what does it look like across the board, and then is the net effect actually positive for the sum of those biomarkers, neutral or detrimental? And then, of course, correct based on that. So a higher calorie intake in my case, which is one argument against going too high for, calorie intake with, increasing lymphocytes, is significantly correlated with a lot more biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. So as I mentioned, I tracked that panel of about 25 to 30 biomarkers on the standard chemistry panel on CBC, and this is just these are just the ones. The little r is the correlation coefficient, and then the p value is the correlation for calorie intake with each of these biomarkers. So almost half of those 25 biomarkers of organ system and systemic function are significantly correlated with these biomarkers going in the wrong direction in terms of how they look in in the youthful state versus age and their and their associations with all cause mortality risk. So just to highlight a couple, RDW in this case, you can see the correlation is positive. So in my case, a higher calorie intake is significantly correlated with a higher RDW, and that may be may be one factor how I've been able to reduce that RDW to now youthful levels. So if I increase calories, I may improve my lymphocytes, but on the other hand, make my RDW worse. So it's about finding the bottom of that u shaped curve so that I can, you know, minimize risk. And then, you know, we can see one other on the list because nicks and the crab, we can see that LDL, in my case, higher calories are significantly correlated with higher LDL, which I've got going in the wrong direction for now, but I'm open to the idea that a little bit higher than where I am may be actually, good for health. So, but that's a story for another day. So to answer the question, what calorie intake may be best for lymphocytes, it these data collectively would suggest that not twenty eighty, which is my lowest that corresponds to a blood test over the past ten years, but for now, I'm in about twenty one fifty, and that's intentionally done. And one reason for that is two blood tests ago, lymphocytes were close to 1,900, and I blood tested on Friday. It was also close to 1,900, So I may be slowing that age related decline and getting my data back to where youthful values are supposed to be. So that's what I got. That's all I got for now. More on the channel. Check it out if you're interested. Greg. Now for Mike, we'll do two quick questions. Anybody has any? David. It's great to hear you talk in person, Mike. Used to do, for those who don't know, he has a YouTube channel, and I think it's I just wanna commend individuals who are interested in taking step concrete steps to improve their health. And, so it's a question of data. How do we optimize the use of data, which is really trust tricky at n equals one level. So, to my question, and I'm keeping it broad because I kind of have an answer, but I'm having use here in terms of the answer. Can you comment about your use of, a Pearson's or other correlation coefficient versus multiple regression, the role for potential confounding, and maybe you help educate the audience a little bit. Yeah. It's a great point. So, for the most part, I focus on I mean, you could even talk about, like, false discovery rate. Right? So, I mean Last parameter on your own. Yeah. So and with when you have just using a p value of less than 0.05, you're gonna have five false positive correlations out of a 100. Right? So I I even though I published using FDR in very large sample sizes, I'm trying not to throw away any data. I'm looking for gross patterns in the data, and rather than, you know, exclude something statistically, I can directly test the correlation. So for example, if cocoa beans are associated with lower lipoprotein a, if I increase cocoa beans and my lipoprotein a doesn't change, then it had nothing to do with it, right? The correlation will weaken over time, and then I'll see other stuff pop up in the correlation list, and I'll continue to follow that. Eventually, it's a matter of data collection. It's how many how many tests do I have to do where now the story becomes evident and it looks like the real, you know, that's the real story. So, so so so, yeah, that's part of it. The other aspect of it too is, you know, adjusting the models for, you know, some of this may be driven by body weight and calorie intake. So if I'm looking at individual, associations between, say, I don't know, fat intake with a panel of biomarkers, if it's if it's significant and unadjusted, you know, just a straight correlation, but then knowing it may be also associated with body weight and calorie intake, then I'll adjust the models in that case to try to dig deeper. But I'm doing this basically, you know, one linear regression model at a time. I don't have coding experience. I am working with some coders to build an app to do that, and that's the the future of this, which makes it a lot easier to do. But, you you can go very far just using unadjusted correlations and just that constant iterate iteration test after test. And I don't know you you try to control at least from one data set to the next as much as possible in the experiment. I've so thank you, Mike. Alright. Any other questions? Let's let's let's do a good evening. I'm I thank you for this, of course. I'm curious. I know you're doing it on yourself. I'm curious if you know maybe about the research around women and longevity because, obviously, women have a, like, very specific cycle that they go through throughout their lives, and then it changes both with pregnancy if they get pregnant and then any kind of things like post pregnancy, menopause, or, in between. So I'm curious how that correlates with all this research because I assume a cyclical body has a different, potentially, relationship to longevity with all these markers. Yeah. For some things that there are, sex independent effects. So for example, RDW, I mean, basically, on the plot, you can see that there it's increasing during aging no matter if you're a man or a woman, but your point is definitely well taken. For example, there are things like, immune cells, which are biphasic during aging for women only. For men, it's pretty linear you know, pretty close to linearly where it increases. So but it can be but even then too, it's, you know, at which point in the cycle are you measuring? Right? So, I think standardization is important. So if you're trying to track your own biomarkers as a woman over time, you know, do you track, you know, two weeks after your cycle hits? Do you track you know, so it's trying to standard that standardize that over time so you've got consistent data. Or, you know, or, you know, it's one week from the cycle, two weeks from the cycle, three weeks from the side cycle, and then separating your data, looking at it like that. So standardization is a big part of it, but, yeah, there are there are definitely sex sex independent effects that are are pretty similar across, you know, one way, but then there are other things that are not. But, tracking is the only only way, you know, to find out, I'd say. Would you approach situation if you have one outlier? Say you have instead of usual distribution, one, their marker is pretty bad. Say, red blood distribution is really bad at everything else. Is it as how it would yield? Yeah. So, that's a great point too. So the I try not to throw away any data, even the outliers. And the outliers could be I found something that I don't yet know if it's true or not. If I throw it out, maybe I've thrown away a novel hypothesis. For example, a very high dose nicotinic acid, increased my NAD, which isn't a surprise, niacin increases NAD. But, another biomarker, Donita Pace, which is an Epigenetic Speed of Aging, it sent it to its worst data that I've ever had. And if you do like the stats on, you know, three standard deviations from the average, it's clearly an outlier. But, that's actually insight into some other processes that I've tested since then to try to figure out what was going on there. So I don't throw away any data. I try to use that as the outliers, preliminary preliminary data for a mechanism that I haven't yet discovered. So it's basically cause of concern, but Could be. But or the other side of it too, where I've actually stumbled on something that may be beneficial. Just I just want to ask about, like, lymphocyte production and whatnot, like, in the thymus and the bone marrow. Have you looked at ways of preserving that? Because I do know that decreases with age and whatnot. And thymus, like, in kids, it's very large, but in adults, it's much smaller. It's like a piece of of fat right here almost, and this equates more mucus that help it. Yeah. So I haven't looked that deeply into it, but I'm basically looking at the end products. Right? So, I can't presume to track thymus, the thymus function or thymus gland size over time. I mean, I'd have to probably get, you know, ultrasound, the semen, right? But if I can look at the end products, whether it's specific immune cells and how they change their aging, and then if I have the recipe, whether it's diet, supplements, exercise, fitness, sleep, whatever it may be, or some senolytic or geoprotector, that I can look at the endpoints. Now is that because I'm improving some aspect of eye dysfunction or some aspect of overall systemic physiology where I'm, you know, reducing lymphocyte degradation or prolonging their lifespan? I don't know. You know, so I'm basically looking at the end products, and indirectly there may be some, you know, slowing of thymus, degeneration over time, but I haven't studied it. I haven't studied that. We've got time for one more question. Kurt? Kurt, do you have one question? Sure. I have two questions. So I noticed you're measuring the the red blood cell distribution, but then you said that the size also matters. So did you measure absolute size? Yeah. MCV, that's the mean corpuscular volume. Yeah. That's one of the biomarkers that I track. Lately, they've been treading upward and going in the wrong direction. So, but I've I've I'm trying some things, you know, based on the correlations to try to bring them back to my most beautiful data. Okay. The second question was just practical. You said you measured since 2015 all of your meals? Yeah. How do you do that at the restaurants? Or, like, like, do you bring a scale with you and how does that work? So, I generally don't eat out. For free? For ten years? Or Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. If I do if I do, it's, I'll ballpark if it's first of all, it's very rare, but if I do, I'll ballpark the calories. But it's such an infrequent event that if I've got a fifty day period, in between blood tests and one of the days I ate out somewhere, and I ate something that I don't exactly know what it is in terms of calories, and that when you think about that in the sphere of fifty other days where it's completely tracked, it's like a dime in a in a dozen times or more. Right? So, yeah. Thank you.