Ergotionine is a metabolite that's found in mushrooms that promotes longevity and healthy aging. So first, let's take a look at the data in mice and that's what we'll see here. On the y axis, we've got the probability of survival plotted against age in days. And in this study, Ergottheonine supplementation was started at seven weeks of age. So that's when the mice are young at a dose of four to five milligrams of Ergottheonine per kilogram body weight. And then in terms of what's significant, we put up a red line at fifty percent survival. That's the time when half of the mice have died and half is still alive. And when compared with the control lifespan at that time point, we can see that there was a sixteen percent increased median survival for Ergotinine supplemented mice. Alright. What about maximum lifespan? So So for that, we put up a red line at ten percent survival. So now, ninety percent of the colony has died and only ten percent is still alive. And here, we can see an even greater effect for Erythionine with a twenty nine percent increased maximal survival. Alright. So one animal model or data in one animal model is interesting. What about a second? So in this study, which will be in the video's description if you missed it. They also looked at lifespan in c elegans, in worms. And that's what we can see here. So when looking at median survival, when compared with the lowest dose of Ergothionine, five millimolar Ergothionine. We can see that the lifespan curve shifted in the right direction but that wasn't a significant effect. In contrast, the higher dose of Ergothionine ten millimolar ten millimolar ergothioneine significantly increased lifespan in c elegans. Alright. So now we've got two animal models where ergothioneine increases lifespan. What about a third? Well, in an earlier video, we saw that Ergotinine increases lifespan in flies. And if you missed it, it'll be in the right corner. So we've got three animal models Ergotinine extended lifespan in each of them. While that's interesting, what I care about and what most of the people watching the channel care about is could ergothione impact health in people? And interestingly, in this study that we're about to see, higher plasma levels of ergothione were associated with a reduced risk of death from all causes. So in this study, it included people with an average age of 58 years with a twenty two year follow-up. In other words, starting with the baseline assessment of plasma metabolite levels, what was the risk of death based on those levels an average of twenty two years later? And then to address that, we put up a red line at the log hazard ratio of zero. And then to the right of that line, relatively higher plasma levels of metabolites are would be associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. And just to highlight what was the case for that, it was cotinine or cottonine. I don't know how you say it but that's a marker of smoking or tobacco use. So in other words, relatively higher levels of cotinine were associated with maximally increased all cause mortality risk relative to all the other metabolites that are to the right of that log hazard ratio of zero. But that shouldn't be a surprise. Smoking is bad for us. The plasma metabolite levels just support that data. Alright. Now, to the left of a hazard ratio, log hazard ratio of zero, relatively higher plasma levels of metabolites would be associated with the reduced all cause mortality risk. And we can see that the metabolite that's farthest to the left in this case is ergothioneine. In other words, relatively higher plasma levels of ergothioneine are associated with a reduced all cause mortality risk. Now, before we all go out and start eating a ton more mushrooms, note that while ergothioneine can be increased by diet, it can also be degraded by gut bacteria. So measuring plasma levels is essential. And we'll soon be able to track plasma levels of ergothioneine and that's using IOLO's at home metabolomics kit. Now, after some gentle prodding for me and trying to get them to add this into their product, I've been told that it will be added for May 2024. So expect an update video, you know, as in Ergothenamine extends lifespan. What's my data? Coming probably sometime in early June. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to buy hack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links that you may be interested in including discount links for at home metabolomics, epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, any dequantification, at home blood testing with Scifox Health which includes ApoB and now GrimAge, Green Tea, dye tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or DIY Tryin brand as I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.