There are five healthy lifestyle related factors that are associated with an increased life expectancy. And the beginning of that story is here, with data for women on the left and men on the right. For women who followed all five factors, they had an average life expectancy gain of forty three years. And when added to life expectancy at 50 years, they had an average or an estimated life expectancy of ninety three years. For men that followed all five factors, they had an average life ex life expectancy gain of thirty eight years, and when added to life expectancy at 50, had an estimated life expectancy of 88. Now, the average life expectancy in 2018 for women was 81, and for men, it was 76. So from these data, we can see that men and women who followed all five healthy lifestyle related factors had about a twelve year increase in life or expected life expectancy. So that brings us to what are the five lifestyle factors. And then digging deeper, what are the underlying mechanisms? And that's potentially important because if we know the underlying mechanisms and pathways, can they be tracked and further optimized? So first, for the five factors that were associated with life expectancy, they were not smoking or never smoking, Physical activity which was defined as greater than or equal to thirty minutes per day of moderate to vigorous physical activity and average of thirty minutes per day. The normal BMI which was defined as 18.5 to 24.9 kilograms per meter squared. Notice that that doesn't include what's defined as overweight which is 20 five to 20 nine point nine or obese which is greater than 30 for BMI. Moderate alcohol intake which was five to fifteen grams per day for women, five to thirty grams per day for men, and then a healthy diet. And that that that's a big box. Right? So what does that actually mean and how is it defined? So for this study, it was defined as the top 40% for the AHEI score, the alternative healthy eating index score. Alright. So what does that mean? What's included on that healthy alternative healthy eating index? And we can see that list here. There are nine components and it includes vegetables, fruit, nuts, and soy protein, the ratio of white meat to red meat. White meat can include fish, cereal fiber, trans fat as a percentage of energy intake, p to s ratio which is polyunsaturated fats divided by saturated fatty acid intake, duration of multivitamin use, and alcohol in servings per day. And this to me seems like it's double dipping because alcohol was already included as one of the other lifestyle factors. Nonetheless, to get a maximum score of 10 for each of these components, for example, one would need to eat five servings of vegetables per day, four servings of fruits per day, one serving of nuts or soy protein, and so on down the list. Now conversely, a minimum score of zero would be for people who didn't consume any vegetables or any fruit, no nuts or soy protein, more red meat than white meat, and so on down the list. And then there is a gradient of scoring for people who consumed a few servings of vegetables but not five, a few servings of fruit but not four to generate the overall AHEI score, and then the top 40% scores were considered a healthy diet. Alright. So now that we know the five lifestyle factors, what are the underlying mechanisms or pathways that may underlie why these five lifestyle factors may be associated with an increased life expectancy gain? And if we know the underlying mechanisms, will tracking and potentially optimizing further lead to an increased life expectancy? That's the goal. So for that, we go to a second study which looked at plasma metabolites of a healthy lifestyle which they looked at the healthy lifestyle factors, those five in relation to mortality and longevity. In this case, longevity was defined as living older than 85 years or the odds of living past 85 years. So in terms of the overall setup, the study included more than 11,000 people with an average age of 54 years and a twenty eight year follow-up. So starting from the initial biomarker assessment, who was still alive and who had died up to twenty eight years later. So then starting with the five lifestyle factors that were associated with life expectancy, those were combined into a healthy lifestyle score. That score was then associated with 243 different circulating plasma metabolites, and then those metabolites were grouped into their metabolite classes. Now, most of these metabolite classes are lipid derived. For example, plasmologins, sphingolipids, these are lipids lipid containing, metabolites. But amino acids are on the list and nucleosides are another component, another metabolite class that are non lipid that are on this list. But the majority of metabolites were evaluated were lipid derived. Alright. So then, they derived a five factor healthy metabolite signature or or a five factor healthy lifestyle metabolite signature. So what are the metabolites that are associated with the five factor healthy lifestyle score? And then how good is that signature? Right? So if the signature isn't associated with mortality risk or the odds of living living past eighty five years, well, it's not very important. So they evaluated that in the study. And in terms of what's significant, we put up a red line at that hazard ratio HR of one. And here we can see that the five factor healthy lifestyle metabolite signature was associated with a lower risk of all cause cardiovascular disease and cancer related mortality. And then in terms of longevity, again, this is the odds of living past five, 85 years. That five factor healthy lifestyle score metabolite signature, the metabolites that were associated with that five factor score was associated with an increased odds of living past 85 years or having an increased life expectancy relative to the average life life expectancy. So taken together, we can see that the healthy lifestyle metabolite signature is associated with reduced all cause mortality risk and an increased odds of living past 85. So now that we know that, which metabolites and metabolite classes were associated with the healthy lifestyle score? And again, if we know the metabolites, they can potentially be tracked and optimized with the goal of minimizing all cause mortality risk and potentially increasing our odds of living past eighty five years. So first, let's start off with metabolite groups that were associated with a higher healthy lifestyle score And that's what we can see here. And we can see that two metabolite groups cholesterol cholesterol or cholesterol it's hard to say cholesterol esters and phosphatidylcholine containing plasmalogens. You can see those stars. That means that both of these two metabolite classes relatively higher levels were associated with a higher five factor healthy lifestyle score. So for those who may not be familiar, I covered cholesterol esters in earlier video. But what are they? And we can see one of them illustrated here structurally. So we it's simply cholesterol bound to a fatty acid. In this case, it's the 22 carbon six double bond fatty acid otherwise known as EPA which is found in fish oil. And together, this forms the twenty two six cholesterol ester or c e twenty two six. Alright. So which cholesterol esters were associated with a higher healthy lifestyle score? It's one thing to know the metabolite classes but those classes are comprised of metabolites. And we can see the five cholesterol esters shown here. So this table's got the metabolites again, five cholesterol esters, the beta coefficient, and you can see each of these are positive. It's also got the 95% confidence interval. But we can see that each of these are greater than, zero which means that relatively higher levels of these metabolites was associated with a higher healthy lifestyle score. And then the p value, we can see that each of these is far below a p value of 0.05. So each of these metabolites was significantly associated with the health healthy lifestyle score. Now, note that each of these five cholesterol esters can indeed be tracked and potentially optimize. And to do that, I've been using IOLO's at home metabolomics kit which besides the cholesterol esters shown here, they include data for more than 600 metabolites. And if you wanna track your own cholesterol esters and a whole bunch of other metabolites, there'll be a discount link in the video's description. So that brings us to what's my data and we can see that here with data for the five cholesterol esters on the left. Six tests, we can see across the top column and five of those tests were in 2023. So So when taking the average of the sum of these cholesterol esters, the average for these five is 271 micromolar. Now, when considering that relatively higher levels of these cholesterol esters were associated with a higher healthy lifestyle score, which was associated with a lower all cause mortality risk and a greater odds of living past eighty five years, I would want to have and we would wanna have relatively higher levels of cholesterol esters and avoid any age related decline. So with that in mind, test number six was the first test in 2024. And unfortunately, off to a bad start. We can see that about a 180 micro molar is, lower than 271. So I don't wanna have an age related decline or any kind of decline. I wanna keep them relatively high towards towards the higher end of my range to gain any of the potential mortality risk reduction or, longevity benefits. And notice I said potential. Correlation does not imply causation. But this is only half the story because there were also metabolite groups where lower levels were associated with the higher healthy lifestyle score. And we can see that here. And there were two metabolite classes that that was true. Diglycerides or diacylglycerols and specific triglycerides. Notice that all triglycerides aren't homogeneous in terms of the fatty acids that they contain as triglycerides by definition contain three fatty acids. So in this case, triglycerides that contained less than 56 carbons and less than three double bonds are relatively shorter chain fatty acids and less unsaturated was associated, having lower levels was associated with a higher healthy lifestyle healthy lifestyle score. So that doesn't tell us though which triglycerides and which triglycerides. And that's what we'll cover in a future video. Also, we'll take a look at what's my data to see how well that I'm doing just like that we did for the cholesterol esters. And then potentially more importantly, how can we keep levels of either cholesterol levels high or the specific diglycerides and triglycerides relatively low? So one way that I do that is by tracking diet. So is diet or other factors correlated with higher cholesterol esters and lower levels of these diglycerides in specific triglycerides. So stay tuned for that in an upcoming video. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more of my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links that you may be interested in, including discount links for at home metabolomics, epigenetic and telomere testing, oral microbiome composition, any dequantification, at home blood testing with Scifox Health, which includes ApoB and now GrimAge, green tea, diet tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Die Trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.