In the last video, we saw that I've been able to increase heart rate variability from an average of 47 milliseconds per day in 2018 to an average of 66.6 milliseconds per day thus far in the 2024, which is a 41% increase. Similarly, over that same time span, I've been able to reduce resting heart rate from an average of about 51 beats per minute in 2018 to an average of 42 beats per minute in 2024, 2024 which is an 18% decrease. So in today's video, we'll take a look at which factors may be contributing to these improvements for a relatively higher heart rate variability and a lower resting heart rate over that six year plus period. So the most obvious place to start is with physical activity. So to track physical activity rather than looking at steps with the which says nothing about the intensity of the effort, in contrast, I've been using the average daily heart rate as a metric of daily physical activity. And Whoop provides that data. I'm not here to promote Whoop. I'm not sure if other fitness wearables provide that metric. But I've been tracking the average daily heart rate, ADHR, and looking at correlations with resting heart rate and heart rate variability. So with that in mind, what's the correlation for the average daily heart rate with the next day resting heart rate? And to address that, we'll take a look at about fifteen hundred days of data. Unfortunately, I didn't start tracking this until March 2020. I wish I had the idea to start tracking it sooner in 2018. Nonetheless, 1,500 of data. And that's what we'll see here. On the x axis, we've got the previous day's average daily heart rate plotted against the next day resting heart rate. And then we can see a significant positive correlation with a correlation coefficient of 0.74. Note that by definition, anything greater than 0.7 is considered a strong correlation. In terms of the p value, we can see that it's far below 0.05 at four times 10 to the negative two hundred and seventy second power. What this suggests is that too much daily activity and too often will be bad for the resting heart rate. Alright. What about heart rate variability? So over the same time span around fifteen hundred days of data from March 2020 through the June 2024, That's what we'll see here. And now, we can see a significant inverse correlation with a correlation coefficient of negative 0.53. Not as strong as the correlation for the average daily heart rate with resting heart rate, but significant nonetheless. As you can see, the p value is two times 10 to the negative hundred and fifteenth power, far below 0.05. So here here too, this suggests that too much daily activity and too often will be bad for heart rate variability. And taken together, these data suggest that with a higher average daily heart rate, that will lead to chronically worse heart rate variability and resting heart rate. So with that in mind, finding finding the balance between active and rest days is important for optimizing both resting heart rate and heart rate variability. If I'm just working out every day and not allowing for these metrics to recover, they'll be chronically overtrained. In other words, a lower heart rate variability with a higher resting heart rate. So what does that look like in terms of finding the balance? So for me, in following these data, following, resting heart rate and heart rate variability with the goal of getting them towards youthful values, I'm currently on or I've been on for a few years, two ninety minute workouts per week. These workouts are full body, essentially circuit training based. I don't take rest sets and, you know, rest periods and sit and watch and screw around on the phone. I don't do any of that. It's basically circuit training for those whole ninety minutes, compound movement focused, overhead press, shoulder, pull ups, seated rows, push ups off a ball, dead lifts, step weighted step ups, and then a whole bunch of mobility, flexibility, Taekwondo stuff, a whole bunch of stuff with the goal of optimizing basically every range of motion that each joint can go through. So what does that look like in terms of the average daily heart rate and finding the balance between resting heart rate and heart rate variability for when to train and and, or when to do the next workout? So starting with the active day, this would generally be on a Friday. You can see that my average daily heart rate on that day was 56 beats per minute. And then I purposefully titrate activity lower over the next two days. As you can see, it was 54 and then 52 beats per minute. And as a total for the day, that may may not seem like a very high average daily heart rate for the day, but note that my average resting heart rate generally ranges from 40 to 42 beats per minute. So on the active day, it's 14 to 16 beats per minute above my resting value. Alright. And then after those two titrated lower days, generally Saturday and Sunday, I would then do a Monday workout. And you can see that 56 beats per minute for the average daily heart rate is a bump up from the 52. And then generally take three recovery days or three lower intensity days which is just basically light walking, nothing too crazy in terms of intensity or effort as I'm trying to allow enough time for resting heart rate, heart rate variability to recover while also allowing for recovery from each workout in terms of, you know, muscle soreness or fatigue. So it's generally a Monday, Friday based workout, but there is some variability depending on how the data look for heart rate variability and resting heart rate. For example, for the past workout on Friday, I cut that to half of the usual ninety minutes because the data was already trending in the overtrain direction. So I didn't wanna overdo it. So I cut the workout in half. I try to avoid that as much as possible because cutting these 90 workouts, in half over time potentially can lead to a detraining effect, potentially also negatively impacting heart rate variability and resting heart rate. So I try to stick to the ninety minute workout plan as much as possible, but I do allow some, time to bend the workouts in terms of intensity and duration, based on how the data for heart rate variability and resting heart rate look. Alright. But note that physical activity isn't the only variable that may impact resting heart rate and heart rate variability. So with that in mind, what's the relationship for body weight with these cardiovascular fitness metrics? So note that I've weighed myself every morning after using the bathroom going number one and number two, and fasted. And I have data going back to 2018. So then, we can look at correlations for the daily resting heart rate with body weight and I have now approaching almost twenty two hundred days of data which is what we'll see here. On the y axis, we've got the resting heart rate plotted against body weight. And then we can see a significant positive correlation. Once again, this is a strong correlation as that correlation coefficient is greater than 0.7 at 0.73. And the p value at zero seems like an error, but I use two different statistical programs to evaluate that. It came up with zero in Excel and then I entered the data into statskingdom.com and using, also Pearson product correlations, it came up with zero. So it's essentially the p value is so low, you know, 10 to the negative maybe 300 power that it's essentially zero. Highly significant association for body weight with the resting heart rate in my data. So what does that mean? Well, as the as my body weight has been higher, that's significantly correlated with a higher resting heart rate. And, conversely, when my body weight has been at my leanest around a hundred and thirty eight pounds, resting heart rate has approached 40 beats per minute. Alright. What about heart rate variability? So over those same about twenty two hundred days of data, we can see that here. And now we've got a significant inverse correlation. Al albeit the correlation isn't as strong as the correlation for body weight with resting heart rate as it's negative 0.46. But it's a significant correlation nonetheless at two times 10 to the negative hundred and tenth power. And here, we can this suggests that as body weight increases, that's significantly correlated with a lower heart rate variability. And conversely, at my leanest or my lightest, as body weight has approached hundred and thirty eight pounds, heart rate variability has approached relatively youthful values of seventy milliseconds. So to answer the question, what's the relationship for body weight with resting heart rate and heart rate variability? From both of these plots, we can see that they approach youthful values as body weight decreases. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more of my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon, where rather than seeing three month updates, this is my first heart rate variability, resting heart rate update in about three months. I post daily data for resting heart rate, heart rate variability, the average daily heart rate, and also sleep stage. So if you're interested in that, check it out. We've also got a whole bunch of discount links that you may be interested in, including discount links for epigenetic testing, NAD quantification, oral microbiome composition, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Softfox Health, which includes ApoB, but also GrimAge, green tea, dye tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Die Trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.