Hi, everyone. Today's guest is doctor Geert Schmidt Schonbein, who is a distinguished professor in the Xu Shu Chen Jin Lei Department of Bioengineering at the University of California San at San Diego. Today, doctor Schonbein will present his lab's work, which focuses on the novel hypothesis that aging is impacted by auto digestion. And for those who may not be familiar, not autophagy, but the process of auto digestion. And we'll get all into it. Doctor Shomai will get all into that into, his presentation. So with that, welcome, Geer. Okay. So, Michael, thank you for the invitation. I'm gonna talk to you today about auto digestion. In a nutshell, what that means is is we human beings, many other species, on the planet, digest themselves, and this has, quite far reaching implications. I have a conflict of interest. It's mild. And, I need to emphasize that the people who really done this work are listed here, wonderful collaborators, students in the and postdocs in the lab. And I'm gonna highlight today, especially the work of Frank DeLano and, and Eric Kistler. Why digestive enzymes? Well, if you go by the literature and you look at peer reviewed publications, if you look at the National Library for Medicine and under the term aging, aging in the title, you get 82,000, references. These are all peer reviewed. If you now go ahead and you put in aging and digestive enzymes, you put both of these words in there, how many publications have come out? As of last, two days ago, it's exactly one. So that may tell, somebody, a young student, this is not a good topic area to get involved in and then the question arise. So in other words, it's not a very crowded field. I, been thinking about this for quite some time. And, actually, the starting point for our work was coming out of the field of shock. This is a a a community of people. They're working in the intensive care unit, and they are dealing with problems where a individual is hurt in an accident or to a drowning. And a particular model that they like to use is called hemorrhagic shock. All you do is just place a femoral catheter, remove some blood, and then return the blood afterwards, say, after an hour. And what you'd observe, there are many things. But the one I wanna talk to draw attention today is you will have a group of animals that survives this procedure. Twenty four hours later, they're they're just doing fine. And then you have a group that is nonsurvivors. And I've been very curious about the same procedure, the same chemical constituents. Why would there be a group of individuals who who fall victim to this event? And remember, this is a young teenage rat, so above it as healthy as they will ever come. In order to gain in insight into this phenomenon, we decided to do the following experiment. We, took plasma of these survivors at the end of the experiment, and we exposed them to naive cells. We happen to like working with leukocytes. Here's a two scanning electron micrograph of them. And so these naive cells are seeing now the plasma of a survivor. In contrast, if you take the plasma of a nonsurvivor, you discover that these cells go into an activated state. That's just like if they were phagocytosis bacteria, a high percentage of the cell go in this activated state. It has severe consequences for the microcirculation, but the most important question comes to mind. We have two plasmas, and one plasma stimulates these cells. So the obvious question is what causes and what's in this plasma that, causes this type of stimulation? I spent quite a bit of time on that, and many suggestions were made. Some people believe it's bacteria. It could be bacterial products, like endotoxins, complement. All kinds of ideas were brought out. We tried these and several of these, and we always run into the following situation. Let's say complement. Yes. We find complement components from the complement cascade. But when we make an effort to remove that complement or block the complement receptor, we do not see that this type of stimulation disappears. And so, I was quite desperate actually at this point. We decided let's take a totally fresh idea. And, my student, Eric Kistler, had the idea. Why don't we do the following? It says a perfectly healthy animal is able to generate a a set of stimulators in plasma. It must be coming from on the organs. So he decided to homogenize different organs. You see them listed here. And, then exposed the homogenate to naive cells just like you saw previously. Most of the organs produce, something like 10%, not much more with one exception, and that's the pancreas. It's very consistent, highly reproducible. The intestine doesn't stimulate the, these these these cells unless you go out and you, add the constituents of the blood. That what we're seeing here is actually after we wash the intestine. Once you, leave the intestinal content in, it would behave just like the pancreas. Now if you add trypsin, this is an experiment you could add many other proteases. You see every organ now becomes a stimulator for these cells. So every organ is now suddenly a, inflammatory mediator, and it, can possibly lead to death. So that was the first indication that we need to pay attention to the pancreatic enzymes. Now you are the experts on pancreatic, digestion. So I'm gonna be very brief, and want to remind you of some items that in this discussion, play a role. So here is a pancreas. 95% of the pancreas is used to, generate the digestive enzymes. The other 5%, generate insulin. And, these enzymes are released in a pro form. There's a little symbols with a with something in their mouth. They end up in the duodenum. In the duodenum, they'll be activated through the enterokinases that are expressed on the epithelium in this region of the intestine. And then the food with the digestive enzymes goes on this long ride through the intestine. Now there's, of course, this is well known today. There is, a pretty comprehensive system designed to digest every biological molecule other than fibers. Our digestive enzymes, can break down every protein, every carbohydrate, every lipids, and all nucleases. So they are designed by nature to be as nonspecific as possible. The other angle to this, is especially important for us. If you take a sample out of the intestine and you find out what is the digestive enzyme activity, We do this by adding a substrate that once it's activated by a a digestive enzyme, it will turn into a fluorescent signal. And so we can read in fluorescent units the activity of the digestive enzymes in the lumen of the intestine. No surprise. There is plenty of activity. In our particular experiments, we have unit these are fluorescent units, 2,700 units, somewhere between 3,007. But now comes an interesting, comparison. How about if we take in the same animal, now a plasma sample, and read the fluorescent units? And those numbers are orders of magnitude smaller. This about order of magnitude of 10, maybe fifteen, twenty, but not much beyond. So the observations you make at this point, wait a second. There is a huge proteolytic activity in the intestine. It has to be because we're digesting, and there's very low proteolytic activity in the plasma per se. And, you are justified to ask the question, Okay. I can eat a intestine. This is, citron style. I can digest that intestine, but I don't digest myself. How has nature come up with a solution to this, problem? There are basically two mechanisms that have been proposed. The but dominating mechanism is is that people have identified a set of protease inhibitors against trypsin and chymotrypsin that are synthesized in the liver. And these are binding molecules permanently in a bill permanently in, turn the trypsin in an in in inactive form. Same with chymotrypsin. We have large amounts of these in our bloodstream. In fact, probably, they are of the amounts just like, albumin and fibrinogen. So nature had known for a while that somehow we have to have a a protection against the trypsin and chymotrypsin and the other serum proteases. The other mechanism is that we like to focus on that nature has come up with an idea. Why don't we digest in the lumen of the intestine? And we then put a barrier so that the digestive enzymes cannot get out. The barrier has to be clever. It has to allow nutrients like individual amino acid and so on to get through, but, not digestive enzymes. They are the order of magnitude of 20 k and larger. So as a result, one needs a barrier. And this barrier is illustrated here. The blue color you see here, this is a villus. This is in the lumen of the intestine, and this is, at the base of the intestine. And we labeled this particular bolus with a, agent, that stains the mucin in blue color. So we see lots of mucin here, and the entire intestine is covered by mucin. And, there are specific isoforms. There are two isoforms. One is a isoform that's released from the, goblet cells, and they get, discharged into the lumen. They mix with the food. And then there's a second even more important, mucin 13 isoform that is on the top of the epithelial cell in what some people call the brush border. That particular, mucin is is actually the actual barrier for digestive enzymes to get through. Low molecular weight can get through, but not large molecular weight. This is how nature would like to see things. But if you now look at the activity, this is again with a substrate that changes its fluorescent properties when you apply it on trypsin. In a sham, it has you can very little activity. It's the same situation again. The lumen of the intestine is at the bottom, and the the villi tips are at the top. And, when you then go ahead and you introduce this is a fifteen minute ischemic period or a thirty minute ischemic. Now we see something new. We see that digestive enzymes actually made it into the wall, past the tip of the villi, and all the way, in fact, to the lumen of the intestine. This is a very severe form of injury to the intestine, so there are many grades of, that type of, that type of infiltration of digestive enzymes into the lumen. The if you look at the morphology of the, epithelial cell, you see that, in fact, even after fifteen minutes, there is already a loss of the mucin, and there is in part a breakdown of the villi. If you go to thirty minutes, there is now a point where the entire billus tip has been removed, and now your digestive enzymes are directly exposed to your own tissues. And this can be seen if you look at either one of the two musin isoforms. It can also be seen for other digestive enzymes. This is, with a substrate that's cleaved by elastase, and you see a similar pattern that with progression of the and broke broke breakdown of the barrier, there is eventually a full infiltration of the digestive enzymes. Now what are they doing? Well, I can only highlight here, one or two items, that are relevant for this discussion. As these digestive enzymes enter into the bloodstream, the first molecules they encounter are the plasma proteins. So here is a scan of the various, bike mass spec span of the various proteins and, other biocomponents that are typically in the plasma of a rat. And each spike are well recognized molecules that are associated with the, lively and and support various types of physiological functions. If you now take from the same animal, this is before shock, a plasma sample aftershock, and run the same scan, this is how it looks like. This is best described as a wholesale destruction of plasma proteins, biomolecules in the plasma. There's a large increase of the low molecular weight fragments. So plasma proteins are being degraded into smaller elements. And, the this animal is, of course, incapable of living if without these biomolecules. The other aspect is the as they enter into a bloodstream, they come out in contact with the endothelium and with many other cells. And what we look decided to look for is how about if we look at the insulin receptor? So here you see in this diagram a picture of a microvascular network with an arterial venous vein and capillary. And in this particular sample, the insulin receptor has been labeled with a antibody against the extracellular domain. That's the binding domain for insulin and, on the insulin receptor. How does it look like in an animal that is in shock? Well, the insulin receptor are still there, but you can probably appreciate they're longer no longer at the same concentrations. If you now go ahead and you block the digestive enzymes, we do this by entering where it's an internal pathway. In in other words, directly into the intestine nomeleuvin, a protease inhibitor, this is a trypsin inhibitor, then we don't see this reduction of the insulin receptor density on the surface of of the cell. And so this is one example of many I could show you that when digestive enzymes enter into the circulation, there is a compromise on surface receptors. This is like a type two, thing. So the the the the when digestive enzymes enter, they clip surface membrane receptors. They degrade plasma proteins and the extracellular matrix. I didn't show that, but you can demonstrate that extracellular matrix proteins are being degraded. They generate peptides in turn, which have their own activity, and the whole system becomes very confused. So it just generates a molecular chaos. And, if you allow this process in a shock model to go on, it will lead eventually to multi organ failure. In other words, to death. So this is a serious process. What does the situation look like with the enzymes in the aged ones? Well, we just completed the first study on that. And the question we asked is the most fundamental question. Do we find digestive enzymes in a tissue outside the intestine of an aged animal? So here is a cross section again of the intestine. The it's same orientation. The villi look upwards into the lumen of the intestine. And this particular section was labeled with a antibody, a monoclonal antibody against trypsin. There's then a secondary antibody classical immunohistochemistry, so that then the substrate that's attached to the secondary enzyme, makes it possible to visualize. Where's trypsin? This is a typical example of a trypsin in a young animal, and young means, in this particular case, four months of age. When we do the same thing, these are identical conditions in an old animal. Looks very different. Now we see, in fact, an infiltration of a there's a brown substrate we use in this case, that is clearly enhanced in the old animals. If we take an old animal that we treated for, two weeks with a trypsin inhibitor, they they receive that in in this, in the water. They drink, and then we see this behavior. Now in order to quantify these things, we, decided to develop a optical technique that allows us to extract extend digitally, the brown color from these images. And then we display in the ground color. They've shown in the black and white contrast so that you can now actually see from these images what is actual trypsin present and what is, what are other elements here. So this grayish color that you see in the old animals is all due to trypsin. So now is the question. Intestine is perhaps not too surprising that it's infiltrated, but what about other important organs? The first one that comes to mind when you think of the contents of the intestine passing into the circulation, the first part they have to go through is the liver in just about all species. And in the liver now, we see a very substantial enhancement of trypsin presence in a typical villas of the, the Sinus villas. If we go to the lung, that's next organ in order, there is a very substantial infiltration of digestive enzymes, quite noticeable. Now let's go on. And by the way, we measure these again by an optical density measurement. And what I'm saying here is supported by the direct measurements. If you go to the heart, you make an interesting observation. The digestive enzymes are predominantly between myocytes. There's a myocyte here, and it's the gap between myocytes, the interstitial space where the, trypsin appears. It's still present in old animals, but, of course, with greatly reduced, magnitude after this, two week treatment. You go to the liver. This is in in the the acid. This is in on the in a domain close to the the cortex. And, you see there is a very distinct infiltration of digestive enzyme, often just around the capillary. And, again, this is reduced when you had taken all treated. We look in the brain. So now the brain is the organ most remote from the intestine. Whatever comes from the intestine into the circulation and into the brain has just breached two major barriers that we have in our body. And here you see, in fact, the labeling of digestive enzymes is often in the basement membrane of the capillaries. So there there there's it's everywhere in the brain, but there is this especially enhanced observation, measurement of the digestive enzymes in these capillaries. This is supported again by direct measurements. If you look in the skin, you find that digestive enzymes in the young ones are virtually absent. In the old ones, it's present, in the dermis the dermis, and especially around the follicles, the root of the follicles. And this is, again, attenuated but not eliminated by, in the old animals. Finally, another view of the whole thing. This is a topical view, onto a bunch of microvessels. These are venules, arterials, capillaries. They are sitting on the outflow part of the intestine, in the mesentery. And there you just find that the venules are, especially high labeled with digestive enzymes. If you block them in the lumen of the intestine, this goes away. So the question now comes up is, well, you showed this for trypsin. How about other proteases? So we take an antibody against elastase, again, pancreatic elastase, and we do a similar immunohistochemical labeling as as I've just described. You see even in, young animals, there is a bit of elastase, especially along the, lymphatics, but it's greatly enhanced in the old ones. The same holds true for the liver, for the lung. This is for the heart. We see another pattern like this that the digestive enzymes are in the interstitial space predominantly. In the kidney, this is in the tubular region of the kidney. And in the brain, we see, a overall infiltration. The way we design these experiments is we want to know how do things look look like when you look at larger parts of an organ. Let's say, one lobe of the lung and another lobe of the lung. How would the labeling look like? And, if you look at these standard deviations that we found there, it's remarkable uniform. In other words, if let's say you go to the lung and you take an upper lobe and the lower lobe, you will see that, in fact, the density on average like this is pretty much uniform. In other words, the animal becomes infiltrated by these elastases in the age in in age group that is leaves no corner of the animal out. There is a nonuniform pattern at the level of the individual cells or microstructures, as I explained, but, the experiment, is, is remarkable in the fact that the pancreatic enzymes infiltrate the organ so uniformly in the old ones. Then we went on. Okay. Let's look at elastase. In the case of elastase, you see a similar pattern. We oops. No. And this is amylase. I'm sorry. There's a typo. And amylase, again, is infiltrating the, old tissue, but not the young tissue. So in this first part, we obtained evidence by which one can conclude that in an old animal, at least in the old rat, the digestive enzymes enter in a more or less uniform way into various organs, and there's really no part of the animal that we could find that's not infiltrated. Now as I've emphasized previously, the real important, structure that controls here where digestive enzymes go is the mucosal barrier. Here is a top view of the mucosal barrier in a rat close to the du genome, upper part of the du union. And you can see when we label FUSIN, we we see this dense distribution. When we focus the microscope on the bottom part of the individual villi, you're now looking down from the top. Again, there is a very high density of mucin. They all the majority of these are in in the goblet cells. So and by the way, the villi are not finger like. They are ridge like, structures. And that's how it looks like in an old animal. It's just a stark difference. The density of this and that's identical light conditions, these experiments, so that you can really draw on pass. And villi, are reduced in terms of, mucin density and the base of the villi along with it. This can be reversed with you to some degree, animals by our two week treatment. And, this can be illustrated also in another way. This is a double staining technique. Again, we look from the top down onto the intestinal wall. These are the individual villi. And we labeled this same section with an antibody against trypsin. So now you see in brown, the trypsin is over here, quite visible. And, in the old animals, you see that the treated animals that the trypsin infusion and and trypsin appearance in the wall is reduced. So as the density of the mucin is reduced, you have more leak of trypsin into the wall. If you do the same thing with amylase, you see again the same pattern. The the the, villi in a young animal really close off the escape of digestive enzymes, which in older animals is greatly attenuated. And in an old treated animal, it's partially restored, but never completely restored. Look a little bit higher magnification. This is a villus. You're looking at on it edge wise. You see the line that's the, mucin that's attached to the epithelial cell, and then you see plenty of these blue goblet cells. Two examples here. When we look at the the same light conditions at the intestine of a old animal, our animals are 24 old. We see now still some mucin, but you see this dark brown labeling, and that's due to trypsin. So several examples where I can see that. If we go even into further details and ask the question, okay. When where is the time when trypsin first enters into it? We try to address this question by a double labeling technique. This is on thin sections, so we can see things on a cellular level. Here's this individual, villas, the lymphatics, and some submucosal blood vessels. You see that where the the the trypsin is present, or you can see this even further in if you do a color extraction. The trypsin is present where no mucin is. In fact, the first entry of trypsin here at the tip is at sites where the goblet cells have just discharged their mucin. That's suddenly a cell that is somewhat exposed, and this is the place where we find this, mucin appear triton appear in in in the bloodstream. This gets carried into the, the villus, into the lymphatics of the villus, and from there on into the central circulation. So the question comes up, well, okay. There's digestive enzymes appearing in the these various organs. Does this have any consequence? Well, in aging research, as you know, there are many different forms of aging indicators one can use. We decided to go for an aging indicator, which is so obvious connected to the aging process, and that's the breakdown of the extracellular matrix. So we were able to, utilize a, what's called a collagen hybridizing peptide that was developed at, at, in in University of Utah and at at, in Baltimore. And, these allow us on a section to look at where is collagen broken down. Again, this is the black and white color extraction. And you can see here that in a young animal, there are individual villi. They have plot plenty of collagen breakdown. In other words, this test allows us to see not only where is collagen, but actually where is it broken down on the molecular level. We look at old animals. They have plenty of that. Virtually every villus is, in the process of breaking down its collagen. And if we look at treated animals, it's restored. But still, just like in the young ones, there are plenty of villi that have a collagen breakdown. Now here's the liver. The liver of a young healthy animal is, free of any digestive enzymes. If you go to an old animal, you see these red dots, plenty of sites in the, microvascular structures and the tissue structures that lead to a loss of collagen integrity and, suddenly a labeling with the hybridizing, enzyme peptide. It's partially restored, and, ultimately, you see the sort of a stereotypic pattern. Every time we treat an animal, we can impart restore what it used to be before. We don't rejuvenate it, but we restore what the animal, had when they were younger. And the same, we see the lung. In fact, in the lung, you see a dramatic form of collagen breakdown, more than most other organs. Let's look at the heart. The heart is very interesting pattern. You see, I told you earlier, these are myocytes and the digestive enzymes are in the gap between these. This is the interstitial space, and that's exactly where we find the collagen breakdown products. The same pattern, old treated animals, you restore that, and this is the color extraction. It's in the kidney. It's in the glomeruli region. Plenty of sites where collagen is being broken down. And then in the brain, quite interesting, if you look at this black and white, the color extraction, the capillaries and their basement membrane are broke being broken down. This was also the site where we saw trypsin previously and, elastase. So what this indicates, there is at least a spatial correlation between the presence of digestive enzymes and the breakdown of the the the collagen. The store the the the situation is greatly restored again through the treatment. You look at the skin. We talked about this earlier. The skin in a young animal just doesn't have any breakdown of collagen that is we detect with this particular technique. In contrast, an old animal has plenty in this mucosa, submucosa, plenty of breakdown of collagen. And, again, in the untreated animals, that's in part restored. So now comes the question, and I come to the last part of this presentation. Is it ever possible to demonstrate that trypsin is actually present in our bloodstream and especially trypsin activity? So we use again a substrate that's specifically clipped by trypsin. And, the students in this particular case decided you want to investigate this question after they had a high fat diet meal. It only takes them about fifteen minutes to eat that meal. And then they take the first blood sample, one at the very beginning. And ask the question, is there a significant increase? And the answer is yes. Every one of the students had an increase irrespective of male, female. It's only about 15 students, 1,520 students. They show saw this increase. The increase does not exist if you skip the meal. After about an hour, the, proteus activity is reduced. And then over a period of five hours, it's a typical fluctuation. It's never quite steady state. If you want to measure trips and activity, you really have to follow time courses. How about others? Our last day's activity, same pattern. And that teaches us that even we, young individuals, run the risk that digestive enzymes leak into the circulation when they eat. I did not speak much about the second what we call the secondary enzyme. These are, like, for example, metalloproteinase. They are activated by trypsin. It's the most effective, molecule to to do so. And when we look at the MMP, this is an substrate that's cleaved by both MMP two and nine. We look at these, we find again a similar pattern. There's this transient increase which disappears. If you do this with a diabetic plasma and a diabetic individual, then you start to see that in fact, the, the activities really were higher. We were quite interested to find out if this plasma has this activity. In other words, it clips little substrates that which are totally artificial, constructs. But if the plasma has activity so that it can cleave the substrate, maybe and one should ask. Maybe it's clipping some much more interesting thing. So just like I showed you earlier, we took an antibody against the extracellular domain of the insulin receptor, and, we labeled an individual cells after they have been these are naive cells that have been exposed to the plasma of these individuals. And you see even the controls have already a reduction of the, the receptor density. And if you take a prediabetic one and a truly diabetic one, you see a dramatic loss of these receptors. What that teaches us is is that as somebody eats a high fat diet meal and has leak of digestive enzymes into the circulation, you instantly lose, insulin receptors. So that's in essence what I wanted to tell you. I'd summarize it here with a diagram, with a cartoon. Under normal circumstances, our food that we eat is digested in the lumen of the intestine, and it's not elsewhere. The intact mucin layer is responsible for that protection, and it follows the traditional physiology that one learns in gastroenterology. If, however, we allow a autodigestion to occur, then in that particular case, it starts by a breakdown of the barrier. The villi may be digested away altogether. Digestive enzymes now get out. They can leave through blood vessels. They can leave through lymphatics. And on a lymphatic pathway, actually, they bypass the liver. And they could leave directly across the entire wall of the small intestine and appear in the, in the, extracellular fluid. So in essence, digestive enzymes can escape through all pathways. Once this occurs, the, systemic circulation is affected, and we are dealing with a multiorgan dysfunction. So that's what I wanted to tell you. I thank you, and I want to leave you with a new greeting, and that is for the future. I wish you a very slow auto digestion. Thank you. Alright. Thanks, Geer. That was great. You could take it off share screen. I have a comment and then many questions. Great. I'm sure I can answer them all. When you look at aging and then aging and auto digestion, and when you mentioned that yours is the only your group is the only paper that's published on aging and auto digestion, and you mentioned Yeah. Actually, let me, clarify that. That particular paper is from doctor Greenberg, published somewhere around '86. And he asked this very interesting question. Is there a possibility that digestive enzymes in an old animal are different from a young animal? And he says, yeah. They are not producing quite as much, but, basically, it's the same type of enzymes and similar levels of activity that you have in old one. But other than that, there's no other publication. As a matter of fact, you can go into other fields, cancer, and ask, is there a relationship between cancer and digestive enzymes? You find a similar statistic. It's been completely neglected. So it I agree. And when you mentioned that, it doesn't seem like that'd be a good field for a young student to go into because there's only one study. I see it the other way where you you've opened up this can of worms where, there should be a lot of studies, and I'm gonna go through the full list because there's so many more studies that need to be done to really flesh this out and see how much of a dent that it makes. No question. No question. Alright. So Yeah. Go ahead. Alright. So with that in mind, so, I looked into the diet that you guys used in the, in the, young and old, rat study. Right? So it's standard rodent chow. Right? But the the composition of, protein, carbs, and fat, it was 32% protein. So is it possible that a young animal can can live just fine, you know, with very little protein digestive leak, on a on a high 32% is a high protein diet. Like, if we translated that into grams per kilogram body weight, that would be three grams per gram body, per kilogram body weight, which is I mean, 1.6 is like the upper limit for people who are in, you know, regular exercise training. Alright. Anyway, so a high protein diet, now you've got an increase in the protein digestive enzymes. The young animal can get away with it. But then over the course of time, the the body is just not able to deal with that, and and that's a part of the process for the increased leak of the protein digestive enzymes. Is that some factor, that may be contributing? A very important question you raised. Thank you. What when you eat a meal, what can possibly open, the mucosal barrier? There are two cases I can tell you for definitively, and then I'll come back to the protein. If you eat a high fat diet meal, you eat lots of triglycerides. Your lipase, which by the way starts to be secreted in the salivary gland, so it's present in food as already before it enters into the small intestine. The lipase will generate free fatty acids. Free fatty acids have to be very carefully carried in the bloodstream. That's what the reason why we have so much albumin, and they have free fatty acid binding proteins in the intestine itself. It's a rich field of activities. And free fatty acids, on the other hand, if you are not bound, it's a totally toxic material. And the reason they are so toxic is because they dissolve in the lipid membrane, and they kill cells. No questions asked. And as a result, of course, you have a breakdown of your berry. The other aspect is alcohol. So ethyl alcohol is well, if you wanna clean your petri dish with a bunch of cells on it, you use ethyl alcohol. Ethyl alcohol also dissolves directly in the membrane, and you get a really an irreparable destruction of the, of the cell. When it comes to proteins and protein content, we honestly first of all, I have to make clarify that we don't have any data at this particular point. Are there certain types of proteins that can cause additional damage? There are always proteins that may be degraded and in large amounts, and then generate a secondary reaction, for example, a b cell reaction for antibody formation. We have not looked at this stage into to what degree, the mucosal barrier is infiltrated, by b cells, for example. So we we followed a very simple concept. Let's just take the chow that the rats can get. And the final point I make to that is the following. I'm very much concerned about the mechanical properties of the food we eat. Why do I say that? Well, if you eat let's say an example is chow, in in a dog, and you eat, like a dog does without chewing at all. It just takes in, swallows it, the kibbles. Right? And, no questions asked. Well, these very rough surfaces now appear in starting out in the intestine, in the stomach, going to the intestine. They may be dissolved already into pretty much a soft tissue. But if they still have that rough surface, that's to me like sandpaper, writing on on this epithelium. And there are some reasons in the literature to be concerned about this when it comes to longevity. So owners of dogs have to make a decision. Should I feed dry food, and how does my dog eat, or should I provide, wet food, which is much less convenient? But, that story, I think, is, potentially a important story also for humans. It depends on what you eat and how you chew. Yeah. Alright. So then I have more questions off that. So I guess one study to test the protein being too high, an increase in digestive enzymes at the body or at least in rats for now, can't tolerate with aging. Maybe that could be one reason why methionine restriction. I don't know if you're familiar with methionine restriction extends lifespan. And maybe because you're reducing protein intake, you're reducing levels of protein digestive enzymes that are secreted, and then less potentially would leak into the blood leading to auto digestion. Right. There is all the literature, in the fifties and sixties where gastroenterologists asked the question, if you eat a high percentage of, protein, would the concentration of trypsin and chymotrypsin last days in the, in the pancreas, would it shift? And the answer is yes. These are long term exposures. So the pancreas knows what proteins it needs to break down and adjust itself. I don't know how big this issue is. Would it make over lifetime a difference? Yes. It could be. But, we need to look at this today in the context of the idea that not only you need to do we need to digest, but we also need to avoid the auto digestion. In other words, the escape of digestive enzymes. Yeah. And the your point about the, chewing, making sure you chew and don't just swallow, like right. Yeah. I think that's a great point because, well, it's a great point because, the act so what I'm trying to say is, there's some there's some evidence that mincing meat helps with protein digestion, with which means that more of it will be absorbed into the blood in in terms of the actual amino acids versus less of that being escaping digestion now reaching the large intestine where it can be broken down into bacterial proteases, which then create all kinds of nasty products in doxyl, paracresol, sulfates that damage all kinds of tissues. So is some of that going on here too where, so for example, during aging, there can be a reduction. Some studies show it it happening and other studies don't show it where there's a reduction in stomach acid. So that means that there'll be less protein digestion and absorption, more reaching the large intestine. And then could it be that that, you're actually seeing some bacterial proteases too? It can the antibodies that detect the trypsin in the blood differentiate between human and bacterial trypsin or elastase or any of the other, proteases? I honestly, I don't know. In the small intestine, I work with Rob Knight, who is interested in the microbiome. We have yet to determine a, enzyme, a a bacterial enzyme that could participate in a major way. You have to keep in mind, when I think about this, there is some truth to your statement, but I always look at it at what are the important reactions. And the digestive enzymes that come out of the pancreas are so dominating this process of digestion that I'm I'm I'm I'm ignoring. What I'm interested in along those lines is, are there bacteria that love carbohydrates? Because if those are present in the small intestine, they'll chew down the mucin, and that's a real compromise of the barrier. They can't can't be worse. So, long term, these things have to be still investigated, to be quite honest. Yeah. So that raises my next question. So, I know that fiber deficient diets in the large intestine can lead to a reduction of the mucin layer, and then it can be easier for, you know, bacteria and other microbial products to leak into the blood from the large intestine. So that implicates a role for fiber in the large intestine on mucin and having a a thick mucus layer to minimize that risk. But what about in the small intestine? I know that the goblet cells will produce mucin, but, are the effects in the large intestine for the muca mute mute, like, mucin layer, does that go upstream, or what's helping form mucin in the small intestine? Well, let me tell you a story. I have a student who did a master thesis, and I asked that student. It's published as a master thesis. We have not completed the story, but I give you the the the essence of it. If you take the content of the intestine, and you ask, like, at this early experiments I showed you, what are the trypsin or chymotrypsin activities? You find something quite remarkable. If you go from the small in over the length of the small intestine, there's no gradient. We find our in our end, it's just about the same activity, somewhere around 200, 2,000 fluorescent units. If you now go into the large intestine where the rat forms its palate, if you transition through the cecum into that part of the the rat has a very large cecum. It's different from humans. But you go through the cecum. You can already see it. And then you go up the ascending part of the large intestine across, you start to see there is a total loss of digestive enzyme activity. There's so there is something going on. Traum, who did these studies, he concluded there is probably a material that's being secreted from the epithelium that actually blocks digestive enzymes. We haven't been able to identify this on a molecular level, but I view this now as an issue. You know, if this weren't the case, imagine the concentration of digestive enzymes. So it come out at the descending part of the the, the animal. It would literally be sufficient to destroy the in all barriers at this. So nature must have come up with a protection mechanism that is and looks like there's actually they are to to turn the, digestive enzymes off. So the human digestive enzymes, but the other side of that is that there are bacterial, protein digestive enzymes in the large intestine. And so one way to minimize the, protein degrading or amino or peptide degrading bacteria in the large intestine is with short chain fatty acids, which acidify the colon, and that makes it harder for the, protein digesting Okay. Sorry, peptide digesting bacteria to survive in an acidic environment in the large intestine. But short chain fatty acids, at least in fecal samples, decline during aging. So it's possible that that allows for the protein, digesting bacteria to grow in number in in the large intestine, not human digestive enzymes, but the bacterial, which then raises the point of which I I know I mentioned already, but maybe it's possible that some of those are leaking into the blood too. Yep. Absolutely. No question. There is Rob Knight, suggests that there are bacteria going out, and that can very well occur under various medical conditions. I have no problem with that, but always keep in mind if a bacteria gets out, digestive enzymes have long gone. Bacteria is the size of a house. A a digestive enzyme is the size of a little cube. So merely from a transport point of view, if bacteria gone out, digestive enzymes have already left a long time ago. Ah, right. Right. Right. Preceding it. So calorie restriction then, with calorie restriction, I think I saw you in another talk. You mentioning calorie restriction should minimize this effect. The more calories you eat, the probably the greater likelihood of having, proteases leak into the blood? In in the simplistic way, when you reduce your calorie input, you eat smaller meals, and therefore, the damage to the intestine with every meal that you eat is reduced. Timed eating is is another example like this. If you eat, nothing over a certain period of time, that allows your mucosal barrier repair itself. That, by the way, is always in repair. It's the intestine is the organ with the highest gene expression, and the the the it takes about a couple of days to fully restore an intestine, intestinal villus. But there are plenty of stem cells in the submucosa, and a gastroenterologist study this at great detail. There's a constant repair mechanism. In my from my point of view is, how can somebody survive a severe ischemia where the entire length of the, villus is now reduced? All you need in order to have a functioning intestine is you have to close the villi. They don't have to be very long. If they are very long, they can absorb, of course, more nutrients. But if they're relatively short, as long as they seal, they protect you from your own digestive enzymes. So that then raises the interesting question of so after eating, I guess you could quantify this, right, where depending on your calorie intake and maybe even protein, intake levels, there'll be some magnitude of auto digestion that would require some amount of time after eating where you don't eat for the villi and everything else to repair itself. But do you have any insight to what that window may be? The no. The the answer is is I can only speculate on circumstantial evidence. The good news I have is we have now developed a technology that allows you to measure proteolytic activity in a blood sample, whole blood sample. This is an effort together with a fellow by Mike Heller, who is a retired professor at UCSD, and interested in nanoengineering. And we have now a technology that indeed you can take a blood sample, this very small, finger prick, to measure the activity with these fluorescent units. And these are experiments that are ongoing, but I can tell you that, animals at risk or humans at risk, have an elevated proteolytic activity. And this is again, it's transient. These are not just steady state value. You can think of it like a glucose value. You measure one glucose value, it doesn't teach you a lot. You have to really follow time force. Same with digestive enzyme. So is that escape that you're asking for, is that a time dependent phenomenon? No question in my mind. But, the exact time when the barrier opens with a particular meal and the particular considerance of a meal and the time when, it's been repaired, that time course is of such importance for all these, timed eating experiments. That needs to be measured. And then these, timed eating experiments can be really based on a rational basis. Yeah. Definitely. So for example, mice that are calorie 40% calorie restricted, they live about 30 longer. And, they eat basically, triple their food on a Friday and then fast Saturday and Sunday. Yeah. And that's in association with that lifespan extension. So clearly that one day of having triple calories can't be that bad from the auto digestion point of view because they've got two days, I guess, to repair it. But, yeah, I'm, I'm excited about, seeing the, you know, more specific details in terms of. Alright. So and then also, there are in terms of biomarkers, if regular people wanted to measure, because you can measure. You can get a blood test, you know, at standard labs, commercially available labs where you can measure elastase and amylase, you know, pancreatic derived enzymes in blood. So I'd imagine if you see higher levels in blood over time, that's probably a bad thing. But are there other biomarkers that we could use maybe commercially available to track this? Not yet commercially available, but there is one biomarker. I mentioned it very differently. When the digestive enzymes act on your plasma proteins, for example, in every experiment we have carried out and did mass spectrometry, we find a large increase in number of peptides. In other words, the the trypsin is such a non thinking proteins, nonspecific, it just degrades every protein that comes its way. As a result, you have a large number of amino acids, especially in the range between five kilo Dalton to about 20,000 kilo Dalton. In other words, this is below the size of normal plasma proteins, telling us that these have been degraded. That is a very strong correlates very strongly with protease activity. No surprise. I mentioned the measurement of protease activity now with a new technology so that you get actually a quantitative measurement. And, the particular technology, one more item, that we are currently and that we have developed is one in which you measure protease activity but in whole blood as compared to plasma. And it turns out, I'm thinking of a group of pancreatic patients, that the digestive activity in whole blood is about 10 times higher than what you see in plasma. In other words, there is a lot of digestive enzymes, trypsin included, that are sitting actually on membranes like the red cell membrane. And, therefore, one really has to look at the different components that you take and ask, where is where are the trypsins? And then, of course, on the other side of the the coin, what is your antifa trypsin look like? In severe forms of shock, we find that the antifertrypsin has been chopped into hundreds of, peptides. And they could potentially be also a biomarker that, we don't have a a a sort of a lab technique. One has to go through mass spectrometry, which takes a couple of weeks before you come back. So clinically incompatible. But, if there are specialized, peptides that one, peptides elements that one looks for, there's a good chance that we will be able to develop a technology that is, truly useful, in a clinic. So, trypsin cleaves at which amino acids? Is there a specific amino acid signature that's based on trypsin? Yep. There's high probability it cleaves at arginine, and, the same you can now it's actually listed in literature. You can look for chymotrypsin. They all have relatively specific site. So if you look at the, peptides, it's a nice exercise because you can actually tell with certain probability how the peptide was actually generated. So would it be arginine containing peptides then? In the case of trypsin. Yeah. In the case of trypsin. Yeah. And and if you go through this list of peptides, it's it's a long list, about a 100,000 or so. And you then ask a question, was where was trypsin involved? Do you look for these arginine residues and get an estimate of that? And when considering that oh, sorry? Since there are multiple enzymes often being activated also, It's not just the digestive enzymes, but they activate, for example, the MMPs I mentioned. And I'm sure they activate also calicryne. They activate, cathapsins and possibly other proteases. After all, we have more than 500 proteases, according to the genome. So in this particular situation, one can get a indication of which proteases you're involved in. And it's a very important piece of information because it tells you what you need to inhibit. Yeah. Great great point. Alright. So, I'm guessing albumin would be a major target of proteases and blood because albumin is the most abundant circulating protein. So albumin levels decline during aging. So could someone seeing an age related decline in their own data, could that be a potential indicator that Very nice experiment that you're suggesting. Absolutely. Yep. Cool. And then so I think you mentioned You lose the albumin, just to follow-up. You lose your, free fatty acid binding capability. Yeah. So the other side the other side of that too is that albumin binds to, bacteria derived metabolites like indoxyl and paracrystal sulfate that are protein digestive, fermentation products. So it's that's so if if you've got an increased leak of trypsin and then albumin's declining, not just the fatty acid that it's binding to, it's binding to potential uremic metabolites that damage the kidney, the heart, the endothelium. So albumin's a big one. So you mentioned you mentioned, we clearly, we we evolved to have antitrypsin, antibodies in our in our blood. Do those decline during aging? According to this Greenberg paper that I cited, this one that's been in the literature, yes. It they decline into the biosynthesis. Similar to other proteins, there's a decline of proteins in general. I don't think they're coming from the liver. I don't think that, these are relatively unique in in that process, in that aging process together with many other proteins, they decline. How significant that decline is, again, remains to be determined by actually protease measurements, protease activity measure. Does this make a big difference in the age of an old person? Should one do a transfection and the liver can be transfected and we enhance the gene expression of alpha antitrypsin, can also be given orally. As a matter of fact, it's the only inhibitor that is reasonably inexpensive that we can afford. And the other because of the fact that there are families that have, polymorphisms in in the gene of that, and they are being treated, a lifetime, with antialefatriptystole. The others have not been produced to any significant degree. They're very expensive to get a hold of. So there is a real need for further development, in order to test these questions that you ask. Nice. So future studies future studies by your lab, what can we expect to see? Do you have any stuff for them? Right. Right. I give you two thoughts. Aging is the highest risk factor for literally every human disease. Cancer, you name it. And we now know that or you have the first evidence that, digestive enzymes are part of the aging process as well as death. It's just a question of magnitude. When it comes to multiorg failure, once you are in a a hospice, you when you die, you die by your own digestive enzymes with your loved ones standing around. That tells me that this process, this this degrading process is probably not unique to just the process of aging. We have the first evidence that, for example, diabetes, this insulin receptor cleavage occurs in these animals when digestive enzymes get out. And so that raises the issue. Can we block the digestive enzymes in a clever way without stopping, of course, digestion? Is there a possibility that we can attain attenuate this process? I'm pretty certain we can, and we're trying to develop techniques, in order to block the digestive enzymes when they get out of the intestine. So is that with intravenous, infusions of the antiproteases, or how would you Yes. That's a possibility. We haven't gone to that point, but, we our idea is the following. The digestive enzymes have this huge concentration in the intestine at about 1% in the tissue itself. So if you take a small molecule, a competitive inhibitor, that can diffuse through the mucosal barrier and can get out. So now the trick is is okay. You block digestive enzymes, but only to the degree that's necessary in the peripheral organs. And you hope, therefore, that the digestion in the intestine still is able to continue. This large differences in concentration may open that possibility, and we're testing that at the moment. Fantastic. Can't wait to see it. Hopefully, we'll have you back on, and you can tell us all about it. Yep. I'm looking forward to that. Yep. Alright. Well, thanks, Geert. I appreciate you. Everything you presented today and all the knowledge you shared, and, we'll see you again soon. Yep. I I hope we meet sometimes in person. Bye. Bye. Ciao.