Hey, everybody. Welcome back to the channel. Today, we've got Chrisman Loomis for round two. If you miss round one, it'll be in the video description. Chrisman is the owner and operator of unaging,unaging,.com. So today, we're gonna talk about a whole bunch of aging related topics. So let's jump into it. So what's on the agenda today, Chris? So, first, you're gonna talk about a diet life expectancy study. Uh-huh. Then I thought it'd be a good idea for us to talk about supplements, and kind of what we think about them. There's a lot of YouTube videos out there of what everyone's taking, and I wanna make sure that you and I put in our 2¢ worth on it. And then on healthy habits, like, once you get beyond diet and exercise, what else is there that you can do that would make a difference? Alright. So I I'll link to this paper in the video's description, but, and I don't even have the title here, but I think it's impact of healthy lifestyle factors on life expectancies. And then I I can't see what the rest is. Alright. But nonetheless, gained life expectancy by increasing and then a variety of factors, physical activity, smoking, diet quality, moderate alcohol consumption, and then, BMI. So in focusing on diet, people who are in the highest, with quartile or quintile of, the alternative healthy eating index, women and men. So you can see that women who are in the highest quintile compared to the lowest had about a four year gain of life expectancy for the highest dietary quality. And then for men, it's, actually, sorry, it's five year gain for women because it's compared to Q1, which is the reference. And then for men, it was a four year gain. So that might not seem too impressive, but then there's another study that was just published. So you can see, you can see here, life expectancy can increase by up to ten years following sustained shifts towards healthier diets. So when it comes to pushing that, and that's, you know, they don't have any pretty pictures. I mean, they've got, you know, like, they ranked want them to rank. They looked at hazard ratio, all cause mortality based on individual food groups. And this is actually the, so they have the in the supplementary data, they have a I don't remember off the top of my head in terms of, what they adjusted for. I think this one isn't fully adjusted. When you look at the fully adjusted data, it's actually cleaner. So I don't know. Maybe I'll share that one too because I have that open. So the what I'm finding is that the adjustment for as many variables as possible is the essential in these epidemiological studies. And I know that may seem superficially obvious, but most epi studies, like for example, using LDL as an example, they'll adjust for, you know, the standards, age, sex, BMI, education, and then like hypertension, glucose levels, you know, basically metabolic health. But then not all of these studies, whether it's LDL or this study or others, they won't adjust for all of the comorbidities. Many of these studies will leave out, like, deaths from lung disease or, liver liver disease, and maybe that doesn't seem like a big deal, but reverse causation is a big or potentially a big impact on a lot of these associations. So, like, in the case I mean, I guess we won't go through the LDL story today, but there's a study that was recently published with about 5,000,000 people where they adjusted for, like, 14 different comorbidities. And when you look at earlier studies that show basically a J shaped or U shaped curve for LDL and all cause mortality or total cholesterol with LDL driving most of that. When you adjust for all of the comorbidities as opposed to some of them, the the curve becomes like, you know, the it flattens out the bottom of that j so that lower LDL is not associated or lower total cholesterol is not associated with, an increased cardiovascular disease risk. So anyway, with with that in mind, the paper, in the supplementary data for the diet life expectancy, study, the ten years, this is the more fully adjusted model. BMI, calories or energy, age, sex, you know, and the, and the full spectrum, which reduces their sample size because I think it was probably double or triple this in the, in the larger set. But nonetheless, they go through all of the different food groups. And in terms of the longest, reduced all cause mortality risk versus, you know, better survival versus shorter. And it's actually some of it is is, you know, what you'd expect. Like, you know, what's interesting is not that I'm a pro meat guy. I'm not anti meat. But if you look at sugar sweetened beverages in terms of, you know, all cause mortality risk, I mean, it's sixty five percent higher risk significantly. You can see the confidence interval is greater than one. And I mean, you know, processed meat too. I mean, Peter Atha is high on his processed meat, and yet 45%. And these are the strongest associations with now granted, the processed meat he's eating, I guess, probably has no preservatives. And I I don't know, you know, how, you know, their what natural flavors they're using. But, nonetheless, the two strongest associations are processed meat and, you know, the sugar sweetened beverages, you know, whereas, red meat red meat, not significant, confidence interval overlaps, white meat, not significant. And, again, I'm not thrower anti meat. This is just what the data shows. But yet in in the pop culture, you know, there isn't this big drive for, hey. Let's let's tax sugar sweetened beverages, or let's reduce intake because now I'm gonna sound like the conspiracy theorist, but you've got big food. Right? Big food who doesn't want. Right? So so anyway, ten year increased life expectancy with this study too. So if we're going to make a dent on pushing that, you know, average life expectancy out, we've got one study showing four to six years for, you know, women and men. This study showing ten years, but then the question is, you know, with the biomarker based approach, can we push it out fifteen to twenty, add CR in there, add some circadian alignment in there in terms of when you eat, and a little bit of fasting potentially based on the animal studies. Maybe push it out to 25 or 30. I don't know what the window is. But, yeah, I just wanted to this will probably be in a video at some point, but, yeah, this is the hot off the presses. Score. So just going over it now, like, some of the things that jump out, like, one is the the nuts at, point four five. It looks like it didn't reach significance, so it's a bit questionable. But the average result was the largest thing on there. As I've talked to, I think about before and have noted from the epidemiological studies, the nuts dosage is very sensitive. So basically getting just what they say here is getting about, one small handful or less than an ounce, like, almost an ounce a day is the best. And you see this tier, my statistical analysis of it from another study says it's a seventy percent reduction in premature death. And you see here in quintile two, it's eighteen percent right on and significant at that level. That one matches expectations. Sugar sweetened beverages matches expectation. The meat white is one that's kind of strange. Right? Like, some of these things have strange intermediate results. But, then again, you see with the legumes then being healthy, generally, but kind of questionable. Fish also being sort of borderline, which is something I usually think is good. But one of the interesting ones that stands out here also is the milk being actually generally healthy is another one that's a bit of a surprise, especially as you get into the higher amounts. Usually, I see that as not healthy. That might be idiosyncratic. This is a UK study. So that might be something that kind of depends on The UK. But in general, I think it lines up. It'd be, yeah. It's something that, I'll be interested to take a look after this and kinda see how it matches with the, the data that we have today. You've got the refined grains too, which, I mean, across the board, you can see q two significant, q three, q four. Every every quintile of higher intake is significantly associated with increased all cause mortality risk. So, yeah, not I mean, but that's easy. Right? You know, that's for me, that's the lowest hanging fruit. Eat real food and exercise, right? It's not specific enough. And like you were saying about the nuts, where you've got Q2 being significant, whereas the higher intakes are not, you know, it gets this idea of, again, specificity. Like, if you look at q five, okay, sure, that confidence interval going, you know, overlapping with one. But when you see so so it raises an interesting thing that that the hazard ratio is so low, It suggests but the confidence interval is so high is that there was a lot of variability within nut intake and all cause mortality risk. But on the one hand and, again, I know it's not significant, so this is speculation. But it suggests that for a given population, there may be factors where the highest quintile of intake is indeed associated with the largest, risk reduction. Whereas, for whatever reason, people who are eating the most nuts, there's some variability in that. So for me, it's a matter of, you know, how can you titrate? What are the variables? And this kinda ties into the alcohol story too, because there's a similar effect going on here also with the with the, hazard ratio potentially suggesting a decreased mortality risk at lower intakes, but it overlaps with one. But it suggests that there may be subpopulations of people. And, again, it's not significant, so it's just a suggestion. It suggests that there are subpopulations of people that if you figure out what the external variables or the other variables are in addition to this that can impact risk to make it a significant thing, there may be a, you know, an even bigger benefit. Right? But, what those other factors are, I I can't I can't say it. I have to do deep dive. Right? So Well, I mean, off the off the top of the head, the the trade off of nuts is the high calorie count to them. Right? So then you might be seeing some people who are then eating far too many nuts. My dad often talked about one of his weaknesses was the jar of peanut butter on the counter that he'd come home after eating a tight calorie day and then get a big old glob of, peanut butter because he was just hungry. Yeah. So I think that's probably gonna be what you're seeing on the top side. The argument against that, though, is they adjusted the model for energy intake. So, but it could be lots of BMI as well. Right? Yeah. So So even even eggs here too. Occasional eggs, q two, significant production. And then you can see even q three and q four right on that borderline of a little bit of eggs, potentially being good. But then q five highest. I mean, now it's significant. Too many eggs, not good. Right? So That that matches up exactly with the epidemiological study I've seen to date where it says that on the dosage of about an egg every other day or so is fine and might even be slightly good for you. And this, in fact, shows that the q two is better for you than being at the lowest egg consumption. But after about an egg a day, then from that, it's basically breakeven. And after that, now you're starting to see other effects. And And that's probably gonna be the cholesterol. Right? Yeah. It could be. But so, I mean, granted, I'm the outlier and the n of one. Right? But so I I increased egg intake from two per week to four per week, and it didn't didn't affect anything. No biomarkers. Nothing changed. So That's that's the sweet spot. Four per week. You're at about every other day. So that's exactly in the q two. That's where I'm saying people actually did see benefit from it. Right. But you'd expect if that were true in my case, you'd expect to see some biomarkers with some, you know, just some improvement moving the needle in some direction and Mhmm. Nothing. Literally nothing. Oh, it had nothing. Okay. It had no Yeah. So but that goes back to the context dependent. You know? It could be and no obviously, clearly, no effect on my total or LDL cholesterol levels. In my case, I've gotta really jack up my saturated fat, whether it's from coconut butter or other stuff, cacao beans, which is saturated fat too, to get my HDL from its or sorry, from my LDL and total cholesterol from relatively low one fifty and, like, 80 for a total in LDL to get that to, like, one eighty, 200. So it it seems that eggs on the context of my, you know, high fiber diet, no moving the needle on cholesterol. But for the average person who's probably eating 15 of fiber per day, because there's an inverse association between fiber and total cholesterol levels. So if you're on a low fiber diet relatively and you go to more and more eggs, and I know people are gonna say, well, the idea that increasing dietary cholesterol doesn't impact blood cholesterol has been debunked. But for some people, it that may not be the case where there is a, you know, dose response relationship depending on the background of other stuff that you're eating, like I said, including things like fiber. So that could be some of the story here, but speculation. Right? I don't know. Right. I'm not I'm not sure exactly on the color coding they're using for this. Because, like, I look at Whole Grains q three, and it's, like, 82%, and it's clearly under one. So it's a significant benefit. But then I look at vegetables q four, and it's also green, but it clearly straddles one. So I'm not I'm not quite clear how they did the coloring. Yeah. The I agree. The color coding here is a disaster. Like, even the blues the blues are their their eat well recommendations, The UK eat well recommendations, which just Okay. Yeah. And then, yeah, I don't I don't like you said, I don't know why the green would yeah. Because, yeah, whole grains, q two and q four are significant. So why aren't those also green? Right? So, yeah, screw it. That's one reason I didn't show this in the video because, you know, it's just there is some confusion to it. Right? So but if you look at it though, another interesting thing that is consistent with the epidemiological studies is that the vegetables and fruits and vegetables don't have that big of a boost overall. I mean, if you look at, for instance, even just having the q two quartile, second quartile of nuts, which gave you the 18% reduction in all cause, none of the quartiles for fruits or vegetables give you anywhere more than ten percent reduction in all cause mortality. Yeah. To to play the devil's advocate there, I don't know if it's because of bias or the published studies or published studies drive my bias, but most people are barely eating any fruits and vegetables. So we're talking about associations for maybe five maybe five total servings per day versus one or two, which to me is, like, you know, comparing sick against sicker. I I I have another I didn't open this tab up, but there's, another study on, fiber intake and all cause mortality risk. And off the top of my head, I have to take another look at it, but I think, fruit fiber wasn't significantly associated with reduced risk, which ties into what this data shows and your what you're saying, but vegetable fiber was. But again, that's still on the lowest side of fiber intake. And I think the highest fiber in that study was, like, 40 grams. Like, how I'm completely I'm double that at least. How do how do you put me into that context? Right? So Right. Well, I I I focus on the fiber getting it from the whole grains and the legumes. The whole grains that we've seen have, come out strong here. They're basically one or below in every quartile after the first. And the legumes, though, that's a mystery one. Like, it I think I think we're talking about the rarity thing. Like, the quintile five, how much legumes are they actually eating? But that range there is the largest almost of any of the ranges. Like, hazard ratio from 10% to 525% is Yeah. Not clear. But those are the those are the real drivers, I think, for most people of fiber in the diet is the whole grains and legumes. It's hard to eat enough fruits and vegetables to get enough fiber before your stomach is full. I know not everyone is able to put away half a kilo of, strawberries like like you can. Yeah. It's the the legumes is where I've been focusing and also on the whole grains because I find that's very underappreciated. Getting, like, a slice of whole wheat bread is actually a wonderful healthy thing. Feels like we kinda forget about it in the the rush towards, whole foods. It doesn't look like a food, but it really is. Or or some healthy breakfast cereals also can be outstanding. Not the Fruit Loops Ranchu, but like the Cheerios or, Grape Nuts or some of those other things, or oatmeal can be excellent with healthy foods. But the argument there, for at least someone like me is those foods don't satiate me at all. And and it's they are processed. Like, it's not it's not ultra processed, but, you know, like, instead of so if you've got a cereal that's derived from whole wheat and it's quote unquote whole grain, ideally, you can buy wheat whole wheat berries. You just cook them up. You just put them in whatever you're cooking, and you just put up the an equivalent amount of cap so instead of having a slice of bread, which is like four bites and a 100 calories, you put that well, granted, whole wheat berries are still calorie dense. You know, whole grains are about a 100 calories an ounce. But, at least you're getting legit the whole food versus, you know, whatever the whole grains 12 grains of whole grains and Cheerios. Right? I mean, literally eat the whole grain. I know. But most doing that. Most people aren't doing that. Right. Well, I'm a big fan of the whole wheat berries as well. I have those every morning. Whole wheat berries, barley, and oatmeal is my standard bowl. So Nice. But, I actually go and and recommend to people some and myself as well, just a granola bar. Hyper processed, added sugar, all of those things. But at least it is whole wheat, and the fiber there is quite high. Yeah. No. I hear you. I hear you on that. I don't know. I can put it back up. But so it's the yeah. That for me, that's like the general, you you know, the general recommendation versus the I don't wanna say the mic level, which is, you know, eat real food. I I just I see so, you know, even the store bought granola bars, are, you know, just that they can be not satiating. Right? So it's how many of those are you gonna eat? Can you just stick with one net one little strip? Or, what I learned a long time ago was, you know, what if I make my own? Right? And for me, that's infinitely more satiating. Like, not necessarily, first of all, the oats being rolled oats, you know, is is it, you know, so there's a difference, like, Quakers Quakers rolled oats versus, like, steel cut oats, glycemic index, there's difference. You know, pesticide use, like, there's a there's a and I think it's a consumer reports or some some website did a a review on pesticides and, oatmeal in the rolled oats. And, I mean, the burden in most rolled oats brands of pesticides, I mean, it was incredibly high even for some of the organic brands. So, so it's important to know which on the list have no pesticides, you know? And, you know, I I can hear people saying, well, so what? Pesticides, conventional versus organic. The nutrient quality is not different. Sure. That is you know, there's data showing that. But I'm trying to limit, you know, stuff like pesticides if I can. Whether that makes a dent or not, I I take the gamble. But from from my experience, the the the bars that you're getting, I mean, just not satiating. And when I make it at home, it's like, you know, I I have cocoa beans and the dates, which I make that homemade chocolate, you know, and that satiates me to the point where I don't I mean, granted, I could probably crush 4,000 calories of Reese's peanut butter cups. But knowing that I'm eating the real food, you know, it it satisfies that urge versus, you know, that I can't who can stop eating, you know, even granola bars. Right? So Well, that's, one key to that I find is not to have too many. There was a time when I was eating, I had a high supply of, granola of protein bars. And I found that, basically, the amount of them that I would eat in one sitting was largely determined by the variety of flavors I had. Because I would just take one of every flavor. If I had two flavors, I'd have two. If I had five flavors, I'd eat five. So I currently have two kinds of granola bars, so I usually eat two granola bars. You're on the marathon, you know, you're on that marathon training diet, so it's like, you need calories, you need quick calories, so yeah. Yeah. One thing I wanna come back around to, I haven't seen that, consumer reports on the oatmeal. I had seen the consumer reports on, on some of the problems with rice, and heavy metals and some of the things, but I haven't seen the oatmeal. From the stuff that I had looked at before, actually, both legumes and whole wheat, whole grains were significantly better on having a very low pesticide burden compared with fruits and vegetables. And, there was a study that came out, I believe it was in the last few years, that talked about the high pesticide residue, fruits and vegetables versus the low pesticide residue. And they found very significantly that the high pesticide residue and this is about a third of all the the, total intake, had more of a j shape in terms of the all cause premature death reduction. And my feeling, instinct, and, have no evidence for this, is that that's because of the low dosage, it doesn't matter. But they were then showing higher cancer rates as people had higher doses of high pesticide residue fruits and vegetables. And I think that's one of the main reasons why when we looked at the other page, as you talk about, like, five servings should be normal for fruits and vegetables. But we don't actually see that much of a benefit, because I don't think many people are able to get organic. It's easy for those of us who are of the means to shop at whole whole paycheck, whole foods, every day to think, oh, well, of course, it's all organic. But anytime you're going out and eating at someone else's house or a restaurant or anywhere other than your home where you have had the luxury perhaps of paying a premium for the organic food, it's not something you can count on, which is another reason why I tend to go towards the whole grains and the beans, which just naturally don't have as much pesticides with them. So that's a good point. You'll have to if you could send, the pesticide and the mortality data, that would be great. But so it might not be consumer reports, but it's something similar to that where they did an analysis of the pesticides. So I'll we can post that too in the in the video's description. Okay. Cool. Great. So, shall we jump then into, supplements? Sure. Okay. And this is, kind of a fast comment. I mean, I as I scroll, do my own scrolling through YouTube and see sort of all the the health and nutrition experts, there's always the question of what nutrients do you take. And I recently wrote a a post on, Brian Johnson and his, blueprint. And Brian Johnson takes over a 100 supplements every day. And as I look at that, my general feeling for that is, I wanna catch all the, the easy to achieve gains through normal lifestyle, through eating the the whole grains and legumes and a small handful of nuts first. And because my benchmark for everything is premature reducing premature death and reducing that risk, for so many of these new things, I have no idea. There's no volume that we could get a study for that would tell me whether it actually reduces premature death. And my confidence in saying, okay. Well, they've taken the study of this particular supplement of this chemical. The the joke that I make on the blog that I talk about is it's hard to tell the difference between some of these supplements in the name of Pokemon, like Genistein, taurine, and other things. And they don't whether that has a particular impact, whether it's actually reducing all cause mortality or just moving a particular biomarker perhaps in a unhelpful way or something that doesn't really make an impact. It's hard for me to see. So the only supplement that I take on a daily basis is glucosamine. Glucosamine chondroitin, which is, knee medicine that's been around for decades. But it's commonly prescribed, and as a result, and it's another UK study from the Biobank in The UK, they can show that it has about fifteen percent reduction in all cause mortality. And it seems to be clustered more around lung diseases, sort of COPD and pneumonia and other kinds of things. So that reduction just from taking a little completely harmless with no side effects effects of any kind medicine is gonna give you a better overall result in reduction in premature death than maybe even getting, restaurant fruits and vegetables that might have other things with them. So for the other things like the, sort of the supplements of the day when you're talking about Metformin, which is a diabetes supplement, Repamycin which targets mTOR. These are strong medicines, but they're strong medicines. They're prescription only at this point. So even if you ignore the overhead of trying to get something that is requires a doctor's prescription in The United States at least, they do have side effects with them. The rapamycin then is going to reduce muscle building, so you need to then cycle it and other things. And I've seen some studies that seem to say, yes, it's very beneficial for people who have diabetes. It's a diabetes medicine. But if you don't have diabetes, you're not going to get the benefit of that. And it's not really clear. And even if they did, they're saying that maybe it's like a five or ten percent reduction premature death, which I'm saying, well, I've already got glucosamine as a supplement, which says a fifteen percent reduction. So I'm gonna stick with that. But I am interested in the NMN, which is coming up as a new thing. And I know that you've been doing a lot of experimentation with the NAD. So, with that, I wanna pass it over to you and hear what your thoughts are on supplement and also your specific experiments of hacking your own NAD production. Alright. Wait. But before then, so if you we can hopefully, you can send the glucosamine data, and I there may actually be some data that it extends lifespan in mice. I I could be wrong about that, but, so we can put that in the in the, you know, in the video's description too. So in terms of, like, what the billion supplements that Brian's taking, he unlike I I hear your point about all cause mortality data and extrapolating from the animal studies to humans. I get that. But in his defense, he's he's tracking biomarkers. Right? He's doing it rigorously, and he's doing it the right way to see, does it make a dent, does it make it not? But I don't think he has the appropriate control, which is, what does my data look like at my current you know, he he he he can't start with the pre blueprint phase Brian data of this is what all my data was, and I was my body composition was worse and all of all of those things. My diet his diet was worse. No supplements, maybe. I don't know if he's comparing himself against that. But, to take everything like, you know, metformin, I mean, TRT, he's on metformin. He's on I think he may be on a statin, which makes me think, dude, does anything in your body work normally without without these things? Like, you know, do you have you're literally patching the dam. Like, you got so many holes whether whatever the situation may be. So that's one. The other side of that though is, like I said, he's monitoring biomarkers. Now, I don't know, though, what's the magnitude of the effect by taking that stuff out? I don't know if he's done that experiment. How which things are actually making a dent? And, you know, what's the consequence of long term usage of these things where maybe some of the damage could be irreversible? I don't know. Maybe and, again, I'm speculating. There's no n of one longitudinal data or even animal studies that have done this. Well, I don't know animal studies, but okay, rapamycin, it'll extend lifespan in sedentary mice in a cage, you know, granted not to the magnitude of CR plus fasting plus circadian alignment. But, you know, if if you take that okay, if you take that in the short term, you get a transient improvement in biomarkers and that's a big if, what's the chronic effect of doing that thirty years? Like and if there are things in your in your biomarkers that change that may be eve even more difficult to change because you're taking you're taking something in a super physiological dose that you've never you would never see this in the wild. Are there some negative effects? Now, maybe the answer is no, and I'm wrong, which is fine. I'm happy to be wrong about that. But on these things, you know, I don't want my existence to cease to exist because I've taken some exogenous agent, which I would never see. And I've basically, for a lack of a better term, f myself with some prescription prescription meds. I try to take the lowest the lowest risk strategy and then, you know, add with the targeted supplementation on top of that. And then even then, even with targeted supplementation, which goes into the NAD, NMN, nicotinic acid story, even with that, I may take those things out that may have a a an improvement in some areas, but make other areas worse. Right? With the goal of still changing it by diet. So the the NAD story is that, based on what, quote, unquote, youthful is in blood cell blood cell NAD levels, which the the common criticism there is you don't know what your tissue levels are, which is a fair point. But there are studies showing that an increase in blood NAD can link with tissue levels of NAD, and we wanna have it relatively high in the tissues. We don't wanna have low levels of muscle NAD. We'll have low levels of muscle energetics and so on. Right? So, but I am doing metabolomics data too to see to try to get more insight beyond the blood versus the tissue. It's not a full picture. We'd have to do muscle biopsies, which is impractical. So relatively low levels of NAD, 20 to 25. Micromolar without supplementing anything. And this is on my, you know, mostly you youthful biomarker driven diet, and exercise training, which has shown to increase NAD, still relatively low relative to 30 year olds who have somewhere around 40 median values. Mind 20 to 25 without doing anything. So I found that nicotinic acid works. I started that experiment with six hundred milligrams per day. But on the same day, it my Dunedin pace, epigenetic pace of aging, was like 10 standard deviations from my nine test average without that test, suggesting I drove it to to outlier status. So then, I shifted down sixty milligrams Yeah. Yeah. Yep. 10 x reduction, still got an increase for NAD to the same magnitude as a thousand milligrams of NMN, which the Internet seems to love NMN and, you know, thinking it's the panacea of all things antiaging. Sixty milligrams nicotinic acid, same effect on NAD as NMN, one thousand milligrams. So, then I sent blood for, any, in terms of NAD, the the I've been alright. So wait. So then so that's the low dose. So then what about is is it a high nicotinic acid, six hundred milligrams per day, and the corresponding high NAD, which was sixty seven micromolar on that day of the test with the worst done need and pace. Is it high nic nicotinic acid? Is it high NAD, that's potentially messing up with the epigenetic pace of aging? I don't know. So to test that, I then went with two grams per day of NMN and got my NAD to 61 micromolar. So then the question is, alright. If it's a high NAD story, the need and pace should be messed up. I don't have that data yet. I sent it. Should be coming on January 10. So So waiting. Yeah. Still waiting. Not much longer, but, the the the pop you know, the Internet seems to think that it's gonna be a high dose nicotinic acid, story. Because if the median and paste is around my usual, you know, point eight, point seven eight, point seven six, somewhere in that range, point eight two, then it's not a high NAD story. It's a high nicotinic acid story. But the good news is nicotinic acid at lower doses, sixty milligrams per day, doesn't seem to mess up my done eating pace. I think it was, like, point eight two on that day, which is in the ballpark of my which still is in point six. Like, some of these guys like Seamland, and others, which is the goal. But, so to to get around that, I've been on the trigo trig it's hard to say. Trigoneline, which I have a recent video about, which potentially could increase NAD. And, that's a dietary change. So it would get a if I could increase NAD and not mess up done eating paste by increasing trichinelline through diet, that'd be a fantastic way to get around this whole nicotinic acid messing up done eating paste in my case. So what what's your what's your safest best bet for increase using NMN, or NAD right now with what you know? Hopefully hopefully hopefully, Trigonelli. Hopefully, Trigonelli. Okay. Yeah. And what's the dosage? It's probably about twenty milligrams per day from diet. Whereas before, it was, like, zero, almost, like, you know, five milligrams. And then you could say, alright. That's a fifteen milligram per day difference. Is that gonna make a dent? But remember, sixty milligrams of nicotinic acid raised my NAD by, you know, 40%. So So so what are the dietary sources of trigoneline again? So you're gonna like this one. Coffee is the most abundant source by far. It's like 22 22 Really? Yeah. 2,200, micrograms per gram, but I think that's dry wood. I've been telling you. That's what I've been telling you. You should be drinking that coffee. Yeah. I've been considering it, but it's a hard sell for me because, coffee was just they're it's just rank for me. I I just and you brush your teeth afterwards, but it stays all day. You know? People if I'm around people that have drank, drank coffee, I'm like, oh, god. They just can't do it. But so then second second on that list is, chickpeas, which goes to Lagoon story. Okay. Great. There you go. Okay. And the story The story gets better there too because I have food, elevated IGGs, food sensitivities against many beans, like, kidney beans, navy beans. Actually, navy beans have higher levels than chickpeas, but my IGGs are just way off the chart there. So and I was gonna put that data in a video, you know, the screenshots of the IgGs and the beans, but, it would be a too long video. So, anyway, so chickpeas, three fifty, three hundred fifty micrograms per gram. So I've actually taken so but then I've gotta move around calories in my diet because I'm trying to stay eucalyro or less. So Right. Barley and oats have significantly less trigoneline. Barley has almost none. Remains. Okay. Very good. But I so I'm substituting the all all the whole grains for chickpeas, to get that. So, whether that'll make a dent and the peep the people that have been, you know, saying, where are the legumes, blue zones, and all cause mortality? Where is that in your data? Now we're gonna see. You know? So will it be enough? I don't know. But, you know, that's the Well, it's, it's inspiring seeing you kinda pushing the levers and fine tuning it. So, I just wish you could test that stuff faster. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, yeah, it'd be great to have that stuff, you know, in my you know, I could just do it immediately and have the answer, like, you know, within days. But some one can hope, right, that that's coming. Right. Okay. Well, let me Maybe the trigoneline doesn't make a dent at all, and then I just have to go with, you know, a small dose of nicotinic acid. And, but, the the trick there too is the the the methyl donor thing. You know? Get just going this goes to the idea of supplementation too. So, you know, so if for people supplementing with NMN or NR or niacin, nicotinamide, or, nicotinic acid, You know, that's well known to deplete methyl donors. So, you know, it's all over the Internet too. And then there is published data that supports this that when supplementing with NAD precursors, it it it can deplete methyl donors, leading to increases in things like homocysteine, which could potentially affect, methylation age too because methylation age is clearly it's a hyper or hypomethylation process. Right? So, I mean, homocysteine is one of the leading indicators for overall cardiovascular issues. Right? Yeah. Yeah. That's right. Definitely. The the RCTs don't show any any improvements, though, which is tricky because, you know, so reducing homocysteine doesn't show from my reading of the literature, and it's not a comprehensive review. But, that's generally the argument against homocysteine as a biomarker. It's what does the r what do the RCT show? But these are in generally already sick populations who have some preexisting conditions. So maybe homocysteine lowering, in that case, isn't a big deal. But my goal is prevention and minimization of risk. So, you know, can I delay any vascular related complications from, elevated homocysteine rather than have elevated homocysteine, and now I'm gonna try to improve my mortality? So I'm trying to prevent. So I think it's a different story. But so the TMG, trimethyglycine is what people are like. Take TMG. Take TMG. Well, I've done that experiment. It didn't work for me. I took up to three grams per day. Homocysteine didn't bulge. I've also done the serine plus b six to pull homocysteine down away towards glutathione. That didn't work either. Six grams of of serine and, like, forty or fifty milligrams of, which is like thirteen x my b six that didn't work either on homocysteine. Methyl b twelve does reduce my homocysteine by a bit, but it goes to this idea of, you know, what are the methyl donors that are, specific that you can take if you're trying to improve NAD or you have elevated homocysteine that, that are specific for you. Maybe it's not TMG. Everybody thinks TMG, TMDT. It may not be. Now along those lines, I've also added which, again, it's gonna seem like a simple change or addition, but, I've added oranges into the approach. I actually cut the strawberries down and added an equivalent amount of oranges. And, I did that because, oranges have proline betaine, which is at the end, you have a a couple of methyl groups. Now can it act as a methyl donor? I don't know. And that's not the only amino acid that is di- or trimethylated. Like, trimethylglycine has three methyl groups attached to its nitrogen. Proline has two. There's tryptophan betaine which has methyl groups. So there are many amino acids besides glycine that are di or trimethylated that can potentially act as methyl donors. Is that gonna be enough from a hundred grams or so of oranges per day? I I don't know. I'll find out. What are what are you, hoping to see in your in your, in your metabolics that would change as a result of moving from the strawberries over to the oranges? Like, what which of the you're just gonna see in the homocysteine, you're thinking? Or where are you gonna see that show up? So that's an interesting question because, you know, I look at correlations between diet and the and the blood biomarkers. And, in a panel of 25 biomarkers, strawberries are have a net positive correlative score with 11 of those in terms of how they change during aging and all cause mortality risk. Now that's unadjusted correlations. I haven't adjusted for body weight. Body weight may be driving some of that as strawberry intake has increased as I've cut body weight down. And body weight seems to be a big driver of improving biomarkers in my data. So so the the risk though is if strawberry is driving some of those correlations, I've reduced their intake and now increased it with oranges. So I may get some, you know, reduction of positive effects by reducing strawberries with a small isolated effect, if any, for oranges. But homocysteine is that primary driver just through the, the, proline betaine to increase proline betaine, which my diet had basically none of beforehand. And if you look at if you look at my Horvath epigenetic age and my homocysteine data without any b twelve or additional folate, it does suggest I have some methyl donor inadequacy or deficiency, so I've gotta try to and then it gets to this idea of diet specificity. You know, maybe the 28 vegetarian diet. The deficit of b twelve is, like, is one of the first things that you're warned about with the vegetarian diet or a vegan diet is that you might not be getting enough of vitamin b twelve. So it's completely understandable. Yep. But in my case, fish I've got fish every day. In terms of b twelve intake compared to the RDA, I'm at, like, five x the RDA without supplements. So it's not a vegan diet, and actually a little bit more. Right. Right. Yeah. So but it goes to the idea of, and it may not be a b twelve issue at all. It may just be methyl b twelve has some methyl donors. I I need to have a boost in methyl donors for whatever reason, and I'm not really fixing the problem. I I'm I'm open to even taking out the methyl b twelve at some point and just trying to still tweak the diet and get more methyl donors. Okay. Great. So, let's continue on and talk about some of the other things that we have, sort of the beyond the food and beyond the exercise. So, I'll start off on this to sort of give an example on this, because it's something I've been thinking about, is what are the things that we can talk about as habits that are healthy but are beyond just, going to the gym and the kitchen? So, one of the things, for example, and this has been, become popular lately, is the sauna as a term of all cause mortality reduction. And the studies of this, and we'll link them below, are mostly from Finland because they have a strong sauna culture there. But, the data is quite compelling. They have RCTs that show things like, improved lactate threshold and VO2 max, which is a really good measure of cardiovascular, overall health, health. And they say they have studies there that show that going to the sauna about four to seven times a week, and they they have the the baseline is quite funny because there aren't any people they could find. Like in a city of 4,000 people, they could only find two people who didn't go to the sauna at least once a week. So the baseline they're comparing to is people who go once a week. But even so, the people who went four to seven times had a forty percent reduction in premature death. So one of the things that I've added to my overall schedule is that I go to the sauna regularly. Here, where I live, down the street, there's a local bath. I'm in Japan, so there's a local bath that has actually a sauna in it. But the thing that's interesting is that I found, some recently, some other studies that show other similar effects for other ways of heating the body. So it seems like the sauna is actually a way that your body to fool your body, hack it, if you will, into thinking that you're still doing exercise. So the study, and, the study refers to, wearing a sauna suit, which is basically wearing a trash bag, so that you continue to sweat, even after you exercise. And it compares going to the sauna, wearing a sauna suit, and also just taking a hot bath. So sitting in a hot bath of, that nice toasty bath for a long time. And, in the last, actually, couple of years, they've had a study that's been released in Japan that showed similar cardiovascular benefits, not as strong as the sauna, but similar, where they're showing increased benefit as far as, reduced strokes and heart attacks and other things from just people who are getting lots of baths every night and evening, as traditional here. So that's one of the things that I do that's further than that. The other things are, would be the dental care is another thing where they have strong reductions of premature death. And I especially like this one because it's different from the other, studies. Oftentimes, people think, Well, yes, of course. If someone takes good care of teeth, they're, taking care of their body as a whole. They're seeing the doctor all the time and all these things. But actually, the specificity about it is that brushing your teeth is helpful for longevity when done in the evening. And only in the evening. Like, if you brush your teeth in the morning, that's great. It helps for fresh breath, maybe gets rid of the coffee smell in your breath. But, it does nothing for your longevity. It's only when you brush it in the evening before you go to bed. And there's other things as well. Flossing your teeth once a day at least is healthy and reduces premature death. And then there's other ones that are sort of not what you'd expect. For instance, mouthwash. And, you recommend bristle, on your YouTube channel quite often for measuring the oral microbiome. And I've talked with the scientists there, and they echo this, that actually a mouthwash doesn't show any benefit in terms of improving the oral biome in general. And the all premature death studies find that as well, is that, yes, it's great to brush your teeth that will extend your lifespan but doing a mouthwash doesn't seem to have any effect at all. So those are two habits that I find to be quite helpful in terms of all cause mortality that have the numbers to back them up that I make sure to incorporate in my daily routine. Mortality that have the numbers to back them up that I make sure to incorporate in my daily routine. So, wait, so starting with the the sauna, I was just taking notes because I didn't wanna interrupt. But k. So Yeah. So I haven't focused on the sauna in in terms of, like, videos or information because it's there's it's already so saturated. Like, you know, Rhonda's got, like, hours of content on sauna. The the initial flags that pop up in my mind are, what's the BMI of that study? What's the BMI? Because I I think the data is probably in overweight overweight people who maybe high have hypertension or prehypertension, and I can I can see I can see a road where that may be the sauna would have benefit for that for that specific group of people? And especially, like, overweight or or obese, just, you know, BMI greater than twenty five, probably not fit or active. So in that case, it's like, you know, when you exercise, you're gonna get the increase in body temperature. And then, the increase in body temperature may be part of a, you know, vasodial vasodilation program where you're you should be able to reduce blood pressure over time, whether that's because of the heat or other, you know, health promoting effects of exercise. The just and and then, this is, again, speculation, but I haven't read those studies. I haven't paid it paid attention to it, but I hear this sauna story everywhere. Right? But, from my experience, at least here in The States, the people who are most likely to use the sauna are these overweight, don't exercise, out of shape, and again, maybe have some So I can see a road where that's beneficial. But then it gets to the idea of, you know, if you take someone who's not hypertensive, not overweight, already lean and fit, if you have that group, and now they're in the sauna four four to seven times per week, and maybe even, like, a randomized crossover trial where you, you know, you have them sauna, then you have them go out of the sauna for a few weeks so that, you know, you're seeing if there's an effective improvement, and then does it come back to baseline? I don't know. Do those studies exist? I mean, they have the studies there, the interventional ones, where they're doing an RCT. And these are standard RCTs. So these are being done probably on, honestly, college students. I haven't actually reviewed that. Doesn't mean they're not, 25, over 25 BMI. But of course, they're all controlled for the BMI. That's standard, right? So it's, it's an interesting thing, but, for instance, the studies that are talking about the bathing in Japan, which is one of the thinnest countries in the world, is not going to be subject to that. That's probably going to be fairly clean as far as most of the people are low weight. So I think there's something in it beyond just, sort of dealing with a higher BMI. And it does seem to be beneficial to do it after aerobic exercise in particular. The sweatsuit and hot bath and sauna study that I saw was talking about this specifically, about doing fifteen minutes after going for, like, a thirty minute run or so. But, it's something worth looking at. And then the other question is, which biomarkers besides blood pressure and I guess maybe you could look at, I mean, the ideal, if it's a cardiovascular disease risk kind of thing where it's reducing that risk. I mean, you would look at, soft plaques or even calcification. Like, I I I just don't know if there are studies showing some, you know, effects on those cardiovascular related outcomes besides blood pressure. Like, I just don't know what biomarker how would you you know, so subjectively, it feels good when you heat the body up like that. And even after a song, like but for someone to say, oh, it it works because it it makes me feel good. Okay. That's a different story than what's the objective data actually show in terms of, you know Well, there's I mean, I've actually doubled down and have increased my sauna time as I'm getting ready for this marathon because of the benefits on the VO two max, which is your cardio respiratory health, which is a key driver of marathon performance. So I've been doing that, and, also, it raises the lactate threshold, which is sort of the point at which you start to get your muscles get sore from overexertion. The other endpoint that they've been looking at, aside from the premature death, is also, in the sauna studies, they've been looking at specifically cardiovascular death, so death from cardiovascular disease, heart attacks, and other things. And in the Japanese bath study, they were then looking at just stroke or cardiovascular events, not going so far as death. And I think that's probably because they don't have as quite as strong I think probably the sauna is more effective, but just a hot bath is a good measure and much more convenient for the great majority of people than finding their way to a sauna after doing exercise. Yeah. So that ties into probably blood pressure and some, you know, slowing of atherosclerosis if it does. But what if your blood pressure is already normal? I get the argument for, you know, the VO two max potential benefits there. I mean, probably pro athletes should be doing this this stuff. You know? Pushing your VO two max even a few units higher is gonna have benefit in that case. Right? But if my VO two max is 50 versus 52, is that gonna really make a difference on longevity versus the time commitment? You know? And not just that. What's crazy is I see some people I'm not anti sauna, and I I'm just being skeptical. Right? You know? What's that, that guy's, you know, Robert Shermer. I think his name is the skeptic. Yeah. Anyway, that guy is just, always a skeptic about everything. I'm not I'm not trying to be that guy. But, so I just had something in terms of sauna. Anyway, just playing the skeptic. Fair enough. Alright. So, oral oral oral oral care. Yeah. So, in terms of so, yeah, I get you on the brushing and the flossing. Regular cleaning too, how often, whether it's every six months, every year, that that can contribute too because the plaque build up, you wanna get rid of that or keep that at a minimum. But, yeah, taking that a step further, it's it's, you know, in my case, trying to well, in the first case, get rid of this bacterium that's consistently 95% of my oral microbiome, which I think to me is a potential time bomb ticking time bomb where I maybe my mouth and system won't be able to keep it limited. You know, sepsis is it's it can cause sepsis. Some you know, anyway, trying to eliminate this thing, and then people are like, why don't you take antibiotics? Alright. So maybe I kill off you know, first of all, it's oral. It's not a topically applied antibiotic. I would eat it. It goes to my gut. I'm gonna obliterate my gut microbiome, which is a problem allowing potential You built that up over years. Yeah. Right. I built that garden over years. I don't wanna just get rid of it. But then, you know, some of it will will indeed impact my oral microbiome potentially eliminating that bacteria. But the other side of that is, antibiotic resistant serratus, which is an even bigger nightmare. And I say that as someone who studies the microbiome and, you know, getting rid of antibiotic resistant bacteria on its own is a problem. That's, like, particularly nasty bacteria once it's antibiotic resistant. So, the race is on to get rid of it. But then, assuming I didn't have that in my oral microbiome, there are certain bacteria that have been linked, with Alzheimer's disease, cardiovascular disease, you know, whether they're found in the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients or found in the plaques in cardiovascular disease, or can specifically cause it in mice like P. Gingivalis. So, yeah, making sure that I get rid of the serratus. And then, once I'm back to a normal microbiome, keeping these bacteria, bacteria that have been linked with, poor systemic health atop the list. To me, that's the cutting edge. It goes beyond, you know, flush brushing and flossing, which you know? But the idea too of mouthwash, the store bought mouthwashes that contain things like alcohol, which many do, which, you know, the there there are published studies showing that that can, affect blood pressure. So basically, you're killing off oral oral bacteria, and those oral bacteria have some positive role on regulating blood pressure stem systemically. So, yeah, alcohol based mouthwashes are I'd stay away from those. Right. I'd stay away from them in general. Because some of the other ones that aren't alcohol based and are still kind of based off of, kind of, strip and basically kill the entire microbiome, which is where, as we've talked about, you want to cultivate the positive bacteria as opposed to just, nuking everything and then hoping the good ones grow back. Right? But that kinda gets into the idea too of, okay, alcohol and mouthwash is bad. But then, you know, toothpaste are loaded with, like, these, you know, sudsing agents, sodium dodecyl, whatever, sulfate, and other stuff like that. So I haven't done a deep dive there. And I I'm sure there'll be people in the comments saying, just take some coconut butter or coconut oil and mix it with sodium bicarbonate and brush your teeth. I I don't know that that's best the best either. There are no RCTs on that. Right? But, but there are things in toothpaste, you know, that, you know, whether it's additives or preservatives. Like, for example, the whole preservatives impacting gut gut bacteria. And, that could be true too in terms of the oral microbiome because it's so understudied. They're just you know, who knows what's good or what's bad in terms of, you know, what a toothpaste should even look like. Right? So, yeah, the figuring that out is on the to do list. Okay. Right. So, what else should we cover today? What do we got on the list? Alcohol? Alcohol. Alright. Let's see. Gotta share screen. Long as we're talking about something more serious than just the alcohol in your mouthwash. Yeah. So so first, in one of the life expectancy studies, it's this one. Let's start off there. See. Hard for me to okay. So, yeah, this is the the study where it was, and, again, it'll be linked in the comments. Five factors that, increase life expectancy men and women. So here gained or lost life expectancy compared to moderate alcohol consumption. So, that was the reference. Right? No alcohol, and then you've got the highest intake. So light blue and red. So for women, what was it here? You can see that there's a loss of life expectancy for the highest alcohol intake, thirty grams per day. So what is that? A glass of wine is about 12 grams per 100 mils. So, you know, it's like three drinks per day, reduced life expectancy, similarly for men. But in men, you can see well, actually, for women too, light blue. No alcohol, almost just as bad for life expectancy as, two and a half or so drinks per day. But even there, the even in in this study, the you know, there's no gain in life expectancy with alcohol intake. It's just minimizing a small loss, if any, you know, two years or so for the abstainers, which is a very mild effect. But okay. This is just the one study, and then I've got another here that was, recently published. Right? Association. There we go. Right? Now we're in business. Okay. So meta analysis published in March 2023. And, this is the largest meta analysis that I've come across, a 107 studies on alcohol, all cause mortality, four point eight million people. So in contrast with the earlier meta analysis, low low volume alcohol drinking not associated with protection from death, death from all causes. So scrolling, I know I got the the perma scroll here, but see. So they separated it. Alright. I don't know if you can see this now. Can you see efigure four? Yep. So so, I don't know why this data is slightly different from what their main results are in the paper. I mean, they I'd have to go through the tables. I know in one of the tables, they they defined the groups differently. So you've got nondrinker, occasional, which is, like, one drink per week, less than one point three grams per day. So you can see compared to a nondrinker, very occasional, not associated with a reduced all cause mortality risk. But you can see the and that's the you wanna see the the fully adjusted. Right? So this is a solid line that would be here. And then the confidence interval, you can see it just just barely crosses one, so not significant. So that's one maybe one drink per week. Then you can see the low volume group for the fully adjusted model, up to two drinks per day, significant reduction in, all cause mortality risk. So but then above that, twenty five to forty four grams per day, it, we've got increased risk. So you can see that's above the hazard ratio of one, the confidence interval. And then you've got significant increases for greater than forty five grams of alcohol per day, which is like four drinks per day. So, but in the in the study, in the main study here I don't know why I can't open this as a PDF. But, the way they define the groups, it you know, whether they define I think if they define the referent as the occasional drinker, then the low dose for, up to twenty five grams per day wasn't significant. And the reason they use the occasional drinker is because, I guess, there is some selection bias in in, abstainers where they used to drink, and maybe they stopped because they're sick, and there's some reverse causation in that. Whereas if you go with the occasional drinker, I guess that's minimized. So when the reference group is the occasional drinker, the low volume group wasn't significantly associated with, reduced risk. But I think there like like the plot showed, there is that trend towards having a lower risk with the low volume, alcohol intake. It's you can see it's just outside the confidence interval being less than one, which, again, goes to the idea of is you know, what's what are the other variables where a low a very low intake of alcohol, what are the other variables that help you actually reduce that risk by seven percent in this case? You know, I don't know what that I don't know what that would be. You know? So Yeah, it's, it's been, this is, an often referred to study. I'm pretty familiar with myself. The interesting thing about this is that, when they originally, started the study, they were trying to say that if you look at someone who has a quitter sick quitter is the term they use they say that alcohol looks like it's healthy only because it's compared to people who are were drinkers but quit because they were unhealthy, and therefore they're saying that that is the comparison. It's people who are already sick. But this study is very clean in that it took people who are abstainers, and then you also have lifetime non drinkers. They've never drunk a drop. So it's not possible that they've just quit because of some other thing. And they found in this case as well that basically, the people who have, are infrequent, drink occasionally, but maybe once a month or so, versus the low volume have a benefit, especially against the people who have never drunk, lifetime abstainers. The people who used to drink but quit are the worst, usually, because of the reasons that they talk about where they were unhealthy before. The former drinker versus abstainers is what we see here. Right? But then they, shifted again to say, okay, well, let's see how about people who drink, moderate amount, how do they compare to people who drink just occasionally? And you're right, they don't find that there's significantly difference. But I would say that basically you've already proved the point that low amounts of alcohol are fine. Whether it's occasional, less than one drink a day, or whether it's one to two drinks a day or less, Basically, it's shown that it is beneficial. And, they see it in, some of the cardiovascular studies and some of the other things. And everyone agrees that once you get over that, and, I do that on a semi regular basis with my friends as well. So, not everything is, strawberries all day long. But it's, it's part of the normal thing, but it's something to be aware of, is it it does seem to have some benefits in that low range. And if it's something that you enjoy, you should go for it. Harvard has a very good write up on this that, we should link in the post as well, that talks about there are some benefits at a low ben at a low basis, but clearly not if you're at any way at risk of going into the higher numbers where all that benefit I, I like this study quite a bit because I think it brings up that clear point. In the later studies then, they do, what I call pee washing, where even beyond this, where they've taken out the lifetime abstain lifetime abstainers and shown that there's a benefit. Then they add in, like, another six or 13 different categories, And they do something that I call pee washing, which is where you basically reduce your group down so much that the significance is lost. You're reducing the power of your study, and so at that point then you say, well, there's no significance, so there's no benefit. Well, okay. I I mean, in some ways, I, I say that in the worst case you could say about moderate drinking is that it's no better. And so if you really enjoy it, then you shouldn't stop it because you think there's a harm to it. At best, this would only be able to show that there's not a direct harm for it, as opposed poisonous at any dosage kind of things, which I think is clearly not the case. And we should save our efforts for places where it's really going to make a difference in premature death, as opposed to something that, if you enjoy it and are able to do within a controlled fashion, is something that you could enjoy as part of your life. Yeah. No. So that's a good point that you made that, it's not associate so at worst, the low volume group, one point three to less than twenty five grams per day, There's that it's not significant, but there is that it's not that it's not significant. It does suggest that it's clearly not harmful. You don't have an increased risk, but there is that trend towards a decreased risk. So, but like you said, if you've got, you know, alcoholism or whatever in in in the family and and, you know, staying away from the higher intakes because, you know, that's associated with, increased all cause mortality risk, let alone let alone the damage to to family. You know? So, so actually, alcohol is a potential option on my to do list too. And, but I've got Okay. Gonna get you drinking coffee. We're gonna get you have drink of beer the evening. Yeah. So so DHEA sulfate, you know, so it declines during aging. And, there is some evidence linking alcohol intake to relatively higher levels. Now I don't know if that's a good thing or a bad thing because but the idea that it could potentially move the needle towards improving it a little bit. And the reason I raised that is because, the testosterone is derived from DHEA, which is derived from cholesterol. So my testosterone levels are youthful, total testosterone youthful. So I don't have I I clearly don't have a problem in going from cholesterol to DHEA to testosterone. So, because to get to testosterone, you have to go through DHEA. So but that my DHEA sulfate is, you know, more than half of what it was in my twenties, early thirties when I have data, just two data points. But I don't know if that was with DHEA supplementation or not. But it's clearly lower. And it's 50% lower. Now granted, I've maintained it over the past year or so. But knowing that it declines during aging, there is I do have a window for adding a very small amount. I'm not talking twenty five grams per day. You know, what's the minimum amount of alcohol that would move the needle in my case where I don't mess up heart rate variability, resting heart rate because, you know, I'm sure you know there as well, an abundance of anecdotal data. People saying, look at my data. Just one drink data. You know? So I don't wanna mess that stuff up, but there may be, a small dose, like, you know, less than a hundred milliliters per day, far less. I mean, maybe half that. But I'm open to including it to try the experiment. So I, for myself, I do follow the moderate, on the days when I'm moderate. I do just have literally a beer, and I don't see any impact of it. It's eyeball, to be clear, but I'll have full recovery days according to my WHOOP after that. I can't tell the difference between the days where I have a beer and the days that I don't. Is that beer earlier in the day, or is it later in the day, or it doesn't matter for you? Just just dinner. So it's about 07:00 or so in the evening and go to bed at around ten or eleven. Wow. I mean, any fluid intake at 07:00 for me is like there's just I have there's no way. It's crazy that you can have any fluid intake and not mess with sleep. So Okay. Yeah. Different things. I don't know. I find that that, helps me, actually. If I'd have the beer, then I tend to nod off a little bit more and then go to bed earlier. So maybe that's why I'm not seeing the impact because I'm getting a slightly improved sleep from it. Interesting. Interesting. Alright. So we covered this. Well, go ahead. Yep. I I'm just gonna say, of course, if you once you get to the heavier consumption of alcohol, it's well known that that will then impure, impair sleep. Yeah. Yep. So I think that they get So you've got the right dose. You know? So, that's the key. Finding the dose. Right? Yep. So we covered it all? We covered it for today? I think that's enough for today. Yep. Cool. Alright. Until next time, Chris. Okay. Great to talk to you, Michael.