Hey, everyone. Today, we've got doctor Vincenzo Sorrentino, who is an assistant professor at the National University of Singapore within the department of biochemistry. Today, he'll present his lab's work on trichinelline or otherwise known as methylnicotinic acid, which has a positive impact on NAD, intracellular NAD levels, muscle function, aging, and longevity, and maybe even better than NMN or NR in terms of stability. So with that, welcome doctor Sorrentino. Thank you, Michael. Thanks for the for the invitation. It's a great pleasure actually to be able to share some of the data that we're gonna be actually published online soon on this new NAD precursor, rigonelline, as you mentioned. And this in particular is work, that I want to highlight, also the contribution that, came from my previous, appointment when I was working in Switzerland with Nestle Research. So, actually, this work is a beautiful example of also how, companies and, academic environments can work together in order to bring translation of findings closer to the, both scientific community, but also to the public. So without, further, let's say, delays, I wanna introduce you some of the key findings that came up from our research on trigoneline for muscle benefits and longevity across species. So just to give you a bit of a context about what is sarcopenia, so sarcopenia is basically, loss of functional, let's say, outcomes in muscle, not just in terms of muscle mass, but also really in terms of muscle functionality, so ability to move, strength, and so on. It's, of course, an age associated diseases, so its prevalence is increasing with the fact that the most advanced, civilizations and, groups over over on in the world are, of course, becoming aging or superaging. And this is, for instance, very true for Singapore, for instance, where I'm currently working. But from from a molecular perspective, people that are familiar with the aging field, they may be aware that the, aging process from a biological standpoint is composed of several intertwined hallmarks, which are essentially declines in the different cellular functions. And from this point of view, muscle aging and the force of mass muscle sarcopenia are kind of sharing some of these old marks of aging and disease. For instance, we know that for muscle aging and sarcopenia, there is increased inflammation in our muscles, dysfunctional mitochondria, which are the centers for producing energy and important metabolites in our cells, increased oxidative stress, also increased fibrotic damage within the muscle, compromising essentially the muscle elasticity and ability to function. And very importantly, there is also dysfunction of satellite cells, which are the muscle stem cells, which are important for supporting muscle regeneration or even maintaining muscle mass in that sense, and imbalance improving turnover, meaning that there is tendentially and often in muscle aging and sarcopenia more muscle catabolism, so loss of protein rather than synthesis. So from a clinical perspective, how do we measure sarcopenia? There are three at least clinical outcomes that need to be, kept in mind for the rest of the discussion that we use also in our studies, and these are aligned essentially between different consortium. This is the for instance, we have the European consortium and here is the, below, you can see the parameters measured from the, Asian consortium. And, actually, these are basically the three same same parameters, which are gate speed, grip strength, and the appendicular lean mass. Meaning, if you lose if your values decline below this threshold values that are indicated here, people will be scored or diagnosed as sarcoidic. Now another key, molecular factor, that has been, coming up in the literature, from different studies including from my own research, but also from very famous group worldwide, such as, for instance, David Sinclair or Jan Albrecht and so on, have actually highlighted the key role of a coenzyme that is involved in more than 500 reactions in our bodies and pretty much involved in every, in most of the cellular marks of aging that I highlighted before, and this is called, NAD plus. So NAD plus has been shown to be important to support mitochondrial function, to, support those redox reactions, reduce inflammation, favor DNA repair, and so on. And what people have really focused on, including us, both at the preclinical level and more recently, people are starting to understand how at the clinical level with exercise or lifestyle supplementation, how we can actually, use certain, approaches in order to maintain NAD and what kind of benefits actually supporting or maintaining NAD levels can bring to the different parts of our bodies. So, basically, through exercise or diet or even using NAD boosters, protein ID has been shown preclinically at least to improve pretty much every organ in your body that you can think of, not just during aging, but also during age associated diseases. And all this, it's basically summarized in this beautiful review from, indeed, from David Sinclair in this case. Now keeping in mind the important role of, NAD as a a key coenzyme, most of the, several marks of aging And the fact that during the aging process, muscle mass declines, rises, and also the other all marks of aging are starting to be, evident. What was done before in SLA research, before actually I joined the company, there was this study published in 2019 where what, what the study did, they looked they did an observational study where they compared in a Singaporean cohort, actually, in male Singaporeans either healthy elderly or, age matched individual with sarcopenia assessed with the three parameters that I mentioned before, so grip strength, gait speed, and the appendicular lean mass. And what they did, they took muscle biopsies from these patients, and then they looked at different, molecular signatures in these tissues. What emerged is that on the other end on one end, mitochondrial, transcription, pathways that were completely downregulated and also indicating proteins indicating mitochondrial respiration complexes that were completely downregulated, indicating mitochondrial dysfunction. And very importantly, what was also, measured in a few biopsies that were still available from these patients is that NAD plus levels were significantly lower in the muscle tissues. Also, very importantly, if you look at the, muscle function, so, again, the three primary clinical features of muscle health, these were actually positively correlated with the muscle NAD, meaning that higher muscle NAD core, correlates with better muscle health overall. And this kind of resonates with what I just mentioned before with NAD being very essential to, support, normal metastasis and functional, outcomes as we age. Now, at the time I joined and I started leading the group on this project, what we also had available at the time were actually serum samples from the same cohort. So what we wanted to do there is to look at, through met different, metabolomics analysis, what kind of metabolites were changing at the systemic reflect what we have just observed for sarcopenia. So could we identify either new biomarkers or new metabolites that could be used as the as targets of therapeutic interventions for, muscle aging or sarcopenia. We looked at different metabolites, including different kind of vitamins. So we did also we measure also on a platform, all kinds of vitamin b three related families, members, which are essentially the precursors for any for the biosynthesis of NAD plus. Of all these molecules, the only one that was, significantly changing, and it was downregulated in sarcopenia, actually, was this molecule called trigonidine. It it also turns out that if we looked again at the three clinical outcomes of muscle health, so lean mass, grip strength, and walking speed, serum trigoneline levels were positively correlated with muscle health. So as we saw for NAD levels in muscle, serum, trigoneline levels were also positively linked with, with beta muscle. And, also, when we looked now, trying to link what would happen if we would look at higher levels of NAD in serum with genes that would be modulated in our muscles? What it turns out is that the most positively enriched, pathways in muscle when we have high levels of chigronaly, it was actually a mitochondrial, Oxford, so mitochondrial related pathways for energy production in our cells, which makes in that sense, if we think of possible link with NAD, that would make completely sense because NAD and molecules that support NAD production, they're also generally linked with better mitochondrial function. So with this in mind, we decided indeed to look at what what is trigoneline. So how does it look like and and how it could be related to mitochondrial health or with NAD metabolism. When we look at the structure of trigoneline, it turns out that in it's pretty much a form of nicotinic acid as we actually had anticipated before, Michael. And, from the literature, the only things that we could find from the past, and this is very old, findings from trigonulin, is that it seems to have beneficial effects from the metabolic perspective. So it seems to work preclinically in, for instance, models of diabetic, disease, diabetes. It can, lower plasma and liver cholesterol in NTGs, for instance, in preclinical models of NASH, of liver disease, essentially. It can improve, glucose transport, but, essentially, we didn't find much else that would link it specifically to its mechanism or action. When we looked at the origin of this molecule, so, where is it present? I mean, how do we find it in nature? It turns out that it's mostly, produced by plants and to some extent by the, it's found also in the human gut, gut microbiome, but, really, in the in the the majority of chigona you can find in nature is present is present in plants, in particular, in fenugreek seeds and coffee beans, so things that are part of our, basically, regular nutrition for people that, for instance, drink coffee. And the only other thing that we could, find from literature in the past, it's a very old study from a Japanese group that showed that if you would take, liver extracts from, from different animals and you would add trigoneline to these liver extracts, you would get demethylation of trigonellin into niacin. So with these hypotheses in mind, we wanted to actually start looking whether trigonellin could be compared with, you know, like an NAD precursor that could be compared to a to other NAD precursors. Before we go into the, effect on NAD, we also wanted to actually understand how, the potential of using this molecule for human application. So one important parameter is actually for all these molecules in general for supplements, but also for drugs, it's their stability. We know that, for instance, for NAD precursors such as NR and NNN, they're actually, they've been shown to be effective preclinically and there's, clinical trials ongoing. However, the these molecules are not to be interconverted, into, for instance, degraded into nicotinic acid or into NAM by our gut microbiome, and they are rather unstable in the human serum. As you can see here, we did a time course just spiking the molecules into, human serum at 37 degrees, and we follow them over time. You can see that NR and then NM, which are part of the savage pathway of NAD biosynthesis, they actually very rapidly disappear from the from the serum in that sense because, actually, they get, degraded, and they release actually NAM or nicotinamide, which is also part of the, salvage pathway of the, the NAD biosynthesis. But it's considered to be, to some extent, also degradation product of NAD. So, this is now quite, very established also with our assays, and it was already reported by other groups before. Importantly, for trigoneline being just a form of nicotinic acid, that's not the case. So trigoneline is very, very stable, even more than twenty four hours in serum. And, of course, it doesn't really easy. It doesn't degrade into numb, just, you know, let's say, a body free system, just in a, impure serum. So with this in mind, and, so knowing its stability and and knowing its link now with mitochondria and possibly with with this, with NAD, in muscle, we wonder whether trigonometry could actually act as an NAD precursory in animal species and impact longevity of muscle. So we started by, doing very simple assays. So the proof of concept is whether if we supplement Trigonell into different, model organisms or in vitro systems, whether we can increase NAD levels. That was the case. So when we, for instance, provide trigoneline in different doses to, HSMM cells, which are primary human myotube cells, so derived from, from human donors, we can see that those, dependently, trigoneline could increase NAD plus levels. True. This is true also when we use primary human myotubes, not only from healthy patients, but also from sarcopenic patients, meaning that the conversion of trigoneline into, into intermediates that can lead to NAD biosynthesis is still occurring even if you may have sarcopenia, and that's actually important to know from a translational application perspective. We we then also also, wanted to use, simple model of of aging, and these in vivo can be done, for instance, with nematodes like c elegans, which age quite rapidly, and you can supplement them with drugs, for instance, and then study, mechanism of action of the drugs. In this case, what we did, we compared the NAD levels between young and old worms, and you can see that if we take day day eight worms, which are already aged, they show a decline in NAD, which was significantly rescued by supplementing trigoneline at one millimolar for eight days in these worms. But more importantly, we wanted to then validate the possible effects in vivo. To do so, we, took, in this case, still young mice, so three months old mice. We cabaged trigoneline, three hundred milligram per kilogram, and this is a quantity of an amount of trigoneline that is equimolar to NR, for instance. So this means that we are using what people use for NR when they do studies in rodents in order to increase NAD and bring benefits, to the to their mouse system. So with this in mind, we did a gabache. We for two hours, and then we collected different tissues and measured NAD plus. What you can see here, if we look, for instance, the liver, muscle, kidney, and blood in this case, sugar linearly significantly increased NAD levels up to two hours in all these tissues. One question that we have actually got, quite consistently, and that's why I'm showing now also this new data that that are part of the story that would be, that, will be published soon, is what happens actually, what are the values of trigonellium itself? So how bioavailable is trigoneline when we look now at the same tissues where we have seen increase in NAD? So what we did here, again, we took the mice with GAVAGLEM with the same amount of trigoneline, and then we followed we measured trigoneline with, with the mass spectrometry with absolute quantification, either two hours or we let the essentially, like, a washout period of overnight, meaning, like, more than twelve hours in this case. What you can see here is that depending on the tissue, you may have already baseline levels of trigonealing, which can be either very low, so we are here in the low micromolar range, or they are even below limit of detection, for instance, for gastrocnemius in in muscle in this particular case. But upon supplementation with trigoneline at two hours, we get a a pretty strong increase significant increase in Trigonell in all the measured tissues, including in muscle, in kidney, liver, and in plasma. And, of course, a huge excretion of Trigonell in urine is actually has already been kind of described in other studies also in humans. But, nevertheless, after two hours, we are able in all these tissues to reach, quite high actually micromolar range, especially in plasma. We are in the range of 100 to 250 micromolar, for instance, after two hours. But you can see that after wash up period, we almost reach based on levels. Again, most of in most of the cases, we in liver, for instance, we still retain a a significant increase of Trigonellium, but for instance, in muscle and in plasma, we almost go back to baseline in this case, meaning that the washout is quite, quick. It still retains trigoneline in most of the tissues. But for, let's say, supplementation purposes, this is useful information to that will help us to decide or define in the future whether how frequent or how much trichonyl can stay in our body and how frequent we we may want to supplement it or not. But now let's go to the mechanism of trichonyl. So we said it's a form of nicotinic acid, but we have we nobody had actually shown that it could actually work as nicotinic acid. So that was the purpose of these experiments that you see here in cells. So here, what we what I'm giving you here is a simple cartoon of the, NAD biosynthesis pathways in our bodies. You have the salvage pathway, which I mentioned before, which makes use of nicotinamide or mem. And, nicotinamide that's usually converted into NNM, which is another known NAD precursor currently already available as a supplement. And, of course, you have nicotinamide riboside, which also can be converted into an NAP. And then this basically can then lead to the formation of NAD plus. Basically, we want to two reactions in this case. And then you have the presampling pathway, which is the one that nicotinic acid, uses in order to generate NAD through several reactions. And what I wanna also, bring you to your attention is that for all of these pathways, there are several key, enzymes that are important for the conversion of the intermediates into the NAD pool. And some of these enzymes like MPRT, which is the key, price handler enzyme to convert nicotinic acid, can be inhibited by two drops in nicotinic acid. Or NMPT, it does a specific inhibitor called f k six six, which can be used to block essentially the salvage pathway. And in this case, NR being downstream of the of the NAPT and also independent of the present pathway can be used as a sort of positive control in order to increase NAB independently of, of inhibition of these pathways. So that's what we did here. We went back to our muscle cell muscle cell line system, and we simply provide a similar amounts, one millimolar of trigoneline and nicotinamide riboside, and you can see that both very significantly increase NAD levels in these cells. What happens now when we provide two drops in nicotinic acid that we block the breast standard pathway? Trigonal link doesn't work anymore, but, NR, which is independent of this pathway, actually can still significantly increase NAD levels. But what happens now when we combine FK eight six six to block the salvage pathway with a two drops in nicotinic acid to block the presynod pathway? What you can see here, first of all, is that FK eight six six, so blocking the salvage pathway, induces a very strong NAD depletion phenotype in these cells, but with trigonalin or NR, which are both independent of the salvage pathway, with FK six six can actually both rescue completely with trigonalin and even boost further with NR the NAD levels even in the presence of of of the inhibitor. However, when we now combine also with duetyloloxidinac acid that we block the breast standard pathway, you completely lose the effect of trigoneline. Again, proving that trigoneline works mostly through the breast standard pathway. We have done also metabolomics analysis in order to prove that the downstream metabolites of the breast standard pathway are increased following trigoneline administration, and that turns out to be the case. What happens now when we want to look at functional outcomes in cells? So as I mentioned, NAD plus is very important to support mitogonial function, for instance, through the action of proteins and mitogonial biogenesis. So one thing that we wanted to to to observe is what happens to, mitogonial function when we deplete NAD and when when we rescue NAD with our, you know, NAD precursors. What we did here, we measured mitogonial membrane potential or maximum respiration through SEARS methodology. You can see that when we use f k eight six six again to block the salvage pathway, as we saw for NDE that goes down, also, mitochondrial membrane potential declines and mitochondrial respiration also declines, which is is in line with what we would expect from the interdependency between mitralgondyl and NNE. However, again, now blocking all of only the f k six six means that when we use an r or trigoneline, we can actually rescue completely the mitralgondyl membrane potential in this case. However, when we now block the presynaptic pathway on top of the salvage pathway, trigoneline is not effective anymore in this case while NR can still function, pretty well. And the same happens with mitogonal respiration. Again, trigoneline can rescue the, inhibition, of the salvage pathway, but not when, also the breast standard pathway is inhibited. Also, this is something very, it's a it's an observation I wanna bring, to our attention is that differently from NAD levels where you would have seen that NR could very, potently induce NAD levels even more than trigonal in the cell line. When we look at functional readouts on mitochondrial health, like respiration, mitochondrial membrane potential, so downstream of the NAD boosting effect. Actually, the effects between an RNA and Trigonelline are quite comparable, and we have observed actually the same also when we go in, in vivo with nematodes, for instance, when we look at lifespan or or muscle integrity. So what I wanna really bring to our attention is that even if NAD boosters may affect NAD levels differently when we look at functional frequency of these precursors, in this case, mitochondria, but it could be anything, could be mobility, muscle strength, or something else. It's very important to, to keep in mind that these compounds may actually lead to comparable efficacy. And that is very important, meaning that we need to also know the biology of these compounds in order to understand which cohorts or applications may be more may benefit more from using different precursors. So next, we wanted to move actually to observing benefits of trigonidine, in a more functional, kind of, readout setting. And for this, we went back to an, unaccelerated model of aging, if you want, or a short lived animal like C elegans. Why? Because in this, animals, basically, within, ten to eleven days, like in this case, you can observe a loss of muscle integrity. So these are muscle fibers in young adult worms versus day 11 adult worms. You can see the loss of muscle fiber integrity. But following ten days of, supplementation with trigonidine, we were able to maintain to a certain degree more muscle, integrity, more integrity of the muscle fibers compared to the 11. This was reflected improvement in mobility of the worms during aging. You can see here two time points that the paralysis of the worms is actually lower when the worms are treated with riginally. And, importantly, this reflects also on lifespan in these animals. It's very in this these are short lived animals, so you can see that the control worms, they live maximum approximately twenty four, twenty five days. However, with trigoneline, we are able to extend the lifespan up to about thirty days with a median, increase of about 17, point four percent, but this is not true when we actually, inhibit or we repress genetically the expression of MPART in the worm, which is essentially the key, enzyme that is important to use trigoneline or niacin. So this also proves that also in vivo, there's a dependency of trigoneline with the, pristanoid pathway. So if we cannot use the pristanoid pathway, we lose the majority of the effects of trigoneline in this case. And finally, we wanted to actually test benefits now in an in vivo model during aging. And in this case, we used in collaboration with the, with the Gordon Lynch in Melbourne, we made use of aging mice, and we treated them, chronically with rigonidine. So what we did in particular, we, took two years old mice, which were fed either a controlled diet or a trigonidine supplemented diet, again, with the same quantity that we used also for the Gavage experiment. We supplemented these mice for about, three months. And then at the end of the study, we measured things such as grip strength and its c two muscle force, which I will explain in a moment. So at the end of the study, we collected, the different tissues, and then we looked at things like, for instance, limb mass, and then we measured the, phenotypes for muscle health. So one thing that emerged from this study is that the limb mass actually in these mice at the end of the study was not impacted. It's also true that mice compared to humans do not necessarily become sarcopenic very easily. So you really need geriatric mice, meaning much older than two years old, in order to start observing some consistent, loss of lean mass. And, also, an important thing that we did here, we measured the peak force in the, tibialis of the and the reals of the mice, meaning that we put the mice to sleep, and then we basically use, electric stimulation in order to cause the maximum tetonic contraction in the muscle of the mice. And what we observed is that the peak force in these mice was not, changed at baseline, meaning that the maximum force, even if you use trigoneline in these mice, is not gonna increase. However, what we did here using the same setup, we now started to stimulate the muscle with several repeated contractions over time. So in order to induce muscle fatigue. So in humans, that would be a little bit like if you were to lift weights, for instance, and do repetitions up to a point where your muscle get fatigued, fatigue, then you don't feel that you can lift anything anymore. Right? So that, essentially, your muscles are not able to contract well anymore. So what you can see here is why when do we do this in rodents, you have here in gray, this line is for a young cohort, so it's our reference cohort. And then we have an age cohort here, you can see in black, where you can see that the percentage of initial force is declining following the repeated contraction. You can see a more significant and steeper decline compared to young mice, which is expected during the aging process. However, the mice that were treated chronically with rigonulin were able to maintain an intermediate level. So we were actually able to improve the amount of force that we're able to generate in spite of the muscle fatigue, protocol in this case. And, importantly, this was also mirrored by a small but significant increase in grip strength in the in the mice, when before essentially sacrifice or in living mice in this case. So with this, what we can say is that trigonally, well, in spite of not, modifying the peak force at baseline This time we there's certainly more experimentation to be done is the trigonalin levels decline in the human sarcopenic cohort and associate with mitral bone function. Trigonalin is an NAD precursor caused species through the breast standard pathway, and this seems to be well tolerated at least in rodent studies and to promote muscle resilience to sustain contractions in aging rodents. Another piece of data I just want to, to to show you before we conclude is that our court in Singapore was based on a very small cohort of individuals, but we have been able to replicate in a larger court. This is an Iranian court, with more than 100 individuals. We have been able to replicate the association between grip strength and serum levels, which we had seen in the Singaporean court, for trigon handling. And most importantly, we don't see in this case, we have actually also, diet, information from this from this, individuals. What we don't see is an association between caffeine intake and vitamin b three intake in this case. Meaning that the effects that we see the association we see between tervonulin and grape strength is not although we have seen a partial association with things like folate and fibers, meaning that probably there may be a connection between trigoneline and the one carbon metabolism or the folate cycle, for instance. However, we don't have now at the end data that this would be something that needs to be investigated further. And along with the other questions that I'm highlighting here about the demyitulation process of trigonalin, which for mammal mammals is not established, And at this point, whether supplementing trigonalin would have a real impact for muscle health. So I think with this, yeah, I'm, I'm done with my presentation, and we can go for some questions, Michael. Alright. Yeah. So so that was fantastic. I mean, and and I usually don't, give out superlatives, but that was fantastic. I think this is tremendous data, tremendous story. The whole field is obsessed with NR, NMN, and Yeah. Basically, your data shows that as good, right, maybe even better. And, and and even the the the the part that really gets me is the stability of NR and m NMN basically going away after twenty four hours. And then trigoneline, it's essentially what was it? 80% of the maximum twenty four hours late or something. Yeah. So, yeah, we have eight hours of forty eight hours anyway. So trigonellini is quite stable, but, of course, it's not made of it's it's a simpler molecule than an r than an r and an m because it doesn't have the ribose group. Right? So it doesn't, yeah, it doesn't, say, it doesn't suffer from the same, degradation step as an r and NNM. But this is important to know because, yeah, that means that these other precursors can be degraded into NAM and then eventually into nicotinic acid. So yeah. So then the question is, is it a, so you did start looking into the diet story, but, you know, for for the you know, it I and I get that coffee wasn't associated with, serum levels of trichotenic acid. But as you mentioned, the fibers and folate may be related. So legumes actually, you know, chickpeas. So it's funny. It's in part inspired by you by your work that and I have my own metabolomic data. I'll be using a metabolomic kit that has trigoneline. And in my data, it's been consistently low, like, point one micromolar, compared to their reference range. So, nonetheless, I looked at I don't know if you if you know how deeply I quantify my diet every day. But Yeah. I saw I saw a little bit some of your your other thoughts on this. Yeah. Cool. So so, I looked into my diet, and I basically had no trigoneline. So I was like, alright. And my NAD levels had been consistently at least plasma intracellular blood intracellular levels have been consistently low, 20 to 25 micromolar compared to what a young reference population would. So, anyway, I looked into my diet and, you know, I basically don't have any trigoneline pre or or trig dietary trigoneline. So, for for the last blood test, which I took on Monday, I, added chickpeas, which, you know, have three based on studies, they have trigoneline. I don't yet have the NAD data. That will should be coming next week. I also don't know if the approximately twenty milligrams per day of trigoneline from chickpeas is enough to impact NAD because your dose was sixteen hundred Exactly. So yeah. Yeah. That's that's an important point because the thing is what we have done in our preclinical studies was to really try to match what we know for NR and for NM in preclinical studies. So, basically, at the molar level, we are using the same amounts that we know that they increase the NAD levels in in the rodents when you use NR and NM, and it turns out that that works also for trigoneline. So an important question would be how low we can go with trigoneline, in this implementation through the diet in order to have a a function linked with NAD effects. Right? So we don't know. I mean, in science, we don't we don't have preclinical studies with rodents in order that show this. We have not done a dose, let's say, escalation, de escalation in order to measure the mini minimal efficacy dose. What we know in humans from our studies with the metabolic, platforms that I've used is that that's a thing in our Singaporean court. We were at baseline in a range of very low. It's like one to four micromolar, which actually matches what you would found in dodging study for things like an r or an m f baseline in humans, for instance, also from the work of Brenner. So I think all these NN decreases at baseline are probably gonna be in that range, in the low micromolar range. And supplementation, depending on the, again, on the stability of the molecule, how pure is either the supplement or the diet how rich is the diet in the supplements will give you a certain amount of bioavailability in plasma and then eventually in tissues. So these are all questions that for trigoneline, we we need to assess because we only have the bioavailability, but with three hundred milligram per kilogram at this moment. Yeah. It it may actually be a low dose. You know? I don't know if it'll be twenty milligrams of trigoneline per day, but just in support of that in my own data, not to make it about me, but sixty milligrams of nicotinic acid almost doubles my NAD. Now would sixty milligrams of trichanneline impact the same? And are there functional I don't get any functional improvements by doubling NAD at that point. But for some people, maybe, you know anyway, it may not be where you've gotta go to eight hundred milligrams or or, you you know, super hot. Alright. So then that that also gets to another question of besides the optimal dose, you mentioned that it's produced by the gut microbiome. Do you know which produce it? So that's that's exactly I've been looking a little bit in the literature. So there are a couple of studies that have linked it to essentially a gut microbiome, for instance, in diabetic patients and in, also people, like, they measure the fecal microbiome of people that do, for instance, hybrids versus, normal, let's say, controlled people. But the problem is so they detected changes in trigoneline. So, actually, for instance, they saw an increased presence of trigoneline in the in the fecal mic related to the fecal microbiome in people that do, for instance, sports. However, there's no clear bacterial species that has been shown to to be able to produce to mediate, for instance, zincotinic acid in this case most likely. And that's actually one of the other questions that could be important to to understand. So we know that, for instance, the gut microbiome can take, for instance, NAM and then generate DNA from it, whether it's also able and which pieces would be able to mediate nicotinic acid to generate trigonalin and in what conditions, it's also known in that sense. So, yeah, this is another the physiology, let's say, of the metabolism of trigonalin for humans or mammals is rather unknown because this is pretty much the first study that points at its metabolization by by by our system, essentially. So far, it was only known for plants. Right? So Yeah. So you've got a whole there's so much work that that, right, that can be done in this Yeah. Essentially, this was a bit we hope that this will open a little bit well, the field in sense also towards the understanding of GND, metabolic complexity, because there's also more and more evidence, I mean, the beautiful work of Bauer that we already mentioned, Abinovits on the NAD fluxes and the conversion by the gut microbiome. I mean, these are all very elegant studies, but there's also work from, from a Japanese group showing that, for instance, even NR needs to be, converted to some extent again through linocotinic acid and it requires essentially. You froze. Froze Vincenzo. You froze. You froze. Okay. We both froze. Sorry. You were saying you were saying n r and then it froze. Okay. So I was mentioning that also NR has been shown that indeed, you know, most of the NAD, boosting effects that we see from NR in vivo are also relying on the need for expression of MPRT, meaning that there is interconversion of NR, which is through base exchange reactions. It's another enzymatic process that occurs in the cells, that generates nicotinic acid from NR, and that leads to any decrease. So meaning that, again, when we take this progresses, there will part of it will go as it is, but a large part of it will be interconverted into the other metabolites. And for trigoneline, we actually do not know exactly if this is the case. So if we can generate other if it cross feed, let's say, into the other NAD pathways and and to what extent of why we don't know this yet. Yeah. So, okay. So some more questions. So Sure. That that big question of where does the methyl group go? Like, so, you know, you've got trigoneline one meth for again, for people don't don't know, it's methylated nicotinic acid. That's gotta go somewhere. Right? So that opens up, you know, whether it's, if if it's based on the pathway in coffee, for example, you know, so, that reaction is is trigoneline plus s adenosyl homocysteine, and that methyl group goes to s adenosyl homocysteine forming, s adenosyl methionine, which which, you know, I brought I raised the, you know, an email that that could potentially lead to a reduction in homocysteine, which is important for, like, vascular health, and it's associated with dementia risk. But then also the s adenosylmethionine is, required for melatonin production, which is involved in sleep, which declines during aging. So these are three very important pathways, oxidated metabolism, sleep, and vascular health. So where does that methyl group go? Yeah. Yeah. So that's that's another big question. In a sense that we when we did our experiments to to kind of we have focused on the antibody part. So what we did, we have used labeled, isotopically labeled labeled trigonalin in order to trace where the backbone of trigonalin would go once it gets demethylated. However, with our type of labeling that we have used, we are not able actually to follow the methyl group to see where it would actually go. Right? So at this moment, with with the experiments we have done so far, we can't really predict whether the material group will really feed into the, let's say, the, the, homosystem cycle. What we know is that my my feeling also based on this human, the the interaction that we see between, for instance, things like folate and trigonalin in the human court is that I wouldn't be surprised if indeed there would be a way I mean, the fact that trigonidine essentially would generate this material group, that that would essentially feed into the the homocysteine cycle, and that would, you know, that cycle interacts with the folate cycle, and that's why you get interaction between trigonidine and folate. So I think I feel like there might be something there, but we are looking at folate and trigonality. So we are looking at the two extremes of the two cycles. So I think that's that will require more specific metabolomic fluxes studies in order to really observe these metabolites, especially maybe in an in vivo context because in a in vitro system like cell lines, which are already kind of, you know, rich in metabolites and very rich media, sacultural conditions, not you'd sometimes you don't observe very strong changes in these components. So So I think the idea would for me would be to go in vivo and look at this fluxes embryo, but now with the focus of these two cycles. Cool. The other aspect too, there's a fourth component, I guess, which would be epigenetics. If you've got an extra methyl group, now the conversion to nicotinic acid. If there's hypomethylation during aging, you could potentially get genes that are turned on because now you can methylate them. So is that on the list to to look at epigenetic? Yeah. So yeah. So this also look at this, look at things like, even methylation patterns, for instance, for checking whether you don't have including, you know, or even methylation clocks, you know, by looking at methylation patterns is all this all needs to be done, essentially. So now that we have kind of found the first, let's say, evidence that this could be the case, I mean, that trigonidine works by increasing NAB, but also by losing this material group. I think now yet a wall, let's say, range of experiments in this direction needs to be done here. Cool. So, so then two other avenues that, you know, one is that, trichannelin is also increased in it's a uremic metabolite. So people who have kidney disease, it's increased in blood, but yet chronic kidney disease is also linked with sarcopenia. So if it was and I I see I saw your data and and its impact on muscle, muscle function, and and longevity. But how how can we reconcile these two bits of data where you've got one where trigonealing within the context of adverse health, seem seems to not have an effect on muscle, you know, at least muscle mass, sarcopenia, you know, in CKD versus the other side of it where it's direct you have direct effects that you've shown. How do you how how do you help you reconcile? Yeah. So, I mean, this is something else that needs to be assessed more. I mean, especially the physiologic little bit studying in the context of, either in humans or looking at preclinical models of, for instance, CKD. Actually, there is not at the baseline, but at least in terms of supplementation of trigger, I mean, there's something that I would say plays in its, favor in terms of for kidney because there's a preclinical study just recently published. Oh, sorry. My camera is kind of weird. That actually has shown that supplementing trigoneline in a model of diabetic nephropathy actually is beneficial for kidneys. So they supplemented mice with diabetic, nephropathy at fifty and hundred milligram per kilogram of trigoneline for, like, eight weeks or something. And then they looked at kidney fibrosis, kidney, you know, gluenuria, creatinine, and so on. And, actually, all these parameters were improved, meaning that, actually, again, in this case, you know, it's a bit of a saying, like, high trigonidine is also good for your kidney in this case. So inner model of disease. Of course, in a context of sarcopenia not this yet, but what we need what we is that trigoneline, I was saying during sarcopenia in the human data from the nature of communication paper, one thing that emerged is that NAPT, so the enzyme that is, involved in, in the NAD salvage pathway muscle is actually also declining in humans with And so what you can what we are speculating is that, actually, the other any deeper courses like an angotinic acid, trigonal, and r, and an m, which do not require any. It may actually be important in this case to be reused also in the contact. So that's why I think that more to be done, but the preclinical evidence linked to the clinical evidence that we see salvage pathway, I don't think it kind of goes in the direction that it would be bad for you if you have eye a trogonaline that is gonna be bad for your kidneys at least. Yeah. Well yeah. So could it be that, in CKD patients, the, there's increased NAD degradation via c CD 38, and then CD 38 I don't know. Yeah. And then CD 38 is degrading NAD into, niacinamide, and then that could be potentially converted into trigoneline as it's only two steps away, not NAM into NA and then NA into trigoneline. So that could potentially explain the increase in CKD. But that like, as you mentioned that adding trichinellium in that equation improves the outcomes. Yeah. I mean, it but but then it doesn't really get at the root of why would NAD be degraded. I I'd imagine it probably wouldn't be as optimal as getting it at the root of that. But along those lines too, as I also mentioned in in email that centenarians, there's a study that, in the supplementary date. Yeah. Triginelli is higher in the centenarians compared to the offspring. So is that a kidney function story? Is it a longevity story? Yeah. Exactly. I tried to look up at that study. The thing that I'm missing from that study, though, is that they don't when they selected their patients, the only thing they said is that they were these patients were relatively healthy. So they excluded people with the with the, you know, age associated diseases. So no cancer, no dementia, no, I guess, also no chronic kidney disease, which means that in this case, you know, we cannot, let's say, extrapolate or keep let's say, we should assume that probably kidney or GFR in that case is still within the normal range for for that age. So in that sense, I think then my feeling is that that would be due to the fact that perhaps there is a positive association with having higher trigonalin and being more, let's say, long lived or or healthy lived, you know, in that sense. So that would be my conclusion based on the fact that they excluded patients with CKD in that sense. But, yes, I mean, having that information on GFR, for instance, would have been interesting to see if there would have been any correlation there. Yeah. Yeah. And then, do you, do things in your diet? Or I don't think it's even sold as a supplement. Yeah. Camera. It's crazy. Yeah. Yeah. It's crazy, my camera. Let's try again. Yeah. Some I don't know why. It it was working perfectly. Oh, man. Sorry about that. You're in the future. That's the that's the future. Maybe. Sorry. Maybe yeah. I don't know what happened, but my computer is going a bit crazy. K. For maybe I'll leave it a bit like this for a moment. But just a couple more question. It's still there. So, what did I have? I just had, one more I had. Man, I got sent to me. Distracted you. Sorry about that. No worries. No worries. So right. So you're in your own personal approach. I don't think that trichinellium is sold as a supplement. I looked Oh, yeah. Yeah. So do you Yeah. Go ahead. Go ahead. Do you do anything specifically to try to boost dietary intake, or, what would you suggest? Or or are there ways that we can do that? Yeah. So, well, I wish that would be the easy way to say just drinking more coffee. I mean, I love coffee. I mean, I drink a lot of coffee, but the thing is just through, let's say, diet is gonna be quite difficult in a sense. Yes. Combining different things in diet. I mean, let's say your legumes or veggies with high concentrations of trigonalin, like phenolic seeds, for instance, and so on. Or drinking coffee could be let's say, certainly, we should increase trigonulin to a point. I mean, just drinking three to four cups per day. I think there's a study from Norway where they actually use trigonulin as a biomarker for coffee exposure. I mean, for how much coffee you drink. It turns out that the more coffee you drink, the more trigonal you get in plasma, but even drinking three to four cups only leads you to, like, something like eight to 10 micromolar of trigonal in plasma, which may be not sufficient for, let's say, modulating NAD values. And so in terms of supplementation, I yeah. That that's the thing. I mean, again, this is a new, let's say, relatively new molecule. So on the market, there is literally nothing as pure Trigonal in at the moment. There is a lot of things like, you know, some people buy also for, let's say, muscle and anabolizing things. You know? They they buy fenugreek seed extracts, which can be either powder or sold as essentially as, encapsulated in pills. The problem with the fenugreek struct is that they are not generally, they are not standardized by the amount of trigoneline. So they are they can be very diverse, you know, depending on the supplier. They will be very diverse on the amount of trigoneline. So there is some reports in literature that say that wild, pheno Greek in in India or something, has up to 12% trigonalin, meaning that you would still need to take something like 13 or more grams, of that of the wall extract in order to have something that is equivalent to what we see in mice for trigoneline. So because you would need approximately something like one point seven and one point eight grams of trigoneline to see with what we're using mice to see in a d. Right? But, you know, eating thirteen, fifteen grams of an extract, that has a lot of other molecules in there. We do not know whether that would be positive for your health. You know? It's probably not advisable, especially not knowing much more at at the clinical level. So, yeah, I would say eating a good diet with lots of veggies or legumes that contain sugar in a way and drinking coffee. Actually, the caffeinated coffee still contains sugar in a way, so it's also okay. That's great. Alright. So I I can't see your face, but thanks, Vincenzo. That was fantastic. And then I'm sure Bob still got the screen. Yeah. So, I'm looking Sorry about that. No worries. No worries. So I'm looking forward to the paper, and, I'm sure we'll talk soon. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you again, Michael. Yeah. Bye.