One, today's guest is doctor Amy Proal, who is the president and research director of the poly bio research foundation, which if you don't know is a super cool site and I'll link to it in the video subscription. Doctor. Proal is also the scientific director at at the Cohen Center for Recovery from Chronic Illness at Mount Mount Sinai. Today, Doctor. Proal will present evidence linking viral infection to aging. And with that, welcome Amy, and let's get into the presentation. Great, Mike. So much thanks so much for having me on. This is cool. Yeah. So yes, I'll just go ahead and share some slides. What I'm gonna talk about today are viruses as age disorders. So literally the ability of viruses to affect many of the processes that directly impact human aging. I'm gonna give a review of honestly just some of the evidence, because there's a huge amount of evidence. It would actually be a very, very, very long talk if I gave all of the evidence, but some of the top evidence. So, okay, when we're talking about viruses as contributors to aging, I'm gonna focus on three main categories: the way that viruses can contribute to mitochondrial dysfunction associated with aging, the way that viruses can directly contribute to inflammation, and the way that viruses can contribute to cognitive decline and many types of processes associated with cognitive decline, including the dementia disease process or Alzheimer's disease process. And I'll focus on viruses, but the truth is that it's viruses, bacteria, fungi, even parasites, most of the pathogens, if not all of the pathogens that can infect humans, especially those that can persist within us over time, that can drive many of these aging processes. In a sense, I'm often using viruses as examples of what a whole wider set of pathogens can do to impact human aging processes. Okay. So here, first, it's important to understand that we all have inside of us what is called the human virome. So what this means is that over the course of our lifetimes, we accumulate viruses, which persist with us once we have them for our entire lives. They are chronic. And these viruses, as they accumulate in us over time, are collectively called the human virome. Now we even get viruses sometimes inherited from our mothers in the womb. In other words, viruses in the acquisition of those that form a person's virome can literally be inherited in the womb, at the start of life, And then we pick these viruses up in many different ways, through drinking water, through interaction with other people, through all kinds of different exposures. And some of the most common viruses that are part of the human virus are the herpes viruses, for example, the Epstein Barr virus, which I'll mention a little bit more later, but lots of other viruses, the papillomaviruses, and increasingly, which is interesting, a number of RNA viruses, which include actually, and I'll get to this later, even SARS CoV-two in some capacities. So, you know, to give you an example of the human virome, this is a study that was done by a team in Japan. It's just a really good analysis. And what they did is they took a dataset where tissue had been collected from people who are deemed healthy. So the way the tissue samples and you can see on the top of this diagram, you can see there's brain, pituitary, thyroid, heart, breast, lung. Like, that top of the diagram has all these different types of human tissue across the human body. And then what they did and and by the way, the way that they got these tissue samples was and this is unfortunate, but at least they were taking, in a sense, advantage for scientific research of the situation. These were people who are unfortunately passed away in accidents, for example, like a car accident, or some other event where they were not passing away due to an illness, they were passing away due to just some kind of, you know, sudden death type event. And they got their tissue, they put it into this database. They also got some of the tissue from people going through just routine procedures, where they're able to clip a little bit of tissue from some of body sites in order to put it into what can be analyzed as part of this database. Then they did a really good analysis where they used some of the more advanced technologies that we have these days to look for both DNA viruses, which are the type of family that the herpes viruses come from, and RNA viruses, which include SARS CoV-two, the enteroviruses, some of the influenza type viruses. And on the left of the chart, you can see that they identified dozens of different viruses in these tissue types from healthy people. In other words, these are the viruses that were just inside these people, all the way from the herpes viruses, like I mentioned before, seen bar virus, cytomegalovirus. But interestingly, getting into, for example, a coronavirus, hCOV-229E, which is a coronavirus that existed far before SARS CoV-two, That was in there as an RNA virus, and they get into Lassa virus, Paro Influenza virus. I mean, so there's a growing understanding that humans acquire quite a range of viruses depending on who they interact with, their settings, how much they travel, what they're exposed to. The virus contains a lot of chronic viral passengers that people have in their lives. So going back to this prime example, just to clarify, of Epstein Barr virus, Many people understand that in college or often people get mononucleosis. Right? And it's this when you get mono, the classic symptoms of mono, you have a fever, you feel fluy, you know, everyone avoids you. But then what happens is usually people's symptoms get better and they're considered, you know, to have gotten over mono, and no one, I'll be honest, thinks about it that much more. The thing to really understand is the virus that drives mono, the Epstein Barr virus, does not clear from that person after they get it. It persists with them for the rest of their life. It is a chronic virus. And what's important to understand is that under conditions of health, so when the immune system is robust, when the immune system is in a good state, it largely keeps these viruses, like Epstein Barr virus, in check. So the immune system is, you know, keeping the virus down in what we call a latent form or a dormant form, where it really can't do that much. It can't create too many proteins or too many products that start to interfere with our own human biology. But if the immune system is disturbed by a number of factors, they could be it could be another infection, it could be exposures to chemicals, exposures to pollutants, stress, all kinds of other factors that often sink the immune response, these viruses then can activate under those conditions of immune dysregulation or immune imbalance, and then they are connected to a wide range of disease processes. So what is very important first then to understand about what they can do in terms of affecting human mitochondria is the fact that viruses are obligate intracellular pathogens. What that means is that they cannot do anything. They cannot replicate. They cannot create a new version of themselves, which is necessary to do pretty much anything that they do as a virus, without pulling the substrates needed to create the new versions of themselves from our own human mitochondria. So this is a paper I wrote about that with my colleague at polybio, Mike Van Elziger. He's a neuroscientist. And what we do in this paper is we walk through the different mechanisms by which viruses, bacteria, fungi, and even parasite pathogens directly hijack the mitochondria of the people they infect, especially over time, to pull, again, these really important mitochondrial substrates that should go towards our energy metabolism, towards their replication and their benefit. And so, for example, this is a diagram from the paper. This is a mitochondria, and you can see in the middle of it the TCA cycle. I'm pretty sure many people who are interested in aging, mitochondrial function understand that this cycle is happening in our mitochondria. The substrates produced are supposed to give us energy, are supposed to feed into our pathways. In the blue boxes in this diagram, those are viruses, many viruses. And what you can see is those are the different parts, the different, you know, signaling aspects or parts of the mitochondrial metabolism that those specific viruses hijack or hack in order to disrupt mitochondrial metabolism to benefit their own reproductive needs. So by definition, if someone has a chronic viral infection or a bacterial or even fungal over time, there's almost no way if that infection becomes more active, starts to do things over the course of a person's life, that it's not detrimental to that person's mitochondrial function over time, which could, of course, be impacting aging processes and mitochondrial health. So next, we have inflammation when we're talking about aging. And this is the straightforward fact that as people age and get older, they get inflammation increasingly that is unproductive. It's over exuberant to a point where there's inflammation and that's the activation of immune molecules that is not great and starts to be, you know, actually not great for the way that they're functioning. So this is just a basic review article showing that inflammaging is really a key contributor, this sort of unproductive, sort of overly activated excessive inflammation in age related diseases and in longevity processes. And I think many people understand this. Like, if you have too much inflammation, this is not good for aging. So straightforward, you know, molecules that are part of the inflammation process are called cytokines. And this paper gives an example of one cytokine. It's called IL 11. These are inflammatory molecules that can activate, become part of the inflammation that can perpetuate inflammation over time. And what this team did in this study is pretty straightforward. They inhibited the signaling of IL 11, this cytokine that can contribute to inflammation, and in a series of experiments then, doing that extended mammalian lifespan and health span. Okay. But the question really is, what is causing these cytokines, like IL 11, to become activated in the first place? I mean, what's the driver of that? What are the root causes of that inflammation? And one, there's a number of factors, but one are viruses or other pathogens. So here's just one example of a study showing that IL 11, which is also called interleukin 11, was stimulated both in vivo, which means in animal models, and in the lab, which is in vitro, by respiratory viruses. So they could just show that a respiratory virus, even a simple one that we would otherwise dismiss, can up the activity of ILO 11. So viruses are some of the largest drivers, if you look across the literature, of the simple activation of the immune system that can be the root cause driver of inflammation processes across so many different, parameters. Now also, this is really key, and this to me is the most important thing to understand about viruses and other pathogens as drivers of aging processes, is that, sure, they can drive inflammation. They can kick up really on unhealthy and unhelpful inflammation over time. But that's just one way that they can contribute to aging type processes. The way that they really mess with us is by directly distorting our human signaling that that is supposed to be correctly allowing pathways connected to longevity. For example, pathways that control senescence, which is the ability of cells to sort of replicate and be healthy in the way that they do that, over time. So what this team did is they did a network based analysis, and it uncovered dozens of viruses that on that encode proteins experimentally demonstrated to interact with proteins from pathways associated with human aging, including pathways that control really important senescence signaling, which again is the a cell's, you know, ability to, control its power over division and growth. So as they did, you know, the the amount of interactions they found between viral proteins that could directly distort these longevity networks in our human body were high. So you can see here the herpes viruses, some of the papillomaviruses, where some of the viruses that create proteins that are the biggest age distorter proteins. There are many different viral sequences. These are, you know, associated with proteins that can interact and distort these networks. Many, many interactions with, with human gene networks. So there were thousands of interactions that the team documented in this one study alone. So what they concluded was this, owing to the considerable number of human viruses, this evolutionary minded view encourages a reconceptualization of the locus of aging, no longer exclusively focused on our own genetic material, but expanded towards a larger set of genetic entities interacting with our species, such as viruses. And this is really key, is that just viruses can get into the center of our cells, where they can gain access to our human genes, and the proteins they create can modulate the direct expression of our human genes that control most of the processes connected to how we age over time. Now one of the ways that they do this is because many viruses have evolved to create proteins that are very similar in size and shape to our human proteins, and this is called molecular mimicry. So for example, there are Epstein Barr virus proteins that are very similar in size and shape to human proteins that are important for controlling the way that our immune system impacts disease. And so what that means is that increasingly, the viral proteins that have similar shapes to our human proteins are able to bind into our human signaling pathways in a way that modulates those pathways in their favor rather than ours over time. So now what about cognitive decline, which I mentioned before? There are just some extremely straightforward research studies that are blowing open the way viruses drive cognitive processes, decline processes that are extremely clear. This is research done by a team at Harvard Medical School that we know well. This is what they did. They took a made a neuron and a dish model. Basically, they made little mini brains in the lab, and then they infected them with herpes viruses. The those same viruses from the family of Epstein Barr virus that have, you know, a number of those, you know, variations on on the family of herpes viruses. They did that, and what they showed was that the Alzheimer's plaque, and and I think we all know that in Alzheimer's disease, the driver, or what we understand is part of driving the disease process, is the buildup of an amyloid plaque in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease that is at the root of the disease process and the inflammation and the neurotangles that occur as people get sicker and sicker. What they showed in these neuron and a dish models is that the amyloid plaque actually functioned as an antimicrobial peptide, which is basic part of the human immune response that forms in response to infections. So what was happening was that this plaque was actually being seeded in response to infections that were in the dish. And so this is a paradigm shift in thinking, which is that the Alzheimer's plaque might not just be accumulating for no reason. It might be accumulating because it has a function. Pathogens, viruses, or bacteria gradually get into our brain tissue, potentially even via traveling the vagus nerve, this important nerve that connects a lot of the organs of our bodies where viruses, for example, can get more easily into at first, like the gut, get into our brains over time, and then the viruses or the infections seed the amyloid plaque, which forms in response to their presence. So this is a huge paradigm shift. This team has actually shown that the same thing happens. The amyloid plaque forms in response to bacterial pathogens and even fungal pathogens that they use in their models. This is another image from Ben Reidhead's team, who is a really great group studying, again, the intersection of infection, chronic infection, and Alzheimer's disease at Arizona State University. It's actually unpublished data, but he shared this image with me. They'll publish soon showing the cytomegalovirus, which is another herpes virus, concentrated inside, again, the plaques of brain tissue collected from people with Alzheimer's disease. And they're able to show that this accumulation of the cytomegalovirus is associated with a type of glial immune cell activation in the brain of certain Alzheimer's patients that's detrimental and a large driver of the Alzheimer's disease process. And so you're gonna see a lot of teams in the next years come out with data like this, positioning viruses right at the heart of Alzheimer's plaque formation. So what do we do about it? This is the thing is we do, you know, we could freak out and say, oh my gosh, this is terrible. But there's so many things that we can do about it because we really do not do much as a society to treat viruses or other bacterial pathogens, especially in a preventative fashion. There's actually a lot of existing drugs, a lot of existing antivirals, a lot of existing antibiotics, and a lot of herbs even, or other supplements that people can take that have antibacterial or antifungal or antiviral activity that can be utilized to prevent the ability of these pathogens from acting in ways that can contribute to distorting, for example, senescence signaling or driving potentially amyloid plaque formation. And one of the most obvious and low hanging fruit examples of that are herpes virus antivirals. I mean, they exist. Some are out there. So for example, when someone does get a cold sore I mean, genital herpes, they're prescribed Valtrex, which is an over the counter generic herpes antiviral that people can take and get access to often. And what this team did is, it's a team in Taiwan. They actually looked through a database of the population where they were able to gain access to records, medical records from thousands of people. And what they did is they looked at people who had been taking some of these, you know, over the counter herpes virus medications, or easily prescribed herpes virus medications like Valcyte, frequently prescribed medications. And they looked at those people who had been taking them more often versus people who had not been given those. And they found, that the people taking the antiherpes virus medications had a significantly lower risk of developing dementia over time. In fact, almost a 10 times lower risk of developing dementia by taking these, you know, very widely available herpes virus antivirals. So one of the things that Ben Reidhead's group is doing, where I showed you the set of myelovirus data, is actually just getting together, honestly, the funding and the infrastructure to run a clinical trial of valganciclovir, one of these herpes antivirals, in patients with pre dementia, to see if it prevents, you know, progression to Alzheimer's disease. So straightforward possibilities for what can be done. Another interesting and I I guess, pause now to talk about how SARS CoV-two sort of fits into the picture because we have been studying SARS CoV-two a lot in the last years because of the COVID pandemic. And the reason one of the reasons we did that as a group interested in viruses, you know, viral activity across the spectrum of chronic diseases and aging is because it was extremely unfortunate, but many people did become infected with the SARS CoV-two virus at the same time because of the pandemic. And that gave us, as scientists, an unprecedented opportunity to bring people together with a common viral infection and then do a lot of analysis to track how they develop chronic disease, and how that chronic disease, and why it manifests over time. So we did that with long COVID, which is just, as people know, a lot of people don't recover fully from COVID, and some go on to develop chronic symptoms. And what is frustrating is that often in the news, long COVID is presented or portrayed as mysterious or weird or or hard to understand. But actually, if you look at the research, there's very clear leads on what's making people sick after COVID. One of them is that there's a large amount of research now showing that at least some people who have long COVID symptoms have just not cleared the virus. In other words, SARS CoV-two can act, at least in some people, as a chronic virus, potentially another member then of the human viral that can accumulate in our tissues and cause disease either right away or potentially later in time. And this is a paper that our group, at PolyBio and some of our colleagues put together, documenting evidence for SARS CoV-two persistence from a number of studies describing mechanisms by which persistent virus can contribute to symptoms, and talking about, you know, other factors that can happen when SARS CoV-two persists. This is an example of a study which demonstrates clear persistence of the SARS CoV-two virus. This is a team that got gut tissue from via, an, you know, sort of endoscopy procedure from patients after COVID, and then they use probes to look for the genetic material of SARS CoV-two over two years after initial infection. And in these cases, you can see that pink in the in the picture is still the RNA of the SARS CoV-two virus. In this case, it's double stranded RNA, which indicate which is indicative of active viral replication because double stranded RNA is a is a type of RNA the virus only makes when it's going to replicate. So if you find it in the sample, it strongly suggests the virus was replicating at the time that you collected the sample. And the virus is actually, especially in the image on the right, which, again, this is in gut tissue from a patient over two years after initial infection. It's actually clustered within immune cells, where it seems to be almost down regulating the immune response and sort of preventing the immune system from being able to correctly target it. So you have immune cells that are clustered around, but don't seem to be able to actually get rid of it. So this is an ongoing area of research in the long COVID space. This is a chart from our paper. This is just some of the studies. In fact, we have a new paper coming out soon, and the chart is would take, like, eight slides to show. These are all studies that have found SARS CoV-two RNA or protein in tissue samples, or sometimes in host cells like platelets or monocytes from people months or years after initial infection. So with that in mind, you know, one of the things that we're doing, I think that's interesting, to try to address SARS Co two persistence and also the potential reactivation of other viruses in people with long COVID, is we're actually running at Mount Sinai, where I'm a scientific director of the long COVID clinic that you mentioned, We're running a clinical trial of low dose rapamycin in long COVID, which I think people in the aging community would find interesting because so many people are also using rapamycin to promote longevity. The reason we're using rapamycin in a low dose, and then we're talking about a really low dose. So our study starts with two milligrams once a week, our trial, and then finally moves into four milligrams once a week, but that's it. That's the the highest dose that people are using. It's based on some of this literature by Joan Mannick's group, which we found really interesting, which is, in this case, this is one study by their team. What they did is they looked at the activity of two rapalogs. So analogs of rapamycin, not rapamycin exactly, but drugs with very similar characteristics. And they found a couple things to be true across studies where they were looking at these rapalogs. They found that after, I think it was in one case, just six weeks of rapalog dosing, that there was an increase in interferon induced antiviral gene expression in the group taking the rapalogs, which is really huge, because interferons are parts of the immune response that play a central role in keeping viruses in check. So if you want a herpes virus or a persistent virus to be in that state where it's more dormant or it's more latent, What you want is a strong interferon response to keep it down. And this team did find that these rapalogs increase the expression of those interferons. If that's true, that would be huge for controlling persistent viral activity over time. Also, at the end of one of the trials of the Rapalogs, actually, they did this in two cases. They gave patients the influenza vaccination. And then they measured the immune sort of response towards the vaccine, like how robustly did people create antibodies after they were vaccinated. And the group taking the rapalogs had a more robust response to influenza vaccination, suggesting again that taking the rapalogs had enhanced or strengthened the way their immune system was going to create antibodies in response to either infections or something along the lines of what is needed for antibody responses. And in one study of people on rapamycin, participants reported a lower rate of infection for up to a year after taking rapamycin, even though they had only taken rapamycin for a certain number of weeks. After that, even, they had a lower rate of just respiratory infections, even UTI type infections over time. And in one of their studies, they actually found that there was improvement in t cell exhaustion in patients taking the Rapalogs. And t cell exhaustion often occurs in the context of chronic viral infection because if someone has viruses in them and those viruses are causing problems, the person's t cells keep kinda coming in to say, hey. This virus is not great. Hey, this isn't great. And the T cells, as they keep recognizing the virus but probably don't succeed in clearing it, actually become exhausted. It's literally what it sounds like. They become tired as they keep trying to mitigate the effects of the chronic virus, and they express markers that actually show that they are exhausted, that we can measure in a research setting to determine that T cells are exhausted, that people taking the Rapalogs in this one study showed less markers of T cell exhaustion after taking it. So overall, in our long COVID trial of low dose rapamycin, we're doing we're measuring all these parameters. At the baseline before people get rapamycin, we're measuring the interferon gene expression. We're measuring the t cell exhaustion. We're measuring all kinds of parameters of the immune response, plus doing targeted metrics of certain viral activity parameters so that we can actually see if there's a chance that rapamycin might be helping people better control viral activity. And if that's the case, then there's a chance that one of the reasons, and there could be many, but one of the reasons that rapamycin helps people with longevity is because viruses are involved in longevity driving, problems, and rapamycin might be helping that to a certain extent. And last, I wanted to say that another approach that we're looking at that I think is also relevant to the longevity community, again, that we're looking at in long COVID, but basically, again, using long COVID as a test case for what can be extrapolated from our knowledge of looking at viral activity to other cases, is that the spike protein of the SARS CoV-two virus drives fibrin formation. And what this this is a paper that was published in Nature, it's a big deal among a lot of scientists, because it's a really well done paper. They showed, again, that the SARS CoV-two spike protein basically directly affects and kind of seeds both fibrinogen, which is the sort of substrate for clotting in the human body, and fibrin, which is the more sort of hardened form of fibrinogen that forms clots. So what that means is that the SARS CoV-two virus, by driving this fibrin formation, is kind of a seeding, of of little blood clots at the very least, right? So that has been documented by many groups now in long COVID as well. This was an early finding in 2021. Most long COVID patients have what are called micro clots in their blood. They're these fibrin amyloid deposits. It's that clotting part of fibrin with a bit of amyloid, likely driven by the spike protein. And these fibrin amyloid clots, which might even still contain spike protein, we're researching that, start to accumulate in the person's blood. This is not great, because likely these little clots, you know, get into their smaller capillaries or the blood vessels that are supposed to be feeding their lungs or their heart, or even parts of the nervous system, and block them up, so that blood flow gets worse, you know, vasculature, blood vessel issues become more of a problem. Now one of the interesting things that we're doing, again, it's a clinical trial, is we're using this enzyme called belukilumbrokinase in a clinical trial to try to break up this fibrin deposition that we're seeing with these little clots in long COVID. And it's an enzyme actually extracted from earthworms originally, and that that's a paper from 1991 talking about this, that has anti fibrinolytic activity. In other words, these enzymes break up fibrin, which is exactly what we need. So we're running this clinical trial in long COVID to see if clots can get broken up. But the important thing to understand is that the seeding of fibrin into a clot form that is not great is actually happens from a wide number of pathogens. So many bacterial pathogens actually seed fibrin formation. Other fungal pathogens have been associated with fibrin formation to the point where actually, if bacteria team up together, and this is a whole other topic, but when bacteria contribute to chronic disease, they often do that by teaming up together and forming what's called a biofilm, where they they they together start to, you know, actually act together. They even sort of split up their functions, and they do this to persist in the face of the host immune response. And the matrix that they create for their little biofilm bacterial community is made of fibrin. So this lumbarokinase type supplement could actually be breaking up spike driven type fibrin deposition, but also biofilm type deposition. So there's a lot of promise here in sort of getting at this fibrin deposition that pathogens, drive that is not helpful. And so I thought, for example, that it was interesting. I saw the other day on Twitter that Christine Peterson, who I co founded the Foresight Institute, and I'm part of their health extension strategy group, she said, I take this. Most older people should. It It was based on someone saying nattokinase saved their life. Nattokinase is similar to lumbrokinase. It's a different slightly it's all it's made from actually soybeans, so it's not made from the earthworm products, but it also has an anti fibrin, fibrinolytic activity. And so I thought it was interesting again that the agent community is taking something often that disrupts fibrin, but they might not understand that part of why this might be helping them is because it's breaking up the products seeded by the pathogens, the viruses, and the bacteria that are part of aging processes. So with that then, I will just quickly say that part of what we've been doing with this work is the Long COVID Research Consortium is a group that we founded to be studying a lot of these trends. These are just some members of our team. We're doing a lot of collaborative work. And you can get on our polybi website. You can actually explore a lot of our projects. Really important to what we're doing, this is the last thing that I want to discuss, is that if you wanna understand whether it's the activity of SARS CoV-two as a driver of chronic disease or SARS CoV-two persistence, and what that's doing to people with long COVID symptoms, or any virus really, and what a virus is doing to drive chronic disease processes or aging processes. You cannot just study blood samples from a person. And it's really remarkable, if you start to look at scientific research, how much of the study we do of what can be wrong with humans, or what contributes to chronic disease or aging, is done on blood analysis. And that's because it's easy to get blood samples, right? Someone comes in, we're used to drawing blood, we do that, we analyze the samples. But the big problem is that the pathogens that are part of the human biome, many of these organisms, many of the pathogens that persist with us, some of the biggest potential drivers of inflammaging, or age disorders that can start to interfere with our human gene signaling, or our mitochondrial function, are in our tissues and not in our blood. So if you're a persistent pathogen, it is just dumb to be in blood. If you're free floating in the blood, that's where the immune system is most likely to recognize you, target you, and kill you. So what these pathogens do is over time, especially, they move out of the blood and into tissue, where they, in simple terms, height. We often call that, you know, amount, that pathogen that's kind of persisting now inside our tissues or nerves in a lower level, but a level that can still drive many problematic processes, we often call it a reservoir. So a small amount of pathogen that is detrimental. So in order to find these pathogens and really start to connect them to chronic disease processes, we can't just get blood samples from people because we're not always gonna find the viruses there. And in fact, the study of blood and the fact that a lot of the viruses or pathogens that can contribute to aging or chronic disease are not there is one of the reasons that this topic is sort of missed or overlooked more than it should be when it comes to aging. So what our group is doing a lot is collecting tissue samples from patients with long COVID or related chronic conditions, Alzheimer's disease, cardiovascular disease, and we do this by actually working, and this is a huge amount of what we do, to work with surgeons who are able to get samples of tissue during surgery, which they're able to stabilize and prepare for research, or patients who are willing to undergo biopsy procedures so that we can get parts of their lymph nodes, so that, again, we can get gut tissue, so that we can get tissue from the peripheral nervous system. All kinds of biopsy procedures that we're working on as part of our studies that allow us to get these unique tissue types that in some cases have never actually been previously analyzed by scientific teams for viruses or other pathogens. So that's a large part of what our research program does. So if you go back to this, you know, sort of display that we just created on our website, a huge part of it is that if you get to our website, you can interact with the projects, and you can see what body systems those projects connect to. Because what it shows you is that if you wanna understand viral activity in aging or chronic disease, you have to gain samples tissue, either via for tissue studies or in imaging studies from every human body system across the human body. And that's a lot of what we're working on. So with that in mind then, I think I'll oh, yeah. I think I'll just end there. That was great. Thanks, Amy. I'm so super excited to see all of the stuff that you guys produce. It's a gold mine of information. So especially the, that's a great point about blood versus tissues, right? Especially when you think that intra intracellular infection is almost, it's not studied at all. Right? So if it isn't studied, how can you even know that it exists to treat it? Right? So, and so many of chronic diseases, maybe even parts of aging itself may be a part of chronic intracellular, you know, microbial burden. Right. So absolutely. I'm stoked that you guys are, you know, and, and like I said, and I don't throw around words like, you know, super excited and super cool, but man, guys, like you, your team is you've, you've assembled a juggernaut of people in infectious disease and immunology and imaging and, neurology. Like, it's it's so it's so great. So, alright. Questions. Okay. So EVV. EVV. So that came up as one of the top hits, in terms of, I think, associated with aging related genes. It was, like, 35 hits or 45 hits. It was it was the top on HH. Yeah. Yeah. One of them. So the the thing that is curious to me is that, EBV so when you get a mono, you get a spike in lymphocytes. So they, you know and but they decline during aging. Lithocytes go from, you know, around 2,000 in youth to, like, a thousand or less in very old people. Mhmm. So if EBV you know, maybe during aging, there are spots where there is reactivation, immune system fights it off. But if EBV was, you know, the main driver, I'd expect to see higher than expected lymphocytes for chronological age. But in fact, the opposite is the case. Right? So that kind of argues that other microbes It could be. And I think one of the things, you know, I like using Epstein Barr virus as an example because a lot of people know about it, and it's it's relatable to people because they actually say, yeah, I got mono, and they they understand more of what I'm saying. But the truth is that I think EBV is sometimes overly talked about. Yes. Is it a a virus that's contributing to lots of of problems? Yes. For example, I mean, there's been a few major studies, and we're actually talking now, like, huge there was a huge Harvard study and basically a huge Stanford study that came out a little over a year ago or more, almost at the same time, both of them putting Epstein Barr virus at the heart of the MS, multiple sclerosis disease process. One that I thought was particularly interesting was the Stanford one, where they showed that they were able to, by getting cerebral spinal fluid from the brain of patients with MS, they found an Epstein Barr protein. And, again, this is that molecular mimicry that I was talking about, where pathogens and they do it on purpose. They create proteins that are similar in size and shape to our human structures, our receptors, the things that we need our human proteins to be binding into for function. This Epstein Barr protein was similar in size and shape to this human glialcam protein. That's a huge target in the MS brain. So what was really happening is that the immune system is targeting an Epstein barr protein, and then it cross reacts, and it hits that human tissue, the human neural glialcam, as sort of a secondary, like, you know, cross reactive process. So what it did is that study at least was proof of concept that you can put pathogens and the proteins they make at the heart of what's deemed autoimmune. You know what I mean? Like and and I like that. But the truth is that, you know, there's a lot of redundancy in the proteins that pathogens make. So there's a lot, you know, if there's a sort of size and shape that allows you to better hack a pathway or allows, again, the immune system to sort of crossfire on human tissue in a way that's detrimental, a number of different viral and bacterial pathogens are probably gonna start to make proteins over time that have shape like that. And again, like, why do they do this? You know, it's a it's a question like like viruses, like, it's it's like over time, over the course of evolution, they keep trying and evolving their proteins to better, you know, disrupt ours. And it's just because, you know, pathogens just don't they want they their fitness is their primary goal, right? And so they're doing whatever they can to survive and proliferate, and it's never in our favor when it comes to these pathogens. So the thing is, there could be bacterial pathogens, like the fungal pathogens, that also have proteins that, for example, even are similar to those created by Epstein Barr virus, meaning that, you know, I think a lot of these chronic diseases, it's not necessarily like a one pathogen, one virus, one disease situation. What it really is likely is that there's a lot of pathogens that could do similarly problematic things, and that depending on the person, they sort of the person accumulates, whether it's a bac viral or bacterial pathogen, right, and they get sort of a common detrimental outcome. With the with the amyloid plaque that I mentioned being the primary example, where they were able to show in those models, in the neuron models, that that plaque is forming in response to viruses, but it forms in response to bacteria. In other words, like, what you really just need is an infection that gets into the brain tissue, and that plaque is sort of a conserved ancient part of the immune response that's gonna form in response to many of them. So I think that's part of understanding, you know, human chronic disease and aging, is that for a long time, there were, and there still are actually in microbiology, these sets of rules called Koch's postulates. And there are a set of rules that say one pathogen must cause one disease. And they were created back in the day when we were just discovering viruses and bacteria, and people were trying to understand, for example, what causes tuberculosis or something. And there was a certain clarity in saying like, oh, tuberculosis is caused by this bacteria. And so they would write it in textbooks and be like, That's what it does. Right? But what it did is the rules became so strict that it prevented people, and still does, from thinking like, Oh, different pathogens can do similar things to drive chronic disease, or they can even act together. For example, the way, like, I was mentioning bacteria team up and form biofilm, where they're all interacting and even signaling collectively, right, to drive chronic disease processes. Like, that's a lot of what's happening, I think, in in these diseases. Yeah. So much to unpack there, one step at a time. So autoimmunity, when you think about the classic textbook definition, it's just self destruction, self eating. Right? But, so I'm I'm guessing your billion dollar bet is that in, autoimmunity, a large component of that is because of intracellular infection, undiagnosed Yeah. Intracellular. So then the question becomes, are there biomarkers that we can study? You know, you know, would with things like IgG I mean, IgG, you'd expect to have higher but then even there, it's like, okay. Am I looking at IgG for EBV, for HSV one, HSV two? You'd have to pick, right, the right one. So it's globally looking at IgG, which increases during aging. Yep. Maybe that'd be a good one of the good biomarkers to look at. It's not bad. I mean, considering what we're able to measure so this is one of the things that our foundation is trying to accelerate greatly, and I even hear, like, increasingly described, is we need to focus on better diagnostics and actually even creating more therapeutics, more antivirals, more things like more treatments for pathogens. But actually, the diagnostics are really important because right now they're actually pretty pathetic. Like, this is what I know, for example, because I both act as a, you know, an academic researcher in my role at PolyBio. Right? So I'm there. We do even a lot of the stuff that we do with identifying pathogens via computer programs and all that. And then in my second job, I, along with my cofounder of CORE, that clinic in Mount Sinai, we actually are just trying to say, like, okay. We're gonna try to treat patients. We're trying to create a clinic where we can diagnose and treat people in the real world. Like, take that academic knowledge and and make it actionable. And that's where you see this huge gap between what we can do in a research lab, where we have access to technologies that can, you know, capture the activity of single t cells or, you know, take a tissue sample and and basically work backwards the genetic material of any pathogen in that sample via sequencing. None of that is available in the clinic, you know, give or take a couple attempts right now. So there's this, you know, huge need to take some of the like, a lot of the research tools we have and start to go ahead and say, like, alright, what does it take from the side of, you know, VC, from the side of the like, from the side of people to move them into the clinic. Because right now, I would have to say that the most you could do to track viral activity over time would be to measure IgG or IgM. And what that is really is, you know, the immune system is creating antibody responses. It's it's recognizing these pathogens over time. And, you know, if you see increased signs of the you know, like you said, IgG is elevated, yeah. I mean, it suggests that the immune system is, you know, recognizing the pathogen perhaps a little bit more and more, which suggests the pathogen might be up to something over time. And that's it's it's something. I would track that, actually. I would do that over nothing. And yet IgG doesn't really give you that much idea on how active the pathogen is, what proteins it's making, you know, it's it's pretty blunt. So I there's a thing where I would say, yeah, I would track IgG and IgN. It's a it's like a related part of the immune response that sometimes signifies more recent exposure to a pathogen. I'd do it, while at the same time pushing for just reminding everyone we need improved diagnostics, and it's possible. The, the groups, the teams are there. We just need the, we need the momentum to care enough to start to do the actual translation. So which, but taking it a step further from IGT, what diagnostics would you prefer to see? There's a couple. I mean, first of all, what I think is is really cool that we can do in our teams can do in a research lab is they can understand if a T cell is still responding to a persistent pathogen. So they can basically like, for example, with SARS CoV-two, when we're looking at persistence, one of the ways we actually can can work from a blood sample, because of the tissue being difficult to get sometimes, is we can take a person's T cells, and then teams can use sequence sequence the way that T cell, and to get it capture its activity, to realize that it's still in a state where it's still responding to SARS CoV-two and its proteins, it's still active. And that, we can capture that and say that's a SARS CoV-two specific T cell, which means that you must still have the virus because the T cell's still there activated in response to it. Right? So kind of using the immune system as a biosensor of the pathogen. And that's that's cool, especially because with sequencing, you can actually even tell, like, how more recently the t cell encountered the pathogen. Like, whether it was a week ago, a month ago, like, you can get pretty intricate on, like, the information gained from the t cell. Right? So that, for example. Like, okay, it would be so amazing if you could just know, you could do a run a panel in the clinic of which T cells do you have in you that are activated in response to pathogens. I mean, that would be amazing. Right? So because t cells are much more specific. Like, if a t cell is brought in, you know something's up. Right? So so there's those those therapies where you're using the immune system to to better capture persistence, and I think those are cool because while the pathogens are often not in the blood, the immune cells that recognize them do circulate through the blood. So sometimes those are maybe in the more realistic, accessible diagnostics. That being said too, you know, I actually do think that let's say for someone, I don't know, with long COVID or issues over time, depending on the situation, doing, let's say, what's called a flexible flexible sigmoidoscopy, it's a procedure to get a piece of gut tissue. Yes. Is it a little, you know, invasive? Yes. But it's actually fairly routine to do this, and it's done in other conditions conditions where we think that disease really matters. So, obviously, if someone has cancer, we have no qualms about doing a biopsy or something to get tissue from the place of, being a problem. Right? So if we were able to potentially, let's say, gut get gut tissue from people over time, either with symptoms or even people who are just sort of curious about their health, that's where we could start to use some of the sequencing tools we have too, to really start to be able to say, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. Here are some of the pathogens that might most matter in your aging and health, chronic age processes. Because one of the things that we're most seeing in studies is that viruses, we often get them, I don't know, we respiratory or we we eat them, you know what I mean? Like, or we get them in foods. Right? So you're you get viruses often end up in the gut. And so the lining of the gut is sort of a real site of where viruses start to accumulate. In fact, in that paper that Ben Reed's head's team at ASU will soon publish, what they really found was that it seems that the virus that contributes to Alzheimer's over time starts in the gut tissue, and then climbs up the vagus nerve, which which innervates the gut tissue, and gets into the brain later. But the gut is sort of where where it's, you know, hanging out at first. So to me, getting a piece of gut tissue and using some of the sequencing tools we have that can basically call out any of the viruses or pathogens in that sample, not the worst in terms of getting someone an idea of how their virome is set up. Right. So I got a so much so many questions. Alright. So first is, could you sequence t cells? Could you break it down by, like, if you've got a whole t cell population, you could say, you know, that it's specifically you've got CMB related t cells and that's, you know, the dominant driver in in someone's case versus can you identify specific tags on c cell surface markers on T cells to identify which? Yeah? In a lab? Yeah. In a research lab, some of the T cell technologies that people are using, yes, you can absolutely understand what even a single T cell is, like exactly which virus, it's not only that, which protein created by the virus. Like for example, like cytomegalovirus creates a number of different proteins. You can tell that the t cell is responding to a specific CMB protein. Right? So, yeah, you can you can do that in a lab. So but, you know, for example, John Wherry is one of the researchers. He's at Penn. He's actually a legend when it comes to chronic viral infection. He's he has some of his lab as some of just the best, you know, T cell they can see T cells. It's really amazing. But he I you know, when I talked to him, he he actually says the clinics like, an average clinic is about thirty years behind what they can do in the lab. I mean, that's just that's crazy. Right? So so, yeah, we did that's an insane gap to bridge. I mean, where we need to to take those advanced tools and, you know, figure out how to make them more realistic. It's it's a little like, yeah, they're expensive now. They are. I mean, the studies where we do, we have to raise millions of dollars to do this. Like, it's kinda like when a first computer was made, you know, and it was took up a whole room or whatever, and it takes a while to to iterate that into a laptop, but but it's possible. So, yeah, that there's a huge amount of diagnostic potential then, you know, depending. Yeah. Alright. So then in the gut, then the question is, what what gut mechanisms are deficient? Like, I mean, it's, you know so the gut immune system, short chain fatty acids being a part of, I don't know how much you know gut physiology. I don't know for for you know? Oh. Yeah. Yeah. But so, I mean, so in terms of gut physiology, you've got, you know, acidification, limits the growth of things like enterobacteria, which E. Coli is a part of, so potentially pathogenic. But what gut mechanisms control, you know, would those same mechanisms impact, you know, viruses persisting? Like, has anyone looked at what, quote, unquote, what a dysbiotic gut looks like, and then it's happens to have more viruses in in that gut too, or is that just a Yes. Bacteria? That's actually one of our like, several of our studies are designed to be doing that, and actually, I'm not sure we need have not even published the data fully yet, but that is exactly part of a couple of them, how we've designed them. So there's a there's two teams right now where they're collecting the gut tissue from patients with long COVID, but then also just getting stool samples to sequence the microbiome and be like, okay. Do we find correlations between changes in microbiome, not just, you know, that composition or the who's there in the microbiome, but the changes in the metabolites they're making, which is really key. Right? In other words, like, the change in the activity of a microbiome and the presence or absence of a persistent virus or viruses in tissue. And I you know, the same with lung. We have a really cool study where there's a team getting lung biopsy via bronchoscopy, but then also sequencing, like, the sort of upper respiratory tract microbiome to sort of understand, again, that relationship between microbiome and, like, what might be more of, like, a single viral infection or a viral issue in the tissue. And the truth is, though, I would bet some money that there will be a relationship because if you it it goes both ways. It's almost like a you know, it feeds into each other, at least from a from a standpoint of thinking about it. If you have a pathogen that gets in the lining of the gut and it doesn't clear, it likely downregulates the immune system to stick around. It's a little like in that image I showed you of the SARS code two still in the gut tissue. The team is, like, is sequencing those immune cells, and they're they're down regulated. It's like they're not acting the way they should to to be active enough. So what it really means in simple terms is you kind of maybe you're seeing a general thinking of the immune system in that area near the persistent virus, and that is just going to give the microbiome a chance to go become this biotic. Because, again, the microbiome, you know, a lot of people, as you know, and I think we describe microbiome as, like, a a group of healthy, you know, friendly organisms, and that is not correct. What it a micro biome is a group of organisms that can act as commensals under certain conditions, but can totally change their gene expression to act as pathogens or create many problematic products under conditions of immune dysregulation or imbalance. It's really so if the immune environment in the gut goes down because of persistent infection, for sure, the microbiome, like some of the bad players, are likely gonna start to act up, and you'll likely see the microbiome kind of now go towards a state that's not as great. I actually think that probably feeds forward and probably creates a better environment for the persisting virus. You know what I'm saying? So, like and this is how chronic disease perpetuates. And the same thing too being that both the persistence in the gut of the virus and the microbiome dysbiosis likely create inflammation, you know, unproductive inflammation that likely wear down the lining of the gut. So you're getting whatever, leaky gut, whatever you wanna call it, gut permeability, I'm sure. That we see. In long COVID, there's a number of teams that have kind of started to correlate persistence of the virus in the gut with, you know, more permeable gut barrier. And then that allows, at least in the case of SARS Co two, the spike protein to leak into the blood, and then that's a disaster. That's where, like, spike then starts to activate all kinds of other immune cells and clotting problems and this and hit the blood vessels. And now you created this huge downstream cascade that's gonna cause way more problems than symptoms. The same true of the bacteria. Like, as the gut is leaky, you're gonna get translocation of the bacterial organisms into the blood. That's gonna cause all kind of problems. They can even see the fibrin that are part of those clots, and now you have that. Like so all of this really does, I think, feed into each other. But then conversely, we we are trying to understand why some people, you know, seem to kick harbor the SARS CoV-two virus in their gut persistently and others don't. And probably one of the predisposing factors to why people sometimes don't clear the virus is because their microbiome wasn't in good shape when they got infected. So let's say someone's microbiome is already dysbiotic, there's inflammation, the virus is probably just in a more in a better environment to to persist. So it really is like a, you know, kind of feeding forward all connected type type situation. Yeah. So I think there was one thing. I everything you said, I agree a 100% and it makes sense. The only thing that, I think you missed was so let's say you've got, virus, you know, some burden some viral burden in in the gut, right, in the gut lining. And, so that block of cells that was unable to clear it potentially goes senescent. And I'm sure you saw so I'm sure you saw that paper that was published a few years ago that senescence is an antiviral mechanism. Right? So I I have. Yes. Yeah. So But that was in my slides. Yeah. Yeah. But, right. Right. Right. Yeah. But so then as you mentioned, right, so, so now you've got a potentially a group of cells in the intestine that are senescent, and then they're releasing inflammation, like you said, and then inflammation, where's that? So a 100%, that all makes total sense. Actually, I agree with you. Well, I'm focusing, I focused on the, the fact that the virus is down regulating some of the immune cells. There's also inflam it's like, what it really is is immune dysregulation, where you're getting some of the immune system turned down, and some of the immune system kicked up, and and and and none of that's productive. You know, so it's kind of a skewing of the immune system, some towards the pro inflammatory and some towards the downregulation. Yeah. I agree with you. And in a vicious cycle, like, once that vaccine starts, it's get it's just gonna amplify over time. Yes. But they're also I'm sure you've seen the papers on there is a gut lung axis where I can't remember if it was, inulin or, SCFAs, but they fed mice, you know, I think it was inulin where, you know, obviously, they got a boost in short chain fatty acids in the gut Yeah. And that enhanced their ability to survive after viral infection. So Yeah. There is a gut lung axis, but then as you mentioned too, it goes bidirectionally where Yeah. It's, you know, the what you the respiratory, infections can affect the gut too. So Yeah. So so then it goes then it goes to the question of, you know, are there things so are there things you're so you're on the you're on the cutting edge of this. Are there things you're doing in your day to day that you think could, Yeah. I mean, you know, and and there's one group that we're we're just starting to use their probiotic a little bit, but it's a it's a group that has a probiotic that, at least according to some of their data, can convert lactic acid into short chain fatty acids, and this is interesting to us. Like, okay. So we in other words, in again, we're considering trial and get in long COVID. Again, because, you know, if you're trying to intervene, whether it's on the persistence in the gut or something, you need to intervene somewhere. Right? And let's say we can improve the microbiome and actually start to recreate better butyrate production or improve the signaling there, well, maybe that at least starts to improve the environment and kind of cut through that vicious cycle we were talking about. So we actually really do think that microbiome based approaches are important in long COVID or you name it. Like, chronic conditions associated with viruses, whatever it is. Right? So so that's that is definitely part of it. And then what was your question the other? So wait. Just going back to I think that covered it, but wait. So going back to diagnostics, your point about Oh, yeah. What what do I okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The your personal. Yeah. Yeah. So in in my yeah. With alright. With SARS CoV-two, I definitely I do think that, you know, some I I take the lumboral kinase, nattokinase stuff. I've been taking those for years though. So I was I started taking, I think, lumbarokinase ten years ago because there was already data that it could break up bile some. So it was convenient that, like, it also seems to break up fibrin from the spike protein. So I I'm on that a lot, and if I've, in the cases a couple times I've gotten COVID, I up that, because there's just, to me, knowing that the spike is seeding fibrin, and that's probably one of the things that it's doing to drive problems with the blood vessels, which is a lot of what I'm worried about. And I can get in the way of that. That's just a sort of straightforward thing to do. Then with antivirals, I mean, there's a lot of natural antivirals, so like, olive oil, even supplements. I use cat's claw, which is, you know, out there that has broad spectrum antiviral, antimicrobial activity. Here and there, I've experimented with methylene blue, which is really interesting. That is shown to have, in some cases, antiviral, in some cases, antibacterial, and in some cases, mitochondrial supporting properties. I like to think that's probably connective, like, it might affect organisms in a way that boosts, like, inhibits the way they impact my you know, detrimentally impact mitochondria. I've taken that sometimes. And I took Paxlovid, you know, let's say this is for COVID. But the problem there is that the short dosing of Paxlovid for for five days is is a tough one because a lot of times when you're trying to, in my case, what I'm trying to do if I get COVID is prevent the virus from persisting. I'd actually like to be able to dose something a little bit longer. Because with persistent pathogens, you do have to kind of wear them down, or you need to sort of inhibit a pathogen for a while. Like, a a short term dose is not necessarily that effective. Sometimes people even pulse the antivirals or antibiotics depending on what happens. So, you know, in those cases, I've experimented with taking longer Paxlovid, but what we do need is we need more development of antivirals that probably have better safety profiles, I'll be honest, than Paxlovid, where you could take it without, let's say, because the Ritonavir is obviously so, you know, just hard on the kidneys, hard on the body. Like, we need to create antivirals that that can be taken for a little bit of a longer period of time. I think that's gonna be really key towards the treatment of a lot of virome issues, is that we're going to need to do probably combinations of antivirals sometimes in people. And to do that, we're gonna need to create antivirals that have better tissue penetration, better safety profiles over time to be able to to do that. So part of what what we're doing is kind of we have a paper coming out soon that actually calls for that, like, increased antiviral development, because I'm not impressed on the side of the antivirals right now. We we have a really bad arsenal, especially for the RNA viruses like SARS Co two. With the with the herpes viruses, I do what I just said. Like, I take periodic doses of the anti herpes, like Valcyte, VOGENCICLIVIER. I've done this for years. I just, I, the safety profile of the, those drugs in all the research I see on herpes virus related problems as a preventative, I absolutely go through periods where I've just gotten doctors who are willing to prescribe me courses of Valcyte, Famvir, different herpes virus antivirals. I've done that. You know? So I don't know. Those are some things. That well, that's that's a great way. So have you looked at, like, your, IgG anti so so pick pick a virus and then have you looked at IgG levels to see if right? Because and then the question too is, you know, along the paxlovid point and not persistence, you know, Wouldn't you need some diagnostics in that case in order to know, alright. I took it for five days, and now I've got some biomarker that's Yeah. A I knocked it down. Right? It it's it's a challenge. You know? Definitely. But but the good the before you answer that, wait. So so rapamycin, just going into that story real quick. Yeah. So there's evidence in mice where, you know, it doesn't have to be for the duration of their lifespan to extend, you know, median lifespan, even transient use. I think it was in middle age extended lifespan, which then raises the question, is that is that knocking down are those mice suffering some from some amount of fungal infection because, you know, rhabdomycin's are known. Right? But then as you as your, you know, your your study's gonna look at is, you know, it may have some antiviral effects too, whether directly or indirectly. Right? So, even just the transient use, but then if it gets, it gets to the question of how long does it need to be if at all? Rapamycin dosing is of great interest to me because I really think that it it seems like at the extremely low doses that it it might have some of these antiviral properties. So, you know, I was actually talking with a guy who does intermittent fasting to promote autophagy, and he thinks that the autophagy process sort of starts to stimulate parts of the innate immune response as sort of immune cells repair over the course of sort of the fasting process or sort of are able to sort of, how would I say, detoxify or whatever, they they more likely if they're infected to potentially start to sort of present the antigens of what they're infected with on the surface, maybe have the immune system come in, clear things up a little bit. This interests me because it can be part of sort of and what he thinks with rapamycin then is if you want to get more of an immune boosting antiviral effect, it is actually that once a week dosing at the very least that would matter because you actually almost like fasting or so. You wanna give time for that autophagy and the sort of related potential immune responses that sort of, get affected over time to play out. Like, you don't even wanna take the next dose that soon. You almost want it to to extend. This makes sense to me somewhat. Right? I'm like, okay. And then also, you know, what I thought was interesting is that I I I do see, you know, obviously studies that or people who have found that rapamycin has potentially led to, I guess, increased problems with the bacterial infection or something. But when I look at the dosing again, sometimes they're doing, like, thirteen milligrams a week or so it's just something that's pretty different than this two milligrams once a week dosing that I actually think is we're using more in our trial. One thing that I find really interesting is that rapamycin in a low dose, I think, is is improving periodontitis and has in mouse models in a couple other studies. And so there's now a human trial of low dose rapamycin and periodontitis at University of Washington led by Jonathan Anne's group, who we actually worked with on our rapamycin trial design. They're great. And in that case, it really makes me think that at a low once a week dose, rapamycin can't have too much of a detrimental impact on bacteria or their activity because periodontitis is a bacterial biofilm driven gum disease. I mean, what happens is that bacteria team up. This is it's shown in papers. They start to express more virulence fact like, virulence factor proteins that allow them to burrow more into the gums. They form more biofilm. You know, they that's, that's the heart of the periodontitis disease process. So if rapamycin in a low once weekly dose, and I think their trial is four milligrams once a week, is helping with periodontitis, I don't know, it can't be too detrimental on bacterial activity. So you I think a lot of rapamycin moving forward is gonna be best understanding really the characteristics of the different dosing regimens. So it is it cohort specific though? Right? Because periodonti periodontitis is an age like, it it's preference increases during aging. Right? So with aging, probably more dysbiosis, whether in the mouth, the gut, wherever. And then even even in the manic study, I mean, I think the cohort was, like, 70 years old. Yes. BMI overweight BMI. Right? So then it gets to to to the aging question of, you know, you have people who are taking so I've taken rapamycin, and it wasn't it wasn't great. Like No. Interesting. Took so I took it specifically to try to reduce candida IgG. So my candida IgG for whatever reason, it's not crazy high. Like, the, lab limit is, like, one point zero minus is one, one, one, two. So I'm like, I, I still don't want it to be on the high side. I want it to be lower. Right. So rapamycin is a known antifungal. Let's see. Right. Right. I know that was its original indication or original timing. Yeah. So I did one milligram per day for seven days. Actually it was seven out of ten days and it didn't make a dent and I felt terrible. It was Really? Yeah. I usually feel pretty good. Lots of energy. I had mouth sores. I had, I had some a heart rate variability, resting heart rate. And granted it's only about a week and a half of data, but it wasn't great. It was on the tendon to be worse. My, which I track wasn't good. So my data all was threatening worse. So I wonder if it's Interesting because even you know Brian Johnson? Yeah. He recently tweeted that he was stopping his rapamycin, except the doses he were taking, to me, were high. That's true. And again, not always once I mean, he had experimented with lots of doses, though, and I don't know the exact, you know, time he took on each dose or anything. So I'm not sure. That's why I think I actually am excited about our long COVID trial because it is going to be one of the first trials measuring these effects of rapamycin on the immune system in a younger patient population. Because, unfortunately, like, the average long COVID patient is actually, like, in their often in their twenties, twenties to forties. It hits a lot of people who are young. So the age of our trial is not gonna is gonna be people of at least medium age. Right? So in a way, it's one of the if not the first trial of low dose rapamycin in in younger ish people. But yeah, I don't know. I don't know, Mike. The truth is I've been taking rapamycin, I'll admit it, for like six months now. And just two milligrams though, once a week, like I said, just so low. And I found it to be just really helpful. So this is the thing. No amylase. No no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no Right after I take the dose, and we've heard this from other long COVID again, because we talk to long COVID patients the most. Especially at first, after I took the dose, I felt worse. In fact, especially the day after, that night of the dose. But it almost felt a little like a herxome reaction. Do you know what I mean? Like, where it often, if you kill bacteria, especially or even sometimes viruses, as the bacteria dies off, it releases endotoxin. That actually makes people feel worse for a while. It it has like a, like a feeling of that. Because I've also taken antibiotics. There's a whole other story, like, that had done her summer tips. Okay. So, but so I feel worse for two days. And then though, like, on the third day, wake up and be, like, much better and just just, like, just, you know, walk and boom and just feel really good. So and then a little towards the next dose where I'm, like, getting towards, like, okay, I would take it on Tuesday, towards that Monday, it it would start to wear off a little, and I'd almost, like, crave the next dose. And then the next dose would sort of reset that feeling worse at first, but then flipping to feeling better. So that and then over time, it kind of evened out where I didn't feel that much worse afterwards. So I don't know. Like, I don't know. So your dose yeah. So two milligrams per day, and that's Yeah. Per week. So two milligrams once a week. That's it. Yeah. I was doing so I did write one milligram per day. And like you said, I didn't give it a chance to, you know, relax and recover, but it so literally was, like, felt terrible every day that I was taking it. And I had to take off a couple days where I was just like, this I I feel horrible. So Interesting. Then it gets I don't know. Maybe, although, like, it sounds that you had some pretty bad experiences. Try taking it one milligram once a week only. Yeah. So then there's another layer to that story. So then about a month later and I don't know if they're related because the mouth sores was a new thing to me. Like, it's like, what is going on here? So, like, a month later, I had some something on the inside of the roof of my mouth. And because I'm tracking, you know, heart rate variability resting for me, I know what immune activation looks like. Because I I haven't gotten COVID yet, fortunately, which is crazy. Really? Daughter's gotten it twice. Yeah. I avoided it completely. That's crazy. Good for you. But the vaccination, right? Every time I get vaccinated, my, nighttime respiratory rate, how many breaths per minute when I'm asleep spiked to like 16.5, 16, and usually it's 13.5. Wow. Anytime I see my data moving in that direction, I've gotta be in activation. So Mhmm. Whatever hit me in the oral infection, it was, like, crazy. I've never had anything like this. So I would I even hit up my dentist, which got me to the oral surgeon and I'm sending them pics and I'm like, do I have oral cancer? I was, Oh my gosh. Yeah. So anyway, he suggested that maybe it was, herpes virus. So. I, Mike, this is a good interesting because when I've heard again, that's the most common side effect of rapamycin is these mouth sores. And so then exactly. My next question is, well, what are the what's the drivers of the mouth sores? And I don't even think it's been explored. Yeah. There should probably just be a study where someone swabs the mouth sore or whatever and sequences the mouth sore and figures out what it what's driving it. It still seems straightforward. Yeah. I have microbiome test kits where they do whole genome sequencing. I have them here. There's a company I've been using. Yeah. So I've tested people with microbiome, like, which is, did you say show me or, or No. Which company? It's, what's their name? Bristol. Bristol Health. Okay. Yeah. I'm terrible at, I shouldn't, should have remembered that off the top of my head. No, you missed a lot of it. Unfortunately, I didn't, I'm like looking right at it. I should have taken a swab because I had, I had that. Yeah. You could try. So like a week, but here's the, here's the crazy thing. When I was asking you about your own prophylactic things, you're taking prophylactic immediately. I jumped into Pubmed and I'm like, well, if this is, you know, so he was like, alright, maybe it's, what is it? Herpes. What's the, varicella zoster was at three, right? Three. So I'm now, like, googling, what does that look like? I'm like, maybe maybe now now I'm on PubMed. What could kill off? Right? So glycer the probably licorice root. What is that? Clicker glycerrhizic, broad anti herpetic start taking that in a few days gone. Like you're late, like a week. I don't know. Yeah. I don't know if it's caused. I used to take that a long time ago and it, I might have to try it again. Wait. So here's where that story gets interesting. So after a week, my data starts to get all of a sudden, like magically better. And I've been battling stuff for like six months, which is another story, but that was pre rapamycin. So rapamycin didn't get better for a month after still what something's going on, funky immune activation, took licorice root powder, ground licorice root powder for like a week. I'm back. My data's looking back to where it usually is less immune activation. And where it gets tricky though is, licorice root powder, which I'm sure, you know, it's related to blood pressure, so it can increase blood pressure. So during that week, my blood pressure was starting to actually come down to where it was over the past few months. Cause I, you know, I tracked that, I don't know, three days a week. And then two days early this week, it was like 10 units higher and this has never happened. So I'm like, all right, time to stop, time to stop the licorice. Now sores are gone. The herpes, whatever it was, if it was, is gone. Blood pressure's going crazy. It's time to stop the licorice root powder too. So Yeah. I guess knowing that you could take it even for, like, a short period, at least at the time of the sore or something like that, it doesn't seem crazy. I mean, and good job tracking your I mean, I need to start tracking things more. I'm, I'm halfway there. I'm a person, I experiment with a lot of logical things, but I'm, I don't even have a, like, I have to sit down with you and a couple other people in the longevity community, get my tracking on track, because a lot of what I do, I swear, is based on intuition where I'm like, I it feels right. And it it would probably drive you guys crazy that actually track things where I should I should be doing that more. But, I mean, I'm not sure that thoughts are I actually suspect that maybe the one milligram every day was not allowing whatever this on top of the gene. And again, we need to better understand this, but but there might be something with the once a week dosing and the extending of the dose. We know that with antibiotics, for example, where sometimes with antibiotics, less is more too, where if you take, for example, Zithromax and you're targeting bacteria, as the Zithromax decays and its half life sort of starts to, you know, play out, it almost seems like the symptoms of the like, the bacteria that it's targeting, people sort of experience different symptoms over time. It's almost like the half life might allow the antibiotic to permeate different tissue or, you know, it's kind of known in the world of targeting organisms that that that once a week or pulse dosing that allows the medication to sort of, I don't know, have an extended effect somehow is important either on in the organism or the immune response. But yeah. So I don't but that being said too, the one thing I wonder about rapamycin is if it, let's say, is improving t cell exhaustion or something and way more research on this needed, including thankfully, our trial is measuring this as a first pass. You know, anytime you're you're combating a virus or an infection that's an issue, there is some immunopathology, right? Like, where as the immune system might start to recognize it, there can be sort of a fight between the immune system, like, as the immune system comes in, where you might get some increase in symptoms for a while. I think so I'm not sure. It could be that in some people, rapamycin actually kicks up the infections for a bit as things start to you know, the immune system starts to actually recognize things more and kinda come in. But over time, maybe that would settle down, but I don't know. You said it sounded like you felt too bad for that to be the case. I think maybe it's cohort specific where you'd have to identify specific diagnostics and people, and you're like, you get good candidate for Exactly. Macamycin. You know? Whereas maybe in my like, for example, too, like, you get people in the aging space who are like peptides, peptides Yeah. Which biomarkers do you actually expect it to improve? And nobody they then they go away. They they don't answer. They just That's interesting. Yeah. If there were you know? So in my case, knowing that it didn't make a dent on candida IgG, I don't know if that that's you know? But Yeah. I don't have periodontitis. My oral health is generally good, but I've been one reason I have the the oral microbiome kits is because I've got a bacterium, and it's living, like, in one section of my mouth that when I went to the dentist, he was like, you've got localized infect localized infection here. I know it sounds like my oral health is terrible, but I No. It doesn't. I mean, no. No. No. Anyway, so I wonder it's a bacteria. It's serratus marcescens, which is a nasty bacterium if it gets into the blood. But, so anyway, I wonder if rapamycin you know, I could I could crush it up and, like, use it use it as a, you know, and see if it makes a dent on that. I'm willing to try anything. So, I don't know. I would take one milligram once a week, point five or something to see low dose. Yeah. To see if if you tolerate it at least or just don't get any mouth sores at that extremely low once a week dose for a while and then just maybe check. But, yeah, I think a lot more research has to be done on dosing and exactly just the parameters of people who because who knows? Maybe it's helpful for certain infections and others. It's like I don't know. There's so much more to be done, but I do think it is an interesting compound to keep sending, obviously. Yeah. Alright. So anything we didn't cover? Let's see. Not really. I mean, no. I think it's always good to talk to you because you, you know, do understand microbial burden. I mean, I think, how you know, in in your world now, are you still you know, you have your book even microbial burden. What's your, when did you write that? In 2016. Okay. I mean, you're the pioneer. No. No. You're the pioneer. You, you way proceeded, you know, way preceded me. I guess. Well, still though, that's so or, you know, whatever. You obviously get this. Do you see more people coming around to an understanding of microbial burden? It's it's it's slow. It's really slow. Yeah. And that's one it's that's one reason I pivoted a little bit into other topics in aging because Yeah. Every video that I made on like, I had a video, like, rapamycin Yeah. In the blood, rapamycin in the brain. Or sorry. Fungi in the blood Okay. Guy in the brain, rapamycin to the rescue, and that's like a two year old video. Okay. Comparatively, the, you know, amount of people that watch that versus other videos, I mean, it's so low. I it's so interesting because, yeah, I'm hoping now that that can be somewhat of an acceleration of the impact of infection on aging. I look, it's is it everything on aging? No. Does it contribute? No question. And I think that, you know, part of what is is cool is that I I think that as I see people who are doing really intelligent regimens of whatever supplements, medications, things to prevent aging processes, I adding in some of these basic antivirus or antimicrobials, I think it can just take them so much farther. I mean, the truth is that I've also had some struggles because I'm part of certain aging meetings and things where it'll be a presentation and someone's talking about, let's say, like, stem cell injections. And it's cool, but you can do all of this and probably inject so many stem cells and do all kinds of, you know, pretty expensive and other things. But if you have a herpes virus in your brain, it just, like, address that too. I don't know. So I I hope I'm I'm glad that you're still interested in this, and I'm hoping that, especially because some of the technologies are getting better for infection, and some of this is moving forward more, maybe we can reenergize the the space. So I'm always gonna be interested in this, even though, you know, the book was 2016. Yeah. So that the one reason I mentioned IgG is because there was a paper recently published where they showed that at least in mice, IGG levels increase during aging, and they Yeah. They developed an animal model where they knocked it down and the the mice had an increase in median lifespan. So there's almost no human data, you know. I mean, it increases during aging. Like, if you look at globulins as a group, they increase during aging relatively higher levels, higher all cause mortality risk. But Yeah. There's nobody's been thinking about that in terms of, like, tracking that as a marker of microbial burden in the aging. So, anyway, my next test, which is in, actually ten days Mhmm. I'm gonna add IgG, global IgG, not just Candida. Try it. And I'm gonna track it, like, eight times a year for the next, you know, upcoming and one reason I was asking too about, you know, the the t cell stuff is because, like you were saying, you know, about the, you know, the labs being thirty years ahead of Yeah. Commercially. I I can't I mean, I can measure t cells and b cells, but that's not measuring t cell exhaustion. So Right. I'm limited there. Or not really measuring the activity. It's kind of measuring, like, sort of if it's there or not, if it's elevated or something, but it's not telling you what it's responding to. It's not, you know there's so much more we can do. So that's one of the things that I do think will also, you know, sort of pivot the longevity community into this more would actually be diagnostics. Because, obviously, without the ability to measure the infections and what they're doing over time well, well, no wonder no one's really paying attention. So that's a lot of what we are working on too is, okay, like, let's accelerate these diagnostics so that people can do I think the IgG is a great start, and it's cool that you're gonna do that, but we also just gotta start to make more, which is what we're working on. So Cool. We maybe in a few years, there'd be more that you can order. Yeah. I've gotta fire all of these ideas at you because you're the you're the you're the the needle mover in the space. And so if it it's possible that these studies will end up happening. So you're Yeah. You're mentioning about, and I agree a 100%, you know, there are so many studies on here's the microbiome and here's the composition, but like you said, that's just who's there. That's not what's actually happening. The metabolites are that readout. Right? So, every time every time, when I'm looking, I didn't just look at, like, IgG. It's, you know, pick your virus or your microbe of choice when there's, an infection or, you know, what's the what is what's the plasma metabolome metabolome look like? And is are is there a specific shift in certain metabolites that I can measure as some readout of of, infectious burden? So for example, like, endoxyl sulfate and pericrystall sulfate are produced by gut bacteria. And they're basically long story short, dysbiotic, bacterial metabolites. Like if they're increasing, you've got, whether it's a gut pH problem or whatever. So I'm tracking those too. That's smart. That's cool. Yeah. But that's the only bacteria, like, you know, the viral and the fungal markers, you know, that's that's the frontier. We'll see. And you're right. Like, the products created by whether it's the viral proteins or the bacterial metabolites, that's more of what we can capture in actually blood or the more accessible sample types. And so that's is where we're going to some point. Like, could we have okay. Fine. We don't find the virus itself or something. But can we find the proteins made or the products? That would obviously exactly give us a really good idea of what's happening as well. So that exactly, you're correct, is another area of nature, like it's gotta move more. So, and there is, there are labs working on that. So, yeah. Or the depletion, like you've got metabolites that should be in the blood, whether it's glutathione or in cells. And if they're depleted, it's the one types of microbial infection, even though it's not specific to microbes, you've got a signal. Okay. Maybe this could be a microbial, I mean, granted, it could be aging or lots of other things too, sterile inflammation, you know, whatever it may be, but, you know, so, yeah, I'm I'm into the patterns. I'm hot on the trail. Like Go ahead, Mike. I I wasn't I I wasn't so much focused on, the the microbial burden biomarkers, but Yeah. You know, I'm starting to think about it more and more now, like, you know, to really put it all together. So Cool. Alright. I'll keep if anything gets on my radar, I'll let you know. But I'm glad that you're you're still going down that path. It's cool. Forever. Forever. It's gonna be forever. You know? Conquer aging or die Yeah. Not trying, you know, to microdrop me to death while I'm alive. So that's what they do. I won't wait one more question too, before I forgot. So, cause every time, every time I'm listening, I'm like, I've got like three questions in my mind. And then I only remember one and I forget the other two. So the plaques in the brain and, you know, granted there, as you mentioned, they're polymicrobial or, you know, whether they're just one microbe at a time, whatever it may be. But once they're there, it's kinda like a scar, you know, and they only accumulate during aging. They're not, you know, so how, so, Stuart Hameroff, who's, anyway, the consciousness researcher or whatever Mhmm. About his microtubules, he mentioned something about, like, ultrasound. And and granted, this is like the borderline of it's crazy AF or it's brilliant. So who knows? But Yeah. He mentioned where they've given Alzheimer's patients, like, ultrasound frequencies in the brain to to disrupt the plaques. And I think you meant, in in one of the poly bio, conferences, it may have been the most recent one, David Petrino mentioned something about low frequency magnetic fields rejuvenating mitochondria. So, There's there's stuff out there. I mean, I, you know, I do think that, for example, there's a company, Open Water. They work on some, basically, like, you know, disrupting a little of what you're talking about, whether it's disrupting stroke clots or anything via ultrasound type strategies, I don't think it's crazy. And if there's a one percent chance that that could work, I'm so glad they're working on it. Right? That's really cool. Because yeah. No. I mean, when the once the plaques form, let's say it's in response to infection, But once they're there, then that's still a problem. Like, you do still wanna get rid of them. They're then they start to see the other flow on problems. That's another thing that I thought was interesting is there was a an article on a procedure done in China that I think they even trialed a few times. I don't know exactly how they do it. But they're able to get the lymphatic system to really just sort of flush the brain to kind of drain out amyloid. And apparently, people do this procedure and wake up with Alzheimer's just able to talk and, like, remember more. It's really interesting to me. I don't know. But it's fun to hear. How did they yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know. This is the thing. It's a it it's something they were doing in China, but I thought it was really interesting because, again, you know, there's sort of the the low hanging fruit of using the lymphatic system. I'm really that's another thing I do. I'm big on lymphatic drainage and whatever because the lymph system, it it's it's picking up the toxins and the the products of these pathogens a lot. And so if it's flowing well, at least you're getting some of the bad things you're doing out of you. So I actually do, like, lymph tapping and stuff like like like trying like, I don't know. Because it again, in terms of just trying things that are straightforward to try to just get the the body to detoxify a little bit, I do think that the lymphatic system, if you can keep that on track, and good sleep does that as well. Like, there's enough studies showing that stage four sleep is really important to lymphatic flow. So all of that sort of starts to play into if you're doing those things well, you're probably gonna have more of that detox of the lymph and probably matters over time. So that's another area. But the but the ultrasound type stuff breaking up, yes. And then with the magnetic type protocols, I'll be honest with you, I don't understand the mechanisms as much, but we're pretty open to groups that can just you know, the group that has the it's a magnetic type protocol that they're using for neuroinflammation. They've used these magnetic frequencies in animal models and stuff, and they've shown reduced neuroinflammation. So we're willing to give it a shot, kind of see what we can do on those fronts, and and and try it. Yeah. Super cool. Alright. With, with that, thanks, Amy. And, Cool. Alright. Yeah. Yeah. Sounds good, mate. Best of luck. Another time and hopefully in the future, all that because, what you're doing That'll be great. Alright. Sounds good. Take care. Bye.