Aging and disease are biochemical processes that happen over many decades. So if we track and optimize well established biomarkers of organ and systemic health, can aging and disease risk be slowed? So apologies if you've heard that a billion times, but that's the central premise of this channel. And with that in mind, earlier this month, I blood tested for the first time in 2024. And note that this is blood test number 49 since 2015. So with that in mind, what's my biological age? And we can see that data here. This is using doctor Morgan Levine's Phenotypic Age Calculator as a metric of biological age. And if you have your own blood test data and you want to measure your pheno age or your biological age using this test, there'll be a downloadable Excel link in a link in the video's description. Alright. So when entering these nine component biomarkers for this test, I get a biological age of 34 point three years which is sixteen point seven years younger than my chronological. And note that the data could actually be a bit better than thirty four point three years. As for the fifteenth consecutive test, the lab measurement, Quest's measurement of high sensitivity c reactive protein, h s CRP, was less than point three milligrams per liter. So that's their limit of detection. It can't be higher than point three milligrams per liter, but it could be a bit lower. And rather than looking at data entered entered into a spreadsheet, all blood test data, screenshots of the lab report will be coming up shortly. Now this is just one test, and that's it's important to not get too interested in data from one result or once a year. But what are year to year changes? How are we progressing from year to year? Are we slowing it from year to year? Are we are we regressing from year to year? So I have for more context, let's take a look at biological age results since 2018 as I have 30 blood tests that correspond for PhenoAge. And that's what we can see here. So when I first started testing in 2018 to 2019, my average pheno age was 36.1 years. And then I started adding h s CRP because it's an add on test here in The States. It's not commonly performed on the standard chem panel in CBC. I started adding it to every subsequent blood test in 2020. So over 12 tests in 2020 and 2021, average pheno age was 35.6 years. And that's probably a closer representation of what my average biological age was in each of those years relative to 2018 and 2019 where it's only three tests over a two year span. And then in 2022, I significantly reduced it to thirty three point eight years. That's over seven tests. Seven tests in 2023, average was thirty four point seven years. Not as good as 2022, but still better than 2021 and 2020. And then 2024 is off to a good start with it with that 34.3. Now note that FINA wage increases by point nine years for every year of chronological age that passes. In other words, starting from 2020, every subsequent year from twenty twenty twenty one through 2024, there should have been a point nine year increase even if all my biomarkers stayed the same such that my current biological age using this test should probably be somewhere around 38.6 years. Instead, it's in the 33.8 to around 34.7 year range. In other words, I've resisted an age related increase for this biological age tool. Now at this point in the video, I'd rather I'd usually show data for aging.ai, what's my aging.ai age, but that unfortunately has been recently discontinued. So for now, let's dig in to the full blood test report and highlight some areas where I'm doing well and some where I have room for improvement. And that's what we'll see here. So starting with HDL, for six consecutive tests HDL is now greater than or equal to 50 per deciliter. And that's potentially important because HDL in the 50 to 60 range is associated with lowest risk for all cause mortality. And if you missed that video, I'll put it in the right corner. Now, prior to these six tests, my 43 test average since 2015 for HDL is about forty five milligrams per deciliter. So we can see that the most recent six tests, there's been progress in improving HDL. Now, another point that I'd like to highlight is triglycerides. At 63, far from terrible. Less than ninety is associated with lowest risk of all cause mortality and that's in a large meta analysis. I'll put that in the video subscription to that paper. But when looking at the hazard ratio for coronary heart disease mortality risk or risk of death from heart disease related mortality plotted against serum triglyceride levels, we can see that the lowest CHD mortality risk was at a triglyceride level of 40 or less. So sixty three is not bad, but I've got room for improvement as I'd like to get it down towards 40. Above forty milligrams per deciliter, we can see a pretty close to linear increase in the hazard ratio for mortality risk from heart disease. As as you go above 40, there's a higher risk. And note that the green line is the fully adjusted model. The model, the blue and the orange are, are models that include less variables that were adjusted in their model. So fully adjusted model, that's the one we wanna focus on in green. Also note CRP, high sensitivity CRP. We can see that point three milligrams per liter, number. And then what I'd also like to focus on is creatinine. Now prior to this test of zero point nine one milligrams per deciliter, the last five tests were going in the wrong direction at 1.01 milligrams per deciliter. And for comparison, the previous 43 tests, creatinine was point nine five milligrams per deciliter. So the last five tests, it's been increasing and that's potentially important but because creatinine increases during aging. So that's going in the wrong direction. 0.91 is progress towards moving it away from its age related increase which we can see here. So serum levels of creatinine on the y axis plotted against age on the x from about 20 to 90 years. And here we can see that red trend line for a increase for an increase for creatinine, with aging. Now interestingly in this plot, note that above 40 years, there starts to become a wide variability in the creatinine measurement. In other words, people old older than 40 can have creatinine levels or more likely to have creatinine levels sometimes as high as 14 milligrams per deciliter relative to younger younger than 40, which you can see on the plot. Those that that data spread just doesn't exist. So for that and some other reasons that I'll cover in a future video, creatinine may not be the best measurement for evaluating kidney function in people older than 40. So with that in mind, I also measured cystatin c. And as I mentioned, I'll go into that for its own video. Data coming shortly. Alright. So onto page two of the blood test, report. What I'd like to focus on is albumin at 4.9 is relatively youthful, and that's potentially important because albumin levels decline during aging. As we also saw in an earlier video, it may be an important biomarker for longevity relative to metabolic health or a more important biomarker potentially for longevity relative to h b a one c and lipids like or lipoproteins like LDL. So we can see that age related decline for abdomen here. Serum levels of albumin on the y axis plotted against age, and this is from birth up through a 100 years old. And this is a study of about one point one million people. So in youth, albumin levels are relatively high, somewhere around 4.6 grams per deciliter or 46 grams per liter. And then we can see that centenarians average values are far lower, somewhere around 36 grams per liter or 3.6 grams per deciliter. Now an age expected value for my chronological age of 51 would be somewhere around 4.3 grams per deciliter. So that it's currently at 4.9 and my average is generally around that 4.9. That's a small win. But where I do have room for improvement is, or at least recent room for improvement, is with the mostly liver enzyme because it's also found in muscle, alanine aminotransferase ALT as shown there with 28, units per liter for this test. And that's potentially important because we can see in this study of sixteen point six million people where ALT was associated with hazard ratio for all cause mortality or risk of death for all causes, there's a u shaped association for ALT with all cause mortality risk. So starting with the referent, which was defined as fifteen with a, hazard ratio of one, as the median value for ALT increased to eighteen and twenty two, we can see that q two and q three, the hazard ratio significantly decreased as the data in parentheses, that's the 95% confidence interval, was completely below one. So that's a significant association. So in other words, median values of 18 to 22 were associated with a lower risk of death for all causes for ALT levels, relative to having 15. So we we can see we got we've got the beginning of the u, but then as ALT increases to up to 29, we can see that now we've got the full u shaped or a j shaped curve for ALTs association with all cause mortality risk. So, an ALT of 28 for this test, if it was chronically around 28, 29, we could see that would put me at a higher risk for all cause mortality. Now I mentioned not just focusing on one test, but many tests to get a sense of where one's data actually is. For the last 10 tests, ALT has been an average of 25.3 units per liter. Whereas for the 10 tests before that, it was 23. So we can see that it's moved in the wrong direction, especially considering that u shaped or j shaped association for ALT with all cause mortality risk. So for this, I'll go to the correlations for diet with blood biomarkers and I'll look for ways to try to improve ALT levels. Alright. Other areas that I can improve are red blood cells and hemoglobin. Red blood cells were close to my lowest, over many tests at 4.53. And correspondingly since hemoglobin is found in red blood cells, it shouldn't be a surprise that they're relatively lower too. Now for the first time in 28 tests, hemoglobin is less than 14.9 milligrams per deciliter. And that's important because red blood cells and hemoglobin decline during aging. So is this the start of an age related decline or is this just the variability in my diet causing a lower hemoglobin level? And again, I've got some tricks in my, in my diet by looking at correlations for diet with biomarkers which I'll cover, in an upcoming video to get hemoglobin levels back to where they usually are somewhere around 15 milligrams per deciliter. Other areas for improvement are MCV. So that's the average size and volume of a red blood cell. A lower MCV would be smaller volume. Higher MCV is a higher volume. MCV increases during aging. My MCV has been increasing for a few tests. So that's another one I'm gonna work on reverting back to a smaller size. And then another, biomarker I've got my eye on are neutrophil levels which at seventeen eighty eight, if you look at the reference range, it seems perfectly fine. But there's data for all cause mortality in a study of about seven hundred seventy thousand people where neutrophils in the two two thousand to 3,000 range is associated with lowest risk for all cause mortality. And then as neutrophil levels go below 2,000, that's associated with a significantly increased all cause mortality risk. So if I look at my neutrophil level averages over the last few tests, it's about 2,000. And I'd probably wanna be closer to 2,000 relative to 3,000 when considering that neutrophils can be, a sign of a pro inflammatory systemic state. But do I want them to be 1,500, 1,300? I don't. So I've got my eye on those. Not doing anything yet to try to raise them, but, that's one to keep an eye out for. Alright. Now, what diet and supplements may correspond to this 17 year younger biological age? And as I mentioned, I'll cover that in an upcoming video probably coming at the latest by next Sunday. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more of my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where I also provide blood test consultations. We've also got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for epigenetic and telomere testing, any dequantification or microbiome composition, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Syphox Health, which includes ApoB, totally different panel than the at home metabolomics, green tea, diet tracking, with Cronometer. Or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Diet Trying brand, as I've got on here, and always I'm always wearing it, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.