And so here's the human experiment. This is a difficult experiment because it's an unpleasant experiment, and getting subjects is always my my biggest problem. So we gave people a very large well, they first of all, they they had to starve overnight. They came in, and then we gave them a very large glucose load, which is just really horrible. We then pricked their finger every few minutes to test their blood sugar levels. And we also wanted to know if this is working the way we think it's working, then you should actually get an increase in c o two because you're using more oxygen as well as more sugar. Well, the control experiment here is in green, and this is done in a separate group of individuals. And this is where they drink the glucose, and you can see their blood glucose shoots up and very slowly after about an hour it comes down. If we give you a burst of red light, in this case only over a relatively small area of your back, Remember, mitochondria talk to one another. They'll run around saying, hey. Something's happening. I'm being driven harder. And if I'm being driven harder, you better be driven harder as well. We do that, and the blood glucose levels do not go up as much. To be sure that we're doing the right thing, we measured the c o two, and, yes, the c o two goes up because they're using the oxygen and they're using the, the glucose at the at the same time. Now interestingly, six seventy was the wavelength we use. You can see six seventy. It's a bit on the it's it's it's kinda brightish red light. We've now changed this, and we've gone over to deeper red lights that you can't see. So we've invited people in to have a cup of coffee. We've sat them down next to a panel which has got eight fifty nanometers in it. Can't see it. It's very, very, very deep red light. And we then invite them back a little bit later, and we measure their blood glucose. We measure their visual function. Everything improves. So it's not this specific wavelength, first of all. Secondly, we can now introduce this into your world without you being aware of it, and we can have physiological effects, and they're good. So if we think about someone with compromised mitochondria, we can potentially think about exposing them to light that doesn't disturb them.