I have a big problem in my salivary microbiome and that involves the bacterium serratus moccasins or serratus for short which has been implicated in a whole host of adverse human health related conditions as shown here including pneumonia, sepsis, meningitis, and others on this list. Now I currently have three more data points for the oral microbiome composition including serratus levels with test number ten, eleven, and 12. So was there any luck in reducing or eliminating serrataeum moccasins? To test that, I sent saliva to bristle. And if you're interested in measuring your own oral microbiome composition, there's a discount link in the video's description. So jumping right into the data, we've got levels of serratus for the first nine tests. And we can see that for six of the tests, serratus levels were almost completely dominating my oral microbiome with 88% of all bacteria at the lowest and 96% at the highest for serratus. Now there is some room for optimism though because my best chance so far in limiting serratus has been with a homemade mouthwash. As in two of those five tests where I used the homemade mouthwash, there was zero serratus. But it's not a perfect system because also in two of those five tests, it was 8895%. So investigating further what's in the mouthwash. Could stuff in the mouthwash be, getting rid of serratus? So in the mouthwash is 1% xylitol, 1% sodium bicarbonate, and two to three drops of peppermint oil. So for test number 10, I decided to collect more data using this standard mouthwash three to five times per day to see what effect it would have. And for test number 10, there was some success. Zero percent serratus once again. So now I've got six tests. Three of those tests with the mouthwash, zero serratus. So that's potentially good news. So is there something in the mouthwash that could be eliminating this bacterium? So it could be xylitol. There's published data in vitro that 5% xylitol solutions can, reduce serrati levels by about 80%. So in an earlier video, I tested that hypothesis and unfortunately, it didn't work for me as on that day of testing there was 96% serrati. So technically, I could go higher again to retest that, but knowing that 5% didn't make a dent, I've shied away from using higher doses of xylitol, again. Conversely though, is it the sodium concentration? Because you can see sodium is a content in my homemade mouth mouthwash. 1% sodium bicarbonate contains sodium. So there is published in vitro data for sodium chloride reducing serratus levels as shown here with levels of serratus moccasins on the y axis plotted against the sodium chloride concentration. And and again note that this is an in vitro study. There aren't any clinical trials, randomized clinical clinical trials that have studied this at least not yet. So I'm kind of on my own looking into what's been published using in vitro studies. So when looking at the correlation for the sodium chloride concentration with serrate levels, we can see it there's an inverse correlation. In other words, relatively higher levels of sodium chloride reduce serratus as shown there. And conversely, lower levels of sodium chloride, there were higher levels of serratus. And that's, I should note, at a pH of seven and at 30 degrees Celsius, which is relatively close to physiological levels. So for test number 11, I decided to test this correlation, this published correlation by adding about 3% sodium chloride to the homemade mouthwash. And I did that by adding sea salt, which is almost exclusively sodium chloride for a total concentration of 4%. Since 1% sodium bicarbonate is already in the mix, adding another 3% sodium chloride should have brought the sodium content to 4%. But it didn't work. For test number 11, serrati went to its highest level yet, 97.3%, which is just outrageous. Literally 97% of my salivary microbiome is just one bacterium. I mean, this is terrible news. But then I thought maybe there's a u shaped curve. Even though this is a linear correlation, maybe there's a u shaped. In other words, no salt, good for serratus. Very high salt, potentially good for serratus by some unknown mechanism. But maybe there's a bottom of the u shaped where if I go a little bit less than 4%, maybe that can make a dent. So I decided to give it a try. And I did that by adding 1% sodium chloride, again by using sea salt, adding that to the pre existing standard mouthwash. So 1% sodium mircarbonate, 1% sodium chloride, or 1% sea salt. And that led to serrati levels on that day of 0%. So actually, I used the mouthwash for about two weeks prior to each test. This isn't just on the day of testing. So for two of these three most recent tests, no serrati, which brings the eight test total with the standard mouthwash to four days zero serratus and four days, unfortunately, there was serratus. So I'm still trying to figure out what the recipe is for continuously keeping serratus at zero and then the next step is what does my actual microbiome look like without serrata and what can I do to further improve that? But one step at a time. Now I also sent data for test number thirteen and fourteen using vanillin. So what is vanillin? Vanillin is one of the metabolites that give vanilla beans its characteristic vanilla smell. And it's potentially important because it reduces serratus moccasins as shown here. And again, this is in vitro. There's no published RCT data So I'm kind of on my own in looking at what's been published in in vitro studies. So on the y axis, we've got the log colony forming units of serratus. So how much serratus was in the cell culture dish plotted against time after exposure to vanillin. And when compared with the control condition as shown there, so serrata grown on glucose, we can see that after adding vanillin one percent, serrata levels were almost completely eliminated within eight hours. And then even a lower dose of sir of vanillin point five five percent, so about half the vanillin dose completely eliminated serratia levels within about forty eight hours or two days. So for test number thirteen and fourteen, I decided to test these two concentrations. 1% for the first test and point 6% for the second test. So results for test number 13 are in. I'm not ready to present them yet. Test number 14 results have not yet come in. Once those results come in, I'll package them together for a vanillin focused serrata, video. So stay tuned for that sometime in the next few weeks. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more of my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links that you may be interested in including discount links for the oral microbiome, epigenetic testing, NAD quantification, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Scifox Health, which includes ApoB, green tea, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch, so if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or DIY Prime brand as I've got on here, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.