If we can flatten mortality risk, can we optimize health and potentially lifespan? So let's take a look at what I mean by that. In this plot on the y axis, we've got the death rate plotted against age on the x, starting from birth through people who are older than 95 years old. And what we can see is that the death rate in newborns up until one years old is very high. And then death rates, decline such that the lowest risk of death for all causes is when we're 10 to 14 years old. But then afterwards, death rates close to linearly increase as shown by the red arrows as we age. Now, instead of having that age related increase for the mortality rate, what if we could flatten it such that it doesn't linearly increase for every year that we're alive after fourteen years old? So then the question is, how can we do that? Well, aging and disease are biochemical processes that happen over many decades. They don't just happen out of nowhere. And apologies if you've heard this a billion times, but this is the central premise of the channel and how I think that we can flatten the mortality risk or flatten mortality risk, potentially optimize health and lifespan. So with that in mind, if we track and optimize towards youth, optimize biomarkers towards youth, and push them towards lowest risk of death for all causes, whether it's by using, exercise, diet, supplements, etcetera. So if we track and optimize well established biomarkers of organ and systemic health, can we slow aging and minimize disease risk with the goal of maximizing longevity? So with that in mind, late in late July, I blood tested for the fifth time in 2024. And note that this is blood test number 53 times, since 2015. So with that in mind, what's my biological age? And we can see that data here. This is using doctor Morgan Levine's phenotypic age calculator, which is a metric of biological age. And if you have blood test data and you want to measure your own biological age using this test, there will be a downloadable excel link in the video's description. So when I enter the nine biomarkers as shown here, I get a biological age of 33.9, which is 17.6 younger than my chronological. Now rather than just looking at data entered into into a spreadsheet, I'll have screenshots of the lab test report coming up in just a bit. But it's important to note that this is just one test. We shouldn't get too high or too low over one test, but tracking year to year changes, I think, is more important for being able to flatten that mortality risk, flatten, you know, flatten that baseline in terms of mortality risk. So with that in mind, let's have a look at biological age results since 2018 as I have 34 tests over that six plus year period as shown here. Now when I first started tracking in 2018 to 2019 over three tests, average biological age using Levine's PhenoAge was 36.1 years. But three tests over a two year span may not be representative of year to year changes, so I started testing more often. Six times each in 2020 and 2021, so 12 tests over that two year period with an average biological age using this test of 35.6. So that's probably closer to my true year to year, average relative to the 2018 to 2019 data. And then I had my best year to date in 2022 over seven tests with an average biological age of 33.8 years. It got a bit worse to thirty four point seven years in 2023, but still better than 2020 and 2021 data. And thus far, after the first five tests in 2024, I'm back to my best data at thirty three point eight years. So what we can see from these 34 tests is that I've potentially slowed biological age. I would never say that I've reversed it. This is the live long enough to live forever approach as all and I can't undo the first fifty one years of of living with where who knows what my biological age and what these biomarkers look like prior to twenty fifteen, even though I do have some sporadic data. But I can only control what I can going forward. So the goal is to have as many biomarkers close to youth and what's associated with lowest risk of death for all causes for the next seventy plus years or as long as my genetic, lifespan will allow. So, alright, let's jump into the blood test data because I don't just focus on these nine biomarkers. There are some other highlights and also there is room for improvement. And that's what we'll see here. Now, what I first wanna highlight is that I've been using Quest for many tests. And one reason for that is you can see that I blood tested in the morning, 07:16 in the morning is when when the blood was drawn. And results were available within twenty four hours, which to me is just fantastic. Just going to my, doctor in the past, the results take probably about a week which is just too slow. Now, to do that, I I haven't been going through my doctor, but as I mentioned in the last video on lead, I've been using Ulta lab tests. Ultalabtest.com, and I've got an affiliate link there if you wanna, help support the channel. So basically, I go to ultalabtest.com, and I order all the tests that I want. I bring them to Quest, pay the $10, blood draw fee and then as I mentioned, I got results, all of the results that I've shown here within twenty four hours. Some some results do take longer, like I measured candida antibodies that took about a week. Homocysteine took about two or three days, somewhere in that ballpark. But for the standard chem panel in CBC, one business day, which is fantastic in my eyes. Alright. So some highlights. HDL, fifty four milligrams per deciliter is now in the optimal range. Fifty to sixty milligrams per deciliter. I covered that in an earlier video. If you missed it, it'll be in the right corner. Now, HDL is now greater than 50 for 10 tests in a row with an average over that 10 test period of fifty five milligrams per deciliter. For comparison, for the 43 tests since 2015 prior to those 10 tests, HDL average was 44.7 milligrams per deciliter. And when using a two sample t test to compare those two groups of data, I've significantly improved it over the past 10 tests. Also note that HS high sensitivity c reactive protein is again less than point three milligrams per liter which is below the or is there a limit of detection? So that's the eighteenth consecutive test where I've had h s c r p less than point three milligrams per liter. And it looks like Quest has actually made a an improvement, in reducing the limit of detection from point three to point two, which let's see if I can keep it below point two going forward. Also, glucose, which was 98 on the high side from my last test, blood test number four, returned too close to my average at 88 milligrams per deciliter. Now what was behind that? I can't say with, much certainty, but I did make a couple of changes that may have made an impact. I removed branch chain amino acid supplementation. So I supplemented with five grams per day prior to the last test. So for this test, I removed that. And then I also reduced fat intake from an average of 93 to 83 grams per day. So why I think those two factors may be involved in the glucose reduction going from 98 back to 88 is because a relatively higher protein intake and fat intake in my correlation, so that 50 plus blood test data since 2015, that significantly correlated with higher glucose in my data. So cutting protein, the branched chain amino acids, and cutting fat intake may be part of the reason why I was able to bring glucose back to 88 from 98 from the past test. Alright. On to page two. So additional highlights, eGFR, which is measure of kidney function. In this case, it's derived from creatinine levels are one zero six. EGFR at one zero six. So that's, twenty years younger than expected based on my chronological age. And we can see that why that that's true here. On the y axis, we've got the GFR estimate, so eGFR, plotted against age. And we can see that in this study of about 386,000 people, an eGFR of one zero six would be the average value for someone around 30 years old, whereas someone of my chronological age, 51 years, has an average value of around 70. So that's about a twenty year better than expected eGFR based on chronological age. Now, the other side of that story is that creatinine levels are proportional to muscle mass. My workout performance in terms of strength and everything else hasn't changed dramatically over the past few months. No obvious major differences in terms of that. So I find it hard to believe that a reduction in creatinine would be, because of a reduction in muscle mass. Body weight is the same too and no change in workout frequency, duration, intensity, or or any of that. Also note albumin at five is on the high side of the range, which is good news because albumin levels decline during aging and relatively lower levels of albumin are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. Alright. So now for some potential weak spots and room for improvement. So the liver enzymes, AST and ALT, at 26 aren't terrible. I've had higher higher, values than that in the past. But lowest risk of death for all causes for though those two liver enzymes is closer to the low twenties. So I've got some room, for improvement to bring those down. Thyroid hormones, free t four and free t three. I'm trying to increase free t three and reduce free t four. In other words, improve the conversion of free t four into free t three as that conversion worsens with aging. So to do that for this test, I averaged four hundred and four milligrams of selenium per day. So there was fifty nine days in between blood tests. So selenium intake for that fifty nine day period was an average of four hundred and four milligrams per day, and I did that almost exclusively by increasing Brazil nut intake. Now I didn't measure plasma levels of, selenium to see if I was able to increase selenium in blood via an increase in dietary intake. So, that could be something that I look at in the future, but I'm pretty confident that, what's in the Brazil nuts should represent, a higher blood level of selenium. So with that in mind, I've got to come up with a different approach other than increasing selenium, which is a required cofactor for conversion of t four to t three, which is why I did that selenium increase selenium, experiment to potentially increase the conversion of t four to t three. So I've got to come up with a different approach to try to improve or increase free t three while reducing free t four. MCV, which is the average red blood cell volume, so do you have very large red blood cells or very small red blood cells? The MCV increases during aging. 94.2 is on the high side of my data over the past 50 plus tests, and that's going in the wrong direction. And I have some ideas based on correlations of my data, which I post on Patreon for why that may may be the case. So, that may be the focus of a future video, so if you're interested in that, check it out. And then lymphocytes. So fifteen forty seven is better than my past two tests, which have been on the low side, But my past three tests for lymphocytes have been relatively low including this test with a three test average of fourteen forty three. For comparison, for the previous forty seven tests since 2015, average lymphocytes were nineteen oh two. And values for lymphocytes around 2,000 is the average value for someone in their early twenties and values of around 2,000 for lymphocytes is associated with lowest risk of death for all causes. And if you missed that data, it'll be in the video in the right corner. So I've got some work to do to figure out why my lymphocytes have declined and what I can do to bring them back to closer to 1,900 and even better around 2,000. Now what I haven't gotten into yet is what diet composition and supplements correspond to these data. And I started working on that video. It'll be, ready for, YouTube next week. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging aging, check us out on Patreon where I offer blood test consults. And before we go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links that you may be interested in, including discount links for epigenetic testing, any dequantification, oral microbiome composition, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Scifox Health, which includes ApoB but also GrimAge, green tea, diet tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch, so if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Die Charm brand as I've got on here, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.