Tea consumption is associated with slower biological aging, and that's what we'll see in this recently published paper, which will be in the video's description. So first, which tea? It included consumption of white tea, green tea, yellow tea, oolong tea, black tea, dark tea, sweet tea, or unscented tea. So any combination of all these teas was associated with biological aging in two cohort studies. So let's jump right into the data. So the first study was the China Multi Ethnic Cohort or CMEK, which included about, 8,000 people that had a median age of 51 years. And then in taking a look at the data, on the x axis, we've got tea consumption in cups per day. And on the y axis, we've got KDM or Chlamara Dubal, method which the KDM method which is basically a compilation of many biomarkers into a biological age metric and I'll have more on that in a bit. So KDM biological age acceleration, b a acceleration. BA acceleration is whether biological age is higher or lower than chronological age. So the pure definition of BA acceleration would be having in a biological age that's older than one's chronological age. So when comparing consistent non drinkers and putting up a red line at a biological age of zero a biological age acceleration of zero, we can see that people who reported drinking less than one cup of tea, any of those teas combined per day, the biological age acceleration was similar to non drinkers. However, for the people who reported two to three and greater than four cups of tea per day, we can see that they had a slower biological age, acceleration over the course of the study. So data in one study is nice, but replication across studies can add strength to confirm or deny findings from one study. So they then looked at associations in a second study, UKB or UK Biobank. This study included about 6,000 people that had a median age of 59 years. Using the same approach where we've got KDM, biological age acceleration on the y axis, plotted against tea consumption. And when compared with non drinkers or consistent non drinkers, once again we can see that people who reported drinking less than one cup of tea per day had a similar biological age acceleration to the consistent non drinkers. But for people who reported drinking two to three cups of tea per day, that he they had a slower biological age acceleration over the course of the study, just like in the CMEK study. And unfortunately or what the data shows is for people who reported drinking greater than four cups of, of tea per day, you can see that the 95% confidence interval which is that vertical line above the square vertical, line above and below the square, it overlapped with a biological age acceleration of zero. So that's not a significant association. So what we can see from these two studies is that two to three cups a day of tea was consistently associated with a slower biological age acceleration over the course of the study. And more specifically, in the paper they also showed that six to eight grams of tea in terms of actual weight was associated with this slowing of biological age acceleration. That data too is in the is in the paper. Alright. But these data introduce more questions. For example, how good or not is this biological correlation with chronological age or its association with all cause or cause specific mortality, then who cares what these associations show? Second, is this just healthy user user bias? In other words, people who report drinking two to three cups of tea per day, are they more likely to have an overall healthy lifestyle relative to consistent non drinkers? And then third, which biomarkers were included in this biological age metric? How many different organ systems are represented? So these are important questions to be asked for for this study. So first, let's start off with how good or not is this biological age metric? So here we'll see that both CMEK and UKB, derived biological age was correlated with chronological age. So on the left we've got the CMEK data, on the right we've got data for the UK Biobank. On the y axis we've got biological age plotted against chronological age on the x. And here we can see that there are linear correlations for biological age with chronological age in both these studies. So it's we're off to a good start. Now unfortunately, they didn't report the actual correlation coefficient and that's important because we wanna know how strong this correlation with chronological age is for their biological age acceleration metric. But we can compare it at least visually to doctor Morgan Levine's pheno age, which is what we can see here. With biological age as indicated by phenotypic age on the y axis, plotted against chronological age on the x. And here we know that the correlation for Levine's phenotypic age or biological age with chronological age is very strong, almost perfectly linear with a correlation coefficient as indicated in green of 0.96. Note that a correlation coefficient of one point zero is perfectly linear. So this is as close to, as close to a test can get outside of, the Horvath test for its prediction of chronological age. Nonetheless, when looking at these, this the CMEK data and the UKB, Biobank data, at least visually, we can see that the yellow lines, the slope of the yellow lines are in the same ballpark as doctor Morgan Levin's FINA age. So we can see that it's of a similar strength that correlation for biological age with chronological age in the CMEK and UKB studies are in a similar ballpark to PhenoAge without knowing what the actual correlation is. Alright. So what about all cause and cause specific mortality? So we're about to see that an older biological age is significantly associated with an increased all cause and cause a specific mortality risk. So first, taking a look at the data in UK Biobank. This is all cause mortality risk. We're looking at data for model two, fully adjusted model, and I'll get into which variables that they included in this model in a second to assess healthy user bias. And then, we're looking at the total, number of participants including data for men and women, and then data for women and men separately. So these are all the data we're about to see. And then in terms of biological age as a cont biological age acceleration as a continuous variable. In other words, for people that had biological ages that were older than their chronological age, what was the association with all cause mortality risk? So in the full cohort, we can see that the hazard ratio is above one, especially the data in parentheses, the 95% confidence interval. Both of those, the data to the left and to the right of the comma are above one, which indicates a significant association with all cause mortality risk. In other words, biological age acceleration as a continuous variable older than one's chronological age was significantly associated with a fifty six percent higher risk for all cause mortality. An effect that was significant in both women, forty six percent and men, sixty percent. Alright. So what about in the CMAIC study? Well, unfortunately, they didn't show all cause mortality data, but they did show cause specific mortality data. First, starting off with deaths from cardiovascular disease, CVD. And using the same approach, biological age acceleration as a continuous variable. We can see that that was associated with a Or significantly associated with a ten percent higher risk of death from cardiovascular disease in the full cohort. Thirteen percent higher in women. Nine percent significantly higher in in men. Significant in women too. It was all An older biological age relative to chronological age was also significantly associated with a higher risk for diabetes related mortality. Fifteen percent in the total cohort. Eighteen percent in women. Fifteen percent in men. And once again, note the 95% confidence interval for each of these are above one indicating a significant association. It was also associated with an increased risk for, deaths from lung disease or chronic obstructive pulmonary pulmonary, sorry hard to say, pulmonary disease. So COPD. And you can see that these are small but significant effects in the total cohort three percent. Just on the borderline of significant as one point zero overlaps with the hazard ratio of one. So not significant in women, but significant in men. And the in the CEMEC study, cancer mortality was not significantly associated with biological age acceleration. As you can see that the 95% confidence interval, 99 to one point o two, overlaps with one, not significant. And it was also not significant in women or men. So here we can see that an older biological age using the biological age metric in the CMEK and UK Biobank studies was associated with an increased all cause mortality and cause specific mortality. So it's a pretty good pretty good metric. Alright. So what about, healthy user bias? What factors did they adjust in the models? What what what factors did they include in the models to potentially account for this? And that's what's shown here. And I won't go through all of them, but you can see they adjusted for many variables, which is important. You wanna have as many variables as possible that could possibly confound the association between tea consumption with mortality risk or cause specific mortality. If there is a weakness in terms of which variables they should have adjusted for but didn't, If we take a look at physician diagnosed chronic diseases, it's good that they adjusted for cancer, CBD, diabetes, and COPD mortality, but it's important to also adjust for other things that could potentially kill us like liver disease, kidney disease, Alzheimer's disease. These were not adjusted for. So they adjusted for almost everything that can be involved with healthy user bias, but there are still a few that could have been included into the models. Alright. So which biomarkers were included? Because we wanna have a tool that can look at many different biomarkers of many different organ system. So let's start off with the biomarkers in CMEK in the CMEK study, which are shown here. On the left, we've got the biomarkers. And then in the middle, we've got their correlation with chronological age. And note that a positive correlation means that the biomarker increases during aging. A negative correlation means that the biomarker decreases during aging. And then the p value or their p value for the core their correlation with chronological age. And we can see that for each of these 15 biomarkers, they are significantly associated with chronological age and were included in the biological age acceleration metric for the CMAQ study. So note that biomarkers of many organ systems were included for biological age assessment. So let's go through which organ systems were were covered. So first, systolic blood pressure or vascular health, waist to hip ratio is a measure of adiposity, peak expiratory flow as measure of lung function, and then metabolic health including h b a one c, glycated hemoglobin, but also LDL, triglycerides, HDL, four markers of liver health, GGT or gamma glutamyl transpeptidase, albumin, aspartame enotransferase or AST, and alkaline phosphatase. MCV, mean corpuscular volume for red blood cell size. Platelet count is one metric of immune function, but platelets have many different functions in in the body including blood clotting. And then two markers of kidney function including urea and creatinine. Now ideally, for replication for biological age tools across studies, you wanna have the same biomarker panel in CMEK and in UK Biobank. Unfortunately, that's not always possible because every study doesn't measure the same biomarkers. So which biomarkers were used for the biological age acceleration tool in UK Biobank? And that's what we can see here. So using the same setup, their correlation with chronological age in the middle and then the p value on the right. And in the blue arrows, we can see that there is a lot of overlap, which is good news for the biomarkers in UK Biobank. So I won't go through their organ systems or which organ systems that they cover. But new or or newly included biomarkers that were in UK Biobank but were not in CMEK included body fat percentage, but that can be linked with the waist to hip ratio too. The HEAL quantitative ultrasound index as a measure of fracture risk. So that's a new one that wasn't in CMEK. And along those lines, vitamin d can be linked with bone health. So we've got two measures of bone or related to bone in UK Biobank that were not in CMEK. Cystatin c and uric acid or urate as measures of kidney function. Forced expiratory volume in one second or FEV one is a measure of lung function. And if you're if that sounds familiar, that's because that's one of the biomarkers that I track regularly. And I haven't made an update video, but that should be coming sometime soon. C reactive protein as a measure of inflammation, which shouldn't be a surprise. I've mentioned it many times on the channel. IGF one as a measure of liver health, but it's also involved in many metabolic processes. So in some, we can see that each of these 18 biomarkers in the case of UK Biobank was significantly correlated with chronological age and hence went into the biological age acceleration tool that was used used for UK Biobank. So to summarize, tea consumption, two to three cups per day, was was associated with a slower biological age acceleration across two different studies using a biological age acceleration tool or biological age metric that included biomarkers of many different organ systems, which is good news. Those biological age tools or biological age metric was strongly correlated with chronological age, and it was associated with all cause and cause specific mortality, thereby highlighting its potential utility and usefulness as it was associated with chronological age and risk of death for all causes. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you be may be interested in, including discount links for green tea, which is where I get my daily tea consumption, epigenetic and telomere testing, NAD quantification, oral microbiome composition, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Syphox Health, which includes ApoB. Note that those are complimentary tests. There isn't much overlap. Diet tracking. Or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer agent or dye trying brand as I've I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.