Hey, everyone. Today's guest probably needs no introduction, Dave Pascoe. So Dave is all over the interwebs. You probably know him as the quote, unquote 62 year old longevity athlete whose epigenetic pace of aging beats Brian Johnson, although he's chronologically older, which is a harder thing to do, and also not spending $2,000,000 a year. But as we'll get into it, I think Dave is completely underrated. So with that, welcome, Dave, to the channel. Shucks. Thanks. It's great to be here. I'm glad we're finally meeting face to face. Yes. I agree. Same. So alright. So let's let's and, you know, it's funny because it's like, the superhero backstory. Like, I I humbly say for everybody watching that I kinda look at what we're doing as, like, longevity superheroes where for, you know, for better or worse, you know, some of us are on the right track, some may be guiding others on the wrong track, but, we're trying to live as healthily as possible for as long as possible and going beyond just that eat real food and exercise kinda mantra. So, you know, I kind of look at look at that as, like, longevity superhero. So you're I see you as a longevity superhero. So I kinda wanna know the backstory. You know, how does Batman become Batman or Superman become Superman. Right? So were you always interested in health and fitness as a kid or did that develop? How did that start off for you? Yeah. You know, I think I was always interested in health and fitness as a kid. One of my earliest influence, I think, was, watching the movie Rocky, seeing Sylvester Stallone, you know, jogging through the streets. I did the whole thing. I put on the sweat suits, would go out jogging early morning, drink the raw eggs, you know, the whole the whole nine yards. So that, that had a big impact on me. That was at what age? Like, how old were you? Gosh. That movie came out in, what, '75, '76. So it would have been, like, thirteen, fourteen years old. Okay. So the 13 home gym, you know, a Joe Weider bench press in the basement kind of thing? Yeah. Yeah. Well, except that was out in the garage. Yeah. Alright. So then, like, bodybuilding magazines, were you into that also as a kid, or it was just the Rocky set it off? Not really. Just the Rocky set it off. And then, you know, of course, right about that time, I think I was transitioning maybe from junior or into junior high, from junior high. Wasn't wasn't quite high school yet. You know, girls started paying attention to muscles. Right? So that was that was a huge driver for me. It's same same. It it was like I went to summer camp and I saw there were a couple of, kids my age and the girls for whatever reason were flocking to them. And I was like, when I come back to this camp next summer, I'm gonna get in the gym and do all the things. So for me, it was exactly exactly the same. But, so basically, it was just Rocky. There weren't any other, you know, fitness motivators. Not really. No. Yeah. I think Rocky did it for me. And then what was your trick I'm gonna apologize. My voice is a little hoarse. I'm dealing with a summer cold, so it keeps going in and out. So quick side note, my, nighttime respiratory rate, which is a marker of immune activation, I for me, it's only gone above, well, pretty close to 14 with vaccination. So the three times I got vaccinated, respiratory rate like 16 or higher, so usually 13 and a half average. So I know that if it starts to trickle in that direction, I've got something funky going on. Times happening. For the past five days, I'm like slowly creeping up and I don't know what it is. So it maybe some are cold just like you. I don't know. Be on the lookout. Alright. Alright. So so, how many days a week? What was the approach? It was just, like, every day, how many how many hours? Like, how what was the initial approach? Oh, yeah. Back then, I had no plan. I didn't know anything. I mean, I still don't really know anything. I'm still I'm still learning. But, you know, back then, I was just screwing around in the backyard with the weights, you know, doing the bicep curls and stuff, trying to get the the bis and tries looking good, trying to build the chest. Just did, like, what friends recommended. I did have one friend that worked at a a place called Biofit, and, he took me through a re routine once there. And it was one of those routines where they scream at you the whole time, like, you're gonna come on push. You know, you wussy. And, you know, I'm like, I got yelled at enough at home by my parents. I I didn't need that too. So that that didn't appeal to me very much. I never understood I never understood when if you're under a bench, just as an example, and you have that personality type behind you, like, talking the whole time. I'm basically, like, shut up. Let me focus on pushing the weight. Right. So but some people some people respond differently, you know? So Yeah. That wasn't my thing. Yeah. Alright. So did you play high school sports or it was just like a No. I really, really wanted to play football badly in all through elementary school. I mean, that was my dream. I wanted to be, like, the high school quarterback. You know? That was I don't know. That was that was my childhood fantasy. Right? But, yeah, about the time I was in junior high, I got braces on my teeth, and my parents said, no way. You're not playing any sports with braces on. So that pretty much ruined all all my plans. And then, you know, the working out didn't help much because I had braces on my teeth. I had, you know, hair that was sticking out here because that's what everybody did. Right? Total dork. Absolute dork. So yeah. I wouldn't say total dork because total dork implies no fitness at all. Right? I think the stereotype, which seems like a derogatory thing to say dork. Right? But I think the stereotype of a dork is someone who's just academic and not into training or fitness or any of these things. Right? So I get that because I grew up the same exact way, you know, academic, but hey. So I don't know. It's not about me. It's about you, but great story. I'm so interested. Maybe we can talk about that later. Or or it's just one big mix. Right? But, I heard you on interviews. I find so many similarities between us. It's just it's cool. It's very cool. This may be different though. So junior high, we had a football team after school, like, you know, who which grade has the best football team kinda thing. And I grew up playing football, like, the same. Like, I wanted to play high school football because kids on my block played high school football. I looked up to them. So, anyway, I played a lot. This wasn't like I I was pretty good too. So, for a little guy. So, anyway, seventh grade came around and the quote, unquote popular kids had their friends on this little football team. And I was like, put me in the game. I got so annoyed. It was like they wouldn't put me in. So, yeah. Anyway, quick quick side story. Alright. So then, and I know that there's your high school experience. There was a com computer science, like, a hacking story, a biohacker story, but I don't know. People if people are interested in that, I'll direct them to where I don't know if you wanna talk about that. I'm trying not to get you in trouble. No. We can talk about a little, I think, probably the statute of limitations on that. Probably run out. So So wait. So you had coding skills, or you all always interested in computer science? Yeah. Yeah. I think, it was I took my first computer class in 1977. It was Fortran '77 and loved it. Absolutely loved it. But back in those days, we were doing it on punch cards. So, I mean, you can imagine we're sitting at this, you know, huge punch card machine, which is like a giant typewriter. It's got this stack of cards that you put in the hopper, and you could only type in one statement at a time on one card. And if you screwed that up, you had to throw the card away, start all over again with the next one. And then, you know, if you imagine, like, all the different statements that you would have in a computer program, your deck could be this big. So I used to carry this, well, it was a camera case, and cameras back then were pretty large. It looked like a giant purse, but it was stacked. It was just about the right size to hold my deck of computer cards. So I had that strapped over my shoulder, and that's how I walked around the halls in high school, you know, with my dorky, computer deck stacked there. But we could only run a program once per day because there was no computer. There were no terminals when we first started. The, the teacher would take this deck, all of our decks, collect them, and he would drive over to our intermediate school district where they had the mainframe, and he would run all these things as a batch job. So we would get our results back the next day and find out, oh, jeez. I had a syntax error. You know, frustrating. So it would take all week just to run one program. That's yeah. That's I can't even I I look at coding now, and I can't even imagine back then in the prehistoric days of of trying to code. You know? So It truly was prehistoric. Yeah. Good good name for it or good word for it. But I guess there was a time where, you hacked into the school database and, this the the wrap went around school that somebody's hacking into the computer database and you were talking to your friend about that. You know? Yeah. Well, it wasn't just our school's database. It was our county's database because it was their mainframe system. We had in our library, there was a thing that you could sign up for. It was called the Michigan Occupational Information System, and it was designed for high school students to be able to try to figure out what they wanted to do for a living. So it would walk you through a series of questions just to see what your aptitudes were and your interests. And then at the end, it would spit out a list of things that you might, you know, have it, you know, might be inclined to do. So I used to have a free hour and I would volunteer in the library to take other students through this. Many times students would sign up and then they wouldn't show up. So, I had just time to play with it myself. But having been a programmer, I knew that, you know, not all programmers are very conscious about how they, do bounds checking on input. And so I thought, well, I'm gonna start putting this thing to its paces and see how good they were with the coding. And sure enough, I just I do some creative inputting. I found I could get the program to abort. And then when it did, I was at a command prompt at the base of the operating system, and I could go anywhere I wanted to. And, of course, I did. So So And, What was the what was the goal? I mean, it was just to look around and see how what's under the hood, or it was just Yeah. Curiosity more than anything. It wasn't like I wanted to do anything malicious. It was just I just really wanted really wanted to see what was out there. So I started exploring all the different things that were in people's accounts, and I found that there was a a professor somewhere that was working on a, it was a Star Wars game. Now back then, games weren't graphical. They were text based. So, you know, you would type in that you were doing something, and it would come back and say, okay. It it would, like, describe a scenario of what you're seeing, and then you would have to guess what to do next. So in playing this game, it was it was pretty fun. They would always bomb out at a certain point. You know, it was just it would hit an error and bomb. And, as the weeks went by, this didn't get fixed, and it was kind of annoying to me because I really, really wanted to keep playing the game. So I fixed it. And that was my first mistake. I made a change. Right? And that was that was detected because, apparently, I guess the bug or the error had been confounding this person for a while and they couldn't get past it. And all of a sudden now it was working. They're like, hey. Wait. What's going on here? Yeah. So low and behold, I was gosh. I think I was just trying to think what year or what grade that was in. I think it was, like, seventh grade. I don't time frame, I'm not exactly positive. Maybe it was tenth probably tenth grade. Yeah. Because there was a senior that was in one of my computer classes that worked for the data center. And we got talking one day, and he starts bragging to me about how how cool his job is and how smart he is. And he started telling me about this, hacker that they were trying to track. And, I was kinda fascinated. And as he told me more, I got kinda shocked because I realized, wait. This is me he's ex describing. And so, like, now I'm just in total shock, shock, and awe about this story. So I was, like, glued to his every word, really. So what did he do next? You know? What did you guys do? And so he was telling me everything they were doing to find this person, which just made me laugh because then I knew everything to avoid. So I continue to poke around and prod around and just have a good old time out there. And I could see every grade of every student in the entire school district, the entire county. And I could have changed any of those grades, but I didn't dare because another change would have attracted a lot more attention. But I really at that point, I thought that there was only a couple of students that would have been capable of that, and I would have been one of them they would have looked at. So, yeah, I didn't touch that. Well, I'm glad you didn't take it further because, you know, the, like, the anonymous hackers and well, Grant, I'm not I don't have nothing against anonymous. Don't at me. Anonymous. My gosh. But, you know, I'm sure you could Any a target on your face right now? I hope not. But, you know, in a in a in a in a parallel universe, maybe there's a Dave that took it a step farther and then started changing it all all kinds of stuff. But which then brings me into, movies. And this is just the side, I know, off track, but but it's on my on my list because I think, you know, I want people to get to know the full version that is you. Right? So, when the matrix first came out, were you just, like, related to it, you know, hacker. Right? Real world. Very much so. Yeah. Even before that, I mean, the movie War Games came out right about the same time that I was doing my hacking. And I'm like, this is so cool because this is exactly what I'm doing. Wasn't touching any government systems. It wasn't, like, invoking any thermonuclear war or anything like that, thankfully. But, yeah, those kind of movies, like, really, really got to me. So And the Matrix especially. Go. Say that again. War And the Matrix especially. Yeah. Yeah. Just real quick. The, War Games. I completely forgot about that movie. And, like, I can't I can't I can't believe this is, like, 50 ago. I can't believe it's crazy. Right? So alright, sweet. So the matrix. So I guess you related more to war games than the matrix? Well, at that time, because that was the movie that came out when I was doing that. I mean, matrix came out so much later, and I was a lot further along, you know, in that. So Right. Right. I see. I got for me, matrix the matrix is in my all four of them. I know people are like, the first one is great, and I relate to all four of those, like, in every in so many different ways. But, And I had I had to go back and watch each one as the next one came out too just so I was refreshed and ready to go. Yeah. So it sounds like that's not in your top list of top movies even though you've got the coding background and these, you know. Well, I mean, I was a movie geek. I would go see every movie that came to the theater the weekend that it came out. So people at work always would ask me. In fact, I had, like, a little blog back before blogs were even a thing. It was hard coded. Right? I had like an Excel spreadsheet of the movies that I saw that weekend, and I rated them, and I would have the list of the actors' names that were in them. And, and so people at work would want copies of this, so I'd have to put it out on the file server, and everybody would download that so they'd know what to rent when it finally came to, you know, to DVD. Blockbuster. Movies. Everything. I saw everything. Hey. Well, it's like Blockbuster Dave Pascoe. Right? It's like you're the so wait. So what would you say that since you're a movie buff, what would you put? Like, which genre what would you put as your top, you know, their top five as the movies, you know, for you? Oh, gosh. That would be impossible. I know people have asked me that before, and I I really can't nail it down. One movie that's was incredibly watchable that I saw probably the most was Beverly Hills Cop. I don't know why. It was just a fun movie. It had great pace to it. Yeah. Yeah. That's a classic. Yeah. So so sci fi is not your Oh, sci fi is my jam. Absolutely. Yeah. Like, RoboCop. Really love that. You know? All the the Star Trek, you know, and the Star Wars. Yeah. I mean, you name it. Time travel stuff, really awesome. Alien? What about the Alien franchise? Prometheus, that whole Oh, yeah. That too. And I know there's another one coming out soon on that, so I'm kinda curious to see what they do with the reboot. Yeah. It doesn't seem as good as what what's already been, but you never know. Right? So Yeah. It's frustrating when they just keep rehashing stuff instead of coming up with new concepts. Yeah. Alright. So okay. So now we've got you out of high school, coding coding, and then college comes. Right? So you computer science major or what was Yeah. Yeah. Double majored, computer science and psychology. Psychology. So what was the plan with the double major? Really no plan. I was just fascinated with psychology. So I did enough of the, the coursework that I just needed 24 more credits in anything to actually have a double degree. But I didn't think that there was really anything I could do with just a bachelor's in in psychology. And I didn't wanna become a social worker or anything like that. I was just fascinated by people. Yeah. I've heard that. I've I've heard you say that about you just observed everyone around you. Like, you're the observer. Right? So I think you've mentioned before that in high school, you saw all of the other or some of the other kids, like, partying a lot, and you're you're like, I see what that can lead to. I don't wanna go down that road. So have you ever have you ever, you know, Briggs Myers personality type? Do you know your personality type? I you know, I wanted to do that in preparation for this just to see what it would be today, and I didn't get to it. So I apologize. But, you know, I've taken tests like that in the past, but it'd be decades ago now. And it used to be any kind of test like that that I took where there was a quadrant of things. I would land right smack in the middle of all four quadrants Interesting. Which I guess makes me a bit of a chameleon. But yeah. That's the best way. I mean, it's, you know, you get to understand it from all sides of the equation rather than polarized. Right? On both sides. I try to be, you know, like that too. But but, but yeah. So INTJ. So that I think that's the observer type. You know? That's like the, yeah. So but you'd have to you'd have to officially not that it means anything. It's just, you know, intuitive thinking, judging, you know, but then you've got people who are more empathetic and more feelings based. So when I when I heard you talking about, oh, I observed because I've been like that for a long time too or maybe forever where, you know, it was similar. I saw the party type, party lifestyle and granted I did too some of that in college and a little bit afterwards. But, there is a bit of it with my personality to, like, peeling back and looking at the world from the outside in. You know? So I got a sense of that from you too. Yeah. Oh, exactly. I I think most of my life, I felt like the ultimate outsider. I mean, some even as a kid, my dad was kinda one of those that believed children should be seen and not heard. And if I was seen or heard, it wasn't gonna be pretty. So I usually just try to keep my head down, keep out of the way, not, you know, not be seen. That saying, the tall poppy syndrome, like, you know, don't don't stand out for any reason. Interesting. It was very, very much a self preservation thing when I was growing up. Yeah. So I don't know. It's a tricky subject. Right? Because parenting back then was a completely different, you know, mindset than it is now for better or worse. Right? In some ways, maybe better, but also many ways, many other ways. You know, I I get that too, but I don't know how deep we wanna go down that rabbit hole. It's fine. Anything anywhere you wanna go, I'm totally willing. So Yeah. So wait. So computer science, psychology, and then after that, working in tech or how how did that Yeah. I got my first job in a direct mail marketing company, which was kind of frustrating because, you know, I knew that the fruit of my efforts were just going to line people's trash cans. So that was a little disappointing. And I also I mean, I had so much background from high school and college. Oh, well, one thing I forgot to mention was that, during the summers in high school, one of the computer teachers just loaned me the keys to their new $3,000,000 mini mini mainframe. And so every day, I would walk three miles through the summer. It's like I'm not even in school anymore. I'd walk three miles over to our, vocational center, and I would have this mainframe all myself with the manuals. And, I mean, I just I dug in deep. I I could operate the thing. I could anything of the systems administration of that mainframe, I knew how to do. And so that came in handy for jobs when I was in college too. But then when I got this first job, for some reason, because I had a college degree, they placed me as a, spacing out now, what it's called. And so I wasn't a programmer. It was, hopefully, you can edit this out when I have brain farts like this. My gosh. I can't even think of what the heck my title was. How embarrassing. But it wasn't programmer. It was something related to, it doesn't matter. So spacing on that. That's, like, really annoying. Yeah. But it's an insignificant detail. It's a title. Right? You know, you had a Yeah. Yeah. Well, okay. So let me just say because my role wasn't one of a programmer, that when I had to interface with the programmers, I wrote I wrote, like, the specs for the programs, and then we would have a programmer that would do the coding. And the coding that they worked in was a a very simplistic computer language that they created for themselves. It was super limited, but it would just do what they needed to do for the direct mail marketing. But our our coders really thought they were the shit. I mean, it's like, we're programmers, and you were just, oh, I was an analyst. That's a systems analyst. That's what they call it. And you're just a systems analyst, so, you know, you don't know how to do this stuff. And I'm thinking, oh my gosh, this is child's play, what you guys are doing. It's just, it's so frustrating that I got treated like an idiot, but I had way more of a background. So eventually I had to, I had to prove that the hard way just by, working with different people that were well, how do I explain this? There were these two guys, Steve and Greg. I'm I'm really going off in the weeds on this, but these guys were the gurus of our computer system, of our mainframe at that company. And and they knew it, and they were really hardcore, and they were rude as heck to everybody else because everybody was so ignorant in their eyes. Right? There's these little p n programmers, and they would always come to them with their major problems, and they would just be annoyed to no end. And one day, my team had a problem, and so I had to come along with the programmers to go see Steve and Greg, kinda like the wizards of Oz. Right? You know, these were the big guys behind the curtains. And, I remember these these guys were just, like, so dismissive. They wouldn't even look up at us. And one of them made some kind of reference to, Happy Days. Right? That was a big show at the time. Well, I think it was probably over at the time, but still in syndication at least. And, and so I just an intuition just threw out a line from happy days. And, I remember Steve looking up from his desk at me, like and he says, a monkey speaks. You know, like, what? And so, and then he went back to what he was doing, and then he would do something else and I just things that I could identify with. And so I would just toss out a comment, and he would stop what he was doing and look at me. And now my the programmers and my boss behind me were getting nervous because they're like, shut up. You're annoying him. But little did they know, he was like, wait a minute. What what's up with this guy? And so I I caught his attention, and we started talking later. And then he realized that I I knew c and c plus plus, which he did not know and he really wanted to know. And he knew that I knew, like, these, you know, desktop computers, which is a whole new thing for him, and he was fascinated by anyway, we just we hit it off. And, that was really all I needed to get in. And then I was starting I was able to write bigger programs and get into more and more stuff there. So, Yeah. I don't really know where I was going with that story, but just it just kinda cracks me up. Yeah. No. That's great. So then going from there and with the coding with the, that was the mail company. Right? So Yeah. What was the next step? And what was the plan? Like, I mean, it sounds like you just followed the path of, well, this is what I enjoy doing. I'm just gonna, you know, get a degree in what I'm what I enjoy, and then I'm gonna get a job doing kinda, you know, some of the coding stuff and what I enjoy. But then was there a plan behind it, or it's just, you know, ride the wave and see where, you know, coding and programming and takes me? Yeah. I mean, I was just kinda riding the wave, really. I knew, you know, from high school that I wanted to get into computers because it would be something that would pay well and would be really interesting. But then I I sort of found my niche at that company once once I was accepted and allowed to do things. I started automating our systems. So I developed this program that ended up doing what we had a whole team of of ladies that would they were in charge of the batch operation of one of our biggest, database fulfillment systems. And I mean, I realized that all this stuff that they were doing at the keyboard was just a very repetitive tasks. And I knew how to use, higher level language application programming interface to simulate what they were doing using their logic and just completely automate that whole thing. And I I talked to my boss about it because I I had the idea for it, but I was really concerned that I might put these folks out of work. And And he's like, no. No. Don't worry about that. We can find plenty of other things for them to do. So if you think you can do that, go for it. And so I did. And so, going back to Steve and Greg, they were really big into old sitcoms. There was a old TV show called That Girl starring Marlo Thomas. Before my time. Yeah. Well, it was kinda before mine too. I just I vaguely remembered it, but but they knew it really well. And, apparently, the star of the show, Marla Thomas, her name was Anne Anne Marie. She, she had a boyfriend by the name of Donald excuse me. There's my voice again. Donald Hollinger. And so she wouldn't refer to him as her boyfriend. She would refer to him as her current date. So whenever you're coding things, often you needed the the date in your program. And so they would always say, hey, what's the current date? And somebody would say Donald Hollinger as a joke rather than saying the date. Anyway, they decided to give me, I had to create a artificial login for this entity that I was creating. And so they gave it the name of Donald Hollinger. And so this thing became quite big. It ended up doing all kinds of automation for the company. And, as a result, what used to take a week for dispatch processing was brought down to a single day. And then there were other systems that, set up the first bulletin board system. If you can remember those things used to be able to dial up into and be able to, you know, post things and get into forums and such. I used that technology to be able to take our data fulfillment, which used to come out on magnetic tape and then get FedExed to the customer who bought the list of of mailing addresses and things from us. Instead of having to ship that magnetic tape, which took lots of time, I implemented this bulletin board system. And now, you know, they could get it immediately. All they had to do is just dial in as soon as the batch was finished and download it. And then there was just lots of other automations that built upon on top of that. So it just it kept getting this process down from a week to, like, a day to four hours to about an hour and a half. And just so I I made a good name for myself anyway to do that. So efficiency, that's the, you know, name of the game. Right? And so so I guess you stayed at that company for a a long time? About ten years. Yeah. Alright. And then throughout that process, still health and fitness was a major focus, or how did that go? It wasn't? No. No. I wouldn't call it a major focus. It was just it was something I was interested in. It was something I did. Again, I I didn't really know what I was doing. I mean, I thought I did. I would go to GNC, and I would walk the aisles and go, oh, yeah. That looks like an interesting supplement. I think I'll take that one. You know? So I bought lots of supplements, and I just had no clue if they were doing anything for me or if I needed them or even if they were harming me. I didn't know. So yeah. So when when did when did the the health mindset get to the point where it's like, I'm gonna start tracking. I'm gonna start trying to optimize, you know, all the as many biomarkers as possible. When did that come into play as a major focus? So through the course of working in that job and doing the automation that it was doing, I had to get a lot of data out of things. At one point, I was responsible for doing both well, it's performance tuning for an operating system, a database, and applications. So, I had to get lots of data out of each of those environments, put them into Excel, graph them out. And then as we tweaked various, you know, like buffers and, you know, other little nerd knobs of these environments, to see how those had an effect upon the processing. Was it getting better? Was it getting worse? So, well, I guess they would have called now they would probably call that fuck around and find out, but that's Yeah. I gotta put that on a t shirt, but yeah. Right. But I mean, that's really the only thing you could do back then to be able to reverse engineer a program, just or to, like, do performance tuning. You had to play around with the variables and and see what would result. Kind Kinda like figuring out what's inside of a black box. It's that was your only option. I started realizing through this that, you know, our bodies are very much a a very complex system, and it frustrated me that we didn't have any users manual for it and that I didn't really have any good data on what my buffers were or my inputs and outputs, which is one of the things I love about your channel because you are so excellent at controlling all of your inputs and being able to figure out what your results. Yeah. I tried I tried to. It's not a perfect system. You know? Sometimes things get in the way, but which is annoying. You know? But, I wanna digress just lightly just to say just to to praise you because I watch a lot of YouTube videos and I listen to a lot of podcasts, but when yours come on, I stop everything that I'm doing, and I glued Thank you, David. To that screen. And I'm doing screenshots of all your different slides and stuff, and fascinating. The thing is your coding experience. Your coding experience. You could probably do what I do infinitely better. I'm like, you know, it's funny. Yeah. The coding guy, Greg and Steve, and he's like the monkey speaks. I feel like a monkey playing with stats. It's just simple correlations, you know. I get sometimes I get criticized by, like, hardcore, machine learning types and Bayesian. I don't have I don't I don't know what where do you even I don't have that coding experience. They're like, you should do it like this. And I'm like, I get what you're saying, but this simple approach, most of my biomarkers are better than where they were. Right? So there's probably a higher level to analyze the data, but, you know, you can get you can go far on just simple correlations and, you know but but I try. It's an imperfect system. I for me, it's like I don't want any praise. You know, I'm seventy plus years away from that. That's that's the way I see it. If I can really do what I think I can do and my genetics don't get in the way, then maybe I was on to something, but maybe I just squeeze the orange of, you know, so my dad's brother died at 51. He had a stroke 48, and then that's it three years later. So I don't know that I I don't have those genetics, and I'm just milking as much of the orange as I can. Maybe that's 75. I don't know. I I hope not, but, you know, all we can do is maximize, you know, based on our genetics. Right? So Yeah. Well, if you're ever looking for beta testers or things that you're doing, sign me up. Yeah. That's I appreciate that. So we're building an app. And as I'm as we're talking, I'm like, fuck. You could probably build an even better app. That's the thing. So, I'm unlimited in the environments that I I know how to code in, and coding on phones, that's very foreign to me. I've I've tried. It's the development environment is just it's huge. It's it's like learning a whole new world for me. Yeah. Mhmm. I feel a little left out of that, but, you know For now. I mean, right now. For now. For now. Now that I'm retired, I might actually have some time to dedicate to that. So Yeah. See. But most of my automation, I'd like to use in Excel because it's it's powerful. I can crunch a lot of data and then get good results, and I can visually figure out what's what's what from that. So Yeah. Same. I mean, same. But I'm primitive compared you know, you've got actual coding skills. You know? So when I, sat down to try to learn to code a few years ago, I just I don't have the I've said this before in other places, but I don't have the brain. I just don't I can't, like, I watch all the videos and I practice it, and then it doesn't go exactly how they said, then I get frustrated. I'm like, I'm literally like the monkey pounding on the table, like, why doesn't this work? So I can only focus on what I'm good at. Right? So, Well, if you're ever looking for Excel macros for something to make something easy, throw something over the wall at me and say, here, can you do this and set it up for me, and I'll send it to you. Cool. Thanks, Dave. Alright. So wait. So when did when did that kick in? So, like, at what age did did the bulb go off? Because it for me, I had a light bulb moment. But for you, when was there an age that you were just like, human body is the same way. I I can start maybe I can start to optimize my health if I can, you know, play with the inputs and, you know, and outputs. Well, that was the frustrating part because I came upon that way too early. I I tried to get, you know, data from my doctor. No way. No way. And they didn't have anything that you could buy online like they do now. So, yeah, I'd go see my doctor, and I'd wanna know, like I'd ask him, what's I wanna know what, like, my testosterone is, my my estrogen, my estradiol, and he just starts laughing. He's like, wait a minute. Estrogen? Estradiol? You don't have those. You're a man. He just thought I was a complete idiot. Right? You don't yeah. You don't you don't need those. And I'm, like, thinking, wow. Even I know more than this guy? This is kind of scary. Yeah. So and then when he would run something, he would run, like, just a single marker that didn't tell you, you know, what's going on in reference to other things. So totally useless data. Completely useless. So it was probably for maybe another decade before these individual self help kind of tests became available, and then I really had stuff something I could work with. So it was always interesting when you'd go for, like, a yearly physical. It's just that the tech and the doctors at the time. I mean, I I don't know if I've ever mentioned this publicly, but, like, in in Texas so I moved here from Texas and, I was testing, you know, basically begging my doctor at the time to measure, like, four times a year, just the CBC, chem panel, whatever the standards. Yeah. And, so when I moved here, I wanted to do the same thing. And and and like you said, it was before the age, I mean, granted, like, fifteen years ago of order everything online, go to the lab, like, that didn't exist. So, one of the doctors here, wrote in my file, like, suffers from anxiety. Didn't tell me to my face. Just wrote that down and then Because you asked for data. Because I asked for data, and I wanted to be proactive and get ahead of the game. And, and I was even like, look. You know, I'm I'm not trying to, you know, flex, not trying to do any of that, but I was I was like, I'm a scientist over here, you know, like and they probably hear so many delusional people. She probably put me in that bin, you know. So anyway, like, I I she left. The new doctor came, and then he asked me. He was like, how's your anxiety going? It's like, wait. What? I don't I don't generally suffer from anxiety. I mean, occasionally, something at work will stress me out, but I don't have an anxiety disorder where it's chronic, and I'm like so anyway, just that mindset of if you wanna try to optimize your health by measuring more often than once a year or whatever, you must suffer from some personality disorder or anxiety disorders. It's just crazy to me. So Yeah. I guess and I guess if you had something they couldn't diagnose, they would just say it was all in your head too. So That's terrible. Right? Yeah. Yeah. A lot of gaslighting of people. So for you, it kicked in about fifteen years ago, or when would you say that No. That would have been in my thirties. So that would have been yeah. So they weren't giving you old, actually. I'm sorry. It would have been more than thirty years ago. It doesn't seem that old, though. I mean, it just seems like a time, a number. I don't I don't know. It's crazy. It does. I look at myself like I'm still 20, so I it blows my mind when I'm with actual 20 and 30 year olds because I'm like, wait a minute. You've you don't know these bands? You don't know this TV show that I'm referring to? Doesn't compute. Yeah. My 15 year old would, like, pull up a TikTok on some, like, three second hook on a song. And I'm like, you don't even realize the original was whatever. And then Right. He'd be like yeah. Yeah. So so were they you were trying to get blood test data from your doctor, and then they just weren't giving it to you, you know, up to, you know, thirty years ago. Yeah. But then was there ever a time when you would get that in get that your blood test data from the doctor and then you started recording it? Yeah. Yeah. I lost a lot of that, unfortunately. I know I in my spreadsheet, I started including, the earliest I could go back and find. But, you know, most of the stuff they give you is hard copy. There was no email versions of things that you could take that data out of anything other than having to type it back in yourself. So it was very frustrating. Yeah. So so what would you say? Fifteen years? Like, what was the I don't remember the earliest data that you had. Yeah. I don't either. I'm thinking probably around 2012 is when I really started my deep dive. So I would have been just turning 50. And I know I've told this story in in a couple other podcasts, but, you know, maybe somebody new will be hearing this. I was just starting my first marathon, and I I've heard on a podcast something about telomeres. And I didn't know what they were, but I was fascinated. And, apparently, they get shorter as you get older. So I thought, there's a test for that. I think I'd like to take that test because I'm certain it's gonna come back and tell me I have the telomeres of a 20 year old. Right? Because I felt I felt pretty good. I felt way better at 50 than I did at 30. And a lot of that had to do with me finding p 90 x at probably about age 45. I I'm a skeptic about everything. So when I saw the infomercials for P90X, I'm thinking, well, that's complete bullshit. You know? It that's just dumb. But then as I'm the more I watched it, I thought, well, wait a minute. They've actually got some really well thought out routines and plans. Anytime I'd ever seen anybody in the gym, they didn't really have a system. They didn't really know what they were doing. They're just slinging some weights around and hoping for the best. Whereas I, being the geek that I am, would go to the gym and with my clipboard, and I would go on, like, all the Nautilus equipment, you know, the machines and stuff. And I would write down my weight, the number of reps, and I would chart it out. I would didn't even have Excel back then. It was some other program. I can't think of the name of it was the precursor to Excel, but I would graph this stuff out and do little charts to see if I was improving sufficiently. You know? Anyway, so when I saw p 90 x, I thought, alright. Yeah. I'm gonna I'm gonna give that a shot just to prove that it doesn't work. So I did everything that they specified right to the letter. And it was kind of amazed because, like, thirty days in, I'm I'm starting to see some chest developing. I'm seeing my biceps and triceps were looking great again. I mean, high school, I was huge. But after high school, getting into college and getting busy with work, you know, I let all that go. I didn't have that spare time just to hang out in the backyard and sling sling weights around. So I lost a lot of that. But I started seeing some real good definition and tone and starting to get cut. And other people started to notice too. So that was a really nice thing. And I was like, hey. Okay. I'm gonna keep doing this. So thirty days, sixty days, ninety days, my confidence completely changed. I would go out to the bar with friends that were, you know, fairly good looking guys. They're used to get all the attention. And one of my best friends at the time, slightly arrogant, used to think all the girls were looking at him, which they probably were to his his defense. But I remember there was a girl on the dance floor that was, like, looking at the both of us, and he assumed it was him. So he started to go out to do the little white boy shuffle and get in there and dance with her. And she's like, totally rebuffed him, and he's like, what's going on with this? So he comes back, stands next to me again, and and she's smiling and looking at us. And he's like, he still can't comprehend that she was looking at me, not him. And I couldn't comprehend it either because I'm thinking I'm noticeable now. I I was used to being completely invisible. Yeah. Again, from childhood and through, you know, most of my upbringing through high school, more of a wallflower, I guess, than anything else. Yeah. Anyway, so p 90 x completely changed my life. So, again, no. So I'm at 50. I'm I'm looking good. I'm feeling good, better than I had in my whole life. I do this telomere test. Comes back and tells me I have the telomeres of a 68 year old, and I was age 50. So now I'm shocked thinking, what am I wait. What am I missing? I'm I think that I'm doing all the right things, at least by what we know right now, to be the right things, taking all the right supplements, doing the right exercises. I was I was tracking my sleep. Dave Asprey loves to talk about this old sleep tracker that he used to wear that attached on a headband. It was called the Zio, the Zio sleep band. I had one of those. So I was always recording my data off that. Loved that thing. It was brilliant because it was really just picking up the waves directly from your brain rather than, you know, off of a ring or a wristband and and trying to figure out by an algorithm what what you know, are you in REM? Are you in deep sleep? I still don't know how they figure that out from this stuff. But, anyway, I dig I digressed in so many different directions here, but, I thought I was doing everything right. So then I really had to dig in and find out what is it. I seem to be healthy. I seem to have fitness, but there's this whole longevity piece that apparently I'm not doing very well at. So how does that fit in? What is it? What do I need to do? So I started doing doctor Google to find everything I could about telomeres and what there might be to make them longer. There really wasn't a lot known about it at that time. I think it was a couple years later, they started learning about telomerase by studies of cancer cells and how they tend to produce their own, and they can seem to be immoral. And then a few years after that, they developed the first telomerase activators. I think it was TAM eight one eight, the Bill Andrews product. And that was ridiculously expensive, still is. So I didn't jump at it right away because there was no way I could afford that. But, over time, I I kept thinking, well, I'm gonna have to bite the bullet if I really if I really think this is gonna do the trick. And living a a good long life is important to me, then I'm gonna have to spend the money and see what happens, see if it works. So I did, and I would retest every year to that that same company until they went defunct. And I started seeing my my telomeres, you know, getting longer and longer, which was wonderful. Well, you've probably seen from some of my data, I recently shortened them again. But there are two different measures. One is so true diagnostic is the epigenetic estimation. Even though that may be a better measure, that's very debatable. Not much not much data. But so wait. So that gets to the idea of, you know, kind of a so I think you you improve your telomere length in part from the telomerase activator, but then also, I think you you mentioned, like, you changed your diet. That was the impetus to change your diet. You just started eating more clean and or what was before that? Before that, I ended up doing a consultation with this company because they offered that as part of the, you know, your test results. And I started explaining to them well, they asked me to explain my lifestyle. And, you know, I'm I thought, well, I knew lifestyle had something to do with it. I just didn't realize how much it did. So I started explaining that, you know, I I do P90X training for my first marathon. I, have a very, very stressful job. It goes from, like, zero to 60 and and nothing flat. And I'm also taking care of my two elderly parents who are battling cancer at the same time. And, as I'm explaining this, the guy's like, woah. Woah. Woah. Wait. Stop. Stop. We've seen this before. We've we've seen it in people who have really like, they're type a people, have really stressful jobs. The stress shortens your telomeres. We've seen it in in endurance athletes who put on high miles and just, you know, are abusing themselves basically, you know, through the stress that they're putting in their bodies. And you're doing P90X on top of that, which, you know, is another you're really really doing yourself some damage there. And we've seen it in caretakers. You know, people that are dealing with parents and having to change diapers and all the stress that comes with that. You've got the trifecta going on. So it's no wonder that your telomeres are so short. And so they recommended that I start trying to find ways to mitigate my stress levels. And they recommended things like yoga and meditation. And I started laughing because those are things I really used to do. I used to do those in my early twenties, like from teens to twenties and even through college. Yeah, all through college. And I just forgot about it because once I got working in my day job, I you know, things get lost when real life kicks in. It's sort of fall on the floor. So I had to pick those back up again and really start focusing on, my recovery, more recovery than just hard charging forward, forward, forward, which I'm having to relearn again now for the same reason because I've been putting a lot of stress on myself, and I think that's had a a shortening effect on my telomeres. In fact, I know it has. Yeah. So So so then that gets to the idea of exercise prescription. Right? Because right. And and I know I've mentioned this a billion times, but, you know, exercise is well known to increase average, but, you know, by an you know, life expectancy increase of up to about eight years. But, you know, that gets that gets us to, like, 80. So, you know, when you consider that only, you you know, it's like calorie restriction at least in rats. If you calorie restrict them, that increases their so if you exercise train rats, no CR increases average lifespan just like in people. But if you calorie restrict them, no exercise, they live even longer, both average and maximum. So and when you calorie restrict and exercise train, there's no synergistic effect. So it gets the you know, there's something about exercise that's great for health span and and, you know, living a little bit longer, but then it's probably chronic stress, which goes to exercise prescription. What is the optimal exercise dose that can get us even longer, a longer health span, not just that eight year average life expectancy in increase. So so how do you, how do you how do you balance that? Because for me, it's like heart rate variability, resting heart rate are great are great insight into stress. Right? So you could have super recovered data for heart rate variability, resting heart rate, and minimize stress completely. But then what's your VO two max? What's your muscle strength? So how do you see the balance? Or how do you now evaluate the balance between how often you exercise for how long at what intensity versus these measures of stress, whether it's telomere length or HRV resting heart rate? How do you integrate that? Yeah. Now, now when I'm doing training for a marathon or half marathon I should just say half marathon because I'm not doing any fulls anymore. That's way too much. If I'm still doing p 90 x at all during that, then I'm I'm doing the run training where a cardio day would have been in p 90 x. So it's it's more of a cross training, and I'm making them more synergistic rather than trying to cram them both in at the same time. I found that the importance is being able to come down from the stress. The stress is a good thing, but then don't just replace it with another stress and keep going throughout the day. Yep. You've got it's how quickly you can come back down from the stress you just put yourself under. And that seems to be the magic sauce for me. If if I go out and do a run, you know, come back in and, you know, get my mind on some happy things, and I'm not just trying to charge through the rest of my day or go do a bunch of yard work on top of that, which again, I had to relearn because I just did that a lot lately. So so then so it's almost like, titrating downward. If you have a high activity, high stress because exercise is stressor. I mean, no exercise, no stressor, but it's for medic. Right? So as you know so I guess if you have a high activity, high stress day, then you try to titrate it downward for a couple days until you're more fully recovered, whether it's general feel or is that how you're Even even more immediate. So if I go out and I do a run, I like to follow that up with a sauna right afterwards because sauna is pretty synergistic with exercise. You know? And it helps, you know, keep the growth hormone high. But in the sauna, I'm I'm either, like, meditating or I'm watching a Netflix that just completely takes me out of my head and entertains me. And so I can just feel myself relaxing and coming down from that. And then a nice long shower, and then maybe do some recovery like I have NormaTec compression boots. I'll I'll put those on. I have an amp coil that I'll set on my chest at the same time. And, now I've even got a brain tap that I'll put on. So So I'll be doing the the brain work and stacking all three of those together, and I just bliss out in that too. So See, this is why you're underrated. People don't know. They just think, oh, he you know, the dude is ripped. 62, he's ripped. He's got a epigenetics pace of aging that's as good as the best, some of the best. And then you start talking about all those things. People don't know. Like, that you're underrated. I'm not doing that stuff. I haven't evolved to that to that level. So, so wait. So if have you looked at so some people have the physiology where they'll chronically adapt higher higher training volume, HRV, resting heart rate will continue to improve. Right? I mean, granted, maybe there's an upper limit, but it's dramatically a higher volume upper limit compared to somebody else. Right? So especially elite app some elite athletes. I've seen some endurance athletes that have really bad HRV resting heart rate, but can bike from, you know, 40 miles or whatever they, you know, you know, doing triathlons and and all that too. So do you have the physiology where your body will always adapt to well, granted the stress telomere shortening being one example, but at least for me, I can't if I'm if I do a ninety minute workout, p 90 x is what, forty five minutes or so? It it depends on the workout in the day. It can be longer. Yeah. It can be, like, an hour and a half. Yeah. So hour and a half workout. If I'm not, like, totally relaxed, I mean, just, like, maybe some walking. If I'm doing yoga, anything, even yard work, that's gonna slow my recovery for the, for the next workout. Unfortunately, I don't have the physiology that for whatever reason, I don't know if I can biohack around that and figure out that recipe, why my recovery would be so much slower. But you it seems like you're able to grind not grind necessarily, but how many how many p 90 x workouts per week? Well, how many should I do versus how many do I actually do? No. No. No. How many are you actually doing? Okay. At least three solid workouts a week. And that cumulatively is how many minutes would you say? Oh, so, I mean, each one of those would be about an hour and a half. Yeah. So you're already you've got more in the high, you know, high volume, high training, and that's not including yard work, yoga, you know, everything else. All all the other activities. The Karol bike. The Karol bike. My gosh. So yeah. The Karol bike's relatively new for me. I just got that last November, so it's not not been a whole year yet. And I gotta say, I don't wanna make this a Carol bike commercial because Yeah. I am an affiliate. I gotta be honest with you on that, but I I was shocked by the Carol bike. When I when I saw it at the biohacking conference several years ago, I'm thinking, nice gimmick. You know? How can that really do anything? But then I would hear more and more of my favorite podcasters really talking about the benefits that they saw from it. And I'm thinking, alright. Hopefully, these guys aren't just trying to market to me. You know? I'm hoping that they're really being honest about their experiences with this. So if there's so many of them that are agreeing about what they're getting from this, then, yeah, maybe I should really give this a serious try. And so I I bought one, and I'd been using it pretty consistently. But the thing about the Carroll bike is I never felt like I was getting any better at it. You know, I kinda beat myself up. I'm like, oh my gosh. I really suck. I would look at my leaderboard scores on it, you know, and I'm maybe the middle of the pack on the leaderboard. I'm thinking, gosh. I thought I was in good shape. Why why am I so bad compared to this whole top half of this group? And I'm I'm imagining the bottom half are, like, 80 and 90 year olds on this, which may or may not be true, but that's, you know, kind of beating myself up mentally about it. So I just I would keep at it anyway, but I didn't really think I was getting any benefits, only because it's AI driven. So every time you perform well, you know, the next time you do it, it increases that resistance just a little bit more, and it just keeps giving you a little bit harder each time. And so I feel like I'm doing exactly the same thing always, but I'm not. I'm actually improving, you know, as time goes. But it's so gradual that I didn't notice. And the way I saw it shocked me. I every year I do the American Lung Association's fight for air climb, and that involves well, at least here in Detroit, it involves running Comerica Park, the stadium, all around the stadium. So you're running up and down all the bleachers all the way around the park. And every year, I would train for that just because it's, you know, it's it's a hard event for me anyway. A lot of stair work. It's a lot of huffing and puffing. But this year, I didn't get to it. I was, you know, in Italy for thirty days, immediately coming back from that. I started working in my attic, which is the worst time of year to be changing out old insulation and putting in new. But I did, and I was pushing really hard up there right up until the day of the the event. And I thought, well, this is gonna suck because I didn't prepare for this. But when the day came and I I did the event, I had fun. I felt good, and I didn't think a whole lot about it until I looked at my scores and my times, you know, afterwards and realized that I just did that whole thing faster than any year prior, like, by a pretty good margin. And I was a minute shy of placing first in my age group, which if I'd had any clue, I would've pressed. I mean, I really would've tried because if first had been in my reach, I would've went for it. So I was shocked. I didn't know why. I didn't know what I could attribute that to. The carol bike was not really in the back of my mind at that point because I didn't think the carol bike was doing anything. And then later, I was training for Mount Kilimanjaro, and which is an event I didn't didn't get to do because of the CrowdStrike thing. Yep. But I did a lot of training for that, and I had to jump into the middle of the training program again because I was in Italy. I was working in the attic. I wasn't doing the training at the beginning of the training program. So I didn't gradually build up from, you know, thirty minutes of running to a mile of running to three miles of running. I jumped into our training program right when we did our first six miler. So I went out and did my first six mile run. And, again, looking at my results of that, six miles untrained this year was faster than my six miles at the end of the training season last year, fully trained. And I'm like, wait. What? What? And then I at that point, I realized this, it's gotta be the carol bike because that's the only real training, if you wanna call it that, that I've been doing. And just shocked at how much that's improved my whole cardiovascular system. So I'm sold. I don't mind doing little commercials like that for Caroll bike because I'm impressed. Yeah. And it's not often I'm impressed with stuff like that. I know it sounds like an a commercial, but apologies. I it's a part of your approach, so I'm curious about these things. And I have no affiliation to Caroll bike, so I just wanna know more. But, so what? It's just the standard, like, stationary bike, but then it's you you program it with I mean, I get are you wearing a heart rate monitor? Is it it's Yes. And then it's Heart rate heart rate strap, and then it's got a, well, it's like a tablet that's attached to the front of it. You could use it for Peloton, I think, if you wanted to. There's lots of there's fat burner things that you can do, but I've been using the, two twenty second all out sprints. That's that's their hardest, you know, the beyond their intermediate, training program. And that's the one I've been using and seeing great results with. And then so the CARO bike so you'll program it to to a certain time, a certain heart rate zone. How how honey? Yeah. There's there's no no there's no programming. I just choose this fixed two twenty second all out sprints. And so you gotta you get in, you start pedaling for, I think, maybe it's two minutes to begin with. And it's, there's like a breath pacer that you see on the screen. So they're they're showing you your your heart rate. They're showing you your cadence, and then they're also showing you your, because it would be your power output. And so you're supposed to be keeping your power output, like, under 20 watts, and, you're just following this breath pacer. So you're having you breathe in and then breathe out. And then right about the time the clock counts down to, like, three seconds, then the screen turns red, and you're, like, imagining the tiger that's chasing you. And now you just start put, like, as fast as you can, and you've got twenty seconds to do that for, which I I mean, twenty seconds doesn't sound like long until you're doing that all out. Yeah. And by fifteen seconds, you're like, is this ever gonna end? I'm dying here. And so and but it's and it gets progressively harder and harder and harder until the very end. You're just you could barely move these pedals. And then you've got another two minutes of a breath pacer and bring your heart rate back down before the next one. So twenty seconds all out, and then you said two minutes of Two minutes in in between of of, like, just recovery and rest. And then how many cycles? How many cycles of that? Two. Oh, just two. So it's, it's a five minute workout. It works out to be 10. So there's two in the beginning, two in the middle, and two in the end cool down. Two, four, six. And then okay. Well, it's it's less than ten minutes. Let's put it that way. It's more than five. But short short and intense. I mean, that's that's the thing. It's not an hour of, you know, ass kicking, Alright. So how do you how do you set up your workouts for the week? I mean, it sounds like you're doing a variety of, you know, the yoga and the yard work and the carol bike and the p 90 x. I mean, do you have a set schedule? We were like, on this day, I'm gonna do it. Like, how do you make those decisions? And and then also, do you pay any attention to heart rate variability, resting heart rate, and guiding your training? So I should. I should, but, honestly, I I haven't been. And I think that's probably a flaw because I'm not making use of that data. I mean, so if you don't subjectively feel bad and you're, you know so I I think it would be bad if you're, like, mentally ground down and then you force your yourself through a workout. Probably if you're mentally ground down, probably the metrics of stress are gonna be really bad. So I think pushing through that would be bad, but if you feel okay and But what I find really weird is that when I'm tired and I have a run that's scheduled for that day according to the training program, I'm thinking, the last thing I wanna do is go for a run right now. That's usually the best runs I have. I I don't I can't explain it. There's times when I feel great, and I think I'm gonna go out and crush that run, and I suck. So the whole mental mindset of, like, how do I feel that day is completely reversed for me. I don't know if it's that way with everybody else. So that's why I've learned not to pay attention to how do I feel that day because Yeah. That usually is it it lies to me. Yeah. And the proof is in the pudding because like you said, your you know, what was it? The your, time this year for the what was it? The mile time or the half marathon time was better this year and you weren't even tracking Six mile run. Yeah. Six yeah. So, I mean, if it was something where you're grinding through it and grinding the gears, I'd imagine you'd see that it's perpetually getting worse over time, but that's the overtraining effect. But you don't see that. So Right. You've got probably have long, not, athlete athlete genetics. I mean, you know Well, you know, it's funny you say that because my grandfather, my my dad's father, used to be an incredibly athletic guy from what I've heard. When I when I knew him, he was just this really hunched over old man with these big pop bottle of glasses and smoking a pipe and never got out of his chair. So that's the grandfather I knew. But back in his heyday, he had trophies for softball. He had trophies for bowling. He was good at anything that he tried. He used to go into bars, and he would bet people that he could take a broomstick and hold it in both hands and jump through it, and then jump through it back the opposite way without letting go. He could do it. He'd bet people that he could go down with one arm, like, do a one arm push up to the floor and pick up a matchstick with his lips, and then come back up again. Right? And so that's he was a heavy, heavy drinker. So he would make these bets for people to buy him booze, and he would always win. It's almost like the the superpower. It's like Unbreakable, you know, wasn't he doing some of that? Did you see that movie unbreakable? Yeah. I did. Yeah. I think that he was. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And the funny thing though about all that is my grandfather being a a mean drunk was, I guess, he was rotten to my dad when it came to, like, throwing a ball around because he wouldn't just underhand soft pitch a ball to my dad when he was little. He would fast ball and beam my dad, like, hit my dad with the ball. And so my dad, like, wanted nothing to do with sports at all, just completely opposed to them. So when I grew up, my dad wasn't into sports. He didn't want us to have anything to do with sports. He didn't teach us to do anything with sports. So, I mean, I never learned how to play baseball, basketball, barely could play catch. I started throwing around football with friends at recess, and so that's where I got, you know, started doing with both arms. You know, I got pretty good throwing it with either hand. So first, we threw like we threw like girls doing it with their opposite hand, which I shouldn't say because there's a lot of girls that can throw a football way better than me right now. But back then, that was the term. Right? You're throwing like a girl. Yeah. But pretty soon after practicing that enough, I got just as good with either hand. So, yeah. I always wanted to get into sports, but my parents wouldn't let me. I even wanted to do track because I had friends that were in track in high school. But my parents said, no. If you've got time for an extracurricular activity like that, then you have time to get a job to save money for college. So wasn't able to. Yeah. I mean, so the the one sport I think that you didn't mention, I think, health and fitness, I see that as a sport or it's sports athletic activity. Right? So, I mean, you could make the and I'm a big sports fan, baseball, basketball, MMA. I appreciate all of it. Right? So, you could make the argument that the most important sport is taking care of your health and your fitness and being active. But so that brings up the question, like, do you have any, ideas or plans for competing in masters competitions, whether it's half marathons or squat, bench press, deadlift? I mean No. No. No. Because I'm not I'm not good at any of those. I I disagree. I think I think, well, granted, I mean, you're not specifically training. Right? You're training more of the general fitness circuit training kind of with the p 90 x is more circuit training. Right? The whole time you're moving and yeah. Yeah. There's weight bearing days, and then the cardio days would be, like, extreme yoga, plot got Pilates, like, there's Kempo x. So it's like Kempo karate. There's plyometrics or jump training. I mean, they've got some really great cross training, so you're always working different muscle groups. I I always tell people that have tried it. They say, oh, yeah. I tried that. I couldn't do that. That was way too extreme. I always tell them, look, if you can get past the first two weeks of that, yeah, you're gonna be sore everywhere cause you're gonna feel muscles you never knew you had. But after those first two weeks are over, your body starts to acclimate to it and it gets easier. It gets better. Yeah. And then you start seeing the gains, but it's hard to stick through that first two weeks. And I get why people drop out. But So the p 90 x is is videotapes? I mean, you're just put that or no. I don't know. Videotapes is let me I mean, it's like we're you know? There are no videotapes anymore. DVDs. DVDs. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So you asked me how do I know which workout to do on which days? Yep. The cool thing is, you know, P90X came with a 14 plan. So there is a different DVD for each day of fourteen days. So and that repeats. So you never really get tired of doing the same thing over and over again, and your muscles don't. You know, you you get the you keep the muscle confusion going because you're always doing something different. And so I I have that schedule, and I being the coder that I am, I have this big Excel I can't even call it a spreadsheet. It's an it's a full blown application that I wrote in Excel that will give me my schedule for the day, like, the workout that I'm doing for the day. And I have all the DVDs burned onto the hard drive of this particular laptop. And I've got it all backed up somewhere too in case the laptop crashes. But, so the schedule, I I get up in the morning, I go down to the basement, the laptop's already open, and on the screen, it shows me the workout that I'm scheduled to do for that day. So I don't even have to think about which one I'm gonna do. It's just the next one that's on the list. And then I, you know, push the button and it'll play on my TV that that workout for me, which I don't always need to play because I pretty much have it memorized now. So, but there are things that, you know, there might be times, like, there's slow slow motion three in one push ups where you'll do, you know, for the count of four, you'll be pushing up, and then the count of four, you'll be pushing down. And you'll do that for a certain number of them. You'll do them wide to start with, then you'll do them narrow, and then you'll do them military style. And that I like to do with the video because it helps pace me so I don't have to try to figure out how fast or how slow I need to go. I can just go with the the group and the DVD. So So that's every day. It's a fourteen day cycle, basically. There there are no rest days in p 90 x? I mean, it There there are. Yeah. It's like Sundays are usually on the schedule as a rest day. But their rest days are they're not really rest. They're more of a recovery day. So there would be a thing like yoga, a certain type like a yoga would be that core synergistics, I think, is one of the recovery days. So you're still actively doing stuff, but it's very low impact and slow motion stuff. But then you add in the carol bike and, you know, yard work. So how do you is it it's just whenever you feel like, how do you how do you integrate the other activities too into the into the approach where it's just, I like doing it. I'm gonna do it today or I feel great today. I'm gonna or I don't feel great. You know? How how do you integrate? There's there's days when I know that I've got hard yard work coming up that I'll I'll skip the workout. But then there's other days where I'm too bullheaded and I think I can do both. You know, I'll do the workout first and then I'll push through the day of of doing the yard work. And by the end of the day, I'm I'm wiped, totally wiped, which feels great. And I sleep pretty good after that, as long as I don't up to a point. I mean, there's still some of those days when I was doing the, the workouts and then going up in the attic and working on that. Or again, you know, going out and trimming the bushes and, you know, cutting the grass. There are times when I would get in bed, and then I couldn't sleep because my mind is still racing. I'm still, like, super tense. You know? So there is that happy sweet spot there. I don't I'm not always good at finding it because I just I'm one of those hard chargers, I guess. I just push too much. Yeah. So what time of the day? Is it first thing in the morning? Is it early afternoon? When when is the best time for you? So when I was working I am retired now as of last September, so it's almost a year now. When I was working, it was super easy to know when to do it because I only had a certain number of minutes that were spare or available during the day. So I had to get it in in the morning first thing. Or, I might be able to go do it in exercise snacks. So I'll I'd start it first thing in the morning. I'd get maybe partway through, come take a conference call. As soon as the conference call ended, run back downstairs, do a few more things, come back, do another call or, you know, do some, some work. And I was just finishing off the rest of it in pieces and piecemeal throughout the rest of the day. Now that I've been retired, I don't have that, that discipline, that forced discipline. So I'm I'm finding it really difficult to stick to the same routines because now I can do something else. I can go look at personal email. I can do an interview with somebody. You know, I can go run and do a blood test. So, you know, now I don't have to like, fasting blood tests, I can I can do it 11:00 if I want to? I don't have to do it super early in the morning. So that tends to mess up my schedule a little bit just because I can. So it's it sounds like it's more a matter of getting in the work, not necessarily what time of day. It's just you're trying to get it in. But now granted with the discipline versus, you know, when you're not retired, but yeah. But you still try to get it in every day and follow the the itinerary. It's not a set time. Right. Yeah. Interesting. So that that so what about sleep timing it? Are you aiming for the same time at time and day, or is that just, you know I'm I'm laughing because I'm been kicking my own butt lately because my sleep timing has been terrible. Because I keep thinking, I've been working harder and more now than when I did when I had a job, which seems bizarre to say. But it's because of these, you know, interviews and the preparations and, you know, doing different affiliate type deals, planning trips. I've been going to lots of conferences. I've got lots more testing planned. In fact, coming up here, like, the September 3. I I don't know when this is gonna air, but I'm gonna be going out to LA. So I'm going for the RadFest conference. I'm excited for that. When I go, I'm going to, get a full body scan or full body MRI. I'm going to Joy Kong's clinic for stem cell treatment. And, I'm scheduled to meet Brian, which will be interesting. Nice. We're gonna record it. I'm sure he's gonna make a video. Yeah. I I don't I don't know how that's really gonna go. I've got somebody coming with me that I'm gonna have, you know, using my camera. In fact, she's the one that set up the the meeting between Brian and I guess she works with Brian. And so I'm gonna ask her to maybe take a couple of pictures because I don't know how that's gonna go. Yeah. So are we gonna see a a YouTube channel, a Dave Pascoe YouTube channel? I don't know. To be honest with you, that sounds like way more work than I really wanna do. Mhmm. Because I keep picturing myself I'm retired now, supposedly, even though it feels like I'm transitioning into an entirely new career, which I'm not opposed to. It's just foreign to me. So that's probably why it's been a little more stressful because it's out of my wheelhouse talking. You know, most people most of my friends could care less about any biohacking stuff, so I never ever really get to speak to them about this stuff. So it's just the fact that anyone out there is interested. The fact that you wanna record this and put it out in YouTube just still blows my mind. So I don't feel like I'm really accustomed to doing this yet. I'm I feel like I might be getting a little better with practice, but so whether I wanna do this or not and create a YouTube, it just sounds like way more work than I actually wanna do. I always saw my retirement as just sitting back and goofing off with friends and having fun with life. But now this is this is really feeling like work. Yeah. So I wouldn't want I wouldn't want it to be work for you, you know, but for me for me, it's fun. I love making videos. Well, that's awesome. Yeah. Because we get the benefit from your fun. I love that you have fun with it. For me, it would be work. So I don't wanna I don't wanna never I I don't wanna say never. Right? Maybe. We could I still think I'd have anything interesting to say. Ah, it's so I think it's a matter of so I think the yours you're I keep saying it, but you're like the, developing superhero. It's like who doesn't yet know that they're a superhero. Like, for me, you're a superhero in this space, and it doesn't have to be conversations. Like, I didn't start off, like, thinking I'm gonna be interviewing or talking to anyone on the channel. It's just me making videos in PowerPoint, you know, so which I'm always gonna do. It's just my style. But no. You made yourself a rock star in the process. So Well, I mean, I've got a long ways to go. Right? I'm I think I'm one sickness away. Like, you know, my data's bad for a month. We all are. Trust me. We all are. Yeah. Yeah. But it could be something as simple as just, you know, people wanna see more, I think, of you and and the lifestyle and, you know, I think it could be something as simple as, you know, I think you do garage workouts. Right? You do the workouts in your garage? In my basement. In your basement. Okay. So just setting up a camera. You don't even have to talk or look at the camera. People watching you work out, which maybe seems weird, but there could be a few people who would benefit from seeing I mean, you're effing 62. You don't look. You don't sound. You're like, you're living the lifestyle. I think and a lot of people could could, learn from that. I mean, your website is great. The davepasco.net is great. But, I don't know. I think I think just setting up like a camera and just you just doing your thing. And, like, sometimes maybe you'll be out of the shot. So what? But most of the time, you're in the shot, you just upload the video and and see I don't know. Just an idea. But I think a lot of people benefit from your It's funny you say that because, there's another YouTuber. You might be familiar with her, Sierra Clark. Yep. She she did a ninety day on Brian's blueprint Yep. And met and met with Brian. She and her crew were out here to visit me last weekend. And so they filmed me going throughout the day through all my routines. And, one was we just she and I did a little short just one little snippet of a p 90 x workout together, which was kind of fun. Yeah. So she where Sierra has reached out to me too. And, yeah. So we're scheduling to when she would come out here. But I'm in a little small one bedroom apartment with water stains behind my sink, and my stove burner just melted somehow. So, and it's like a little apartment. I try not to kick the walls when I'm doing, like, taekwondo kicks. So that's gonna be interesting to to, you know They'll have to do for you like they had to do for me because I'm in a little 900 square foot house, and, they had to use a a wide, wide lens to be able to film stuff. Because my my sauna, my carol bike, it's all in my laundry room. So there's really just enough room as a pathway to get between them to get to the washer and the dryer. So they had to get in there and film, like, sit on top of the washing machine to be able to film us in the sauna, you know. So I'm sure they'll have to do the same for you. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's gonna be interesting. But so, anyway, I think I think you have a lot to offer. It doesn't have to be with interviews, doesn't have to be making PowerPoint presentations or anything crazy. And if it feels like work, you shouldn't do it. But, anyway, that's just I'm not trying to get you know, I I I try not to push people, you know, you know, it's you're a grown up. You can make your own decisions and do you know what I'm saying? So Yeah. But I think it would be great if you did. And, you know, this I thought it might be fun to maybe film that, you know, doing the, you know, going to do the stem cells, like, film some little segment and put it out there. I just really haven't thought it through. Yeah. Yeah. There's a whole production value of it all too. Yeah. That see, I I have no interest in for me, the pro production value seems like work. So it's like, I don't wanna sit there editing for hours, and I don't wanna send it somewhere, and then it's back and forth. You know? I just wanna create and put it out there. So, I'm with Instagram. Right? I mean, I've been putting some things out in Instagram, but that's way more work than I really wanted it to be too. I mean, I never I never desired to be an influencer. Right? Yeah. Yeah. Like, no. But I've been getting into that. I've been sucked into more and more of that, which is another big time vampire for me because I'm the more I'm on Instagram, you know, finding and posting content and then, you know, exploring the content of other people is more time than I'm taking away from podcasts or taking away from going out and living my life and having fun. Right? Yeah. It's all part of the game. You know, you kinda have to do it to get viewers and keep people interested. And Yeah. So so, so that's another thing I think you differ from most of the people in the longevity space is you're out there living life. Like, you're not counting calories. You're not, you know, calorie restricted. You're not on an exercise prescription like me. Like, you've got it's just, you know, I it's not the f around find out. It's just, you're literally living life. Right? So travel's a big part of your approach, and then you're not stressed about You know? Say say what it It seems to be now. It it never used to be. I was I was more like because I heard you on your interview, where you were you were talking about how you're more of a like, it's a stay at home kind of guy. Yeah. I've always been that way as well. It's just that this year, way more than ever, I've been doing a ton of traveling. Like, I went to Dallas for the biohacking conference. I went to Austin for a longevity conference. You know, went to Italy for the thirty days. I was supposed to do Kilimanjaro. I'm going to be, you know, going to LA here, in another another week. And then I'm going to Nicaragua for a mission trip, you know, in November. And so I've wow. It's like way, way more traveling than I've ever been used to. So and that also tends to add to the the stress because travel is rough. It's really seems at least for me, it's pretty rough on my system. So how do you get the workouts in during you know, with the traveling? How do you work around that? It's a challenge. I well, I'll bring I'll bring my laptop with me, and that's twofold. One, because, you know, I can edit my website and keep that up to date while I'm away. But I also have the p 90 x workout videos on that. So and my and my workout schedule. So I can do a p 90 x workout in my hotel room if I need to do. Even with time change and being on a plane for six hours still doesn't matter. Yeah. Well, I it's it's not pretty. Let's put it that way. It's a grind. It's more of a grind than usual. It is. So then Yeah. So then diet two, I think you try to eat it as clean as possible, but then not counting calories. Don't have an eating window, you're eating, I guess, what's like, how do you how do you look at diet in this equation? Diet is huge in this equation. I think you started to allude to it early on that earlier that, with my true diagnostic data, the only, like, real change I made between having a 0.77, I think it was, to getting the 0.66 was finally cleaning up my diet. So I I think the diet, you know, the the exercise and the sleep are all required. I definitely had the exercise. I think I was doing okay with the sleep, but I was still doing a lot of processed foods. And, you know, at the time, my my while my parents were still alive, it was very difficult to get them to eat cleaner. Now, I was the one going and buying the food, and I was buying it with my money. So, I was sort of a bully in that respect, that I would make them eat healthier food, whether they wanted to or not. But it didn't come without a lot of pushback, because they loved their hot pockets, which I still had to buy for them. And, their craft American fake cheese slices, you know, and things of that nature that they they wanted to I was embarrassed to even put in my shopping cart for fear that somebody would see me. You know, you eat that? Which is silly because, I mean, everybody else in the grocery store is buying the same things. They could care less what I'm eating, but my cards are almost always just fruit and vegetables loaded up from the produce aisle, and then rarely anything else from the rest of the supermarket. But when I finally started doing after the parents passed away and all the work that I did on this house was finished, because that took a couple of years. Then I was finally able to start just making all of my own meals like I'd always wanted to do, rather than eating a pizza here or some Taco Bell there, you know, in between eating clean. Now, I was eating a 100% clean. And that seemed to make all the difference in my true diagnostic pace of aging. So even even on what you consider, you know, less clean versus clean diet, at your worst, it's point eight two. It's not 1.1. It's not one point zero. So the the true diagnostic, the or not true diet, the median pace, it it's, it's an epigenetic prediction based on 19 biomarkers. So one of those biomarkers is VO two max. So basically, you know, they they had a cohort of people. They had data for those 19 biomarkers, VO two max, some blood testing stuff, waist to hip ratio, a whole bunch of other stuff. And then it's the epigenetic prediction of the people that had the most youthful clinical biomarkers versus the people who had, you know, intermediate and the worst. So considering that exercise is a big foundation of your approach, I'd bet that, you know, VO two max your VO two max being relatively high probably skews you closer towards that point six six. And then but and probably your, you know, you know, your fitness level is still probably better than people of my age or even younger. Like, you train way more than most people. So, Which which I don't see because when I'm running, I've got old way older people just passing me all the time. I'm one of those slow AF runners. You know? I mean, I have I'm mostly in zone two. I I saw a trainer when I went to do one of my DXA scans and had my VO two max checked. The trainer said, you know what? You've got this whole another top range Yep. That you've never explored. And I and I had to agree because I don't at that time, that was prior to Caroll bike. I I'd not done a whole lot of zone five training. It was mostly always zone two and three and some four. So Yep. I need to really focus on doing that more because I think I could pick up my speed a whole lot more, and I'm starting to see that slowly. I don't know that it's a running speed thing. So and even I think the v o two max test where you're you know, you have to physically breathe in the device, and it's you're running up, you know, so it's a graded test. You're going up the hill, you know, at at a faster and faster pace every couple minutes. I don't know that that may be granted it's the gold standard. But all out sprints, I can imagine that your lung capacity and your ability to process oxygen and your quote unquote v o two max, you don't have this external stimulus applied to your face. You know, it's kinda like white coat hypertension where people's blood pressure gets raised because they see the doctor in the white coat. There may be something to, you know, would your VO two max be as high if you're not running it up a hill, which I don't know, most people really aren't training hills, versus the carol bike is kicking your ass for ten minutes. That's an all that's gotta be a VO two max booster, which At least for forty seconds. But for ten minutes, cumulatively Yeah. You know, it's still I mean, granted, it's it's up and down. But compared to someone doing, you know, whether it's slow runs or just less less exercise and they're less fit, their VO two max won't be as high. Their Dunedin pace will be a little bit worse. So I think that's the underlying thing, you know, with seems seems very, very great score point six, whatever. Brian's point six in that ballpark. I think that's an underlying factor is having you relatively high. Because your worst data is pretty much my average data for Dunedin PACE. And yet all and all of my other biomarkers except but the I I'm not I'm not trying to optimize VO two max at least right now. Prop for some of the reason you mentioned with, you know, when you're you have that nine to five and it's hard to train around that, I'm kinda stuck in that for now. So I'm limited on the exercise. But, but, yeah, I think that's the underlying thing for Dunedin Paste, which is the VO two max. But it's just funny how at your worst diet, you've got data that's ten year someone that's ten years younger chronologically, and that's really trying to push it even as young as he can, and you're already it's like nothing for you. It's easy. So Well, you're gonna get there. I have I trust in that because you're gonna find it. Yeah. I totally believe in that. Yeah. It it just may take having to train more and having the time and the freedom to do that. But, so my VO two max go from 32 to 42 just to just through run training, just getting out there and and pushing at it. So you could you're gonna be great. You're gonna be way better than me. I so I don't doubt that at all. So I've I I've come from, like, training like a gorilla and actually cutting down on the workouts because of the HRV and and wrestling heart rate data. But it just comes down to the, like, the other responsibilities of life. And I only have, like, an exercise cost where if I go above that, I don't recover as well. So, and then if I don't recover as well, then my actual ninety minute workout start to suffer, and I don't wanna that's like the the core of what's keeping me fit and functional. So, but at some point, I expect to have more of that, you know, time to spend on exercise cost, and hopefully sooner than later in the next year or so. It's really supercharge it and kick it up and try to get to where you guys are with the point six six. I know you wanna keep getting more and more lean. Right? You wanna you wanna lose more weight or you're good with your weight now? So I had it down to some five seven, a hundred and forty one pounds. Last two days, it's been on the even one thirty nine. So that's going in the wrong direction. And I say that only because the HRV and resting heart rate for the longest time, they've been improving with getting leaner without changing workouts and frequency intensity duration. But then once I got below one forty, now they weren't they were they it's like they they hit a plateau and now that stress of too many calories was gone, but now too few calories might be a stressor. So I stopped and then, you know, for like the last three or four blood tests, I basically, keep it, you know, I'm trying to body weight maintenance, until and then I also started to see some dip in the workout workout performance. So, you know, everything I have is structured sets, reps, movements. So I kinda have that p 90 x fourteen day workout and then ninety minute workout every workout. So I know how many pull ups I should be doing or I or I do every workout. There is no change it up for me. I I it just doesn't work. So I for the longest time, 12 to 13 pull ups, high quality pull ups above the bar pronated. And then two months ago, it was 10. And then I was like, wait. What's going on here? Am I just being lazy? Am I getting bored? Is this aging? If you're losing weight, you're probably losing muscle. Right? Because you're already That that's that could be true. But, during the 15 to 20 pound weight loss, there was no, still 12 to 13 pull ups. So and I've been body weight stable this whole year. So that couldn't be a variable. Right? So is it low NAD? So I increased nicotinic acid. Anyway, I've gotten that back, but some of that equation may have been I was getting too lean and I was starting to lose a little bit of muscle. So, yeah, I've gotta stay where I am now before I try to push it. I don't wanna get into the anorexic, you know, and then it's like, function isn't good and fray. I don't want any of that. I wanna be as lean and fit and functional as I possibly can. You know? So Yeah. I'm I'm down another 10 pounds from what I was, like, three weeks ago, which is way, way, way, way the wrong direction for me. And according to bat my bathroom scale, that was seven pounds of muscle that I lost. And I can see it. I can see it in my workouts because I I'm I'm not able to push the weights that I was doing just a month ago. Unintentional? Is that Unintentional is because I was just pushing so hard through, like, doing all these schedules for these trips. Like, for this whole LA trip, being able to schedule all those things at the same time was was pretty stressful for me. I don't have people to do stuff like that for me. Yeah, I have some some folks do. I know you and I don't. But and and getting ready for Sierra coming out and, just getting all the data to you and just everything was weighing on me and I wasn't settling down. And then I would try to sleep and I'm I'm still all tense. That could lead me to another story that I don't even know if I wanna tell. But, Yeah. Why not? I'll tell it. It's it's embarrassing. I, I've been having this, like, bouts of diarrhea for, like, a couple of weeks and completely puzzled at what it was. At first, it happened right around when I started eating watermelon every day. So I thought maybe maybe I got a a tainted watermelon. So threw the watermelon away, went went a few more days, still had it. That's weird. Alright. What else could it be? What am I eating? Well, my diet hasn't changed any that I know of. Gosh. You know, maybe it's my water filters. You know, maybe I need to change out my water filters. So so the AquaTru and the refrigerator water filter, I swapped those out. It wasn't time. It was way too early, but I I did it anyway just to be sure. No. So more days went by. Still still nothing. But then, you know, a couple days, I'd be fine. And then right back into it again. So what the heck is causing this? Well, then I thought, alright. I do sprouts. Maybe potentially something. I got, like, an E. Coli or, you know, some kind of salmonella, you know, in the sprouts. I'm always very, very careful with my sprouting, but, so I threw my sprouts away, bleached everything down again, ran them through the dishwasher, started all over again. No. Still had the same problem. Then I started, like it started to dawn on me, like, okay. So there is a pattern to this. Weekends, I don't seem to have the issue, but weekdays, I do. What if I did change my supplements a little recently because Seem had done a review of my supplements. Right? And, he recommended some better timing, which I totally agreed with. And then, due to some studies, there, I was not taking the recommended study dose of glucosamine. So I doubled my dose of that. Right? And then I, my taurine, I I think I I'm trying to remember if that was I was not taking the right amount or I just didn't have the right amount on my website. But either way, I still increased that to, more optimal according to the study data of what you should take. Not thinking that, you know, my bowel tolerance may not be able to handle that along with everything else that I'm taking. But more and more days went by of me trying to figure out what's causing this. So there's some days where I just take the morning supplements and not the evening, and I'd be fine. And then I'd swap that and try taking the evening supplements, not the morning. Nope. It's the evening supplements. So and then, you know, you've got so many supplements you're taking. You can't just figure out which ones which can't pick it out. Right? Yeah. So when I package up all my supplements, I do it for a month. So I've got four weeks of things packed up. And now I'm three weeks into this new iteration with seems recommendations. And I I think this I'm not I can't take this last week of supplements because I know it's gonna give me diarrhea. I had to throw it all away and start over again. So that was a huge waste of money. But at least I figured out what it was, and I was able to, you know, knock my doses back down again. Still higher than what I was taking, but not like doubling up on them. And, that made a huge difference. That helped a lot. So I think that had a lot to do with, the weight loss too in addition to the stress that I was putting myself under. And it was wrecking my sleep because it would affect me mostly when I was trying to sleep and then having to just get up and run for the bathroom. So all of it together was was terrible. And I see that I it impacted me on my pace of aging, my true diagnostic data. So wait. Problem solved now where the diarrhea is still it should be Problem solved. Yeah. So, that's a great story because I think, you know, figuring out issues and then if I don't think it's intuitive for most people. Like, it's just they go to the doctor, the doctor put them on antibiotics maybe, and then, you know, you haven't really fixed the problem. And it was just a supplement in this case. Right? So, yeah. Fantastic. Alright. So I've made so many dumb mistakes with supplements through the years. What other oh, gosh. Wait. So that brings me to also besides that, the dumb dumb mistakes with supplements. But so this was a recent weak spot, a recent weak spot story. Right? So do you have weak spots that you're trying to correct? Whether it's, like, flexibility, whether it's, I don't know, a herniated disc. Like, do you have any Oh, yeah. So on my birthday in 2021, I believe it was, I, got a concussion at a roller coaster park. So as a celebration of my youthfulness, I used to go to a roller coaster park every year on my birthday. I I mean, it wasn't part of, like, any longevity plan. It was just me celebrating how young I still feel. And my plan was to do that until the day I dropped. Right? But this particular year so I used to come home every year after doing the roller coasters, and my head would just hurt. And I would tell my mom, you know, I don't think this is really healthy for me. If my head hurts after doing this, because probably all that motion is probably not good for my brain. But it was just a passing thought. It wasn't really a serious belief until the concussion. So I'm on the very last ride of the day. It's a a Cedar Point in Sandusky, Ohio, and I'm on the Raptor, my favorite ride there. And something about that ride that day, it came to really an abrupt stop, and it felt like my brain wanted to keep going even though the Skovole stopped it. My entire field of vision went down to this tiny little dot, And then came sucking back, and I was just, like, stunned. And the ride's over, and my friends are like, hey. What are you doing? Come on. We gotta get off the ride. And I was just I just I wasn't there. And that scared me. And my headache didn't just last for a couple of hours. It lasted for, well, probably like a week and a half. So I went to see the doctor and got diagnosed with a concussion. And, and my balance, which used to be great because I would do a lot of one one legged stands and things in yoga. Now my balance was terrible. I thought, oh, this is not good because this really affected me. So I started doing the doctor Google and looking up things like, what what's the protocol for brain healing? And found that hyperbaric oxygen treatment is, a big treatment for boxers, football players, anybody dealing with a TBI or a concussion. So I didn't really wanna spend that kind of money, but I found a clinic close by. I'd drive about an hour to get there and started doing sessions. And then I started on some peptides like cerebalicin, you know, for the BDNF. Just anything I could find that would be a treatment for the for the brain. And I I and now I do a lot of, I guess, you would say, balance board type of things, trying to get my balance back. I I posted a thing few things on YouTube where I'm playing around with a Slack line in my backyard. Yeah. I saw that. Yeah. I'm I'm bad at it, and I don't mind looking like a complete idiot, you know, in front of people. But it's something that if I keep doing, I know I'm gonna get better at. And just in the I've only done it, like, five times, and then I haven't done it again since. But each time I did it, I filmed it and put it out on YouTube or not YouTube, on Instagram, I meant to say. Yeah. I know if I stick with it, I'll I'll get a lot better with it because I saw a lot of improvement just in those two little or five little times. And now I bought a board for indoors that's got a slack line built into it. It's called a a gibbs a Gibbons board. So now in the wintertime, I can do the slack line stuff indoors without having to go out in the backyard in the snow. So I am working a lot on my balance just to try to bring that back to what it used to be. I'm getting there. So having seen you on that balance, like, in you're trying to balance, it was like, it looks like a rubber band, a giant rubber band. I wouldn't say that's someone that's had a head injury and his balance is or, you know, your balance is terrible. I didn't even consider, you know, the decades earlier head injury. It it just looks like, you know That wasn't even decades. That was twenty twenty ones. We're talking, what, four years ago. Oh, the roller coaster. Oh, that was just a few years ago. Alright. But I didn't get that sense that you had some kind of head injury, and then your balance was terrible. You just look like a regular person on a on a trying to balance. It didn't look it it which should be good news. Right? So Yeah. Yeah. No. I I feel I feel good about it. I just I suck like a normal person now instead of suck like sucking like a injured person. So do you think the HBOT helped in that case, in the peptides too? I I like to think it did. I don't have any way of measuring that. But now I'm gonna be doing another series of HBOT in conjunction with the the stem cells that I'm gonna be getting. So I've got 10 of those lined up, and I may do another another 10 after that. So where are the stem cells injected? It's just in the blood, and then the they can circulate? So in this case, I'm doing, it's a therapeutic dose because I so another weak spot is I'd like to blame it on p ninety x, but I have a a rotator cuff impingement. And I gotta show my elbows. I'm actually I gave plasma today, so that's why I'm taped up on both arms. This elbow doesn't straighten out. There was a time when back in the days of Facebook where there was a a thing that was going around where you would do 22 push ups for twenty two days to bring awareness to suicide for veterans. And I I have some of those videos are still out on Venmo, and I think I they might even I think they're available on my website, really. And not intentionally, but they're still there. They're still publicly accessible. I know some people have watched them. But I would do a different set of push ups each day for those twenty two days, getting progressively harder and crazier each time. And I would practice the more advanced ones while I was still filming the the more basic ones. And then the practice for one that involved a, I guess, a stability ball. There's one where you would you would do the push up. You you start off with the stability ball out to extension. You'd come down. You push off and bounce up with the stability ball off the ground, and then catch yourself again before you before you smash your face in the ground. And in doing that, I ended up, like, airing something in this elbow. And I don't know if you can see in the video. I can straighten this one out perfectly. This one cannot. It still got a nice bend to it. It won't get healed awkwardly. But, like, strengthen that arm? I mean, it not dramatically worse. It's just you can't you can't straighten your arm? Well, since then, I've gotten the strength back because this this is my I'm left handed. So that's my more dominant arm. The strength has come back, but I'm still limited in in motion with that. So, I got the elbow impingement. The elbow, we have what do you call it? The shortening, the shoulder impingement. One of my knees is starting to feel a little funky. So, anyway, I'm getting doses in all of those and systemic as well. So, also, our weight, so then supplements are bad. I hope that I hope that works out. I hope the sense that. Yeah. I know what it feels like to have the shoulder impingement, like, you know, from doing overhead presses. It it's happened to everyone, I'm sure, in time, and they are misery. Like like, it feels almost like granted, I've never had a dislocated shoulder, but it it's I I get you. I get you on that one. It's incompatible. Then I had got it fixed, and I messed it up again immediately because there's a little thing called, club exosomes. Doctor Sandra Kaufman and, Stephen McCain run it. So, I went out to Vegas. I got the exosome treatment, and I felt amazing. For the first time ever that night, I was able to sleep on this shoulder and not feel any pain. And so, I'm like, I am cured. Well, you know, idiot. It takes many weeks to really heal from something like that. But I was starting to feel my oats and thinking like I was Superman. When I got home, I have a pair of, Olympic, like, gymnastic rings hanging from the tree in the backyard that I always loved playing on. So I got right back onto those. I was doing my flips and things, and my chin ups, and reverse chin ups and all that. And I felt it. I ended up messing it right back up again. So now I know when I get these stem cells to go easy, not try to be Superman, do the HBOT, do the other peptides that are gonna come along with the treatment, and there's ozone that's gonna go come along with, the therapy. Do all the things, take the time, heal, go through the rehab routines, all of that. And then once, like, months from now when I'm healed, maybe I can start playing with that stuff again. So, wait. So, the exosomes are from you? They're they're taking plasma. They're Nope. Yeah. They're they're, exogenous exosomes. But where they'd have to come from somewhere, from someone. The central derived. Interesting. The same as the stem cells. So technically, you could take exosomes from, like, profect you can isolate them from blood or exosome circulate in blood. So just if you get them from plasma, you know, just find a high Just from core blood? From cord yeah. From cord blood from, you know, from the newborn. But, I'd imagine if you got, you know, got it from an elite athlete or more elite, I guess, or someone who, is 20 years old, exosomes from a 20 year old. Yeah. Its rejuvenation capacity may be better. Exosomal ability to rejuvenate may be better. You know? Well, I mean, supposedly, the rejuvenation capacity of a newborn is at at peak. That's true. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And the stem cells too, it's from it's placenta derived or Yeah. Yeah. Because I'm at an I'm at an age now. We're trying to get it out of my own fat or bone marrow. It's not gonna be that beneficial. If I if I would've done that, I should have banked that, you know, decades ago, but they didn't have it decades ago for me. So it wasn't really an opportunity. So how do you balance a potential overuse injury versus trying to repair damage that may be from overuse? Right? What if what if the exosomes and everything else can't repair and it's just a matter of volume, training volume? Considered? That's it's a good question. I don't know. Yeah. I'm not gonna do any stupid things again. I mean, like, where I I know there's potential for injury. I'm but I also don't wanna I don't wanna stop what I'm doing because of my age. Right? I know you've said it many times. I've said it to being good for your age. Those are fighting words for me. Those that's that's that's dirty words. Yeah. I don't wanna be good for my age. I wanna be good for any age. Right. Yeah. No. I get you there. But it you know, it's like the car can only you know, you can fix fix the car as much as you want, but the fact is if the car is still traveling a million miles a day, maybe if the car went 500 I don't know. Some some prescribed dose where you're still getting the benefit of elite fitness, but, you know, you're now now you're it's less, you know, wear and tear on the joints. I don't know that it can be I don't know that it can be repaired with exosomes and stem cells. I hope that it can. I don't either. I don't either. I'm willing to give it a try. It was, it was quite the the shell out of of cash that I didn't wanna part with. But it's an experiment. It's gonna be an expensive experiment. I'm willing to see what happens with it. Just from the the benefit that I got just from the the exosomes, that was so profound to me that I'm thinking that this should be a good thing. And in speaking with them, the consult prior to, I guess there are people that don't really respond well and others are they like to refer to as super responders. And because of the experience that I had with the exosomes of feeling that relief immediately, they think I might be a super one of the super responders. So, we'll see. Could it be a dose too where you'd need to get it not just once every however couple months, but maybe once a day, once a week? Like, you gotta get the dose. Yeah. Potentially for, like, a therapeutic dose for a really bad injury, it, like, every three months, they recommend a a redo. So, don't know whether I'll need a another dose three months from now or not. Kinda hoping time. Or sooner. I mean, maybe that you got immediate relief tells me that, you know, it's just a dosing. It's just, the way they explained it, they say that the, the exosomes are very short lasting. Yep. The stem cells will keep going for a good three months. And so that's why they give they they say a three month cycle because really just about the time that the stem cells are no longer giving you benefit would be that three month portion where you could get another hit and stay consistent. Nice. Alright. So HBOT, this is this is where it comes to the, you know, Dave Pascoe is underrated. HBOT, stem cells, exosomes, like, most people are not doing this. Plasma plasma donations. Most people aren't doing that either. So but plasma donations, that's to what? To dump iron, to lower ferritin, is or it's that's just a no. Getting rid of, you know, degradated proteins. You You know, I look at it like, changing the oil in your car. Right? You know, as you're as you go on, you could not change the oil in your car ever if you don't want to, but you're gonna keep accumulating all that, you know, waste and the broken down engine components that are wearing down the gunk that builds up. I look at our our plasma the same way. I think that's one of the benefits of getting plasmapheresis, is and I know people pay $10 to go get their plasma removed and replaced with albumin because you're dumping all of those old proteins that your body's no longer clearing. So you're getting rid of all that gunk and you're now starting with a fresh clean slate. And then if you did young blood on top of that, you might even be getting some beneficial proteins from younger people, which is yet another level up. But I can't afford young blood. I'm not probably never going to be able to afford that. Or young plasma. I don't know why they call it young blood. It sounds more interesting that way, I guess. So, instead of spending $10 on plasmapheresis, I just go make regular plasma donations. And it's sort of the same thing. Based on the the donation size that they take from each time, it works out to replacing my entire plasma blood volume every four and a half to five donations. Wow. So but then the I think the weakness potential weakness there is you would assume that your body would so you're dumping base right. I I get it makes sense where there there could be a buildup of stuff and that buildup of of stuff is bad stemically because you can't get rid of stuff you should be getting rid of. Alright. So you dump it, and then the idea is your body should be making new fresh proteins and metabolites and all the things. Right? But what if that's less and less the case with age? Right? Then, it's like it you can't win either way in that case. So I look at it the other way. You know? It's for me, it's it's, I get the plasma freezes. I get the data. I I've seen all that data, you know, but it's I'm still not sold. Like, I don't wanna I don't wanna be tied to a young animal and our blood connect you know, all the all the crazy stuff with that. But, you know, see, my approach is, how can I optimize the system so that the blood is young so I don't have to dump it and I don't have to worry about a blood transfusion? What is that recipe? Right? So Yeah. Yeah. So I look at it like that. I know they only allow you to give whole blood every sixty days or every fifty six days, and that's only because it takes that long to build up red cells. You could technically donate even more, but they like to be on the extreme safe side and make it fifty six days. They do the same thing with, the plasma because you can donate plasma twice a week because your body just regenerates it that quickly. Interesting. So that's that's why I'm not really concerned about, you know, those those proteins. Do you see a difference in biomarkers or subjective field when you donate plasma? No change. No. And I I've tried because I really, really thought, hey. Maybe this will be maybe this will give me the next, you know, bump up in a, pace of aging score, but no. HBOT plasma, you know, nothing. No change. Alright. So plasma donation, exosomes, HBOT, stem cells. There's there's other stuff on those. You've got a smart house. What what what, what technology defines your house as a smart house? Well, I have a mix of technologies because everything is from a different company. So all of my blinds are, leveler blinds. They're all they're all powered. So they open and close and adjust their, you know, their pivot at different times of the day depending on the sun. And, all of my lighting, I I when I remodeled the house, I put recessed lights in all the rooms. And so every bulb is a fill Phillips hue bulb. It's capable of any color or any intensity, and each one is Bluetooth enabled. And they're all controlled via a, Samsung smart oh, wait. Actually, that one's controlled by a Phillips Hue hub. But I also have a Samsung SmartThings hub that integrates with the level or it integrates with the Phillips. It integrates with, all of my light my light switches are Levitron, ZigBee and Z Wave controlled switches. So those all also are controlled by the SmartThings Hub. So I can program everything via that one that one hub. And in each room, I have a, it's a Amazon echo dot. I don't wanna refer to her by her name. Otherwise, I will invoke her right now, and I won't be able to shut her up. But there's one of those in every room. And, gosh. What else? Oh, even my faucets, they're touch faucets, but they're also network enabled. So, like, I can take my AquaTru picture and put it in the sink, and I can say, I'm gonna call her Amelia right now. I will say, Amelia, please tell Delta to fill my picture, and I can walk away. And it'll fill the picture to the right amount without overflowing and wasting any water, and come back and take it and put it back into the thing. I mean, just silly little gimmicks like that. Right? But it's when you buy things now that are new, they all come with this enablement. So even all of my TVs are smart TVs. So they're I have them all set right now with a I have one TV in every room of the house. They all come on and go and turn off automatically, so I don't have to deal with them. And they're all programmed to the same thing. So I have a a Google what is it? The Google Chrome device that powers all of them. So when I'm watching one of your videos, if I'm not glued to it right on my phone, it's playing in all the TVs. So as I'm walking through the house doing my housework, I can see you from just follow from room room, even down in the basement, into the laundry room, my workout area, you know, the whole nine yards. Or if I'm listening to podcasts, I'll have them, you know, chrome chromecast to the TVs that way, so it's in every room. High-tech house. Alright. Wait. So the lights the lights got me. So I guess you vary the what is he? Minimize blue light at a certain time? Yeah. Yeah. In the evening, as the sun begins to set, they're program, and the sun, of course, setting is variable, but part of the SmartThings hub is it's always connected to the Internet, so it knows as the sun is changing, it varies its routines based on, you know, sunrise, sunset. So it begins to, shift. Well, actually, immediately shifts everything to red. And then throughout the evening, it progressively dims and dims and dims until it's time for me to go to bed. So if I'm home or not, it's gonna follow this this program. So when I'm out of town to the neighbors, it looks like I'm home because all the lights are coming on doing their thing, and the blinds are coming up and going down. And, but when I go to bed, since I go to bed a lot earlier than 11:00 is when I have that time, I will tell her, Amelia, good night. And she then goes through her routine to make sure that every light and everything in the house is all turned off at that point. And then in the mornings, when I wake, I say, Amelia, good morning. And she says, good morning. And, you know, today's date and, you know, here's the weather in your city and, here's what's on your calendar for today. And she tells me a little fun fact. And then, so while she's doing all that, I'm doing my my stretching and my morning routine while I'm still in bed. But, then she reads me the or or plays for me the news on, CNN, Fox News, and ABC News. So I'm filling my mind with what's going on out in the world because then I put all that stuff away, and I don't wanna hear anymore of it. But at least I know what's going on in the world. And, I know what what my day is gonna consist of because she just told me my schedule. So I'm thinking about, okay, what do I have to prepare for While I'm doing my stretching, while I've got my my beamer, which is underneath me, running and, you know, hopefully helping my blood flow and circulation. And my we got the NanoV strapped in with a little cannula, and I'm inhaling the the the wonderful vapors that are coming from that, which are also helping with my protein misfolding, and oxidative stress. So I'm, like, doing all these stacking all these biohacks while I'm still in bed listening to to her chatting in my ear. So it's 2001, A Space Odyssey. Do you ever worry that the the house is gonna go I know it's a dumb question, but a house is gonna go rogue. So I've wondered about somebody hacking into it and, like, really messing with me. So that's that's a possibility. But I do have a I have a hardware firewall because I'm a I was a network security guy, so I know how to do, you know, network firewalls. And so I have a a pretty good firewall in place. Hopefully, I'm not inviting people to try to hack through it right now, but putting this out there. Alright. So also PEMF. So I guess you're using electromagnetic, radiation or specific frequencies to try to enhance what rejuvenation. So what what Yeah. My my amp coil, I use mostly for, recovery. So there's lots of detox and recovery protocols in that. So, I really love it for that. The beamer is I don't even know how to describe it. It's it's it's kind of PEMF, but not. It's on the same the same level of PEMF. But their claim to fame, they have you know, you know, you can only claim so many things according to the FDA based on the studies that you can prove. So their claim to fame is, you know, blood flow. It helps with being able to bring, red cells into the the finer capillaries of the body. I'm sure it does a lot more things than that, but that's the only thing that they can really make claim to. So yeah. So I like to use PENF just for my recovery and just helping to keep me keep me going. So do you notice a difference with all of the stuff that you're doing, pretty regularly when you travel? And then do you notice subjectively or I mean, granted you have the the travel jet lag and all that messing with you, but, like, is it it's gotta be night and day in terms of or or maybe not. Like When I travel, it's it's funny because I'm I'm so used to being able to wake up in the middle of the night with my sleep mask still on and just ask Amelia what time it is without having to pick it up and go, you know, look, turn a a light on and mess with my circadian rhythms. Right? And I can't tell her good morning or good night when I'm in a hotel. So that's that's a little odd. But but what was your what was your I know I'm not answering your question. No. No. So just do do you notice a difference? I mean, granted, the routine is different, but, like, you know, is it a subjective thing where it's like, if I don't do the, the mat and I don't do the, you know, the if you're not doing all the things, you don't notice it you don't don't notice it, but it's No. Yeah. I don't I don't notice any major difference. I mean, I know they're doing good things for me. It's just, like, I can't measure them if that makes sense. Yeah. I can't quantify them. So is there, like, a, biohack or hacks or interventions that you've done where it's just like, this is essential. I've got a I've been granted eating cleanings and sticking to the workout approach and getting good sleep foundation, but taking that a step above where it's like you you saw your biomarkers and you're like, alright. I'm gonna try this. I'm gonna try that to move the needle here, and then it moved the needle. Like, do you have any examples of stuff like that? Yeah. Asana made a huge difference for me. I I saw that, I thanks to the sauna, because it seems to be melting away that subcutaneous fat. Mhmm. Plus, I feel just absolutely amazing after a sauna. So when I don't get a sauna session in, I I really miss that. I do feel the absence of that. A supplement example would be, nicotinamide or hypozyme or NR. So there was a time when I was doing my p 90 x workouts, probably about 55, maybe 54, at age 54. I started seeing that it was taking me more than an hour to get through an hour p 90 x workout just because my energy wasn't there. Then I heard on a podcast something about, you know, NAD levels and how they decline with age. And then there was this product called, True NIAGEN. So, again, thinking of this is bullshit. This isn't gonna do anything for me. I'll give it a try. Let's see what happens. I took it. And on the third day of taking it, I didn't feel anything different going about my day. So there was nothing at all subjective about, you know, no change. But when I did my p 90 x workout for that day, I felt amazing. I got through the p 90 x workout in the hour time, and I still had so much energy left. I did another one just because I could, because I wanted to see where's where's the bottom end of this? Where where does this floor drop out of this energy? Because this is amazing. I've been doing that ever since. So wait, what dose of NR? And then have you measured NAD levels? I have. Yeah. Because I started just recently last year, I started seeing the same thing. I started to see that my energy levels were dropping off. And I assumed it was probably NR related because I was doing just the base dose. I think it's three hundred milligrams. I'd have to go back and look. So so I did two tests. I did one from do not age, and I did the GINFINITY test. And they, they both came back and told me that my NAD was still just at the low end, in the lower range of optimal, but still within optimal. So I knew that wasn't it. And then, I guess this would be one of those, one of the many dumb, dumb supplement things that I did was, I did a SpectraCell micronutrient analysis. And based on that, I found that I had a b vitamin deficiency. I'm like, wait. What? How can I have a b vitamin deficiency? I supplement in b vitamins. This makes no sense. So then I had to take a really deep dive and figure out what what is it that I'm doing and taking or eating or drinking that has the potential to be absorbing or blocking my absorption of B vitamins? And I found that it was the, I I do a lemon tea in the mornings. I make a very or I was brewing a very strong brew of many different types of tea. I had, Oolong, oolong, gosh. What well, green, black. I can't even think of them all right now. There were at least five different teas that I would mix, and I'd mix them quite strong. And I would brew them. I'd put, you know, crushed linen juice in there and humic and fulvic mineral minerals, which I still do. But I realized I had found this before that by doing this tea, I was impacting my ferritin levels previously. They were getting they were being driven way too low. Took me a while to figure out which was what was doing that. But then I backed off on, like, the dosage, like how strong, how many tea bags I would use. And the ferritin level thing resolved itself. But I didn't realize it was still impacting my b vitamins. It was blocking I guess it's something to do with the polyphenols. We're blocking the uptake of the b vitamins. Somehow they were interfering with the receptors. So once I took out the tea completely, I just threw it right out of my routine. My next test came back normal and everything was good again, and my energy level popped back up again too. Interesting. It it's like, there's never enough stuff to measure. It's like always Yeah. It's like whack a mole. You fix one thing and then five things pop up too. The NR story is interesting because nicotinamide, or NMN. Right? Which is in the same ballpark. It's nicotinamide based. Three hundred milligrams doesn't make a dent on my NAD. It it Yeah. But then, you know, I'm sure you know that fifty milligrams of nicotinic acid is basically the equivalent of one gram of NMN. But, but that is different, you know, different for you you got a boost Right. With 300. Right? So but, I There's so many other things that come into play there too. Have you checked, like, your c d 38 to make sure that's not impacting your your So I haven't measured c d 38, but the argument against that is sixty five grams of fresh parsley, which is about a hundred milligrams of ApoGenin per day. And, I find it hard to believe the CD 38 wouldn't be lower. And then the other other argument too is that NAD can be degraded into Trigonelline. And my Trigonelline levels before all those Trigonelline experiments through diet was like almost zero, like, completely none, which suggests no NAD degradation into Trigonellium. So, yeah, I don't know. It could be it could be something else. Infection could be a lot of things. Infection that's not related to CD 38. I I don't know. Still trying to figure out. It's fun how all this stuff interrelates. You know, you mess with one thing and it can change so many other things. Yeah. But that's fascinating to learn about. It yeah. But we're like such early days, you know, AI eventually is gonna crunch all of the data, all of the metabolomics. And, you know, we're only still looking at a snapshot. Like, metabolomics is like 4,000 metabolites or more. We're only looking at 600, you know, and the epigenetics is just one modification. You know, there's acetylation, you know, there's there's other epigenetic modifications besides methylation. So we're just still look you know, how much of the picture are we looking at? We're looking at the corner piece, and we're trying to tell what's going on. Right? So Yeah. The IOLO data just kinda blows my mind because that's a whole bunch of other markers I've never ever considered before. Yeah. So I'm focused on, the kynurenine to tryptophan ratio, which I think totally underrated. Most people don't know about it. It's activated that, you know, so tryptophan degrades into kynurenine, and then, it inform aging basically activates that enzyme. So, and it increases during aging, higher levels associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. And some of the centenarian studies that I'm working with in academia, we see that that exact pattern, higher kynurenine, lower tryptophan, so more degradation of tryptophan deiagent. So I think that's totally underrated. I've been, you know, originally, I was yelling about, albumin. Nobody was thinking about albumin. And I mean, it's the most abundant circulating protein, and now more people are thinking about albumin besides glucose and lipids. Kyourine and tryptophan and ergothioneine are on that list too. But it's not ergothioneine. No matter how much I push, I can't get Iola to include ergothioneine, but maybe one day. But the nicotinamide, have you measured? I don't I don't think I saw your homocysteine because in my case, the nicotinamide, even very low doses may push it higher. Do you remember off top of your head homocysteine? No. But it's low. It wasn't it wasn't alarming to me at all. So Nice. Yeah. Because it in randomized controlled trials, nicotinamide increases homocysteine more than nicotinic acid. So, and then you hear the thing, we'll take TMG, and TMG doesn't work for me for whatever reason. So Then uric acid comes into play there somewhere. It could. In my case, uric acid is low, unless I increase sardines too much or increase protein intake too much. But in your Sardines are fantastic. But you've actually you've resisted the age related I don't know. Should we go through some blood test data? We could. I don't know how I I mean, I could go forever with you know, it's up to you. I I could too. Alright. So I'm I'm game. I don't wanna bore you. You know? I don't wanna, let's I mean, I've I've already missed my my dinner hour, but that's alright. I I can keep going. What do you think? So we call it now and then go for another? I'm I'm game, really. I'm game. Keep going if you wanna keep going. Yeah. I don't wanna I don't wanna miss dinner time, and I don't I don't I want you to be like, hi, David. I missed it because that mother Shut up. No. No. I'm I I don't know if you've heard this about my protocols, but when it comes to my routines, I will gladly set a routine aside to spend quality time with somebody. You know, that's because that to me, that's way more important because at the end of my days, when I'm laying in a hospital bed somewhere, assuming for a moment I would get hit by a bus or, you know, some other immediate death. But if I'm laying in a hospital bed somewhere and I'm staring up at a acoustic tile ceiling and fluorescent lighting, listening to this beeping and wishing worry wishing a machine's keeping me alive, you know, Am I gonna be there regretting that, oh, gosh. I didn't get to eat dinner on time that day because I wasted that time with Michael. Right? No. No. In fact, it would be completely the opposite. It would be like, you idiot. You had this opportunity to spend with Mike. Why did you, like, blow him off to go do some stupid routine that really in the long run doesn't matter? I get you. High five, my friend. High five. Yes. Put a Borat voice. I don't know if you like that movie. I thought it does. Because I got a I had goofy questions too, you know, like, the aliens, like, what's going on with the aliens. Right? But, you know, that's a They live right down the street from me. Okay. That's right. It was a wait. Was it in Michigan where that was a wait. So let's backtrack. Let's let's backtrack. Do do you do you think that, aliens are real? So, look, I'm not just longevity. I like to think about stuff that could be true. Maybe it's true. Right? And I like to live on that edge of could be crazy as hell, but also could be brilliant. And, you know, so I think they're real, 100% real. They may have actually been here and have always been here, may have co evolved on the planet with us where, you know, right now you could have primitive human species and then us. Who's to say there isn't a more advanced species that's, either evolved, you know, for hundred million years, already before us, tinkered with DNA to enhance our evolution? I don't know. I just it's fun to think about. Yeah. It's speculation. I don't have the answers. So what are your thoughts on the whole? Well, when you look at, like, the Aztecs, the Incas, the Mayans, you know, all these ruins that we examined from, you know, centuries ago, and they have these lines that are, like, dug in the earth and these patterns that can only be seen from space. What? I mean, come on. There's no other purpose for that, terrestrially, than to be signaling somebody way out in the atmosphere, you know, that that can see that. And, the technologies that they had seemed far too advanced. It's somehow it's technology that has been lost to civilization. How did they get it? When you look at the pyramids and how they've been built and, you know, the the structures and the stones that are placed that are tons and mega tons with you can't even fit it like a playing card between them. The precision is just so perfect. Oh, come on. We can't we can't even do stuff like that today. Yeah. So how in the heck did they do that then? They had to have some help. So, yeah, I'm not a big alien conspiracy guy, although I, you know, I I love, you know, UFO stuff. And, I like watching that kind of stuff on TV and movies. And when I was a kid that there was a book called In Search of Ancient Astronauts that came out that I read, and I think they made that movie. In fact, there was a series that became called In Search Of that was sort of launched from that all about aliens and things. Loved that as a kid. I'm thinking they're probably there, but they're just too advanced for us to detect. Yeah. So it it there may be two things going on there. One, it may I'm not saying aliens built the Pyramids and Machu Picchu and all of these megalithic stuff. Either. I'm saying that they might have been influenced by those. But Yeah. Could be. I don't know. But the the, like, UAPs where they're transmedium and they've got video where they're dipping it into the water and then the there's no splash, and it's like they've got gravity bubble and the warp drive, whatever that is. What the hell? Like, what the hell? You know? And then even, like, so when you think about we evolved to survive. Right? Our senses are just primitive for survival, right? We can't see in the infrared, we can't hear ultrasound. So great. Yeah. We can do it to modify our genes to be able to do something like that, but yeah. Or we invent the tech, right? We invent the tech to see those things, right? So, but, like, there are videos where you've gotta, you know, it's in the infrared and you can see them, but you can't visually see them. Right? So and if if you think, like, if you're an advanced civilization or alien, whichever it may be, ultra terrestrial, crypto terrestrial, you know, I don't know where they're coming from, but I don't wanna be bothered by the primitive monkeys shooting missiles at me. Right? I'm gonna cloak, right, in the stealth technology. So I'm just fascinated. Like, yeah, for me, it's like learning. If there is a higher level to this and humans aren't the highest that exists, I'd wanna be able to learn from that, whatever it may be. You know? So Yeah. It's cool when you think about, like, there's so many levels of the, of of the light spectrum that are just completely out of our reach. We don't even know that they exist. So there's that whole spectrum of reality that we have that we're completely out of touch with. The animals, dogs, how they have the sense of smell that we don't have. You know, they can detect bombs. They can detect cancer. You know, we can't do that. That's a so that's another level of reality that we're unaware of. It makes me wonder how much stuff is going on around us that we just don't know about because we can't perceive it. Yeah. Exactly. So psychedelics, that gets me in the psychedelic What anything else ever I have not tried any, but I'm really curious too. In Michigan, we can't really get our hands on stuff like that. Yeah. I know my my friends out in the West Coast are like, yeah. Come on out. I can hook you up. You know? No problem. So I would I would be really curious to try, Ayahuasca or, oh, gosh. What is in the other one? Salicibin. Salicibin. Salicibin. Yeah. Salicibin. Yeah. I have I have done I did mushrooms once with some friends when I was out in Vegas. That was just sort of interesting. All I saw were halos around lights and, felt really blissful. But other than that, I didn't didn't have any great trip. Maybe we didn't use enough. I don't know. That was recreation. But that's psilocybin. Right? So you did I suppose that was. Yeah. Yeah. But it wasn't like a it wasn't like a great dose where I had a a journey or anything like that. I I haven't done any of that stuff. At least psilocybin, I wanna include that at some point. Just the idea, like, when you were saying about how much of our senses can detect reality and what's going on around us. I mean, from anecdotal mushroom experiences, right, magic mushroom experiences, it seems like there's all this weird stuff in shapes and sounds and and it's like, wait. Is that is that, like, chemical I don't know. I'm just interested and fascinated. You know? Can can I expand my consciousness to see more than I can currently see and perceive? You know. And and then even to, like, the brain signaling, I don't know if you've seen, like, psilocybin brain signaling without it and with it. It's like it's, the brains that have been imaged at least what I've seen, it's like, you know, you get a certain amount of brain that lights up just normally. And then with, psilocybin, it's like vast networks interconnected communicating with each other. It didn't exist before. Yeah. So, I That's cool. That's really cool. Yeah. Curious about that. So yeah. I wanna go, to Daniel Amen's clinic and get a SPECT scan. In fact, I've I've got another friend of mine who, who's had a a TBI, and I've been, for last year, trying to get him to go with me because he needs it more than I do, to both for both of us to go get scanned. And I think that we're gonna try to do it this October or November if we can fit it in. I would love to see if I have any lingering effects from my concussion. Does the Prenuvo wouldn't the Prenuvo cover full body MRI? Wouldn't they do brain? It would. It's I think Prenuvo is more structural where the SPECT scan is more functional, if that makes sense. So if there were structural damage, the Prenuvo would see it, but the the spec scan would light up, you know, more functionally. They would see different parts either dark or light or super bright depending on, yeah, what's going on in my head. Yeah. I wonder what what they would do for, rejuvenating the brain functionally in that case or even structurally. Right? Because it's not like you're out here. I mean, do you drink alcohol? I mean, it's, I do. Not not a lot. I mean, compared my my friends tend to think of me as a nondrinker because compared to them, I kind of am. But but I do like to drink a beer occasionally. In fact, just what was it? Monday. I went out with friends, to a Mexican place where we do margaritas. Now I skipped the margaritas. I only did a beer because I was doing, an organic acids test, urine test, and I didn't wanna really screw that up. So so I skipped out on that, but, yeah, I do drink occasionally. Yeah. So it's not like you're, you know, an alcoholic, you know, drinking all the time, which I'd imagine would be bad bad for brain health. Right? So Very bad. Yeah. Take someone who's already healthy and fit and, you know, very moderate alcohol intake and nonsmoker. Right? You don't smoke. Right? So Never have. How do you further improve upon that? I don't know that conventional medicine knows how, right? Because if they could, they'd rejuvenate, you know, their degenerative diseases. Right? If it was that simple. So I I'd be curious to know what how they would do that. Well, I did look up some of the protocol that they would use at the Amen clinic, you know, for brain healing, and and HBOT is definitely one of those. The cerebolisin peptide. What else was there? Cmax, I think is another one, or C link, I think, are the are the three. Yeah. I think most of those are what they use for brain healing. There may be other things, but those were the only, like, four things that are really picked up on. I know Dave Asprey likes to do, like, I think it's modafinil, some other, some of those other, like, I don't know what you would call those smart smart drugs, I guess. Nootropics. Nootropics. There you go. Well, yeah, I have done some nootropics. Like, I've tried, Alpha Brain. I've tried, gosh, Qualia's product, Qualia Mind. I really kinda I really liked that one when it first came out. I don't use those very often. But some of the the really, the the big ones like the buy the big biohackers like Dave Asprey and Ben Greenfield are using. Those are interesting to me. I just it's not something I can get my hands on. Although recently, I did find a place that I might be able to order them from. So I I might give those a shot just to see. It's like, what would you look at, you know, in terms of output biomarkers, you know, that efficacy. Right? That's the tricky thing. Yeah. I know well, you know, Dave can do all his, forty years of Zen type scanning for his, so I don't have that available to me. It might help me be able to come up with, words quicker and faster when I'm doing interviews. Because I love to do interviews all the time. Right? I don't even think you're 62. It's like a magic number. It's like crazy. I I don't see you as 62 at all, which is nuts. I you know, I get that a lot. In fact, they're they were laughing today when I went to do this, plasma donation because it was a I went to a new place, not the same place I used to go. And the guy is like, oh, wait a minute. This okay. There's some there's an error here in your data. Your year of birth is not right. And I I said, woah. What does it say? And he says, you know, '62. I just no. That's right. He's like, wait. You're 62 years old? I'm like, yeah. And so then this guy kept bragging to all the nurses like, hey. How old do you think this guy is? You know? And I'm like, alright. I might have had a shot with that nurse until he just blew it for me. Thanks. But, you know, just dumb stuff like that. Like, when I was in Italy, probably shouldn't say this because my friend will see this, but I was out to dinner with my buddy who's this exact same age I am. We're eating dinner, and, the waiter comes up. He's like, oh, is this your dad? I'm like, no. No. And Did your friend he thought your friend was your dad? Yeah. Holy cow. Ben was sitting right across the table from me, but he was looking at the menu, and he's a little hard of hearing. So I don't think he caught that, but I was so embarrassed for him. I'm like, oh my gosh. No. Don't say that. Does he look 20 or so older than you? He looks his age. You know, I I I don't I'm not trying to throw him under the bus. I don't Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I don't think he looks he's a handsome looking guy, but he looks his age. So wait. Yeah. I know I know you dye your hair. So if you didn't dye your hair, then Yes. Totally white. And and I get Botox in my forehead too to remove the, I was getting big deep rub I got a lot of that. I don't I don't I don't know if you can see. I got a lot of that. Yeah. That's exactly what I was getting, and I it wouldn't go away. Right? But when you did that on purpose, then it showed. But as soon as you relax, it goes away. Yeah. Mine was not going away. Oh. I could still see the lines. They were still there. They're like, oh, that this has gotta go. I would see it in pictures. They're like, no. No. That's gotta go. So how often how often do you do that? Well, most people will do it, like, every six to eight months, I've been told. I'm way too active for that. I sweat too much. I run too much. My metabolism is too fast. I end up having to do it maybe every eight weeks instead of every eight months. And I I did try Botox. It made I had a little bit of a reaction to it. My eyes would itch, like, never stopped itching the whole, like, eight weeks that I had it. And then I switched to, dysport or dysport is another, option. Tried that same thing. And, then they tried me on Xeomin, which I guess these things only differ by some minor little protein in the chain. And and Xeomin seemed to work for me. I don't have any sort of itching or allergic rash into that one. So But it's just in the forehead? It's or I don't know. I I get it right along the the top line here because when I didn't, I was getting a weird roll. Like, my friend looked at me one day, and he's like, are you wearing a wig? I'm like, no. What do you mean? I I thought, well, maybe since I dye my hair, get my roots colored, I thought maybe he was just seeing the the white from the roots. But then when I went and looked in the mirror later at myself, I'm like, oh my gosh. Yeah. There's a there's a strange roll right there. It's I guess it's where the the muscle there's a muscle there that somehow naturally ends. So it's the edge of it. And, yeah, it just looked funny. And so I mentioned that to them next time I was in there, and, like, oh, yeah. Oh, okay. We can we can go up a little bit higher, and we can take care of that. So they did. And I did have I did try my eyes, but I didn't like it. It gave me it gave me a funny eye look. And the thing was, when I got it done, when I saw myself in the mirror, I recognized that same look in some other people. Without naming names without naming names, actually, by the way naming names. There's a very well, friends, people I know. Yes. But, also, there's a very famous actor that's on a is in a sitcom or was in a series. I haven't seen it lately. So maybe it'll come out again this fall. But a very popular guy, he was in sci fi stuff, you know, early on, and then, you know, he was in this new series. And there was something about his eyes that just looked odd to me. I had the same eyes. So I recognized it right away. Oh, okay. He's getting Botox in his eyes. That's why. It makes perfect sense. And then the beard too. You've gotta be dying the beard. Oh, yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. The hair, I'll get colored because I can't do it myself. I can't see the back. But the beard, I do I do myself. So then right after I get the hair. But then you'd you'd have white hairs everywhere. I guess they don't you just shave shave No. No. My my arm hairs are still black. My leg hairs are still black. And then eyebrows? Eyebrows. Yeah. I don't touch any of that. It's all still natural. So, that's how I know. Like, people say, oh, well, you're dyeing your hair. What's your natural color? I said, well, this this is my hair is naturally black. I could go brown, but then if I did brown, it would look funny. The lights just dimmed. It's It's getting late. Yeah. We're we're starting the the evening wind on here. So Yeah. Yeah. Let me crank it back up again. I could probably tell Amelia, but I don't really wanna do that. That's right. We can we can wrap. I don't you know, it's all good. We can Just to finish that thought, though, I was gonna say that the my chest hair at one point was totally white. So that I had to shave because that looked funny. Right? But then somewhere along the line, I don't know what's doing it. Now the chest hair is fifty fifty. Oh, interesting. And I think that's really cool. If I knew exactly what it was doing it, I would do more of it so that I could get all of it to go back to plan. It could be NAD. I've seen anecdotally people with the NAD stuff. So yeah. Maybe. Maybe. I don't know. Alright. Cool. Well, thanks, Dave. I greatly appreciate you coming on. Hopefully, sometime relatively soon, we got all the blood test stuff and, you know, biomarker stuff. We didn't even go through go through, you know, the deep dive on that. Yeah. Whenever you want because I you know, I'm having a blast with this. So next week, tomorrow, like, whatever fits your schedule, whatever you feel like doing, let me know. Hit me up. Sounds good. I appreciate your day. Alright. And you know what? We're friends now, so you can call me and just BS with me anytime you feel like. High five, Venus. High five. Yeah. Cool. Alright, Dave. Talk to you soon. Alright. Thank you. Take care. Bye.