Hey, everyone. Today's guest is Petey Mangan. Petey is 69 years old and is arguably one of the fittest 69 year olds on the planet. As shown in the thumbnail, he practices what he preaches in terms of health and fitness and is a wealth of health and fitness related info, which we'll jump into today. So with that, welcome, to the channel, PD. Thanks a lot, Mike. Thanks for inviting me, and thanks for thanks for the kind words. Yeah. I mean, most people think about 69, and then to look at you, you don't look or sound or act like a 69 year old. So I think it's great. Well well, great. I mean, I you know, it's hard to know what 69 is supposed to feel like. And, you know, so I I get up every morning. I'm moving around just like normal, and and, you know, here I am. So, I don't know. I when when I think about being 69 years old, I think, wow. How did I get here? But, obviously, it just happens. So Yeah. But one of the memes you posted, I think, Bill Gates how old is Bill Gates? He's he's 68. So Yeah. Yeah. So he's nine months younger than me or something like that. Yeah. So that that's probably closer to what people think of as 68, 69, you know, rather than the fitness side of it. Right? So so I wanna peel all of the layers back. I wanna dig deep into the details. Right? So I wanna start off with your workout approach. Right? So frequency, intensity, duration, even how you go about, like, workout to workout, which movements to include. Do you have standardized? I've listed, like, all of the questions right away. So so let's take take us through a normal workout. So which do you have a set, set days during the week when when you work out? No. I don't. Generally, I well, currently, I'm working out once every four days. So the day of the week varies, and if I, am not particularly feeling it on a particular day, I do not hesitate to take an extra rest day. So my my approach to training is what might be called, brief and frequent, but intense exercise. So one thing here is that, you know, speaking speaking generally when when, you know, the public thinks about exercise and so on is, they conflate exercise with physical activity. So when I talk about exercise, I mean training to get fitter. Physical activity is basically anything else that isn't just sitting or sleeping. So so as far as the exercise goes, yes. I train about once every four days. My workouts last me at the most thirty minutes. When I see the when I see the clock on the gym wall and I and I see that I've actually hit thirty minutes, I know it's time to clear out. So what do I do in these workouts? I'm doing strength training, obviously. But, this type of strength training that I do, resistance training, it's known as high intensity training. I'm, you know, certainly not the inventor of it. It involves doing compound exercises. So compound exercises are those exercises that, exercise large groups of muscle based basically, you know, technically, any exercises uses more than one set of joints as a compound exercise. So let's say a chest press is a compound exercise. So I do those and I do them to failure, momentary muscular failure, which means that you do repetitions of the exercise always in good form until you get to the point where you can't do another rep. Or even more specifically, you can't even move the weight or resistance anymore at all. When when I get to that point, then I'm done. It is one set only of each exercise. Then what I do is I move to the next exercise with minimal rest in between. Bay basically, I try not to rest at all, but in a in a regular gym, you know, there's a certain amount of time where you gotta go walk over to the next exercise station. Sometimes someone is occupying the one you want, so you gotta go find another one, this kind of thing. But the idea is basically, little time between exercises. And so this part of the training is the, you know, basically cardiovascular component here. So as you get going into this workout, you'll find that you have a pretty elevated heart rate. You're breathing hard through this workout. So you go through the, the workout this way, then so I do the large compound exercises. I do no more than two different exercises for each muscle group. So just one set of each exercise, but possibly two exercises for a muscle group. My my workout varies a little bit depending on how I'm feeling about it that day. Then towards the end of my workout, I might do a few isolation exercises like biceps, curls, triceps, pull downs, this kind of thing. I always end my workout with a metabolic finisher. So I wanna be sure that I have gotten the best cardiovascular conditioning I can out of this workout. Typically, when I'm going through the workout doing doing the actual, resistance training, my heart rate will be, you know, anywhere, you know, when I stop and check after an exercise, anywhere from, say, you know, one thirty two up to one forty four during the workout. Then so I then when I do the metabolic finisher, and typically what I do for that finisher is I get on a stationary cycle. I put it at a pretty high level of resistance, and I start pedaling until I basically can't continue. And usually, that's twenty to twenty five seconds somewhere in there based on the resistance I put it on. When I get off the this metabolic finisher, my heart rate gets pretty close to its maximum. At my age, my calculated maximum heart rate is something in the something in on the order of a 168. So I get up pretty close to that. So that's my workout. Then I I kind of carry myself out of the gym and go home, and that's that's that's it. Alright. So the first exercise is what? Like, you get there, you're doing the bench press, you're doing dead lift. What's the first exercise you're doing? Right. So that does vary. Yes. Sometimes I will start with dead lifts. So the if one is doing dead lifts, it is a good idea to start with it because this is, an exercise you do with free weights, and your form is very important. A few years back, I was very much into, increasing my one rep max on the deadlift. You know, so, like, at one time, I've dead lifted dead lifted over 300 pounds, which for you know, lots of people do more than that. Don't get me wrong. But for me, it was a lot. But I don't do that anymore. I am very conscious of preventing injury. This this is just the most important thing in exercise. You gotta you gotta gotta just start with this as your basis for exercise. Don't get hurt. That's the number one priority. Anyway, yes, I often start with deadlifts, and I'll do a set of deadlifts, basically to failure. Failure is a little bit different in exercise like that because of what I mentioned. You're using free weights. You always wanna stay in good form. So when I feel like I can't do another one, you know, if my form is breaking down, I stop. Then I might proceed to chin ups, and, again, I'll do those to failure. One thing that I do in most of my exercises is, what are known as set extension techniques. So, basically, there there are two of them, drop set and rest pause. In a chin up, since I'm using my own body weight and I can't change my body weight, I use rest pause. So I might get 15 chin ups till the point where I can't pull myself up anymore. Then I'll stop and rest up to about ten seconds and do another rep, and I'll do that several times. With this this other set extension technique, drop set, this is more appropriate if you're working out on a machine because you can change the weight very easily, usually with a pin. It just takes a second or two. So you get to the point where you can't push that lever or pull, as the case may be, the lever anymore, then you drop the weight, say, 10 to 15%, do another rep in good form. I can do that. I might do that several times. So yeah. So then let's say I'll do I'll do the, deadlifts, do chin ups, then, on a on a day that I don't start with deadlifts, I might go to the leg press, and do a set of those. Then I will do I will do chest press, dips. I'll do an overhead press, machine overhead press, and then maybe also, a dumbbell lateral raise for the shoulders. Also, chin ups chin ups are an exercise that, works the lats and and back muscles, and so I will also do a seated row. Also works the back. At that point, I've got most of my compound exercises done. And so like I said, it does vary a little bit, but that's that's basically it. And then I'll go do, say, a set of biceps curls. I like to do shrugs as well. That works the traps. Once in a while, I'll do a set of triceps pull down, something like that, and then I'll go to my metabolic finisher. So in terms of, so deadlift, for example, you're not it's it's gotta be submax because you can't be going to failure at you know, you can't and you can't it's probably not a good idea to jump straight to, like, two twenty or, you know, whatever you're doing worksets at one eighty. There's gotta be some warm up there. Right? Well, yeah. Well, yes and no. So you you're totally correct about, you you know, not being a, you know, totally a maximal effort on the deadlift because, like I said, I'm very conscious about preventing injury. I don't want my form to break break down, and I often will do a warm up, you know, a few warm up reps for the deadlift. However, regarding warm up generally, well, I don't do them for any other exercise. So so so, basically, the idea is that for you know, people do a warm up largely because they wanna prevent injury. If they're lifting, you know, a heavy weight, they do a warm up. So, you know, everything everything's in working order, and they and and then they do their main set. The thing is in in my way of training, we're not lifting or moving a weight that on the first rep or two has a potential to injure us. Right? So, you know, the the the stress of or the or the the, stimulus to building muscle comes from continued reps and going to failure. So in conventional weight training, you would see a a lot of people doing, say, a set of three to five reps, at a pretty heavy weight. And and so if somebody can only do a set of exercises, say, from three to five times, they're generally using a pretty heavy weight that has the potential for injury. So I am not doing that. So then you've gotta know what your one rep max is in order to scale it back to have a weight sufficient enough to induce gains, you know, strength and and muscle mass gains while at the same time, you know, being heavy enough to provide that stimulus. Right? So you've gotta know your one rep max in that deal and then scale it back. So do you know approximately where you're training relative to your one rep max? It's so so, actually, I don't. The way that I, do this is that, I select a weight. And, of course, by now, you know, I'm I'm used to doing this, so I have a, you know, pretty good idea of what weight I'm gonna use every time I hop on a machine. And I'm always trying to either increase my weight or my reps, because I'm, you know, always pushing pushing to failure. When you push to failure, you are always training against the limits of your strength. So at least in theory, you should always be making progress. So what I do is I try to I I select a weight such that I get to failure somewhere between about forty five and ninety seconds of doing the exercise, anywhere in there. So if I can't get to forty five seconds, of course, I'm not sitting there with, you know, looking at my watch or anything like that. Yeah. But I do slow reps. Yeah. And so I have a good idea how long each rep takes. And and then so I try to do it. So I hit failure somewhere between forty five and ninety seconds. If I can't hit forty five seconds, then I'm I'm using too much weight. If I can keep doing it ninety seconds or longer, then I need to add some weight so I get to failure in less than ninety seconds. So are you doing that specifically because of ATP, CP, energy metabolism? And if you go beyond, like, you know, you get past three minutes, now you're on aerobic metabolism? Right. Right. Exactly. When you when you get up into several minutes of doing this, yeah, you're you're it's it's more like a form of aerobic training than really, you know, anaerobic or strength training. So how many reps is it? I mean, I've seen you do, I think, like, two twenty five, 20 reps. I mean, is it you're generally doing 20 reps for each of the compound movements within that ninety second frame? No. I it it isn't that many. It, you know, it it depends. Some of the, some of the machines that I use seem to be more conducive to slower reps, others are not. For example, in a seated row where where I'm pulling this way, I can pretty easily, you know, just maintain tension in, you know, an eight second up, eight second down, seven or eight seconds, something like that. Where others, I find myself doing them a bit faster, like, let's say, a biceps curl, probably no more than five seconds up, five seconds down, something like that. So it it does vary. I'm not but it I don't think there's anything that I do that's as as much as 20 reps. So it's time under tension. It's a combination of reps and time under tension. Right? So Right. Right. Exactly. It's it's time under tension. I mean, technically, reps, you know, the number of reps doesn't matter. It's all about time under tension. I mean, I've I've seen a really, you know, some some people, you know, believe in very slow reps. And I I've seen, an interesting video, of a guy who was training with Doug McGuff, and he did a his chin up was I I believe it was sixty seconds up, sixty seconds down. So he did one rep, but he was doing that for close to two minutes. Yeah. But then then the there's, like, a balance between slow strength and then explosive power. Right? So if you're training I get the time under tension, and time under tension is gonna be good for muscle mass and even strength. I wonder how that translates where, you know, if your time under tension at a sufficient load is so great that now you've got real explosive power, or do you need to train explosive power all the time in order to have explosive power? Right? So Right. So as far as as far as, resistance training goes, I I believe that, no one should ever do any explosive movements. So explosive movements, of course, are necessary playing a sport, football or soccer or, you know, whatever, baseball, anything that, you know, you need these quick explosive movements. And and so this this, points to another distinction. You know, I mentioned between exercise and physical activity, there's also a distinction between exercise and sports. And and this is, you know I mean, somebody might say, well, that's pretty obvious. They're not the same thing. But the thing is is that in exercise, for example, I mentioned don't get hurt. That's, you know, that's top priority. Whereas in sports, you you kinda, you know, you go into playing a sport knowing that, yeah, there are certain risks. You've gotta use explosive movements, this kind of thing. Whereas in exercise, I don't believe that explosive movements are necessary, that they shouldn't be done. Now somebody might point to, let's say, power lifting. So this obviously involves some pretty explosive movements. But again or or Olympic weightlifting. Again, powerlifting and Olympic lifting are sports. And, certainly, somebody who who trains that way will get stronger and so on, but there are more effective and safer ways of training. And it's my view that the only people who should be doing power lifting or Olympic lifting are those who wanna practice them as a sport. If you wanna exercise for strength, no. You shouldn't be doing those. Yeah. That's an interesting approach. I'm with you on almost everything else. You know? Basically, compound movements, you know, a circuit training based approach, you're getting the cardiovascular stimulus. Only I'm doing it for ninety minutes. I could do it for longer, but the fitness metrics start to look like overtrained all the time and chronic fatigue, which we'll get into that too. But then, but I do include clean and jerk. I do include a little bit of the explosive movements. And whether that may translate into, like, you know, the when you think about older age, I I believe me, I hear you on minimizing injury risk. Right? But when you think about older age, it's a loss of, you know, basically explosive movement. Right? An older person can't race across the street to get away from a car or predator. Right? So if that's never trained, I imagine and granted, I like I like the heavy gorilla lifted up over my head and press it. I mean, it's like, you know, it's a it's a rush too. So but I hear you on the injury risk. Nothing is worse for aging than, injury, especially lower back, herniated disc from dead lifting and all that stuff. Absolutely. Absolutely. People have life changing injuries in the gym, and that's that's something definitely to be avoided. So no negatives too? You don't do negatives? So, Well, yeah, I do negatives. I mean, I, on the negative portion of the rep, I go just as slow, so that's a negative. And and if I'm on the last rep, I'll try to do a very slow negative. So, yeah, I do those. But at a higher, weight. Like, for example, if you're doing, if you've maxed out on chin ups and you can't do anymore, sure. You could do a, you know, a pause and then and and do more reps. And I do that too. But then at other times or lately, I've been, you know, doing negatives where I'll literally jump up and then control the slowdown. So I know I've exhausted myself on the concentric, and I'm purposely exhausting myself on the eccentric. And, you know, I'm sure you know that there's data, you know, overloading the eccentric phase can, increase improve improve the concentric. So no negatives within that. Right. Well well, maybe a little bit, but not not so specifically you like like what you're talking about. Because as you mentioned, you've gotta be careful. Too too many negatives too often increase injury risk, and then you can't train and that screws it all up. Right? So Absolutely. And probably, you know, I I feel pretty, right now, I feel pretty comfortable with the idea that I'm not gonna hurt myself in the gym. I've done everything possible, you know, to to avoid that. The the real, a more important risk for me, you know, if you wanna call it a risk, is overtraining. And when you overtrain, well, you know, you don't feel so good, and then it takes longer to get back in the gym again, all this kind of thing. So I really definitely try to avoid that. That's one reason when, you you know, if if I'm working out of the gym and I see that clock on the wall and I've been there thirty minutes, then I know, you know, I bet I just I I just better get out. Even though I I get very enthusiastic, I wanna keep going, but it's better for me if I just stop at that point. Alright. Wait. Before we go down the overtraining road, so, in terms of, I've just had something else there on the workouts. Injuries. Right? So have you had injuries? Tendinitis, herniated disc, lower back, all that stuff. Have you had injuries over the past, I don't know, say, twenty, thirty years? I I have. Yes. I've had tendonitis, in my elbows, and that went away pretty easily. When I've just figured out what was doing it, I stopped doing that, and it just went away. Yeah. I've hurt my back. I I don't really know how seriously. I think most of the stuff were, you know, muscle pulls, this kind of thing. I I certainly don't have any kind of lingering injury. I've never seen a doctor for, you know, for any of that kind of stuff. So, hopefully, I, you know, I haven't hurt hurt myself too seriously, and and I guess even if I did, it's it's gone now. But, yeah, even even pulling a muscle, it's painful, and then you can't work out for a while and yeah. So, you know, even something like that definitely to be avoided. And then how long have you been on this thirty minute, you know, twice a week? How long have you been on that? And then I know that evolved out of you were a runner. So how long you know? Yeah. How's that evolution been? And and and do you see that being the same, you know, approach going forward indefinitely? Yeah. So to to to answer the the last part first, yeah, this is what I intend to keep doing. My, my study of high intensity training has convinced me that this is a a completely adequate, if I wanna say, or a legitimate way to improve cardiovascular health that doesn't require, you know, long training runs or long, you know, bouts of whatever it is for for cardiovascular stimulus. As far as how that evolved, well so that that takes us into another place. But, yeah, I was running I ran for years and years. I've I've, run a couple of marathons in my lot of distance. And then, I was fairly ill for a while. Like I said, this takes us into another thing. We can talk about that if you want, but I was ill and and, for quite a few years. And then when I started getting better, I decided, well, I'm gonna try lifting some weights, and and and I got into it again. It was pretty tough at first, but, you know, joined a gym. So that that's where that started about fifteen years ago. And then I I trained in a conventional way for, I I don't know, six, seven years, something like that until I discovered high intensity training and switched to that, and I've been doing that ever since. Nice. So going down the overtraining road, so I guess were there times when you were it was it wasn't a 30 workout, but it was 60 or longer, some longer workout, and then you realized, if I go above that thirty minute threshold, don't have a certain amount of days in between, I feel, fatigued and all of the symptoms that come with, overtraining. Absolutely. I mean, I there there were times I mean, I think even a typical workout back back in the day, I'm I might be in the gym an hour and fifteen minutes, hour and twenty minutes, something like that. Of course, it wasn't the same in the sense that there there was some rest time between exercises, and I, you know, I was doing multiple sets and and all this kind of thing. But, yeah, that that kind of training really kicked my ass. I mean, it it was it was I just had too many days where, you know, I wanted to just sit in my comfy chair and not get up. You know? So It's such an ego hit because, like, I love doing my nine like I said, ninety minute workouts, and I could do it for even longer. It used to be three hours where I would just throw stuff around like a gorilla for three hours. Right? And, like, in a circuit based thing. But then, like you said, the next day, I feel like I've, you know, gone out. It's a night of drinking. So it's it's such an ego hit to have to cut it down. And it like you, it takes me three to four days to recover from that. So, yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. It's a big hit. But I think most people aren't thinking about it like that. It's everyday gym. It's, you know, 10 sets per body part, and then the next day, you do a different body part. And I think you know? So when you think about, like, I'm sure you know the the the vibe that's all over the interwebs these days of have your VO two max as high as possible and basically train like an elite athlete to to maximize longevity, which ends up being at most, like, seven years on average per lifespan. But when you consider that exercise is well known to increase average, but it doesn't get you to the maximum, whether it's in animal models in comparison against calorie restriction or elite athletes and, you know, four minute milers who get the increase in average life life expectancy, but you don't see them at a 115 years old. So I wonder if overtraining is a component of that equation. It has to be, right, where exercise gets you that increase in overall general health. But at the same point, even if you're overtrained by some amount, maybe that limits, you know, getting to the maximum and potentially beyond. Right. Right. And I'm sure you've seen those, u shaped curves as far as exercise goes where, you know, too much exercise is bad. And and and in resistance training, too much exercise turns out to be not all that much. I mean, there's some studies. These are epidemiological studies, of course, but some studies where, you know, sixty minutes a week in the gym was basically as much as you would wanna do. So yeah. So you're you're right about exercise as as far as longevity goes. I mean, in in animal studies and so on, the exercise just doesn't seem to do all that much for for longevity. Certainly increases health span. I mean, it's it's it's totally totally the best thing to do is to is to to do the right kind of exercise and the right amount and everything. Definitely very healthy. But as far as longevity goes, yeah, it's it's not all that impressive. And and, yes, maybe overtraining has something to do with it. I mean, you you see these, you you've seen these, studies where, you know, like, lifelong distance runners have the the the, you know, scarring on the heart. They're what do they call that? Gadolinium late gadolinium enhancement, where they do these imaging studies and they have, you know, their heart their hearts aren't so good, because they've been just really overstressing them for a long time. Yeah. So how many so what's your, and and maybe this is a philosophical question. So do you have longevity genetics? Like, are your parents still alive and or or not? How long? Yeah. So, so yeah. Kind of. So my parents are not alive. No. My mother died, just a few years ago at age 99. So yeah. And and so her side of the family, there's some long lived I I had a great uncle that lived to be over 100. My father's side, not so much. Just sort of normal. 70, 70? He he was he was in his eighties, when he died, and and but with but without, without modern medicine, you know, it would have been definitely less. So what do you have an expectation for how long you expect to live, or is it just a matter of squeeze as as much juice from the orange as you can and wherever that lands is where it lands? Yeah. More more the latter. So, you know, I do think about this. I as far as, okay. I'm I'm 69 years old. How much longer could I possibly have? Like you, you know, very nicely said at the beginning of the show, here that, you know, I don't seem like a 69 year old or look like one, not like Bill Gates for sure. Yeah. So so I think, wow. You know, if if I just keep doing this, and and, honestly, I I don't think I feel all that different from what I did ten years ago, for example. So if I just keep doing this, you know, how long can I keep doing it? I I, you know, obviously, I don't know. But when when people talk about, like, say, living to a 120 or you get even more extreme things you hear here and, you know, here and there. Right? But when people talk about that, I think, you know, like, at least for myself, I think, no. That's not gonna happen. You know, it's so it's just a matter of doing what I wanna do to keep myself fit and healthy. And then, yeah, the chips are gonna fall where they may really, you know I I I exert as much effort towards this as I can, but, you know, then then the rest is beyond my control. Have you seen any performance, deficits in the gym? Like, do you have do you know exactly alright. I I I'm usually doing 20 reps for deadlifts at this or 15 reps. Like, are you tracking your, like, strength over time? And have you seen any decrements, or is it pretty consistent for the last, you know, ten, fifteen years since you've been, focused on it? Yeah. Yeah. You know, it's hard to say because, like like I said, I used to used to go for one rep max deadlifts, for example, and I don't do that anymore, for for the reasons I stated. So I don't know. A few years ago let's see. So I don't know how long or, you know, I don't know, six, seven years ago or something. I weighed about 20 pounds more than I do now. And, you know, when I started weightlifting, I was like, okay. I was I was skinny, and, you know, I wanted to put on muscle. I did pretty successfully. I put on muscle rapidly in the course of, you know, six months to a year when I started training. And and I was eating appropriately or maybe inappropriately. Anyway, I got to I got I got up to about 20 pounds more than I weigh now, and, you know, I was still training hard and everything. And, I mean, one day, I, you know, looked at myself in the mirror and I said, you know, hey. Don't fool yourself. There's a lot of body fat there. So I deliberately lost weight. Now did that affect my muscular strength? You know? I don't know. I kept training, obviously, kept eating in the way I thought was appropriate, but, you know, maybe it did. Wait. So that 20 pound weight loss was how many years ago? Probably seven, eight years ago, I'd say. So then within the past seven to eight years, would you say strength and performance during your workouts is about the same? I mean, granted, you said you used to do one rep maxes, but, if there's any way to relate how so I'm thinking, you know, if you can maintain strength and performance indefinitely, right, that's a big part of longevity. Right? So whereas if you start to see some decrement, then it's like, alright. What what can I do to fend this off? And what's underlying that? You know? So Right. Right. Right. So as far as I know, no. I have not seen any decrement in in performance. That you know, that said, I'm terrible at tracking things, unlike you. I will. But but yeah. So so I I haven't been able to notice anything. I I really you know, when I go to the gym, I mean, I've I've I'm cranking it. And, I I do sometimes think that, you know, like, you know, could I could I please have a little bit better recovery? You know, that's the thing. So, like, for for instance, today today, I worked out two days ago. Let's see. Today is Sunday. So I worked out on Friday morning. Usually, forty eight hours after the workout is when I'm feeling it the most. You know, so I so I always would like better recovery, and I, you know, really try to, like I've talked about already, try to control how much work I'm doing in the gym so I don't get into that overtraining state. Like today, for example, I I wouldn't say I'm overtrained, but, you know, maybe close where, you know, feeling, you know, not so energetic and so on. So yeah. But but, otherwise, I I just keep doing it. I think that, I I can't tell that there's any been any, you know, diminished strength or anything like that. That's good news. So then I think you mentioned that you do, like, just low intensity walking on the other days. And have you have you played around with I mean, I can hear people that are saying cold plunge and all these things that are purported to enhance recovery, which I put them in quotes because I I'm just not convinced. Because, you know, for me, nothing works better than actual rest. Like, don't stress me with sauna or cold plunge. I need to physically relax my heart rate for everything to to get back to normal. So have, like, have you experimented with, alright, I'm just not gonna leave the house today and see how that impacts, you know, my recovery versus a walk one mile, a walk two miles? Do you have that in an equation almost? Or have yes. Yes. Somewhat. There are there are days when I when I just say, yeah. I don't think I'll go out for a walk today. Unfortunately, when I do that, it's usually kinda too late. Like, in other words, like, I'm just feeling too tired, so, you know, I better not not do any of that. But yeah. So, you know, my like, my walking, I mean, I'm not going out and doing the, you know, 10,000 steps, you know, for for time or anything like that like some people do. It's more of a casual walk. I just I think, you know, this is an interesting point of about physical activity that, you know, in in my study of of this, I think that, maybe is unappreciated or underappreciated. I don't know. Anyway, that just the idea of kind of, like, getting the juices flowing is really important. You know, the the amount of physical activity that, can is conducive to having much lower mortality rates, I you saw me post this the other day, is very low. Yep. So if somebody goes from sedentary to walking thirty minutes a day, a few days a week, you know, they're getting just massive benefit out of this health benefit. So and and, also, you you kinda just briefly touched on this earlier. What you had in your in your video a couple weeks ago about v o two max and how the these so called elite, elite VO two max had the, you know, the the lowest mortality, but the elite actually wasn't even all that high. You know, that's something that's attainable by most people that doesn't require hours and hours of of conditioning exercise conditioning a week. Yeah. And some of that too is so when you look at the so I'm okay with the casual walk. I'm doing the same exact thing. Like, it's very low intensity on the non workout days. My whole workout routine is centered around that, you know, circuit training, compound movement based ninety minute workout. So I'm not trying to kill myself on the other days. Even even with the recovery and overtraining, there are day if I didn't have to expend energy on activities of life, like commuting to work or parenting, other things that impact stress levels, which can impact recovery, I could do some high intensity stuff on the day after, but even there, I've gotta be very careful. It's gotta be, like, less than ten minutes of, like, all out sprints. Otherwise, I'm further pushing my recovery to even slower than it usually is. So, but what the point I'm trying to get at is when when you look at, like, published studies on, like, 8,000 steps a day or 10,000 steps a day on, like, maximally maximally reducing all cause mortality risk, this is generally in people who are, you know, eating four diets and are overweight. Maybe they need a little bit more. Whereas someone who's really hitting it hard on those recovery days, you don't have to go and walk three miles or four miles. I I don't know. It's just a hypothesis, but, you know, there's no evidence in my data whether it's blood pressure or, you know, lipids, you know, that, you know, ramping it up even higher in terms of duration and and frequency for exercise would be beneficial. So Yeah. I I totally agree with you. Yeah. That that, right. Even even with, well, just yeah. Basically, I'm just repeating your point. Yeah. Most of these people are are are not eating right and, you know, might be overweight and so on. And and, yeah, you just don't need all that much exercise. I used to try to do, I used to try to intersperse my strength training workouts with some, you know, high intensity interval training. And, I mean, almost every time, I would just push myself over the edge into, you know, oh, man. I'm way overtrained here. So I don't do a whole lot of that anymore. I just, you know, take it take it, you know, on my training days, that's it. And then, yeah, the rest of the time, pretty casual stuff. And let the body recover. Right. Absolutely. Alright. So let's transition into diet. Right? So the sun, snake, and steel approach. So we got the steel. That's the, exercise component. Snake being, you know, a major part of the, diet component. So what's a normal diet? Like, starting from when you wake up, to when you you know? What time do you wake up? What time do you go to sleep? What's the eating pattern in, you know, in between? Okay. Okay. Well, these these days, I'm getting up pretty early because, I I, coach clients, and some of them, I they're from all over the world. So, like, if somebody's in Australia, for example, I I I mean, I talked to an Australian just the other day, and it was, 5AM my time. Seventeen hours time difference. So so I'm up pretty early. I drink copious amounts of tea. That that's that's my, drink of choice. And, sometimes I will do some intermittent fasting. You know, it kinda kinda depends, but, I would say, generally speaking, I probably wouldn't have anything to eat till I've been up for five or six hours, something like that. And I eat eye protein, and, I emphasize protein. At breakfast, you know, I might have something like Greek yogurt, like nonfat Greek yogurt or something like that or some cottage cheese or maybe, maybe some eggs, that sort of thing. Very similar things for lunch. I try to keep it light. Dinner is typically, yeah, some kind of meat like a steak with some vegetables, salad maybe, something like that. I have a couple glasses of wine. Yeah. And that about covers it. I mean, it's it's, you know, pretty similar from day to day, and and, you know, and I like it. So your eating window basically starts at some ten at ten in the morning then if you're up at five? So ten, eleven? Yeah. That yeah. That's fair enough. I mean, it's not the same every day, of course, but, yeah, something like that. Right. And then ends at about what time? Probably probably before 6PM. So ten alright. Eight hour eating window. And then on workout days, when do you fit the workout? Is the workout in the morning, you know, afternoon? How when do you Right. Right. I go I I do go early in the morning for, you know, actually a couple of reasons. Well, one, like I just said, I have clients and and I you know, if it's on, you know, a weekday, I often have to just squeeze the workout in. And fortunately, because my workouts are short and the gym is only three minutes drive for me, that's pretty easy to do. And and yeah. And then, of course, if if I do work out, I'm not gonna be fasting afterwards. I get some protein afterwards in some form or or other. Yeah. So let's see. I don't know. What did I answer the question? Was there something else there? Yeah. So the workouts are basically in the morning fasted, and then, you come home. And then do you continue to fast after on purpose, or then as soon as you get home, it's it's get food in the you know, food in? Right. Right. Exactly. It's it's get some food in, right after. So, yeah, that that's what I do. Voraciously. Right? I mean, it's, you know, I I I look forward to it after a workout. I've got it ready to go cooked and everything. Abs absolutely. I I usually, or I often find that I I, you know, weigh a pound or two more the day after my workout because I've eaten so much on workout days. I'm so hungry. Ah, so you're that's right. You're not you don't So you're just you're not counting calories at all. It's just, completely satiety and Right. Yeah. Interesting. Wow. I can't do that. I wish I I could do that and and auto regulate, but, unfortunately, that doesn't work for me. Uh-huh. Well, you know, the like like I've said to people, the only the only, app that I use in fitness is a scale. So that's, you know, basically how I'm judging things. It's interesting too, you know, when I step on the scale, and it kinda gives me, a a general idea of, like, am I really hungry? So, like, if I step on the scale and I'm, like, a pound or two more than I think I should be, I then I I think, oh, well, you know, yeah, I guess I'm not really very hungry, am I? And then so I'll fast a little bit. So you so then so that so do you weigh yourself every day? Is that is that a part of the I do. So if you see if you see the scale weight is a little bit higher that morning, then that's the motivation maybe to eat a little bit less that that day? Right. Yes. That's interesting. Yes. Absolutely. But you've gotta do that over a long enough period of time where it's like, alright. Yesterday, I had more salt than usual. It's a salt thing. It's not a calorie thing. This is this is true. I mean and and especially if I've, maybe had a few carbs, I eat generally pretty low carb. But if I've eaten more than usual and, of course, you know, body water comes with eating carbs. And so yeah. You usually, I can tell what's going on there, you know, especially, like, if we've gone out to eat or something like that, and I've had some things that I don't usually have and then yeah. So it's not a never based approach for some of the more, quote, unquote, fun stuff. It's just a limit that stuff as much as possible. You know? Right. Right. Rest restaurants, like I tell my clients, restaurants are terrible for weight loss. Yeah. Absolutely terrible. I mean, in theory, it's possible you go to a restaurant, and if you're really good, you can find something on the menu and stick to the plan and all this kind of stuff. But in practice, you know, you go to a restaurant, you're with friends or family, you have a drink or two, and then it's like, ah, who cares? You know? I'm just gonna have whatever I want. So, yeah, restaurants are not good for that. And they're in the business of, like, making sure you, you know, pay as much as possible by satisfying you as much as possible. So it's gonna be hyperpalatable even though it's not, you know, ultra processed. Right? So Absolutely. Yes. And that that's probably, you know, where I think we agree the most is ultra processed foods. You know? Now granted, I'm not a never on that too, but you've gotta be really careful with it, you know, to include it at all because if, you know, if it's frequency, you know, the, if the frequency of ultra processed food is more than a certain amount, now you're messing up the signals between the gut and brain, and you can't turn it off and you can't auto regulate. You know? So never on UPS for you, or that's just it's a very rare thing. Yeah. I I I'd say just very rare. So there there are probably there are probably few thing not too many things that are just never for me. But, you know, something like a dessert, well, that's not strictly speaking ultra processed, but let's say, but but but let's say a nice dessert. I mean, I'm probably only having something like that a few times a year. Yeah. Nice. So so, that gets to, like, calorie, calorie restriction. Like, how what's your I don't even know how tall you are. What's your body weight? So I I'm, about five nine and may maybe five nine and a half on a good day, and I weigh weigh about a hundred and fifty pounds. So you you may be some aspect of CR. BMI, what's that BMI? It's probably, like, twenty three ish? Twenty it's it's in the it's above twenty two, but it's, like, twenty two point three or something like that. Yeah. Interesting. Yeah. Alright. Yeah. So yeah. I I I've wondered about that myself, if I kind of fall into that category of I mean, obviously, I'm not restricting calories. For one thing, I'm not doing it deliberately. And for another thing, the people who are doing it deliberately are even, you know, as you know, a lot lighter, you know, like BMI of 19, this kind of thing. Right? So I'm not anywhere near there. But, yeah, I've I've I've wondered about that. Does that have something to do yeah. I'm I'm in good health, and I, you know, we talked about, you know, my age and all that kind of stuff. Does this have something to do with it? I do think that, you know, I I like I said, I'm terrible at tracking, but I look at overall and I think, you know, yeah, maybe I don't really eat all that much. So maybe in terms so when you like you said, when you think of, calorie restriction, yeah, there are people that are, like, eighteen point five and below, which to me is way too far in the extreme. But Yeah. When considering you were 20, that's a form of calorie restriction that you are able to maintain a 20 pound lighter, body weight. So I think there's a pretty good marker. I don't know if you've measured, sex hormone binding globulin, SHBG, that's dramatically elevated for people on CR. It's elevated by people who exercise, you know, or frequent, frequent regular exercisers, but it's almost double that for people who are on CR. So I don't know if you've measured It's it it I have, but it's been a long time. So I, you know, I couldn't tell you what it is currently. You know, my my I will tell you so this is an indication. I mean, last time I had blood work, it's been over a year, but I had testosterone done in my so, you know, I'm sure you know all about the relation between SHBG and free testosterone and so on. My free testosterone was out of range high. So that way you get yeah. SHBG probably very low. Right. Right. Interesting. So probably not CR then. That's interesting. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. I guess. Yeah. I'm on the other side of that point right now where my s h b SHBG is double the reference range. My total testosterone on the last test was very high, like nine seventy, but my free is right on that border of, you know, what's considered low. So I've actually increased my calories by a small amount. Because, you know so, free testosterone impacts erythropoiesis, which could impact total levels of red blood cells and hemoglobin. So I've actually started to see a pattern in my data of a trend down for red blood cells and hemoglobin as I've been cutting calories sequentially test over test. So that argues that my current BMI of around twenty two may actually be too low. So the people who are on more extreme extreme CR, I can only imagine, like, they're I don't know that they're doing it that that carefully. So Right. Right. Yeah. That's interesting. Yeah. The the the I I I've seen in in a number of clients who were, exercising like mad that they had, you know, low free testosterone, even low total total testosterone, high SHBG. I mean, I talk I talked to a young guy. You you know, he's like twenty twenty three, 24 years old or something, and he's saying, wow. I cannot can't put on muscle, and what's going on there? And so I talked to him. And, I mean, he he was, like, in the gym two hours every day, you know, all week long. I'm like, well, jeez. No wonder. You know? Your testosterone's low and yeah. Overtraining. It goes back to the overtrained phenotype. Right? So Right. Yeah. And and you would think that more is better where you're just moving your body, but yeah. So alright. So the third component, and I should mention for people who don't know, you're if I were you, I just a suggestion. I'd put it on a T shirt, sun, steak, and steel. I mean, it's a gray model. Right? So, so yeah. So we've got this, steak and steel. So the other aspect is sun, which, so no sunscreen no sunscreen ever? No sunscreen ever. But I I guess I I would have to, maybe maybe people get the wrong idea. So it's not it's not like I'm spending hours out in the sun lying out there every day. Nothing like that. It's more like I mean, I like I was out there today lying out a little bit. I was out there for twenty minutes. I mean, it was so all that depends on, you know, time of day, season of the year, all this kind of thing. So I'm not I'm not, you know, laying out, hours a day or anything like that. It's more well, a couple of things. I would say one is that it's more about don't be afraid of it, like like so many people are, you know, that we've been taught to be, oh, yeah. You know, if you're gonna be out there five minutes, you better have your sunscreen on, this kind of thing. The other is that it's more or less shorthand for just get outside, get some fresh air, move around, you know, and, yeah, get some sun. So that's that's what that's all about. Yeah. So I'm in the same boat. Twenty minutes, twenty to thirty minutes. It used to be an hour, and I started to notice some, like, bleaching, you know, that you get, like, sunspots that bleach. And I was like, oh, this is too much, which sucks because it's fun to be in the sun. Now I'm not trying to go the opposite extreme and no sun, but that's dramatically underrated, you know, especially with sunscreens everywhere. My 15 year old's like, I'm gonna lather up, and I'm like, you're you need to get sun exposure. It's we evolved getting sun. You know? So, even, you know, Brian Johnson probably is the most famous for this where he's, you know, never getting in the sun, which, I mean, that's just disagree with him there. You know? So Yeah. Yeah. Totally. I yeah. I agree. I I think I've heard you say it, but most people are deficient, especially older adults. So, you know, it's hugely potentially hugely important to to get that right. So Right. Right. Absolutely. And and and also, you know, be being in the sun, as you know, it it does a lot more than just, you know, produce vitamin d in the skin. So increases nitric oxide levels and and has all, you know, these other benefits. And then not only that, usually, I mean, if you're lying in the sun, you're getting some grounding, which I believe in also. So reduces inflammation and so on. So I think those are those are good. You you get into you get into, you know, the whole marginal benefit thing. Like, how, you know, how like, if I am who I am, how much benefit am I getting from, say, you know, grounding every day or something like that? Well, you know, who knows? It it it certainly can't hurt. The average person could probably get a lot of benefit out of it. So, wait, grounding is basically where you just bare feet on grass or and then what is it? It's something about the electrons in the ground. I don't know what's the what's the mechanism. Right. Right. So, yeah. So it's bare feet on the grass or, you know, if you, also, if you're on concrete that's in contact with the earth, that works as well. And so what it does, at least one of the main things it seems to do is, yeah, you're you're, getting electrons from the earth, and this increases the zeta potential of red blood cells. And so it lowers blood viscosity, so therefore, it improves, circulation, and, and then it reduces inflammation as well. There have been studies on this. Now whether whether the reducing inflammation part has anything to do with the zeta potential of red blood cells, I don't know. But but the, yeah, the the zeta the zeta potential is important. I mean, if you look up, for example, you know, studies about, you know, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and mortality, you know, you find that people who have, high sed rates have higher mortality, and it's because their blood you know, the red blood cells are all just clumping together. So you don't want that to happen. So that anyway, that's one thing at least that grounding does. The grounding can reduce the ESR, reduce, or or the zeta potential has has to do with if the red blood cells are I guess, they're negative. I I don't I don't know. Right. Right. So the the the zeta potential is the fact that, each red blood cell has a negative electric charge around it. Therefore, they repel each other. Yeah. And and so, grounding increases the zeta potential, and so they have less of a tendency to stick together. So is there published data that, grounding is associated with reduced all cause mortality risk? Is has that been published? That, I don't think so. I've never seen anything like that. But it's the hypothesis that it should lead to the less tendency for the red blood cells to clump, less clotting, and all that all the bad stuff that goes with that. Right. Alright. So I haven't I have alright. So since we're on biomarkers, right, so I wanna so the lean mass hyperresponder. Right? So let me pose the situation. Right? So you you've got someone who's very low carb and, as expected, you know, triglycerides come down, LDL goes up, HDL goes up. Right? So you have a low TG to HDL ratio, LDL very high. High total cholesterol. The the assumption would be that in that case, someone may improve their metabolic status. We're now glucose is low. HbA one c is low. But what if that's not the case? What if it's, what if it's just, you know, glucose is over a 100 hbA one c close close to six in conjunction with the lipids being in those directions. So what would you what would you do in that situation? Well, in that situation, I'd say that person is likely not metabolically healthy. So, you you know, in a metabolically healthy person, you'd expect to see hemoglobin a one c closer to five. Yeah. And and so, and if they had a high the LDL part. So this is, I suppose, what's of most interest here. For one thing, it appears that oxidized LDL is the important part of it, that if it's not oxidized, it really doesn't matter. And, and then, you know, of course, lately, they've been getting in at all the ApoB stuff, and the same thing goes here because ApoB is a a marker of small dense LDL particles, which are associated with for metabolic health, metabolic syndrome, and so on. So, I I mean, I would expect for, you know, for somebody to go for someone that went on a low carb diet to see improvements in all those markers. But in any case, the the way you describe it, that's not good metabolic health. And so this is what I believe is the crucial component of cardiovascular risk. Yeah. So how would I'm not for me, it's not I mean, I hear you on the LDL, but it's more of, okay. If someone has gone low carb and they see all of the things, you know, and they're not over overweight or obese, You know? So how would you improve metabolic health so that they can reduce glucose and reduce h b a one c within the context of going low carb? Yeah. So, well, of course, one thing is exercise, of course, what you know, whether they're doing the right amount, of exercise or any any exercise at all. People, who are of normal weight often have relatively high body fat and low muscle mass. So just the fact that someone is in a normal BMI range doesn't mean that they have good body composition and that they have good good metabolic health in that way. And then another thing that I've seen, a lot in talking to my clients, and this is not this is not hard to believe. But, unfortunately, in my opinion, in, you know, ketogenic and low carb diet circles, they promote ingesting a whole lot of fat. And and they they think that this is, basically, you know, a free food or harmless or however you wanna put it. And so some of these people are in in, you know, doing, you know, massive amounts of of fat. I mean, I've had I've had clients, for example, that have come to me and they're drinking bulletproof coffee, for example. And and, you know, like, I I think, like, why would anyone wanna do that? You know? I mean, not not if you're aiming for weight loss, certainly. So, you know, whether all that dietary fat could, you know, be involved in having a higher hemoglobin a one c or higher glucose, I, you know, I don't really know. But it could certainly be a factor in not being able to lose weight, for example, or, you know, lose excess body fat. Is it possible that that, increasing carbs in that take in in that case and I don't mean, like, pastries and cookies and all this other stuff, but, like, just real food. You know, maybe, the fiber helps to you know, the gut microbiome get involved to reduce, you know, to improve insulin sensitivity. There's published date on that. Like, I I hear you. There may be people who thrive on low carb, whether it's high fat or not, and then glucose is low. H b one c is low, and they're not you know, and they're exercising. You know? But for people who are high, you know, it's a matter of trying to titrate the dose in people who may not, you know, respond to generally, you know, the lower carb diet where now you've got some other metabolic issues that shouldn't be there. Well, maybe it's there's stuff in the diet they can change or maybe try to get leaner. Well right. So, you know, I'm sure you're probably aware of the, you know, the paper by Nick Norwitz Yeah. Yeah. Where he ate ate Oreos, and it brought his LDL from very high way, you know, way down, and it was more effective for him than when he took a statin. And so yeah. But but I think so yeah. So so if somebody's on a very low carb diet and they have high LDL, yes, they could they could potentially, you know, bring it down by eating some more carbs. Then this is the lean mass hyperresponder phenotype. But not but not the l l d l side of it. I'm more interested in the glucose h b a one c, you know, because you're gonna get the I I hear you in in Nick's experiment. You know, you're gonna reduce LDL, but LDL, you know, maybe me maybe it's meaningless. It's within the context of insulin resistance and inflammation that maybe now it's it's a big player. Right? So Right. So so for the aside from the lipids, like, you know, I don't know if I looked at his paper, but I I don't know if that it was in there. But did his glucose or h b one c or insulin levels change when he added? High blood? I I I I don't know. I don't think that was in his paper. I I you know, one thing that happens in in, I've seen this in myself is this the so called dawn effect with blood glucose. So I've had I've I've gone in and had a, you know, fasting glucose done, and it was, like, a 105. And I've seen, like, for example, Sean Baker, posted his. You know, this is a few years ago, I think. But, yeah, he had, like you know, it was a 120 or something like this. And so the idea here is is the dawn effect, the idea that when you get up in the morning and and cortisol rises and your blood glucose rises. And and this is especially, especially happens if people are under stress. And by stress, I don't mean necessarily, you know, something horrific, but just, like, getting up in the morning, driving off to work, you know, rush, rush, rush. I mean, it was like when I had my 105 glucose, I was working in a clinical lab. And, you know, I had gotten up in the morning, rush rush, drive off to work, my commute to work, get in the lab. I'm running around in the morning, getting all my work done. Then I finally after two or three hours there, I had a break, and I said said to one of my coworkers, hey. Can you, you know, draw my blood? You know? So, obviously, I was all, you know, all this stress. So maybe that had something to do with it. Yeah. So h b a one c may be, a better measure in that case. Right? Because then it would be more reflective of the longer term changes. Right. I think Sean I think Sean, rationalized that his insulin levels were low. I think it, like, three milli IUs, which in even in combination with the glucose of a 100 would be a low HOMA and and technically insulin sensitive. But, yeah, I I too work with clients. So I I do have one that where his, you know, high high fat, high low carb low carb diet, basically, keto diet and, glucose glucose, you know, older than age expected. HB won't see older than age expected. You know? And then and then it's trying to figure out what can we add in to to, you know, you know, to solve to square the circle there. You know what I mean? So I I think that, one you know, what the resolution to that is, I I'm not so sure, but one one, an interesting thing to do would be to get a non fasting glucose test. Mhmm. And if it's lower than the fasting, then I think you can you can very probably say that, you know, this this fasting glucose is this dawn effect. It's an anomaly. And, overall, maybe it doesn't matter. Yeah. Alright. So let's let's shift into your probably your most famous biomarker being the iron, you know, dumping iron. If people don't know, you've written six books. That's one of them, dumping iron. So what's so the I get the iron story that it's a part of hemoglobin and red blood cells, but there may be people who aren't familiar. So how would you how would you, you know, pitch the iron story in aging? Okay. Wrote a paper too that got published. So Right. Right. So, let's see. Where do I start? So iron is necessary is a necessary element for all living things. And as far as human beings go, go, we have, finely tuned, iron regulatory mechanisms, hormones, and so on that regulate the absorption of iron from our food. So at least in theory, if somebody is very metabolically healthy, everything else is right, when people get to a certain, level of body iron stores, basically, the regulatory system will really kind of shut down the absorption of iron so you can keep that in fine tune. In practice, many people are not metabolically healthy, and there's there are sources of iron that, we we, didn't necessarily have before. You know, for example, flour and cornmeal in The United States is mostly iron fortified, and people take multivitamins with iron supplements and, you know, this kind of thing. So the result is is that, generally speaking, people's iron iron level body iron stores as indicated by the or ferritin rises with age. And this has been shown to be associated with all kinds of ill health and higher mortality and so on. This this whole line of reasoning and investigation basically started when, the late Jerome Sullivan, several decades ago, was thinking about, well, why do women have such lower heart, rates of heart disease? And, you know, at the time, and for all I know, maybe still now, a lot of people are are saying, well, they have estrogen and various things that, you know, prevent heart disease. And he thought, oh, well, gee. Women have much you know, premenopausal women have much lower stores of body iron. Their ferritin is low. And, you know, in middle age, like, you know, let's say between the age of four 40 and 50, You men have, about five something like four to five times the levels of ferritin that women do, and they also have about four or five times the rates of heart attacks as women do at that age. So that's where where it all started. There's been a lot of research. Iron is important, for instance, in cancer. Cancer is a rapidly growing tissue. Anything that is growing requires iron for for growth. Some many, tumor cells upregulate transferrin receptors so that they can accumulate a lot of iron. Another side of this evidence is is that, and, again, this this research goes back a few decades, and and there there's more recent research too, that blood donors have better health than nonblood donors. Now, of course, you've run into a big problem there, which is the healthy donor effect because you gotta be healthy to donate blood. And and not not only that, probably people who don't feel so healthy are not even gonna try. But this is so this has been looked at as well. You know, try trying to statistically account for the healthy donor effect is, you know, to see how much of this is real, and it certainly does appear to be real. There was a paper that came out a few years ago that said that so one thing they do to account for the healthy donor effect is they look at, for example, they compare frequent donors with nonfrequent donors. So, you know, this this doesn't necessarily account for the whole thing, but at least you're not comparing just blood donors to non donors. So, anyway, they they looked at this and found that, it it it was something like every blood donation beyond two donations a year was associated with seven and a half percent lower mortality rate. I think I got that right. So this this was trying to account for for the healthy donor effect. They've also looked at things like, like in some countries, people are, not allowed to give blood after the age of 65, so they compare current blood donors with former blood donors. And so, anyway, that that's the whole thing with iron. And and so, the idea is oh, and, also, let me let me add another part to this. Therapeutic phlebotomy, in other words, bleeding people, bloodletting, does all kinds of good things for metabolic syndrome and fatty nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, all this kind of thing. So iron is a very reactive metal, and and, you know, can cause oxidative stress, does all kinds of, all kinds of bad things. So, so keeping iron body iron levels low is, in in in a low normal range, I should say, is the thing to do for good health and longevity. So it it's not just looking at iron by itself, but iron with, ferritin, or is it could you look at iron by itself as a biomarker? Right. So so bay basically, no. In most cases, you have to look at ferritin. Now so this is this brings up an interesting point because the iron that is causing trouble in the body that causes damage and so on is what they would call free iron or labile iron. In other words, this is iron that is not bound by the protein molecule ferritin. So the, you know, the the question is, well, so if you, donate blood, for example, you lower your ferritin. Does that but the in in my book, the I use the analogy that, for example, if you look at dynamite. Okay? So dynamite is, you know, allegedly, if it's just sitting there, you know, it's all safe, you know, until until you do something to it, like, I don't know, light a fuse, whatever they do to dynamite. It's okay. But, you know, you wouldn't necessarily wanna store a case dynamite in your house. And and so that's the analogy I use with ferritin. So if if the if the iron atoms are locked into the ferritin molecule, then there's no problem. But in practice, this whole system becomes dysregulated. One of, the late, doctor Leo Zakarski, who wrote the preface to my book, and he he had done a lot of work on iron. He he talked to me about, for for instance, fair the ferritin molecule can become glycosylated. It with you know, if somebody has high high glucose excursions or generally high blood sugar, the you know, it become it can become glycosyl, and and then it does just doesn't work properly, and it leaks iron. So, so in in that sense, yeah, get you know, getting the ferritin down to a low normal level is helpful in that way. So So probably looking at both. Right? Not looking at only at iron levels in blood, but also ferritin. Probably measuring both would be a good idea. Because if you only have the iron, you don't know the ferritin. And if you only have the ferritin, you don't know the iron. Right? So Well well so so if you're looking at, if you're looking at serum iron, yes, it does become dysregulated sometimes, but but the damage of, of the iron is going on inside cells. And and so, you know, this this gets really technical into sort of, you know, the kind of territory a hematologist would be looking at, you know, iron and transferrin and, total iron saturation and all these kind of things. So, there there are a number of studies that, you know, they've been done, I don't know, a few decades ago where they were looking at, what were they looking at? At? Transferrin, I guess, or iron saturation. But this is just not as if somebody has a high iron saturation, that generally means they're absorbing too much iron, And, you know, so, like, they they might have hemochromatosis or at least, you know, some gene variant that is causing them to absorb too much iron. Interesting. So then it's maybe it's not just looking at iron as a biomarker and ferritin, but total iron binding capacity. Right? Because if that's high Right. Then you've got a lot of iron being released from hemoglobin and wherever else it's coming from, and that's indicative of cellular damage. And, you know, for whatever reason, whether it's microbes causing it or your cells are just dysfunctional. Right? So Right. Right. Just think wow. Yeah. So so what I I didn't even think I was gonna bring in microbes into it, but do you think microbes, when considering, you know, gut leak, there could be a blood micro microbiome that maybe just overgrowth during aging. Do you think that that's a component in the iron equation since microbes compete with human cells for iron where, Yeah. That's interesting. And and, you know, I'm not sure. I I only have, an idea or two about that. You know, one thing that I found so interesting was recently, I I I learned this is is so two two genera of bacteria that are generally considered probiotic, namely lactobacillus and bifidobacterium, do not require iron at all. They are like one of the very few species, you know, genera, you know, life forms, whatever we wanna call it, that do not require iron. And it, you know, it it it seemed curious to me that the fact that they don't require iron and they are considered healthy for the gut, you know, does is that related? One thing I I could say is is that as far as, you know, the gut goes, well, the liver is the first organ to, you know, to see the basically, you see the contents, you know, that that what's coming in from the gut. And, of course, we get, you know, fatty liver and cirrhosis and things like that. Iron is involved in in that, definitely. You know, it's free iron, of course. An interesting thing kind of as an aside, you know, a lot of people don't know this, but being on Twitter, I'm sure you do. You see all the stuff about seed oils. Yeah. Right, and and what they're doing and as far as they they polyunsaturated fats are very reactive molecules and and lead to, you know, oxidative stress, molecular damage, and so on. So what's going on there? Well, in at least in many cases, it appears to be it's a combination of polyunsaturated fats and free iron. The free iron is reacting with the polyunsaturated fats to create this problem. This is exactly, you know, you you know about this too, lipofuscin. So, you know, this is a so called age pigment that builds up in inside, lysosomes and just basically totally messes up the cell. It's been called the garbage catastrophe of aging because it's garbage that the cell can't get rid of. What's lipofuscin made of? It's made of polyunsaturated fats and iron. And and then and then and then it it just it it messes up the protein molecules polyunsaturated fats. That's that's what causes the buildup of lipofuscin. So microbes potentially playing a role in that process outside of the lactobacillus and bifidobacteria? So so for example for example, if, you know, like, in the gut, if, there is there can be, like, you know, the degradation of the mucus layer. So now the bacteria can get into the endothelial cells. So So could there be a situation where the microbe microbes had infected a cell and, you know, it's inside the cell? You you know, the and maybe that's a part of autoimmunity. I mean, this is speculation. Right? But, could there be a process where microbes are competing for iron and then there's cellular damage as a result? Iron is released, as a part of that process, which then is a cascade of, you know, horrors for the body. Right? So Right. Right. So, yes, for one thing well, what's interesting is that, yeah, so so all all bacteria, microorganisms, apparently, other than lactobacillus and bifidobacterium, all require iron. And if if we're talking about pathogenic bacteria that invade the human body, iron is absolutely the limiting element for their growth. They absolutely have to have iron. So they have developed ways to acquire iron, and we have developed ways to withhold it from them. This has been called an evolutionary arms race where where it, you know, like our transferrin molecules, for example, have grown to become ever you know, to ever to hold iron ever tighter and tighter and tighter, you know, so that bacteria can't get them. And then they the the bacteria or other microorganisms have developed ways like Siderophores. So these are, you know, that the the proteins and that they secrete into their environment that grab iron. So, whether, you know, whether that's well, another thing is that when people are, critically ill or, or they have severe injuries that, you know, this can lead to the release of free iron. And then you have the bacteria or other micro microorganisms swooping in because they've got all this free iron, and then you see, you know, you see infections and so on. Whether that dynamic has anything to do with, you know, disordered iron metabolism, you know, as most people would experience it, I couldn't say. Yeah. I don't know. That that's the, yeah, that's the next step in this evolution of the story. Right? Are microbes causing it, you know, causing the the, you know, the leak, but who knows? Right? So Right. Alright. So what would if you had if you had to change parts of your approach, you know, what if you had to go back and tell your younger self, you know, what would you change? Like, in in two in two ways. One, the the pre runner, the pre you know, the listening to mainstream health advice because I was brainwashed by that nonsense too. We eat low fat. I was going 10% of my total calories, and it wasn't until I started tracking diet and looking at correlations was like, oh, man. That's not true at all. That's actually terrible for, you know, a lot of biomarkers. So, so so in two phases, like, I guess before you you had that awakening, before you unplugged and I I heard you say, you know, red pill. The red pill also was in total recall. Right? So you gotta be careful we gotta be careful about people throwing around red pills because maybe people saying the red pill stuff, maybe trying to throw, you know, a blue pill disguised as a red pill. But anyway and so so in two in two parts, with the the pre you know, basically, autodidact, which I have the greatest respect for at that level of of thinking, which I think you are in that boat, and very few people are. Unfortunately, I hope that more people would would be on the self taught, you know, road. So before the, you know, the the the runner, the PD runner, and then over the past, you know, say, ten years since you've been more on this track. So are there things that you would change and you wish you changed earlier on relative to to now? Well, yes. So, you know, I wish I had been training the way I am a long time ago. You know, that said, I I really did enjoy running. I mean, there there's something like when you when you go out and run 10 miles and when you get into it, it's just this this feeling. It's it's euphoric. Yep. You know, so I I really did enjoy that, but I don't think it's the best way to exercise anymore. What I really wish that I had done differently was not gone near any of that vegetarian vegan nonsense. Protein and particularly animal protein is just so important. And, you know, generally speaking, vegetarians are you know, and especially vegans don't get enough. And, you know, I practice both of those for a while because, yeah, I believed all the mainstream stuff. Oh, don't have saturated fat. It's gonna clog your arteries and kill you. And heart disease, you know, you asked me earlier about my family. Well, my dad's side of the family, heart disease runs in the family. They all had it, you know, including my father. And so this was always a big concern of mine. Like, you know, shit. I don't wanna get that. You know, so, you know, this this was the message coming down from mainstream media or mainstream health sources that, you know, you should don't eat don't eat red meat, don't, you know, or don't eat meat at all. That's even better. I listen to these. It's it's like it's like I'm almost embarrassed to say now. I mean, I mean, I listen to people like, doctor John McDougall, you know, who who was advocating this, vegan diet and so on. So that that was that would probably be the main thing that I I wish I could change. Well, here's another one. I just I just saw it as something else. I smoked cigarettes for fifteen years. Yeah. I've heard you say that. That's crazy. Yeah. Right. You know, at the time, I mean, so every god. I just like, when I was, say, around 20 years old, every everybody smoked. And, you know, it was kind of this thing about, like, well, yeah, they're telling me it's bad. Maybe I should cut back or, you know, this kind of thing. And, of course, eventually, I quit. But when I look back on that now, wow, lighting lighting tobacco on fire and inhaling it into your lungs, like, wow, that's pretty crazy. How long how long did you smoke for? About fifteen years. Oh, man. How many cigarettes a day? What well, so it wasn't all that many. I mean, probably even at my heaviest, it was half a pack. And then towards towards the end there, it was more like five or six cigarettes a day, that sort of thing. But that was, thirty five years ago or so? Yeah. So when when we I probably probably started, you know, about age 16 and probably smoked till I was 30, 32, somewhere in there. So what motivated you to quit? Just health. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you know, my just talking about my dad who had heart disease. Well, he was a smoker. He was also a doctor, you know, back then. Even the doctors smoked. And and so it was just totally normal, you know, in the environment. But then, yeah, eventually, the messages started getting through to me, and I thought, yeah. Okay. I better not do this. So my mom smoked when she was pregnant with my brother and I. So that's, you know, crazy. Just, like, literally crazy. I I can't imagine. Yeah. Yeah. Right. Right. So advice would be don't go vegan, don't go vegetarian, and, don't smoke back then. That's true. It would, change. Right. Right. Don't smoke. I mean, the the message not to smoke cigarettes is, of course, you know, everybody recognizes that now, but it was at the time, I guess, it it was just so common. I guess it was just less appreciated. Smoking was so common that that message wasn't appreciated. Have you tested lung functions since then? I have. For some reason, I was having some kind of problem medical problem. This would have been over fifteen years ago or something, and I went in. And so so they gave me a chest X-ray, and they said, why don't you go get this lung function test? So I did that. And they told me I was in the top one percentile for my age. Nice. Alright. So yeah. Like, okay. I'll take it. Yeah. Alright. So it wasn't that that much of a negative, right, where it persisted. Yeah. So that's good news. Alright. I'm all out of questions. Anything that we didn't cover that we could have covered, should cover? Not that I can think of. I think we covered a lot here. Cool. Alright. Thanks, PD. Until next time. Well, thanks a lot, Mike. It was great talking to you. Thanks for having me. Same. Alright. Ciao. Okay. Alright. Ciao. Bye.