In an earlier video, we saw that low dose nicotinic acid, more specifically, sixty milligrams per day increased NAD. But what's the lowest dose of nicotinic acid to impact NAD? So to address that for a March 4 test, I sent blood to GINFINITY for intracellular NED analysis, blood intracellular NED analysis. And if you wanna measure your own NED levels, there's a discount link in the video's description. So from the last test until the day before this test on March 4, average nicotinic acid intake was twenty seven milligrams per day. And I log my supplement intake and food intake every day, using Cronometer. So that's how I know these amounts. But we can be more specific with how much nicotinic acid before the test. Two weeks before testing, average daily nicotinic acid was thirty eight milligrams per day. And even more specifically more specifically one week before testing, it was forty five milligrams per day. So we've got a lower dose than the sixty milligrams. Will forty five increase NAD? But there's another metabolite that could potentially impact NAD and that's Trigonelline. And if you missed that recent video, it'll be in the right corner. So I've been trying to increase dietary intake of Trignone with the goal of it on its on its own increasing NAD. So for one week before testing, average Trignone was was my highest to date, fifty one milligrams per day. So did that combination impact NAD? And unfortunately, it did not. We can see that my NAD for the March 4 test was 26.3 micromolar, which is not higher than my levels without NAD precursors, which as shown by these seven tests are in the 18.5 to 26.6 micromolar range. In contrast, with NAD precursors, NAD has been higher than 26.6 micromolar for seven tests With the exception of three hundred milligrams of NMN per day which didn't move the needle 25.3 micromolar. So to answer the question, what's the lowest dose for Nactinic Acid to increase NAD? It's still still sixty milligrams per day in my case. As the combination of forty five coming from nicotinic acid and fifty one milligrams per day trigoneline didn't increase or move the needle in terms of NAD. So with that in mind, what's the next experiment? So half of that fifty one milligrams per day of Trigonelline one week before testing came from alfalfa sprouts. As I was eating about a 100 grams of those per day and at those amounts, it's a decent source of Trigonelline. Now, there is a food or a sprouted food, potentially sprouted food that has higher levels of Trigonelline relative to alfalfa and that's red clover seeds. Now, I don't know if they're in in the sprouts. I searched PubMed for studies that looked at Trigonelline content in red clover seed sprouts. Wasn't able to find that. But the clover seeds have five x more than alfalfa sprouts. So for the next NED experiment, the plan is to eat an equivalent amount of sprouts coming from clover seeds relative to alfalfa about a 100 grams per day, which should three x Trigonellium from fifty to about a hundred and fifty milligrams per day. So if I was getting 25 from alfalfa, clover seeds have five x that's a hundred and twenty five milligrams. And then 25 coming from my background from chickpeas and other foods, that should be a hundred and fifty milligrams of trichannelle per day. So that's a three x increase. Will that plus a much lower dose of nicotinic acid? I'm only planning on using it on exercise days as it may have some benefit in terms of heart rate variability and resting heart rate recovery. Will that combination, very low dose nicotinic acid with a three x dose for trigoneline impact NAD? The plan is to set in blood, within the next few days either on Friday or on this Sunday. So four days away. So stay tuned for that data coming in an upcoming video. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in including discount links for NAD quantification, epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Scifox Health, which includes ApoB and GrimAge, green tea, dye tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or dye trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.