See, we've been talking about this, calorie restriction, and you've been eating less calories than you need to. But the thing is is that you also gave hosted a presentation from, Camille Pavlis, if I remember his I'm I'm, Pavlis, if I'm pronouncing his name right. So he visited your podcast, and he talked about the impact of short lived controls on calorie restriction. And, basically, as he went through it, he found that the calorie restriction that they show in the animals only works in the really small animals. Like, basically, the lowest weight animals. So for any one of the four interventions they do, whether it's in yeast cells or fruit flies or mice, the top 10% have no benefit from calorie restriction at all. And these are even in the animals. And it's only in the bottom 10% by weight that get any benefit from it. And so a natural question out of that is, are humans more like fat rats or like lean rats? How long do we live for our size? Well, this has already been answered. Here's a statistical analysis that went through, and it measured every animal they could find on how long it lived versus how much it weighed. And you can see down there in the lower left, we have mice underperforming the amount of time that you expect them to live given their body weight. And then all the way at the upper top of it, we see humans who are live much longer than you would expect for our physical size. In fact, we live five times as long as would be expected just based off of our weight. So when we're looking trying to compare ourselves to these fruit flies or other things, none of them live anywhere as long as a human does just based off of how long you would expect something to live based off of their weight. And then if we go further into that, one of the natural places to look is you're thinking about, longevity. And you mentioned this is one of the things that should be on the tiers is the mortality based on body weight for a human. So if it was true that eating low calories for an extended period of time was the key to longevity, then naturally you would be seeing that that the people who weigh the least would then live the longest. But we don't see that at all. In fact, the people who weigh the least actually die fifty percent have a fifty percent higher all cause mortality than people who have a normal BMI of between twenty 25. So it only starts to go up as as we mentioned before when you started to get into a heavy BMI. But if you're in a normal range, there's really not that much benefit from eating less calories. And you could say, well, I'm doing calorie restriction. I'm not just losing weight. Well, the people who are doing calorie restriction, almost all of them are very low BMI, an average of around eighteen or so, which is at the point that it significantly increased all cause mortality. And this has already been, data has already been cleaned to remove the smoking people. One way to lose weight, unfortunately, is to smoke. It's also been corrected for the level of activity and exercise and class and and age and other things. So this is basically saying that the humans that are living in the normal range can't get any additional benefit just from trying to reduce their calories and live a life of deprivation. You wanna go ahead and, give some, give a swing back? Yeah. So if we're starting with the nine hundred day rule, a major takeaway from that paper too was that, CR was one of the few interventions to consistently allow mice to live longer than nine hundred days. So if nine hundred days if median lifespan nine hundred days is a short lived control, CR was one of the few interventions where consistently the, mice live longer than nine hundred days. And if I can if I can, share screen here so I can show that data can't share. You've gotta give me share privileges. There we go. Alright. Hang on real quick. Yeah. So if you look at one of the recent studies, that just came out and I don't know. Wait. Let's see if you can see what I see. Let me, go full yep. Alright. Okay. So this study, just came out, and they're for those who haven't seen it, videos on the channel. The importance of this study, and not to say this is any different from the nine hundred day rule, but it it's additive because this is, recently published. So it wasn't available when, Camille's group published, his data. Anyway, this study included 960 mice. So that's a key point because when you look at any lifespan studies, if you're if you are two groups or have many groups have eight mice per per intervention or controls, it's not adequately powered to look at lifespan. So each of these five groups, eat as much as you wanted ad lib. One day of fasting, two days of fasting, 20% CR, 40% CR. Five groups. 960 mice in total divide that by five. That's how many mice were in each group. A lot of mice. Grant and also it's in female mice, so I can't say anything about male mice in this study. So when you look at the nine hundred day rule, that's about thirty months right here, median lifespan. So compared to ad lib, you can see that relatively relatively short lived was but an increase in lifespan relative to the short lived, ad lib, eat as much as you wanted, both one and two days of fasting. So maybe you can cross off one and two days of of fasting as being potentially relevant because it increased lifespan relative to the, short lived controls who live shorter than nine hundred days. You could also make that same claim about, or actually where now where you start to see the lifespan curve go beyond thirty months or sorry. Sorry. Now then even 20% CR, you can see 20% CR median lifespan is right at not is right at thirty months, nine hundred days. So, you there too, you could say, okay. 20% CR, no extension of lifespan if you use the, nine hundred day rule, and, you know, basically your ad lib, there those are short lived controls. But then you can see 40% CR very clearly way past the thirty day rule. So you could say, okay. The 40% CR is pretty extreme. Almost nobody can handle that. And where I I prefer Nuance to everything you just mentioned is that, while it's true that absolute CR is probably bad. Right? It's you can't say, eat as little as possible, have a BMI of eighteen. Right? I I that's something I've never proposed ever, and I never would propose. Right? It's it's find the body weight and body composition that's associated with your best biomarker profile in terms of how does that biomarker look by how do those biomarkers look in terms of youth and their association with all cause mortality risk. So in other words, it used to be calorie restriction with optimal nutrition, c r o n. I'd add to that c r o n and optimal biomarkers. So chronob. Right? So I guess I just heard the phrase, and it's probably a terrible name. We can come up with other names. But highlight highlight that point just using this study again as an example. When using the, not not the thirty day rule, but taking it even a step further and looking at, mice that lived in any group past thirty five months, which clearly beats the thirty day rule. Right? So you can see that even in the mice that ate as much as they wanted, there were still a pretty good amount that lived longer than thirty five months and got close to the, you know, forty more than forty months, which is long lived for a mouse. And obviously, as you go up the groups, you know, fasting, there, you know, there are more mice in in the full CR groups that live past thirty five months. But the authors the authors of this study then asked, which biomarkers are associated with a longer lifespan without even looking at at if the animals were CR or not. Right? So the one day of fasting, they weren't CR. Two days of fasting ended up being CR. So you have two groups that are essentially not CR and three groups that ended up being CR. So in terms of biomarkers that were associated with a longer lifespan regardless of which group those mice were in, having higher levels of lymphocytes at a relatively young age, 16, associated with a longer lifespan, and on the other side, having a higher RDW, which is many people know on the channel, is a major predictor of biological age using doctor Morgan Levine's bio biological age test PhenoAge, having a higher value for that regardless of group group designation was associated with a shorter lifespan. So these data aren't just in mice. These this story is similar in people. The RDW increases during aging. This is in people again, and a relatively higher RDW is associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. And, conversely, lymphocytes decline during aging just like they did in that giant mouse study, with lower levels of lymphocytes being associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So just to go back to your original your original point, it isn't an absolute CR where lower is better, get your BMI as low as possible. I look at it as find the magnitude of CR that's best associated with your most youthful and quote, unquote healthy, lowest all cause mortality risk biomarker profile. But then also, how do you feel? Because if you're tired and hungry, you're probably too