In the last video, we saw that my biological age, when using doctor Morgan Levine's biological age calculator, PhenoAge, was about seventeen years younger than my chronological. So what may be contributing to these data? So let's start off with supplements. And if you're familiar with the channel, the first two shouldn't be a surprise. I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in my early twenties, so I've been taking prescription levothyroxine since then, a hundred and thirty seven and a half micrograms per day. And then in the non summer months, so eight to nine months out of the year, I supplement with a thousand I use of vitamin d. And you can see that for all forty nine days that correspond to this test, I supplemented with vitamin d. So more about that forty nine day period. So that it starts or started on the day after the last blood test, which was which was on 11/27/2023 and lasted until the day before this blood test, which was 01/14/2024. So from the immediately after the last blood test to the day before this blood test is a forty nine day period. I also supplemented with methylfolate, four hundred micrograms per day, but only 18 of the forty nine days that correspond to this blood test as I added other stuff into the diet that has folate, so I thought it would be wise to take out the supplement. And I also supplemented with methyl b twelve, a thousand micrograms per day for all forty nine days of this period because that's significantly correlated with lower homocysteine in my data. I also supplemented with nicotinic acid, but only for two of the forty nine days in this period, in part because I don't wanna supplement with the supplement with it all the time knowing that it could impact the epigenetic pace of aging, otherwise known as done eating pace. But I think that there may be some value in supplementing with it on exercise days as that may be the, when I need the biggest, NAD boost or, the the biggest effect of NAD restoration by including some nicotinic acid. Now interestingly, I also discovered in my data that a relatively higher niacin intake, including supplemental nicotinic acid, is significantly associated with a higher heart rate variability and a lower resting heart rate, which is good news because that's closer to youthful status. And that's after adjusting for body weight. And I posted that data on Patreon. I may include that in a video at some point in the future. And that's it for supplements. No other purported gyr protectors or senolytics, which then brings us to diet. And more specifically, what diet composition corresponds to blood test number one in 2024. And that's what we'll see here. This is we're gonna see the average daily dietary intake for the forty nine day period that corresponded to this blood test. And note that I track all of my, daily diet by weighing it first on a food scale, entering it into Cronometer, and then manually entering all of that data into an Excel spreadsheet where I can then line up each blood test with a corresponding average dietary intake. In terms of the foods that I ate for this forty nine day period, the average daily dietary intake, we can see the top 25 foods here that are ranked in terms of grams with the exception of green tea, which is an ounce. And if you wanna use what I use as a quick shout out, there's a discount link for the company that I use. It's organic loose leaf green tea sourced from Japan. So check that out in the video description if you wanna use what I use. Alright. So were there any experiments for this test? And if you're familiar with the channel, you'll know that my strawberry intake is usually around 600 grams per day. So I purposely cut that by about a 150 grams, and I'll get to that why in a second. But I also cut yogurt because some of the strawberries I mix with, with yogurt is kinda like an ice cream, but so if I'm cutting strawberries, I also cut the yogurt out. So I did that to get some calories to spend on other stuff to do a couple of experiments. And one of those was the inclusion of oranges. So why oranges? Oranges are a rich source of proline betaine, five hundred and ten micrograms per gram, and that paper will be in the video's description. All of the papers will be in the video's description that are referenced in this video. So what is proline betaine? So we can see its its structure there. So, it the the amino acid protein at its nitrogen atom, you can see that there are two methyl groups. So in other words, proline betaine is dimethylproline. In other words, it can act potentially as a methyl donor for reducing homocysteine or potentially impacting methylation, whether it's the Horvath epigenetic test or Dunedin Paste. At least that's the goal. So from oranges, based on the sixty three grams per day average that I took in, and when multiplying that by five five hundred and ten micrograms per gram of oranges, that yields thirty two milligrams per day of proline butane. In other words, expanding my methyl donor pool. And I know everybody or a lot of people talk about trimethylglycine, which under the same structural context is three methyl groups added to the nitrogen of the amino acid glycine. In my case, trimethylglycine doesn't make a dent on homocysteine. In the past, I've tried up to three grams per day, no effect. So it may be possible that I'm saturated on how much trimethylglycine I'm already eating because beets are a rich source, and I need to expand the methyl donor pool by adding other amino acids that are either di- or trimethylated. For example, another one is tryptophan betaine. In other words, trimethyltryptophan. So I'll have more on on that in an upcoming video. So did adding oranges and their proline betaine intake make a dent on homocysteine? So homocysteine for this test on the January 15 test was 9.6 micromolar, which there's room for improvement there. But the previous 15 test average was 10.5 micromolar. So moving in the right direction or just some random variability where it's lower than average. Nonetheless, it's going in the right direction as I wanna wanna see it closer to my u full values, somewhere somewhere around five to six micromolar. Alright. I also added chickpeas into the diet, and not so much because of the recent video where I showed that legume fiber is associated or five grams of legume fiber is associated with a lower lower risk of all cause mortality, but because chickpeas are a rich source of trigoneline, also known as one methylnicotinate. So one methylnicotinate has a methyl group that when trigoneline is converted into nicotinic acid, can act as a methyl donor, again, potentially impacting homocysteine and other methylation related pathways, thereby increasing my methyl donor pool. Now whether that actually is what can happen, we'll see. I'm waiting on epigenetic data. But for the homocysteine data, when considering the inclusion of chickpeas and oranges, that it's going in the right direction, I may be on to something. So was there an impact on NAD as the goal of in adding chickpeas was to increase trigoneline, which can potentially increase NAD, and that data will be in the next video. Alright. Onto part two of the diet. We can see that I consumed 48 different foods for this test, and the same system ranked in terms of grams from 26 to 48. Now, also, to get chickpeas into the diet, I cut other foods that contribute to calories as the goal is to not increase calorie intake, but to stay eucalyoric or a little bit less. And to do that, I cut oats and barley intake. They're usually around 25 to 30 grams per day. So in total, I cut the two of them together by about by about 50 grams per day to get chickpeas into the diet. Now the diet isn't purposefully always clean. I do include cheat meals, but at most, I try to limit that to two per dietary period or two per forty nine day period. For this test, it was chocolate chips mixed with sweetened condensed milk and peanut butter. I just I love homemade Reese's peanut butter cups, and I usually make it with chocolate chips melted melting the chocolate chips and adding that to peanut butter. So for this test, I decided to sweeten it up with literally sweetened condensed milk, which was pretty tasty too. For the most recent test though, I used honey. So we'll see that in an upcoming video sometime in March. Now in terms of calories, what this, relatively lower nutritious food, chocolate chips and sweetened condensed milk added to the diet, 551 calories from the chocolate chips, 476 calories from the sweet sweetened condensed milk. And again, that's over two different days. That's not a small amount every day for forty nine days, but two days where I had it and then forty seven days, I didn't have it at all. No junk for forty seven days. So in terms of percentage of the diet that's clean, 99% clean, 1% a little bit of junk. That's what works for me. Other stuff may work for other people. I let the biomarkers drive how often, to have cheat meals in the approach. And when I have when I if I go more than that, now I start to run the risk of obsessing about junk food and potentially going off diet and messing up the biomarkers, so I'm not trying to do that. Two cheat meals seems to work well for me. It may not be like that for others, but that's how it goes for me. Alright. So this list is ranked in grams. What about foods ranked in terms of calories? And that's what we'll see here, top 10 foods for average daily calorie intake for the forty nine day period that corresponded to blood test number one in 2024. And we can see that here. And note that these data are tracked with Cronometer. If you wanna track your own diet using Cronometer, there's a discount link in the video's description. So in terms of the food that contributed the most in terms of daily calories, it's sardines. And then just quickly going through the list, strawberries, chickpeas, flaxseeds, almonds, carrots, coconut butter, collard greens, beets, and pistachios round out for where I'm getting the majority of my daily calories, which then brings us to macronutrient composition. So first, starting with calorie intake, average daily calorie intake, it was twenty ninety two calories per day, which if you're familiar with the channel, you've heard me say this many, many times, but this is again my lowest calorie intake, average daily calorie intake since I started tracking diet in April 2015. The previous low was twenty one zero six, and that was for test number seven in 2023. And for those who may be new, I've been slowly making very small cuts to the average daily calorie intake as it's easier for me to maintain that, that weight loss, that fat loss over a long period of time relative to in the past where I've made very big cuts to the calorie intake and got lean really quickly, but wasn't able to maintain it and literally binged that weight back on. So small cuts over a long period of time have, enabled me to stay leaner for longer and not feel, like I'm missing anything in the diet while still being satiated. Average daily protein intake for this test was 97 grams per day. In In terms of percentage of calories in the diet, it was 18.6% of total calories. What about fat intake? We can see that here. Average daily fat intake was 81.2 per day, which is about 35% of total calories. Now something else that I'd like to highlight is when considering that my biological age data is consistently in the 15 to seventeen years younger than my chronological age, I'm not trying to blow up the system from test to test. I'm trying to maintain that for every test. And one way that I do that is by, trying to ensure that my macros are consistent for every test. And we can see that by looking at the data for fat intake for the November 27 test, which was test number seven of 2023. And without going through each individual fat, you can see that the data is remarkably consistent, and that's done on purpose. That's not by accident. I aim to have consistency across the diet, whether it's protein intake, fat intake, including monounsaturated, polyunsaturated, etcetera, from test to test with the goal of, having my data, my bio biomarker data be consistent also from test to test. Alright. Next up is carb intake. So total carbs were about 283 grams per day, which seems like a lot, but net carbs equals total carbs minus fiber. Average daily fiber intake for this test was about 86 grams per day. So when subtracting that from total carbs, we get a net carbs of about a 197 grams per day. When multiplying that by four calories per gram, that yields a net carbs of about 38% of total calories. Now note that fiber also contributes calories to the diet around two calories per gram, and that's because the soluble fiber fraction of fiber is converted into short chain fatty acids. In other words, a small percentage of fiber is converted into fats. And with that in mind, a 185 calories from fiber, which is about 9% of my diet or 9% of my total calories, can be added to total fat. Such that now we can calculate my net macros that correspond to this test, my average daily net macros for that forty nine day period of about 44% total fat, 38% net carbs, and 18% 18.6%, total protein. Now note that within sugars, I don't look at correlations for total sugars with biomarkers, but I do look at correlations for total fructose as the diet has a lot of fructose containing foods. And in my data, for for whatever reason, relatively higher fructose intake is significantly core correlated with a lot more biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. So I try to limit, how much fructose that I take in while not completely eliminating it as it'll probably be virtually impossible because the foods that include it impact impacts, how satiated that I am. Nonetheless, total fructose for this test, we can see that by adding fructose plus half of sucrose as sucrose is half fructose. And when adding those two together, we get a total fructose average daily intake of about sixty one grams per day per day for this test. Now for comparison, that's close to my lowest fructose intake since starting diet tracking in 2015, which is 57. Now I know that that still may seem like a lot, but this is relatively half of my highest intake since I started tracking diet in 2015. So progress, not perfection. Alright. What about micronutrients? What is that what do they look like in terms of how they correspond to this test for the forty nine day period in average for this test? And I won't I don't wanna spend a lot of time on that. I just wanna put it up so people see that data. So all of the vitamins posted there, I'd encourage going full screen if you haven't already because they're very small, and it may be hard to see if you're not on full screen, and then mineral intake. And what I'd like to highlight here for those who are interested in looking at the micronutrients is that I have full RDA coverage that's essential, I think, to starting this process is making sure you're at least covering the RDA. But many micronutrients are purposely much higher than the RDA, and that's because I'm following their correlations with multiple blood biomarkers and a few other biomarkers too, like slow wave sleep and blood pressure. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for epigenetic testing, NAD quantification, oral microbiome composition, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with SyFOX Health, which includes ApoB and a different panel from the at home metabolomics, diet tracking with Cronometer, green tea, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or diatribe brand as I've got on here and as I wear all the time, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.