Can we do this in us, in humans? At this point, we started to to to move right over to working on human subjects. We're all interested in that. We're all getting old. And I'm in the Institute of Ophthalmology at University College London, so we're very eye oriented. And this was actually quite a simple experiment. We asked people, can you see a letter that we present to you in either blue or in red if we degrade the letter? So we the letter's becoming more and more fuzzy and we say, what is that red letter? What is it? You've got to identify an a, a b, a c, and it's called a threshold experiment. We work out the level at which you can detect the letter. And if you look at the black dots here for the blue and the black dots here for the red, that's before we gave you a red light. We gave you a burst of red light, a single three minute burst of red light, and then we brought you back three hours later. Now that should remember your retina has got more mitochondria than anywhere else in your body. Your photoreceptors It's a picture of the photoreceptors and the red dots of the mitochondria. More mitochondria than anywhere else and it ages rapidly. We brought the people back. Three hours later, we retested them, and the retesting is the red squares. In almost every case, the red squares are lower than the black circles. That means your threshold has come down. That means you can detect something more easily. If we look at the population of people we did that in, there's a seventeen percent improvement in your threshold. That's that's quite an improvement, and it's slightly stronger for, blue than it is for red. But that's because your blue channel in vision is much frailer than your red. You you'll you're really as you get older, your ability to see blues is reduced more so than it is the reds. If you're diabetic, if you've got macular degeneration, your blues suffer. But three minutes exposure and tested three hours later resulted in a very significant improvement. How long can we keep it going? Well, we can keep it going for a while, but basically it's about a week. So we've redid the study a week later. We're running out of subjects here, so there's fewer people. But one week later we don't get that seventeen percent. We get ten percent and we get eight percent. It's still significant. It's still an improvement, but red light, a burst of red light does not last forever. Whether you're a fly, a bumblebee, a human, or a mouse, it always lasts roughly one week. And that's that's telling me something about a mechanism. Only three minutes. I mean, now we do expose for much longer, but you can be exposed for two minutes and you can be exposed for fifteen minutes. The results are pretty much the same. So it's we we think this is a switch. It's a switch we're turning on.