Thyroid aging is impacted by and impacts many hallmarks of aging including cell senescence and telomere shortening, inflammation, epigenetics, metabolism, loss of proteostasis, and stem cell renewal. More specifically, TSH or thyroid stimulating hormone induces the thyroid gland to produce inactive thyroid hormone or t four. And it's named t four because it carries or it has four attached iodine atoms. One of those iodine atoms is removed to produce the active form of thyroid hormone or otherwise known as t three. Now t four can be also converted into reverse t three, which diverts away from the production of active thyroid hormone or t three. And t three can also be degraded into t two, further reducing the active thyroid hormone concentration. Now collectively, thyroid hormone metabolism can impact longevity, but also aging and age related disease. So with that in mind, in today's video for the thyroid hormones, free t four and free t three, what's optimal? And to address that, we'll take a look at how these thyroid hormones change during aging and what's their association with all cause mortality risk. So first starting with the data for free t four, as we'll see in this plot, it decreases then it increases during aging. On the y axis we've got free thyroxine otherwise known as t four and this is in picomolar and that'll become we'll see why that's important in a minute. On the x axis we've got age and note that the age ranges from 20 to 90 years and later in the video we'll go deeper into age related changes in centenarians. And this study includes 83,000 plus people. If anyone's come across larger studies for how these thyroid hormones change during aging, please post it in the comments, and I'd be happy to give you a shout out in a future video. Also note that all of the papers in the video will be in the video's description with links in the video's description. Alright. So free t, four in youth, average levels for women in red and men in blue are around thirteen point two five and thirteen point five picomolar, which then decline during aging until around the fifty to sixty year range with values around 12.5 picomolar. Afterwards, we then see an age related increase up until 90 years for both women in again in red and men in blue. Now note that the reference range for free t four is and this is Quest Diagnostics reference range, is point eight to 1.8 nanograms per deciliter. So I'm gonna compare the reference range with the data that we see in the plot. Now first note that the units are different. Nanograms per deciliter is not the same as picomolar, so we'll have to do a conversion. So when taking the lowest value, 12.5 picomolar, which is found in around fifty to sixty years, and then the values that are expected to be average values that are be, expected to be found in youth thirteen point two five and thirteen point five picomolar for women and men respectively. Converting that into nanograms per deciliter we get a range of point nine seven to one point o five nanograms per deciliter. Now when comparing that with the reference range, we would miss the age related increase after fifty to sixty years and we would also miss the age related decrease prior to, you know, going from twenty years to about fifty years. So this once again highlights that the reference range is not necessarily optimal. We may never see changes that are outside of the range, both on too high or too low. And by focusing on year to year changes, that can better capture, how we can slow potentially slow aging. At least that's my hypothesis. Alright. What about free t three? As we'll see here, it decreases during aging with data that's more continuous relative to the data for free t four free t four. On the waxes, we've got free triiodothyronine or free t three, again in picomolar plotted against age. In youth, average values for women in red are about 4.6 picomolar and for men about 4.9. And then we can see that for both women and men values in 90 year olds are close to about 4.1 picomolar. So the data is pretty continuous in terms of a decline for men whereas for women it's biphasic. In other words, it goes down, then it goes up, then it goes down again. Alright, so here for free T3, the reference range is two point three to four point two picograms per milliliter and we'll have to do some converting based on the data on this graph and when we do that we get a range of 2.67 to 3.19 picograms per milliliter. So once again, all of these values are within the reference range, and if we only focused on the reference range, we would miss the age related free t free t three decline. Now that free t three is lower and that free t four is higher at older ages after around 50 to 60, that suggests a decreased conversion of free t4 into the active thyroid hormone free t3 during aging. So looking at the free t3 to free t4 ratio may be more informative, And that's what we can see here, which is on the y axis. Once again plotted against age and this is also again in the twenty to ninety year age range. So in youth or relative youth younger than around 50 years old or 50 fifty to fifty five years old, we can see that the free t three to free t four ratio is about average values are about point three five to point three eight, and that's for both women and men. After which, there's a significant significant decline for this ratio during aging as shown by the red arrows. Such that at older ages, we can expect to see lower values for the free T3 to free T4 ratio of around point three one to point three two. Alright, but what about older than 90 years? And as we'll see here, there's a further reduced free T3 to free T4 ratio in centenarians going from point three to point two. So on the y axis, we've got the free T3 to free T4 ratio plotted against age. But in this case, the age range goes from 50 years to about a 113 years old. And then we can see that there is a significant inverse correlation. In other words, a relatively lower free t three to free t four ratio at the oldest ages and the oldest old relative to younger ages. But maybe a lower free t three to free t four ratio is a marker of longevity. In other words, a good thing. So if centenarians have a relatively low ratio, maybe that's something we should strive for. But I'd argue, maybe not. And that's based on this data. So free t three to free t four ratio on the y axis plotted against Fi, and the Fi is a frailty index. This study included 180 centenarians that had an average age of 102 years. And to the right, more frail and to the left of the plot would be on the x axis less frail. And then we can see that there's a significant inverse correlation. In other words, a lower free t three to free t four ratio is associated with being more frail. And conversely, a higher ratio is associated with being less frail. So that argues that having a lower ratio may may not be good for frailty. And I'd argue probably not good for, health and longevity. Even though you can get to advanced stages with a low ratio based on the frailty index data that would it would suggest that having higher levels may be even better for being healthier and more fit at advanced age. But that's only part of the story. What what's the association for this ratio with all cause mortality risk? And we'll see that a relatively higher ratio is associated with reduced all cause mortality risk and conversely, a ratio less than point four five is associated with an increased all cause mortality risk as we'll see here. So on the y axis, we've got the hazard ratio of mortality or risk of death for all causes plotted against the free t three to free t four ratio. In terms of, how big this, sample study sample size was, it was about 6,200 people, average age of of about 46 years, and with a median follow-up. So in other words, starting at the initial assessment of thyroid hormone levels, who was alive and who was dead, a median of about twelve years later. In terms of what's significant, we put up a red line at a hazard ratio of one. And then remember, where the shaded gray region is completely above it or completely below it, we have a significant association. So when compared with the referent, which was defined as 0.5, we can see that values that were higher than that were not associated with a significantly increased all cause mortality risk as that shaded gray region completely overlaps with one. In contrast, when this ratio, the free t three to free t four ratio was less than about 0.45, we can see that the shaded gray region is completely above that hazard ratio of one. In other words, significantly associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. Alright. So one study is nice. These data were also shown in another study as we'll see here. Once again, hazard ratio and the 95% confidence interval, that's the shaded red region in this plot for all cause mortality or risk of death for all causes on the y axis plotted against levels of free t three divided by free t four. And this study had a larger sample size, and I usually start with the larger studies first, but the x axis is a bit screwy. They didn't convert, their thyroid hormone levels into the proper units. So you can see that we've got two, four, and six where the free t three to free t four ratio should be less than one. So they didn't properly convert their units. Nonetheless, we can see in both plots that the data is similar. So in terms of significance, we put up that red line, a hazard ratio of one, and we can see that relatively higher levels for this ratio are associated with lowest all cause mortality risk, whereas relatively lower levels are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So two different studies, two different cohorts, similar data. But note that the average age in both of these studies was pretty similar and the median follow-up was also in the same ballpark. In other words, the average age of death was or median age of death was somewhere around 60 years. So what about at older ages? What's the association for this ratio with all cause mortality risk at older ages? And let's go to as old as we can get. Centenarians. An average age of 103 years as shown here. Survival on the y axis, who was alive and who had died, plotted against time now in days. And in terms of what's significant, we put up that, line at point five survival. This is the time when half of the population has died and half is still alive. In terms of the shortest lifespan, that was cluster three in red, and they had an average free t three to free t four ratio of point one eight. And they lived an average of five hundred days after the initial assessment of thyroid hormone levels. In contrast, cluster one, as shown in blue, had a higher ratio of 0.24, and they had a significant increase for median lifespan, living about four hundred days or fifteen months longer than cluster three, which had a lower free t three to free t four ratio. So from these three studies, we can see that having a relatively lower ratio is associated with an increased all cause mortality risk at both young younger ages relatively younger ages and advanced age in the oldest old. Alright. So that brings us to what's my data as one of the major goals of this channel is to optimize biomarkers of as many organ systems as possible, and thyroid hormone function is obviously one of the organ systems. Now I've been taking levothyroxine. If you're familiar with the channel, you then you know I've been taking levothyroxine prescribed for almost half of my life. And with that in mind, I've basically forgotten about tracking thyroid hormones with the assumption that I should be fine. I'm taking one hundred and thirty seven and a half micrograms per day of Levothyroxine. Well, that may not be true. So, I only have two tests, and I'm going to change that, you know, as I'm going to include thyroid hormone testing at every test going forward, so I'll at least have seven more tests every year going forward indefinitely. So I only have two data points. One of them, October in 2022, and based on the t four and t three, free levels for both, my free t3 to free t4 ratio was 0.3. Not too bad as we'll see in a second. For my most recent test though for the 04/29/2024, so last month's test, for the same data, free t four and free t three, and calculating the ratio, I get a much lower value of 0.18. Now remember, it declines during aging, so this is going in the wrong direction. And 0.18 is what you'd expect expect to find in, in you know, a sent a short lived centenarian. Now that doesn't mean that I've got data that will get me to centenarian status. My interpretation of it is it's too low, and I wanna avoid the age related change. And knowing that in at least two data points, I've had values as high as point three, I at least want it to be as high as that, if not as high as the data that's found in youth, point three five to point three eight. So that's the plan. So how will I increase it though? That's the big question. I only have two data points and I can't calculate correlations yet. So the initial plan is to increase selenium intake from whole food, which would I which I'd expect to be lowest risk relative to taking high dose supplements, and the major source of my selenium intake comes from Brazil nuts. Now my current selenium intake, mostly from Brazil nuts, is already around two hundred and seventy five micrograms per day. But the tolerable tolerable sorry, tolerable upper limit has been defined as four hundred micrograms per day. So the initial plan is to increase Brazil nut intake up to the tolerable upper limit of four hundred micrograms per day and then I'm going to retest very soon, not just for thyroid hormones but everything else. Hopefully I don't increase or improve, thyroid hormones in terms of the free t3 to free t4 ratio, but then mess up other stuff. And then I'll have to come up with a new strategy for improving the free t3 to free t4 ratio. So stay tuned for that data in an upcoming video. Alright, that's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where I offer blood test consults. And we've got a whole bunch of discount links that you may be interested in including discount links for epigenetic testing, NAD quantification, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing including metabolomics, and Scifox Health which includes GrimAge and ApoB for the Scifox Health, green tea, diet tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website Buy Me a Coffee. We've also got merch, so if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or DIY Trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.