Today, we've got Seem Lan whose new book, The Longevity Leap, is a deep dive into the science of longevity and how we can add healthy years to our lifespan. So with that, we're gonna do a deep dive into Seem, his backstory, and then as much as we can cover in the book. So welcome, Seem. Yeah. My my pleasure, and I'm happy to be here. Cool. So there aren't that many interviews of you on, on YouTube, or at least I didn't see very many. So I think it's important that we go back and look at the, you know, the evolution of the process. Because where you started on YouTube is almost a completely different place, although in this health and fitness, sphere. So but I wanna go even further back. So, as a kid active into health and fitness, so what are your earliest memories of, being into the active and fitness lifestyle? Yeah. So, my earliest memories probably have to do with in terms of fitness, have to do with doing push ups with my dad when we were kids, something like four or five years old. Like, in the evening, we would do, like, a push up contest of how many push ups we could do, and, like, we were amazed. Wow. My dad can do, like, a a bunch of push ups. So, that was, like, my earliest introduction of, hey. I wanna be kinda strong as well. I wanna do, you know, different kind of, glycemic exercises and to be strong and healthy. I, you know, as a child, I was growing up in the countryside, so I was always doing something like physical, mostly playing outside and playing soccer with my brother or, we also did like this, you know, medieval battles with each other. We, like, fight each other with sticks and swords, that kind of thing, climbing trees. Of course, we did some, like, physical labor as well, like carrying some stones or, doing hay, like, we spent our summers in our great aunt's place that, where you do the hay traditional way where you, like, rake the hay, you throw it in the barn, you stomp it. So it's kind of old school method. And, yeah, also just doing pull ups on the tree on a branch when I was, like, I guess, something like eight or nine years old. I remember, you know, in the evening again, like, trying to do, like, a few sets of pull ups. And, yeah, I mean, those were the kind of early days of me trying exercise. I wasn't particularly, like, at least with cardio or stuff, I wasn't, like, very athletic. I didn't I think I was in good condition and fitness with, calisthenics. I was in school. I was, like, the best in calisthenics out of my class, but not for cardio. So, yeah, I was always kind of mediocre with cardiovascular exercise. And, yeah, in high school, got into more, like, strength training. And, yeah, since then, I, you know, as an adult, I started to learn more about all the different topics, primarily in the beginning, learning about, yeah, how to build muscle and lose fat, through, like, a gym perspective and, gradually, yeah, learning more about different aspects of health and longevity as well. Alright. Wait. So were there specific people besides your dad who, you kinda had his fitness role models when you were a kid or a teenager? Yeah. Like, I guess, yeah, my dad was a role model for the, kinda, calisthenics side. For overall, like, fitness, I didn't have, like, you know, any particular role models be besides that, you know, I did play soccer a little bit, but I wasn't yet, like, into, like, sports in that sense. So I was kind of self I I just my my main motivation was to just, yeah, kind of I think I thought it was just, you know, something that you would want to do as a good human being to, like, get get strong and, be kind of athletic. So it's this kind of the Socrates quote, it goes something along the lines that, it it will be a shame for your for you to go grow old without knowing what your body is capable. So, yeah, I think that was maybe one of the quotes as well that has kind of kept me motivated as a, like, a teenager. So it was the idea of fitness not necessarily seeing people who are fit and while you were at a young age saying, I wanna emulate that path. Like, even sports athletes like soccer players, there weren't any soccer players that you saw and you were like, wow. I wanna be fit and, you know, I wanna be fit like that person. So I don't think so. Like, you know, of course, I did watch soccer as a child, you know, the World Cup or the EU Cup. So, like, Ronaldo and Luis Figo or those, like, Zidane, like, these old school soccer players back then. So, of course, they were, like, inspirational, like, you were as a kid, yeah, like, I had a Ronaldo shirt and stuff like that, but I never, like, you know, saw them as, like, role models for fitness. Like, you know, I I was just hey. I wanna play I wanna play soccer well, but I was never, like, interested in it as a, you know, even not even a career thing or anything like that. Not to mention the kind of a health and fitness component. Interesting. So how about now? Are there people in their, you know, seventies, eighties, nineties? I see you posting, like, bodybuilder pictures on, x, and you're like, oh, this is kinda like the standard of what we can be at 70 and 80 years old. Are there people that stand out that that, Yeah. Like, you know, I post, yeah, these different kind of videos or clips of, older people who who are in great physical condition and good health. You have, like, these, 90 year old gymnasts and the 90 year old rowing champions as and, like, pole vaulting champions. So, yeah, of course, now being into longevity is, those people would be, like, role models of okay. When I am, you know, in a few decades, this is what I would like to, like, emulate in the in a sense. But younger people, like, yeah, I don't I don't think I look in towards my peers for, like, inspiration in that sense. Like, I'm kind of past the phase of trying to, like, do bodybuilding as like aesthetic thing. Like I did it early in my early twenties, kind of past that phase. Currently I'm mostly interested in like you know of course maintaining decent physique because it's a good sign of like health and good body composition. But that's pretty much, it. Maybe like, I don't know, I don't have any specific names that kind of come to mind. And the most inspirational or, like, impressive of these people, you know, don't have any, like, social media or something. They're this kind of random grand grandpa in China that does does, like, pull ups at, 90 years old. Yeah. I have many, which, you know, so it's almost a completely different path. I mean, like, Schwarzenegger, when I was a kid, Schwarzenegger was, like, big and huge, and then there were other people, Clarence Bass, John Taylor. Some of these have some of these people have died. But, yeah, you get to a certain point where it's not about emulating anymore, and then it's it's almost like people are emulating you because you meet or you get to know those people, and it's not as impressive as you thought. And then you think, wow, I can better. Right? So so do you have do you have aspirations where you'll be that 70, 80, 90 year old plus still lean and ripped, avoided all age related decline? You know? Do you have aspirations? Is that part of the plan? Yeah. Well, like, I definitely don't plan to stop taking care of my health and stop, exercising. So I think it's gonna be just a natural byproduct of staying consistent with, good diet and good exercise for the next few decades. So I don't think it's, you know, these people don't they're not, like, particularly, like, let's say, unique in that sense. They've just, you know, implemented exercise, and they've stayed consistent with it for decades. And a lot of them don't even exercise before the age of something like 70, and then they start. So, yeah, I think it kind of go goes goes down comes down to, staying consistent with it. So I definitely, you know, I don't I'm not gonna try to, like, you know, a lot of these people, like, do, like, marathons and and, those kind of things, like, compete in desire, like, a 100 year old, sports events. Like, I don't have any, like, desire to do that. Like, you know, I think it would be cool, yeah, like, to be the world record holder for some sort of a sprint event, like 400 meter dash or something like that. But, I'm not, like, you know, super drawn to that. So I guess, yeah, like, I don't need any, like, achievement besides just working on my own, like, health and luxury to when I'm, like, older. So I hear that, but I also have some doubt because so it's just naturally competitive. Right? If you see Brian has a speed of aging at whatever it is, point six six. Right? There's gotta be some small amount, you know, of you that's like, well, I can beat that. Right? So now fast forward. And then you see people in whether it's my generation or even your generation, maybe a generation older than me, like Dave like Dave Pascoe. Right? So if some of those, of that those generations start to actually compete in some of these master's competitions, And there's gotta be a part of you that's like, yeah. I can do I can do that. Right? And then before you know it, land is the Yeah. We'll we'll see. Like, but I'm not, like, doing that for that reason. So if I if I have, you know, reached a 100 years of age or even, like, 80 or 90, then oh, but, yeah, I mean, like, the older you get, the less competition there is. So if you're, like, a 110 year old sprinter, then there's probably no one else out there to compete with you, so you instantly, like, win. So, the the actual competition is, like, you know, kind of staying, alive for longer. Definitely. Definitely. Alright. So you your evolution in this field, I mean, I think you started off in the keto crowd in very low carb. And then so how how did you and especially when you started making YouTube videos, I think that was about seven years ago. You started mostly on that journey and and with autophagy and met talking about metabolic flexibility. So, like, what was your what was your thought process at that time? And then how is it the same, or how has it changed since then? Yeah. Like, my first videos was, yeah, in, like, 2016. So very, like, all up there, like, eight years ago, but but it was, like, very small in the beginning. And the first videos were about actually something like personal development and that kind of thing. Like, that was what what I was into. So I wasn't, like, into diets or longevity back then. And, the the first videos were about, like, like I did like the the seven habits of highly effective people and stoicism and those kind of videos and then I started to make a little bit about nutrition and exercise as well, so this kind of yeah more like maybe like a Tim Ferriss approach that that you talk about productivity, you also talk about diet and blood work and those kind of things. And yeah like the back then I was doing you know mostly intermittent fasting but the first thing that I did, So I did like sixteen and eight, one minute a day, Warrior diet and different kinds of fasting and, that gained a little bit more traction. Those videos, I also experimented with like a ketogenic diet for a few years and I did make videos about that as well. Then, I guess, like, you know, the reason I did the keto diet was, I wanted to kind of, you know, try it out. I heard some things about it. I wanted to experiment with it. I shared shared my experience as well as I shared, like, content about it. So back then, there was not a lot it's very new. Like, a lot not not a lot of people were actually talking about, these topics. So they got I just gained attraction in the YouTube, like, search engine. So that's where I kinda grew my first, audience, maybe like 1,000 people or something. And then it kind of grew from there doing a mix of content about keto, doing a mix of content about, you know, fasting and autophagy and those things. So, yeah. But, you know, eventually, I kind of changed my diet, you know, introduced more carbohydrates, doing different types of carbohydrate cycling, etcetera. I mean, I've I've always just been, like, experimenting with the different diets and the different ways of eating. And my content has been, yeah, like, about, that, you know it it hasn't been, like, a journey that I've I'm doing, like, some sort of vlogs. My videos have always been somewhat, like, about educational. So I pick a certain topic, you know, how to increase the topology, and then then I make a video about it, and it kind of gains popularity because no one else is really talking about it. So back in 2018, like, no one was talking about mTOR and autophagy. Like, I was one of the first ones who actually, like, like, create, I guess, like, a spot on the algorithm with, that those kind of keywords. And, yeah, I was kind of early early in that in that space. So so then you experimented with keto and playing with carbohydrates. I'm guessing you played around with protein intake. Mhmm. So how did how is that journey evolved? Mhmm. Like, what works best? What, you know, strengths and weaknesses, independent of blood blood testing, like, just Mhmm. Right? Because you obviously, you you changed from the keto to the higher carbs, without I don't know if that was a blood test based thing, or what was the mindset in in changing it up? Yeah. Well, before keto, I was high carb. So, like, when I was 18 years old up to, like, 20 years old, I was I was, you know, eating a higher carb diet, and then I switched keto for a few days, and then I switched back. So the reason I, switched back was because let's be honest. Like, my the biggest motivating factor was, like, strength training. So eating more carbs just makes me stronger, and I build more muscle more easily. And I also noticed that my, like, fat loss is also easier, like, actually, it become leaner if I had more carbohydrates. And, yeah, my metabolic rate is higher and those kind of things. So it was just, you know, I'm gonna try this thing, low carb keto four a little bit. And even during that time I was doing some aspects of carb cycling, so it was never like completely strict keto. It was actually more like a low carb diet, so it didn't meet the actual keto specifications of of getting less than 50 grams of carbs per day. So I was always eating something like a 100 grams, or something like that, plus some aspects of carb cycling. And then I went back to it because, yeah, I wanted to maximize my, like, potential for muscle strength and muscle growth. So, yeah, I wasn't, like, reaching that with, like, a low carb diet. And, yeah, before and it kind of the reason I made the change was that I remembered, you know, okay. Before keto, I was doing the high carb version, and it was working great. So, like, why change it? I'll I'll I'll I'll go back to it. In terms of blood work then, I mean, there are some, like, just simple expectations or, like, clear expectations that you can expect from changing the diet. You know, if you're on low carb, keto version diet, your cholesterol typically is gonna be higher, your blood sugar might be slightly lower, and maybe triglycerides are slightly lower. And on a lower fat, lower saturated fat, higher carb diet, Your cholesterol is typically lower. My blood sugar is pretty much the same, and my triglycerides are also, like, pretty much the same. So it also made sense from, like, a rational perspective of, okay, it's kinda better for my blood work as a as a, like, a whole. But only on a small segment because I find that a lot in the Keto crowd only focus on metabolic health, which is what you mentioned, glucose and lipids. So, at some point, I I don't know. Have you done the experiment? Well, I guess we can go through, we can take a deeper dive into diet. Right? So, have you done any experimentation with, you know, the keto even at a 100 grams of carbs per day versus the higher carb? And when you say higher carb, just to, you know, illustrate for people who who may may not be familiar, I'm I'm guessing this is probably whole food based. This isn't like Mhmm. Seasoned cakes because I think when most people hear high carb, it's like, oh, you're eating donuts and and ice cream. Right? Yeah. So have you done any experimentation comparing the, you know, 100 per day or less versus the relatively higher carb and then effects on biomarkers? Are you guys Besides metabolic health, kidney, liver, inflammation? Yeah. I mean, like, I deep track my blood markers not as, like, regularly back in the day when I was doing keto, compared to now. And, you know, I mean, I I didn't have any, like, other real changes to my blood work except for the cholesterol. Like like, my metabolic health is very good right now. It it was pretty much, like, all my incidence activity was, also, like, very similar to what it was, what it is right now. So there was no, like, change. It didn't worsen, like, my glucose or insulin levels going from, yeah, like, a 100 grams carbs to now something like 200 to 300 grams carbs per day. So yeah. So So about to save no change. You can you can basically thrive right now on any diet, metabolically flexible. Yeah. And I think that the biggest thing is that, you know, I exercise and I also maintain, like, a good body fat percentage year round. So, you know, any diet, you can, see improvements if you just lose a little weight and, you, you know, exercise regularly and vice versa. Like, any diet, you can see worse results. You can see blood markers getting worse if you're gaining weight and you're being, sedentary. So, yeah, I think, you know, my personal belief about diet is that, yeah, a lot of people, you know, get very defensive about diet, but the truth is that it only moves the needle, you know a little bit it's not usually the biggest determining factor of course there are some yeah minor or individual biomarkers that tend to change but like the all of them work in the context of the calorie intake and your like body fat percentage. So if you're eating a keto diet but you're overweight then you know your insulin sensitivity is still going to be bad. And then the same with a high carb diet you know you will eat a bunch of carbs and your insulin could be very low and your blood sugar could be very low or normal, because you're not overeating and you're exercising at the same time. So, yeah, I think many people, you know, just focus on the diet, but they're not focusing on the blood markers. So the blood markers at the end of the day are what actually, you know, mediate any potential risk from what you're eating and, what actually drive these, chronic diseases that end up, killing people. So let's assume yeah. I agree 100%. So let's assume you've got the those two diets. Right? Lower carb, keto ish, you know, 100 grams, 50 grams, whatever, or and then the relatively higher carb. Right? So and again, not 80% carbs, you know, even something more reasonable, 40 ish percent, you know, 50%, somewhere in that ballpark. Right? So think about short term versus long term potential effects where right now, in your case, you're metabolically flexible. Your blood data blood blood biomarker data is basically about the same on both diets. But, you know, in order to properly test which diet may be optimal, you'd need a a twin, a genetically identical twin. And you're on your diet, and he's on, their you know, on the other diet. Right? So who would and and assuming all of other factors are the same, you know, sleep, exercise, intensity, duration, frequency, all that. Right? You'd have to fast forward twenty, thirty, fifty years to see, alright, which was truly best based on genetic background. I mean, there's just no way to know right now. Right? So what are your thoughts on although metabolically flexible right now and biomarkers mostly the same right now, could there be a time when, you know, maybe when you're 50 or 60 or, I don't know, 40, whenever the case may be, now the biomarkers start to look a little bit off. And now you've gotta maybe make some changes to whether it's diet or supplements, even changing maybe the exercise up, to try to move the needle back towards a more youthful state. Yeah. Like, of course, you know, I'm not married to any particular diet. Like, you know, I can eat many different foods. I kind of I'm not like, yeah, super, like, this foodie person. Like, I can eat beans. I can eat, eggs. I can eat sweet potatoes. I can eat rice, vegetables, fish meat. So, yeah, like, I'm not like a huge food fan in that sense. So, yeah, of course, I will I would always, like, adjust my food and the macros, etcetera, based on, you know, what my health is currently and not also, like, my goals for the moment and and what I'm doing. So, yeah, if I'm not exercising that much, generally reducing my carbohydrate intake. But, yeah, if if we don't have yet, like, the perfect experiment where, you know, you have their twin doing the opposite diet for two decades, but, you know, at least, you know, based on observational data, then there's no nothing that would indicate that a carbohydrate intake or something like 40 50% would increase your mortality. That's actually typically linked to the lowest risk. So yeah, like if you're eating a lot of carbs, like 80% of your calories is carbs, then that probably is not the best solution, but there's nothing that would indicate that a moderate carb intake would be somehow harmful either. And, yeah, I mean, Japanese people eat rice, Mediterranean people eat pasta and stuff. So, yeah. I think, a lot of people might be afraid of carbs because of, you know, in the in the past two decades ago, everyone was afraid of fat. But I think that, like, the pendulum has shifted that now with everyone is afraid of carbs. But, whole food carbs, aren't aren't really, like, a badge in my opinion. Yeah. It doesn't necessarily have to be carbohydrate. It could be anything. It could be, you know, do you need more omega six now? Not omega six, omega three. Do you need more, you know, certain types of protein and less of other types of protein? You know, just, Yeah. Think people there's so many in this space that are married to the ideology of it. And even, like, you know, without thinking of the broader context, rather than, as you said, what do the biomarker show? And then how can I use whether it's diet, supplements, exercise, you know, sleep, whatever, you know, to try to move move the needle? Right? So Yeah. Yeah. And your omega three like, yeah, if you have a biomarker that connects with some foods or some macros, then, yeah, that's a very good thing to keep track of. So, like, omega threes are the best example you have, a specific biomarker, omega three index that actually reflects your omega three status in red what red blood cells. So, you know, you can use that to gauge, okay, are you getting enough omega threes? And, you know, vice versa with some other, like lipids and glucose markers, etcetera, certain foods affect those markers. So you can adjust your food intake based on, okay, is your some of these markers getting out of, out of range. So I I would add one caveat to that. That's one half of the equation. Right? So you'd expect that an increase in dietary intake for omega three should increase, you know, whether it's red blood cell or plasma levels of EPA and DHA. But if they're not, knowing that inflammation increases during aging and inflammation is a driver of degradation for EPA and DHA, just as one example, they can be metabolized into all sorts of, other metabolites. If your omega three intake is high, but blood levels are low, then that suggests that it's not a problem that can be fixed solely from more intake of omega three. Like, that's, the, an ex a good example of that too is like taurine. So I don't specifically supplement with taurine, and, you know, I do eat fish, but, you know, when I make a taurine video, people are all over the comments talking about, oh, I supplement with taurine, but that's only one half of the equation. It can be degraded and metabolized into other stuff. And unfortunately, most people are measuring that stuff. Right? So, yeah. They're only focusing on the one one half, I think, the dietary intake side. Gotta look at the biomarkers. Right? So, I another so let's dig down into details. Like, how carefully do you pay attention to diet or maybe not at all right now, or it's just a or even calories? Do you do you track any of that stuff, or it's just eat, you know, eat as much as you want and just exercise? So what's your like, in terms of the diet prescription in your case, how can we define that? Yeah. Like, I don't count calories. I don't, like, weigh my foods. I don't count the macros, either. I'm mostly looking at, yeah, my body composition and body fitness. So I eat until I'm full. And, on some days, I'll eat more. On some other days, I'll eat less. And if I see that, okay, I'm starting to gain a bit too much body fat, then I'll just, you know, for a few days or a week or something, I'll eat less and vice versa. If I'm getting too lean, getting too skinny, or getting too weak at a gym or something, feeling tired, then I'll increase the calorie intake. So, yeah, I think, you know, the problem is, yeah, like, even if they're aware so, like, there's no way to know that, okay, this optimal split of this percentage of protein, this percentage of carbs, this percentage of fats, there's no way to know that, that will be optimal for every day for the rest of your life kind of. So, much rather, yeah, I tend to just look at the, like, the blood markers and, the body composition and seeing, okay, is my muscle mass decreasing? Then, you know, I need to probably make sure that I get enough protein and ensure, like, that I do resistance training regularly and the same with, like, blood markers as well that, okay, I might be eating too many fats or carbs or protein or what whatever the case may be. So yeah I don't track anything I kind of eat to satiety, I do like prioritize protein in my meals and you know I have you know, for some days, you know, maybe every few months or so, I'll track protein and maybe track calories as well and then I'll see, okay, this is approximately how much my average meal has, the approximate amount of, vets and proteins and calories. So, for the rest of them, a few months, I'm just gonna, like, follow that kind of a similar pattern. And then it's gonna fluctuate, obviously, every day plus and minus five to 10%. So how would you break it down? Like, protein, carbs, fat, fiber, based on those, you know, times you do track? Yeah. So, like, my average protein intake is something I've been reducing my protein intake slightly over the last year. Before that, I was consuming at least a 150 grams of protein. And nowadays, I'm eating, like, a 130, maybe 40 grams of protein on average per day, my total calories on average are something like, again, depends if I'm trying to lose weight or kind of, bulk up a little bit. But on average, it's something something between 2,000 to 2,500. And, maybe on some days, it goes up to 2,800 if, yeah, add, like, a a bit more olive oil or or something like that. Carbohydrates intake is on average, yeah, 200 to 300 grams. Fat intake would be something like seventy, eighty grams, maybe even 100 grams on some cases. But, yeah, I don't I'm not on, like, a low fat diet, but, I'm not looking at a super high fat, diet either. And fiber, you know, I don't count fiber specifically, but, all the carbohydrates come from, you know, fruits, vegetables, berries, tubers, some, these whole grains. So, yeah, I'm probably probably getting something like 40 grams of fiber in my opinion. Nuts? No nuts seeds? Or I have, like, a few, so in the morning, my first meal of the day is, like, a protein shake, or even like a you can call it like a smoothie or like ice cream type thing. I put up a protein powder and I blend it with frozen, berries. It becomes, like, somewhat thicker. And with that, I'll have, like, a handful of walnuts. So, maybe five, six, walnuts. Or some on some other cases, it might be Brazil nuts or, almonds, maybe. Not not almonds. Not not that much, but the walnuts are kind of, I think, one of the healthiest ones. Alright. So wait. So since we're on that, so then that's the first meal. Then second, how many meals per day? How are you what's what's the general day of eating look like? Yeah. I'll have the protein, smoothie or protein shake at 10AM, and, I'll wait around maybe two hours, three hours. I'll go to the gym or go for a run, depends what day it is. And after that, I'll wait maybe two hours, you know, cool down, go to the sauna, and I'll have a dinner right now. I've been having dinner at 4PM. In the past, it might have been at 5PM, but I've been reducing it to 4PM. I tend to, like, find it that's better for sleep, and that meal is usually, yeah, like, as a carbohydrate source, it's either sweet potatoes or buckwheat, maybe some rice, not that often but occasionally and some sort of vegetables like broccoli, cauliflower, peas, carrots, steamed usually, in some cases I'll have like beans, like black beans or kidney beans. With a protein source it would be something like fish, I haven't been eating that much meat recently, but, I'll have it, like, a few times a week and, or some eggs, maybe two, three eggs. So I'll be getting, yeah, something like 90 grams of protein probably from the second meal. And from the first meal, I'm getting 30 grams, 35 grams, something like that. And, as a as a last last meal of the day after the the main course, I'll have some either some cottage cheese or some Greek yogurt with, some, you know, berries or nuts or, something like that. At what time at what time is that? That's pretty much immediately after the the the meal. So it's some somewhere around 5PM. And then that's it. No more eating until what time is bedtime? I'll go to bed usually between 09:30 and 10:30. So then you're up, what time? I'm up at, between six and seven. So no eating for the first three hours as soon as you wake up? No. Yeah. And that's on purpose? Or why why what's the rationale? Yeah. I mean, I've been doing this, way of eating for six years or something that, you know, I've always liked eating the fasting. It's always felt easy and kind of effortless. So, yeah, breakfast for me just kind of feels like a bit of, like slow not not slows me down, but it's just kind of a time sink. You have to, like, make something. So I'll much rather, like, have something quick. Takes me, like, two minutes to make that, proteins, shake drink drink, and then I'll be, you know, doing work or something else during those hours. So I'll, you know, I'll spend only thirty minutes of the day actually preparing the the meal or even even less like twenty minutes. So it sounds like when you're up between six and seven, you don't wanna eat because it gets in the way and it slows you down. So then you're you're just getting work done. Like, as soon as you wake up, the wheels start turning and you're just getting work done for the next three, four hours, and then it's like, alright. I'll take a break and and eat the drink the smoothie? Yeah. Like, I just like to work in in the morning. So, writing, researching, something about content and, those kind of things, emails. So, yeah, that's what I'll do in the immediately after waking up. Six tea. Yep. Yeah. I'll have tea or coffee maybe. I drink, some mineral water. But, yeah. I mean, I'm not really hungry even within those hours. So, I don't dare, like, feel the need to have anything. So alright. Wait. What kind of tea? Black, green, other kinds of tea? What what kind of tea? I like green tea. So it's I've always liked the green tea. Sometimes it might be also this, chamomile tea or, there's one of these, like, spicy teas as well that, I've liked as, like, cardamom and, those kind of things, some sort of Indian spice, tea. So the that eating pattern and that, those, you know, foods, is it consistent from day to day? I mean, I know that you course correct based on, you know, strength and and how you look and all that. But is the overall, the stuff that you're including in the diet pretty consistent day to day, week to week? Yeah. Like, yeah, like I said, I've been following this meal timing pattern for, yeah, six years. And, during that time, we know I have, like, you know, changed some of the foods. I've eaten more meat based. I've eaten more carb based, etcetera. So, those decisions come mostly for me, like, blood work, decisions. Gotcha. Alright. So a big part of that approach, though, is satiety. Right? Because Mhmm. You know, it's hard for most people. You say you eat until you're full, but for someone like me, I'm a volume eater. I that could go six, seven, 8,000 calories. So, you know, on 2,000 to 2,500 calories, you've gotta be satiated. Right? Otherwise, it's very easy to eat just a couple 100 calories over. And then before you know it, you've got more body fat, and then you've got, of course, correct, and and it's this vicious loop. So I guess that on your approach, satiety is, like, almost a 100% where you almost never wanna stray from it. And then if you do, I don't know. Do you include cheat meals or cheat days or junk or some desserts? How often do you do that? Like, what's your thinking around that? Yeah. I'm, like, pretty much always satiated. I've like, I don't remember really, like, a time where I was like, oh, I'm in a super craving for something of that, or I'm super, like, ravenous. You know, of course, I might get hungry every once in a while, but, nothing like yeah. Super ravenous, and I'm always kind of satiated after, meals. So it might be something something to do with, I don't know, microbiome or something like that. I don't know. But, yeah, like, I do have some, like, quote, unquote, cheat meals or something like that. The most, common one is just like some ice cream. I'll have, like, some of these, sugar free ice cream like Halo Top or, Knicks or something like that that's very low in calories and, tastes like regular ice cream. I might have some regular ice cream as well sometimes that has, like, some sugars. So I'm not, like, super, like, strict above my diet. It's just most of the time, I'll end up eating the same old the same old that I typically eat. And, yeah, I mean, I haven't noticed that, having, certain of these cheat meals or something would worsen my blood markers. So might be because I'm exercising a lot, But even then, like, I like to joke that, you know, all the centenarians, if you look at them, they all eat ice cream. That's kind of an interesting pattern that all the 100 year olds, they're like, oh, I have ice cream every night. So I do I do think that ice cream is pretty healthy, or it's, like, at least the healthiest type of dessert, one of the healthier ones, especially if you have, like, less sugar. But that's a potentially double edged sword. Right? Because then if it's at every meal and you're not satiated because it's not a whole food, it's pretty processed, then it's like, alright. I don't wanna eat this all the time, and then it's hard to stay on track. So how what's the frequency of, you know or it's just feel. It's like, I feel like eating a little bit today, but then what's the frequency for the next cheat meal? How what what's that general routine look like? Once every three days, once every day, once a week? Right. Well, I think depends on a person. Like, you know, some people, they can have, yeah, like, literally one scoop or, like, one one, some sort of a small cup of, ice cream and just ignore it or they can, like, have one square of chocolate and then and then they'll be fine with it whereas others, yeah, like, I'm gonna eat the entire box of donuts. So the people need to, like, know which kind of, satiety profile they are. Personally, I I've, I've been both in the past or, like, I've I've been in periods where I'm able to just take one bite and ignore it, whereas in other periods of, yeah, like, I'm gonna eat the entire box and and, that's it. But I think yeah. Like, currently, like, I don't I don't feel like like I'm so sort of, yeah, like, super creating, for for these kind of things. I do have maybe, like, twice a week or something. I'll have, like, some, ice cream. But it's usually, like, I'll have either one of these cones, is what you call or, like, a small cup. So, you know, yeah, I don't think I guess that the dose is what really matters. Yeah. Like, of course, if you so what I like to say is, like, okay, if you eat one potato chip every day for the rest of your life, you know, chances are it's not it's gonna have, like, any it's not gonna have any significant effect on your, longevity. If you eat a 100 potato chips every day for the rest of your life, then it's very likely that you'll be slightly more overweight and with slightly worse blood markers, and you'll probably, like, die sooner. So okay. What how where's the sweet spot between zero or between one and a 100? So it's probably you know, depends on a person. Some people, it's five, ten. Some people, it's 25. I don't know. Like, you know, maybe, yeah, like, over 30, it's probably gonna be too much. So, yeah, it's always the matter is always in the dose. And, for weight loss and body composition, then the calorie intake is still the most important factor that determines weight loss or weight gain. So, you know, I've experimented it with myself as well that I can lose weight and gain weight as well on both a low carb and a high carb diet. So the macro ratios are secondary to the actual calorie intake. And the health effects are secondary to the body composition changes. So your body composition will worsen first before your blood markers will worsen, in my opinion. So if you're starting to gain weight, then you're you can be pretty sure that your blood markers will also, like, worsen. But if you're lean and, you're not overeating calories, you're not gaining weight, then it's very it's less likely that your blood markers will also also, worsen. So you have, you know I don't know what the percentage would be. So I would suggest that maybe, like, five to 10% you can get away with, like, less optimal foods. And, how big is it is it more on the side of five, or is it more on the side of 10? Depends depends on the the person and their, you know, fitness and, age and, metabolic health. So I I agree a 100% that calories are the essential. It's it's probably the biggest part of the equation, and then balancing out how much junk to enable you to be able to stick to, you know, the the lower calories and be lean and have, you know, almost no visceral fat rack. That's huge the maybe the biggest part of all of it. Right? But, you know, there's there may be some nuance because what if you've got a pro athlete who's eating nothing but pizza and ice cream and and literally has no other nutrition? So you may you you know, their performance may be good and they're satiated, and they can just burn it off. But are they getting the nutrients that they need to optimize kidney function and and, you know, inflammation and mute all of the things. Right? So and you may not see it if they're not measuring it. Right? So, For sure. I think it's more than just the calories you got. You know, obviously, you gotta pay attention to the to the biomarkers. So but it sounds like it sounds like you don't have any issues with this at all where it's your you know, it's just course correct. Don't have to track it, you know, which is like a gift in some ways. Right? Because I think most people can't do that. Right? More people than ever are overweight or obese, and they're probably not tracking. So it's it's an incredible challenge and and and difficult for most people to have optimal body composition just kinda winging it. You know what I mean? So Yeah. Yeah. For sure. Like, you know, I have done the hard work many years ago. Like, ten years ago, I was tracking calories and macros. So I did it for a few months. And, you know, you learn a lot about it. You learn actually how much certain foods have in terms of the macros and the calories, and you, like, you know, develop the skill of, okay. This meal approximately has this much. And, eventually, you're not gonna even think about that, but, you know, the kind of steps should be that in the beginning, you track everything, you weigh everything, then eventually, you'll wean off from it slightly. You'll be kinda eyeballing it, you know, in your head or in some sort of a calorie tracker. You'll, you know, look at the food, put it in the tracker. You'll see the numbers and try to stick to those, within those ranges, but you're not, like, weighing it. And then the next step is, yeah, like, you're kind of being somewhat mindful and conscious about it, but, again, you're not even tracking it. And then the final step is, yeah, like, you eat whatever you want kind of and, intuitively or habitually just, stay in the, optimal intake or, like, a kind of decent intake, with, with with the calories and macros. Yeah. That's what works for you. Right? So Mhmm. Yeah. I I've tried that approach. It doesn't work. I have to I have to physically track everything, you know, and even just eyeballing it. It's not, you know, but but I'm, it's you gotta find what works for you. Right? That's the bottom line. So Art, you mentioned you you cut protein by 20 grams. Why why the protein cut? I think, the biggest reason was that, based on the research, it's you need much less than you think. So, the one fifty, 60 grams, that I was aiming for, I think, let me just quickly calculate my weight in the pounds. What's your what's your body weight in kilograms? It's seventy seven right now. So so that's a hundred and sixty nine pounds. So, a lot of the research or a lot of people say that, okay, aim for this one gram per pound of body weight, which for me would have been something like a hundred and seventy or a 165 grams of protein. But, the research shows that you get the maximum benefits for muscle growth or they peak at one point or at 0.8 grams per pound or 1.6 grams per kilogram. So you need actually much less for maximum muscle growth than a lot of people suggest. So I felt that, okay, I don't need to eat that much protein, so there's no reason for me to do that. So I'm just gonna reduce it to, this 130, 40 grams, which would be the 0.8 grams per pound, for me. So yeah. And I didn't notice any, like, loss in performance or, loss in muscle mass either. Actually, the DXA scan solid in the when I was eating the more protein, and in July, I did the second one when I had been eating less protein and actually gained 0.2 kilograms in the appendicular lean muscle mass index, so like the muscle in the arms and legs. So actually, they gain muscle eating less protein and actually and while at the same time having lost like 5% body fat as well, which, you know, is is actually the best result that, could be that you lose body fat, then you build a small amount of, muscle tissue. So, yeah, I think many people overemphasize the idea of protein. You need much less than you think. Yes. You wanna get get something like 0.7 to 0.8 grams per pound of, body weight for protein every day, but that already maximizes the muscle growth benefits. And if you eat, like, one gram per pound, then it's kind of overkill. If you're very orate, then I would, like, suggest that, yeah, a much higher protein like that, so there's something like one gram per pound, would be more optimal because, first of all, protein is very saturating. So if you're orate, you want to promote satiety and, yeah, protein makes you eat less overall, and you also burn a lot of calories digesting protein. So if you're eating something like 200 grams of protein, then a lot of it goes through digestion, and you waste it for, and you waste waste that energy. So you're not storing that. So yeah. But if you're leaner and you're more physically active, then then from my own experience, then you need much less, than you think. Yeah. So there's another variable in that equation, which is, blood urea nitrogen. So, you know, it seems like that's the hot topic on, you know, eat more protein. And that may be true for some older adults who barely struggle to even get point eight grams per kilogram. Right? Making sure they get at least that minimum may be important. But once we get into, like, you know, a 150, a 172 grams per kilogram or more. So if blood urine nitrogen is high, assuming normal kidney function, so, you know, protein has nitrogen. So if you're not using it, the the body's gonna deaminate, take off the nitrogen groups, and form urea. So that may not seem like a big deal, but urea increases during aging in part because kidney function declines during aging. Right? So that may not seem like a big deal, but Mhmm. Urea can degrade. So if urea is circulating, elevated levels of urea are circulating, the gut is, you know, it has vasculature, so it receives that blood supply. Urea can degrade the tight junctions in the intestine, so which means that more stuff from the lumen can leak into the blood. Now you've got stuff that activates inflammation. So I'm not saying very high protein diets will be bad for, inflammation. I'm not it depends on the individual. It depends on what your data shows. If someone's eating two grams of protein per kilogram or more, and the blood urine nitrogen is relatively youthful at twelve, thirteen, 14, Not a problem. But bun increases during aging. So, you know, this whole drive of eat more protein, eat more protein, you know, for the people who are having a hard time getting enough, I think it's important. But like you said, it's most people get more most active minded people, as long as they're getting that 1.6, how much above that is very debatable? And I'd argue there are a lot of mechanisms that, yeah, may not be good. Yeah. For sure. Like, why take the risk if, there's no benefit? So, that's what I like to think a lot that, you know, high protein diets usually don't, like, cause kidney disease in otherwise healthy people, but you don't know what it might do to your So if you eat, yeah, like, a two two grams per pound for decades, you know, are your are your kidneys going to be suboptimal once you're 80 or 90 years old? So, like, do not take that risk then. Okay. Eat just just that much as is needed and, not not more more than that. I wasn't presuming that the very high protein intakes cause kidney disease. That Yeah. Yeah. I know. Many factors there. But knowing that kidney function declines during aging and any excess that your body doesn't need for the protein, you know, it's gonna be deaminated and forming urea. And knowing that elevated blood levels of urea, it, you know, potentially either in conjunction with poor poor kidney function leading to the elevated urea, that degradation of the, tight junctions. You know, it's a potential disaster. You know, I eat too much protein being a disaster for, you know, systemic health. There's another there's another side of this equation too, which is, gastric output. So stomach acid production and, pepsin levels can decline during aging, and then and I say can because some some studies show a decline, other show others other studies don't show a decline, and that's potentially important because if you can't digest and absorb that protein in the small intestine, so we get the protein in the blood and, you know, get, you know, protein muscle protein synthesis and all the things that protein is good for, more of it will reach the colon where it's fermented by gut bacteria to produce, quote, unquote, deleterious metabolites that can indeed impact not just kidney function, but the heart, the vasculature, the brain. So, but most people aren't measuring these things. Right? So they just think, oh, I'm eating a very high protein diet. I'm good. But, you know, what are the biomarkers show? Right? So Yeah. Yeah. Interestingly, I think with plant based proteins, you don't see those negative effects that often as with, animal based proteins that, this protein fermentation as well is less likely to happen with other plant proteins. So, yeah, like, if you're eating higher amount of plant proteins, then that appears to be safer, whereas a higher amount of animal protein typically, tends to be worse in the studies at least. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. 100% agree. The only caveat is is, like, as you know, egg and meat, their their what is it? The biological activity or their ability to do small most protein synthesis is higher than plant protein. Right? So now you've got this balance between you wanna keep the protein away from the fermentation by the gut. But now, you know, it's like how much meat, how much animal products versus how much plant based protein. Like, there's that bound Mhmm. Nobody's thinking about this. It's just eat more protein. But, yeah, these are all variables in the equation. Yeah. And, you know, if you are eating animal based proteins, then you need actually much less. Less. So you wouldn't so so you wouldn't need, like, one gram per pound of animal protein. If you're eating a 100% animal protein, then you could probably get the same effect from just, yeah, 0.7 grams per pound. Right? If you are eating plant based proteins, then you need a little bit more, like, 20 to 30% more. So if you're eating plant based proteins, then you might need, yeah, like, up to one gram per pound, for the maximum proteins in this is a fix. Yeah. Makes sense. Alright. So exercise. Right? So how often, for how long, how do you decide which days, what's your what are your thoughts on the, optimal duration for you? Like, I know the published studies and and it's you know, most of it, you know, it's in the book or almost all of it's in the book. I mean, you know, 8,000 references. I I can't imagine how you left any stone unturned. But, outside of the published studies, like, you know, that people can get in the book, the seam the seam workout plan. How Mhmm. How do you settle on where you currently are? And what are your thoughts for frequency duration, all that? Yeah. So I've, yeah, changed my workout plan quite drastically over the last three, two years, something like that. In the past, you know, between the ages of 18 and 28, I was pretty much doing only strength training with, walking. I was, yeah, at the gym or, you know, doing calisthenics or whatever, maybe four to five times a week, resistance training. And, but, yeah, like, based on the research, which is which is why I changed some of my workout plan, then, you know, doing, like, an even split of cardio and resistance training appears to be better for long term health. So, right now, I'm doing resistance training three times a week, and I follow, like, a push pull leg split. So I work out day one number one, I'll do pushing muscles. So let's say bench press, shoulder press. Workout day number two, I'll do leg muscles, so squats, maybe this stiff leg deadlifts. And workout day number three, I'll do pulling muscles, so pull ups or, these rows, barbell rows or or dead lifts as well. So, yeah, this covers the entire body. And, I think that's, you know, for me at least, that's the kind of optimal amount of resistance training that I found while at the same time also doing cardiovascular exercise. So, yeah, if I was to work out six times a week with weights, then I will be maybe somewhat of a different protocol. But I've always kind of followed this idea that cycle between the main muscle groups, And, I like to do the main compound lifts because it's the most kind of time efficient way to exercise or do lift weights and is also, like, more functional. So you're, you know, targeting more strength. So I I wasn't, like, really interested in muscle mass. Like a bodybuilder, I wanted to be more, like, stronger, so, like, a more power lifting, approach. And, with that, by focusing on strength, you also build plenty of muscle mass. So it's kind of you get both the best of both worlds. And, yeah, the compound exercises, the multi joint exercises like bench, deadlift, squat, rows, They're just, like, the best fit in my experience, for that overhead press. Yeah. I I like that a lot. So, and this is also, like, the worst workout plan that I did when I was 18 years old, 17 years old, this, five by five strong lifts program, which, you know, has their own, like, exercises, but it's also the main just compound lifts. So you don't need to do, like, dozens of different exercises with machines. If you just do the bench press, you're targeting your triceps, your front delts, and your chest, etcetera. With the rows, you're targeting the lats, your forearms, and biceps, etcetera. So, yeah, I it just takes me, like, thirty to forty five minutes at the gym, and I'm pretty much done with that. So I don't spend, like, a lot of hours at the gym. Maybe four years ago, I did went go I did go through, like, a mini kind of, like, bulking arc where I was, trying to build more mess. And, during that time, I did, like, longer workouts. I was doing maybe one hour, maybe even, like, a one and a half hour at some time. And, but that involved still the main compound lifts, but I was doing a lot of the accessory exercises as well for the hypertrophy. But, nowadays, when I'm not focusing that much on the muscle mass and just focusing on strength and, bone density, for example, then I do, yeah, like, two exercises pretty much, you know, in a given workout, forty five minutes, and, that's pretty much it. Then with cardio, so I'm doing, currently for the last month, I've been taking a break from cardio just to kind of, yeah, take a break from it. But before that, over the last year, I've been doing, two to three zone two cardio workouts per week, which lasts fifty five minutes on average. And, the intensity is somewhat low, so it's not anything strenuous. It's kind of like a, you know, easy jog. So I'm always, like, breathing through the nose. I'm not getting exhausted from it. I could do it for, like, two, three hours in a row. So, yeah, it's it's been my main focus over the last year to build, like, this cardiovascular, base. And then once a week, I'll do, like, a HIIT workout as well, some interval training. Now the HIIT workout kinda varies. I might do it once a week, or I might might also do it, like, once every other other week. But it's not like, staple in my program because I'm already, like, you know, exercise exercising quite a lot. So if I, yeah, feel that, okay, I've been, you know, being too or I've been exercising too much already, then I'll just skip it. But if I do it, then I might replace one of those own two cardio workouts with a hit program. And then usually, I'll have one day of the week where I, you know, don't do any exercise. So I might might just go for a walk or something like that. And the the HIIT program, the HIIT workout kind of fluctuates as well, but I'll typically do something like four intervals, each interval lasting somewhere between two to four minutes. And, I I, like, do, like, a rest interval or, like, a slow jog for as well, like, two to four minutes in between those, rounds. So I'll repeat it for four rounds. And, yeah, that's pretty much it for the interval. Wait. So the the your hit training, you're doing two to four minutes all out, sprint? Like, just hard run as hard as you can for those two, four minutes, and then then it's, two to four minutes of slow jog? Yeah. Like, so well, you're not able to, like, go all out for in the entire two to four minutes because, you know, you're only able to sprint for, you know, less than thirty seconds usually. So is it like just a moderate pace and I'm aiming for this, 80 to 90% of my max heart rate? So I usually wear this, polar heart rate monitor doing the cardio sessions and I'm tracking my heart rate. So I'm aiming for the 80 to 90% of my max heart rate for those two to four minutes. And, in the wrist intervals, I'm, reducing the heart rate to something like 50 to 60 max heart rate, and then I'll repeat it. So you're purposely training, trying to train the 80 to 90% heart rate zone by doing it for that long? Because you could do it. I'm guessing you get to 80 to 90% within thirty seconds or less. Right? And then Yeah. You could just right? So you're literally trying to train that as much as you can. Yeah. Yeah. And, it's also, like, a good metric because it can change, so to say, like, you get fitter and then it can Yeah. Increase, but you always, like, try to, like you can also use, like, your rate of perceived exertion kind of so, So, like, eighty eighty to 90% of your rate of perceived exertion. So, like, a 100% is that, yeah, like, you're all out sprinting and you're kind of almost falling down and, 80 to 90% of that. So you can pace yourself, according to that if you don't have a heart rate monitor. But, the heart rate monitor is kind of is a very useful tool that I found, and it kinda you can see it, so you're more, like, accountable to yourself as well. So so you're not gonna cheat. Like, you're not gonna, I'm gonna go a bit slower this time because, I mean, this interval is pretty brutal. It kind of takes takes you out of breath, but it's also very effective for a VO two max. And, you know, I lost a lot of, visceral fat as well during that time. So I went from, like, a pretty pretty good visceral fat of 350 grams to 50 grams, which is I don't know if it's too low, but, you know, I wasn't planning to get it that low. It just happened. So and, one of the biggest changes to my workout plan was I was doing the intervals. And there is research that, you know, the hit intervals are very good for, visceral fat, reduction as well. Nice. So the hit the total hit, you said, how many four rounds? So two to four minutes on, two to four minutes off. So at most eight. So it's about a thirty minute at most fifteen to thirty minutes. Yeah. At maximum, it's like thirty two minutes. And, if I'm doing shorter intervals, then it's usually because I'm feeling okay, feeling a bit tired, I'm gonna take it easier. So I'll do shorter intervals. So I'll do still something. And, the first answer was obviously the always the hardest, but the subsequent intervals usually feel pretty good. Alright. So day one push, day two legs, day three pull, day four hit for zone two, or is it I think no. No. Like, I'm I'm alternating between. So, like, Monday is push, Tuesday is zone two, Wednesday is legs, Thursday is either rest or zone two, Friday is either, you know, rest hit or zone two, then Saturday might be pool, Sundays, either rest zone two or hit depending, yeah, what I did before. So five days combined weights and cardio or six. Five or six? Five five or six. Yeah. Alright. And then wait. So taking it take it back. So you're, so in the strength training workouts, you said you're doing, for example, two exercises on that Monday for the push. So, I mean, I guess I'm guessing you're resting between sets because it's not like a circuit training based thing. So it's just taking your time and get or or do you have set goals where it's like, alright. I'm gonna be in there for forty five minutes. I'm gonna do 15 sets. Like, how do you think about within workout? Yeah. I don't, like, have a goal. Okay. Forty five minutes. And, you know, sometimes I'm time constrained, so then I'll only have forty five minutes or something. But, you know, sometimes it might be fifty, fifty five minutes as well. Depends, yeah, how much I rest between the sets. So my strength training program is something I'll I'll pick two main compound lifts. So the for the pushing, their bench press or the incline press, which is not kinda the same. It's just a different, angle. And the the second exercise would be like overhead press or some seated dumbbell shoulder press. So kind of the horizontal plane and the vertical plane. I'm always kind of training both in the same workout. So the horizontal plane horizontal push exercise would be a bench press, and a vertical would be the shoulder press. For the pulling muscle, the horizontal would be the barbell row Yep. And the vertical would be the pull up or something like that. You could even lean back and do kind of like an, you know, incline. Yeah. Yeah. You can do it for in many ways. Yeah. But kind of the main Yeah. Yeah. Directions. So, yeah. Two exercises and, I'm aiming for something like four to six reps with those compound exercises. Four to six reps is my working weight, typically. And, I'll warm up, you know, warm up to the weight, do four to six reps for typically, I'll try to aim for three sets. So the warm up sets don't count. You know, when I'm warming up with a bench press, I'm gradually increasing the weight slightly every set as a warm up. That takes me just something like five minutes, maybe less, and then four to six reps for three sets. And I'm typically resting, something like I try to rest, you know, like, as long as I need to, but it's gonna be something like three to four minutes. So I'm not trying to get a, like, a cardio workout with strength training. I'm trying to apply the maximum amount of mechanical tension, which is the biggest driver of, muscle hypertrophy. And, you can achieve that with many different rep schemes. If you have, like, lighter reps, you're doing, like, 10 to 12 reps, then you just need to go to closer to failure. You know, one to two reps is, like, very close to your one rep max, and it's, gonna be harder to you you would need to do, like, 10 sets of, something like that to reach sufficient amount of volume with that, but four to six reps three times. At at least I I find that it's a pretty decent amount of volume that, is good for muscle growth and strength that development as well. So And, yeah. So I was just gonna say, so what are your thoughts on, like, I I get circuit training based approach. You'll potentially limit your maximum strength increases. Right? Because it's hard to have all out effort if you're doing four to six reps on a bench press and then four to six reps on a on a row. Right? On a dumbbell row or whatever, you know, the the pull rows. Right? So, but you're getting the cardiovascular stimulus. Your heart rate is staying elevated. Granted, it may not get to 80%. But in terms of the biggest bang for the buck, you could argue that maybe you don't have the the maximum strength. You don't have the maximum cardio, but you're getting the kind of the best of both worlds there. So, like, no thoughts on or what are your thoughts on circuit training based, you know, approaches? Yeah. I think they definitely work. And, for people who have, like, not who who have, like, let's say, less time or something, then it can be for sure, like, a good trade off. And, you know, it depends on your goals as well. If you don't wanna be yeah. Like you said, you don't wanna reach your maximum strength, then you don't wanna reach your maximum cardio, then it's a good trade off. You know? I like the the idea that, you know, the man that catches two rabbits or chases two rabbits catches none. So I I like to be okay. In the strength training workout, I'm gonna focus only on the strength. I'm not gonna even try to break a sweat. Like, usually, I don't, yeah, like, get sweaty doing that. And, with a cardio workout, I'm training only cardio. So, I I feel like, okay. If you have the single focus, then you'll reach the better results. But you will have to, like, you know, have separate workouts, for that. So I'm not usually doing cardio after strength training either because of that reason. So I'm only having a strength day workout, and a strength day and a cardio day, yeah, separate day. So your cardio day, you said, is on day two, but then you're training legs, you know, with, dead squats. But deadlifts are day three or day two? It's on day three. Yeah. Like, Wednesday. Yeah. But day two squats. So you're doing, you know, fifty five, sixty minutes of running, which is I mean, granted it's type one type one type two a muscle fibers, whereas you're working the type two, you know, two b's, two x's when you're doing squats. But there's still there has to be some element of fatigue going from day two into day three. Right? So wouldn't that limit overall strength gains with the squats and and all all the other, you know, leg movements? I haven't, like, noticed that, like, I'm I I don't get, like, sore or anything from, any of my workouts really, unless I take, like, a break. So, yeah, like, the first workout after not having worked out that muscle for two weeks is is gonna feel, like, sore the next day. But, if I'm in my regular routine, then I don't get sore from cardio. Like, I could do cardio even every day and still work out with weights. It it will be a lot more act like center nervous fatigue. Yeah. That could be the limiting factor. So if you're just overtraining every day, then, yeah, your central nervous system will be the limiting factor for strength. But, I haven't experienced that. Like, because because zone two cardio for me is isn't is not it's not supposed to be intense. Like, you're supposed to be doing it or you're supposed to be able to do it for many hours every day pretty much if you do it the right way. So I'm not even, yeah, getting my heart rate super elevated. It's like in the low one hundreds, a 120, 130, something like that. Yeah. But it's just the general fatigue, whether it's central or just just, type one, type two a muscle fiber fatigue that may limit or maybe that helps to recruit more, muscle fibers when you're doing your leg workouts if there is some just general leg fatigue when you're doing, you know, strength training the next day. Maybe that actually helps. But you're adapted to it. In you know, I think most people, they'd be you know, can't do, you know, even though it's a relatively easy workout for you, you've adapted to it. Whereas a fifty five minute cardio workout, I can't imagine most people are training legs the next day. Maybe the other way around where they train legs on day one and then do the fifty five minute zone on day two because it's like you're not really training for perform performance zone two. It's just kinda like an easy run. Right? So Right. Yeah. I mean, there is research that this active recovery is better for, like, performance. So, yeah, like, if you train legs and the next day you go for, like, a even like a jog or some easy cycling or something, then that appears to be, like, better for recovery than just being, you know, sitting. So any movement, like, light movement is good for recovery, is active recovery. But, yeah, you could easily overdo it. But, I've been doing it, yeah, for you know, I've been lifting for twelve years, and, I've been, yeah, pretty much, exercised a lot. So my body is very, like, adapted to it for sure. And then what about using, like, HRV or resting heart rate? Are you still tracking that, or have have do you have enough data year to year where you can see changes in avoiding age related declines for HRV and avoiding the age related increase up to around 50 for resting heart rate? Still tracking that? Yeah. Like, this this one I've been tracking, yeah, pretty consistently over the last four or five years. And, I mean, it's pretty much the same as it was. So, I mean, it might have improved slightly. I don't recall exactly, the number off the top of my head when I started tracking it, but, you know, back in 2019, something like that, it was still, yeah, in the low forties. My resting heart rate nowadays, it's something like 38 to 40, so it's slightly better, and my HRV is kinda same. It's been, you know, like a 100 over a 100, the the entire time. Nice. So are you expecting to keep those data there as long as you're consistent with the workouts, or do you think there'll come a time when the workouts, even even though you'll be consistent at some point, maybe HRV starts to dip, resting heart rate starts to increase. If so, what would you do in that in that situation? Or it doesn't matter. HRV, resting heart rate doesn't matter. No. I do think that they're important for sure. Like, I mean, there will yeah. For sure will be some age related changes at least based on what we know about aging and, in the studies as well. You see heart rate increases and HIV decreases with age. I think, first of all, I would take, like, a mini break. So it might be that I you know, because even now, you know, every once in a while, my heart rate goes to 44, HIV goes to 89 or something. So that could be that just, yeah, I need to sleep a little longer, take a, like, a few days off. So I'll do it and it kinda normalizes. So there's always, like, those things, small things that, need to be first, like, okay, taken into account. So is it maybe there's something in in the diet, maybe there's maybe you're getting, some sort of a cold or infectious, kind of, conditions, whatever it is, to first, like, address those before making any conclusions. But, yeah, theoretically so if my HRE begins to tank and my heart rate begins to increase with everything, like, being the same, then, you know, Paul yeah. I would, you know, I would first try it out and see, okay, is exercising less going to improve those numbers again, and then make, like, adjustments according, to that. So you and even then there might be, like, okay, we don't know which one is more important. Like, okay, is it is it more important to have this low resting heart rate and high HRV versus is it more important to keep exercising? So I guess we don't know that data. So at that point, it comes down to, okay, which one you choose, which option. So I wouldn't necessarily suggest exercising less in that case. Right? But but, so I'm I'm guessing that you'll be able to best resist age related changes for HRV, resting heart rate, and whatever other biomarkers, you know, muscle mass, visceral fat, right, with the consistency of training over a long period of time. But if you did start to see some dip, knowing you're consistent with the exercise, like you said, you know, is it infection? You know, what's the cause? And then maybe you actually get closer to some kind of root cause of quote, unquote, aging in your case, which would lead to immune activation and and overstressed, which is what the lower HRV and higher heart rate resting heart rate. So, ideally, you could probably catch that sooner because you're paying attention to it. And it not may not necessarily have to do with exercise dose. Right? So I wouldn't want you to cut down on the dose. It's a matter of what's that underlying factor that's, limiting your ability. Right? Because because then you're in that vicious cycle. Right? Alright. I cut my exercise dose, and my data goes back. But now is that gonna be bad long term? Because I've caught my exercise dose, and that is below my peak fitness. Right? So now you're on that slow decline trying to optimize it as opposed to what's the root underlying that HRV resting heart rate, and that's probably independent of exercise as long as you're consistent with that over time. Right? So I don't think anybody's thinking about it like that too. It's For sure. Yeah. And I think that there's also, like, a certain reserve that you have. So, like, for me, like, my heart rate is right now thirty eight forty, but 45 would be also excellent. Like, you know, there's actually, like, no data that 40 would be better than 45. Not that I've seen. And with HRV as well, like, okay. Is is a HRV of a 150 better than a 120 versus 95? Like, we don't know that either because they're, like, so out of the normal in that sense. So, yeah, maybe maybe if it goes from a 120 to 95, I mean, that's still super good, and your heart rate goes from 38 to 48, then that's still, like, pretty good. So yeah. Pretty good based on the average person, but you versus you. I mean, is or it just doesn't matter to you. Right? As long as you're in the quote, unquote what's, you know, really good, it's good enough for you versus there is an age related change. It's not my best, but I'm okay with that. Right? For me for me, things changing during aging and, you know, it those are dirty words to me, but how how about how do you see that? Yeah. Hard to say. Yeah. Like, it would be for for me, yeah, like, a heart heart rate of 48 would be bad. Or not bad, but it's kind of, heading in the wrong direction. Yeah. So, I would defers I would definitely try to, again, make some different adjustments to my diet or exercise, sleep, etcetera, to try to get it back down to normal. But, you know, if someone else is, you know, going from 45 to 48, then that for them might not be that big of a deal. Yeah. Alright. So let's go the two more two more import not more important, but also, as a as a part of the optimizing the base. Right? So sleep and supplements. Right? So Mhmm. To have, like, a sleep, hygiene approach, or it's just I sleep when I'm tired. How how do you think about sleep optimization? Yeah. CP is obviously very important, and, I have, like, a pretty simple sleep routine. So a few key things that I try to, follow. So I try to, like, minimize this bright light in the evening, bright artificial light. So instead of having, like, this blue and, kind of, ceiling lamps, I use, like, like a pink Himalayan salt lamp in the bedroom, or, you know, I might have some, like, red light bulb, like like something of this. You know that wavelength? Nanometers? No. It's it's it's a regular light bulb, but it's red. So, like, it's yeah. It has the red light wavelengths, but, something of that And then I'll wear, like, some of the blue blocking glasses or something like that as well to kind of if I'm using, like, my smartphone to look at something, then I'll wear the blue blocking glasses, and that's kind of useful. Now is it super mandatory to, wear the blue blockers? I don't think it's, like, the first thing that matters. The consistency of the bedtime is probably the you know, or, like, you know, first thing is make sure you get to the seven to eight hours, and then the consistency of, going to bed around the same time on a regular basis. Those are the most important parts. And, what I found is, yeah, dimming down the lights is kind of good for my sleep as well that, helps to wind down easily. And, for example, if I'm recording something late, like a podcast, not today, but, on some days, it's, like, at the 9PM, which is, like, one one hour before my bedtime, then, I do feel that, like, this kind of very bright light does keep me up a bit longer if I if I do that. So, yeah, I mean, there's some research about the blue blockers being useful for insomnia and sleep. And, from a, like, mechanistic perspective, then the bright lights do suppress melatonin. And in my opinion, like, melatonin is one of the, like, primary antiaging hormones. So not only for sleep, but also as an antioxidant and regulator of these other systems in the body like gluethon and, autophagy and, those kind of things. So I don't want to, like, you know, suppress my melatonin in the evening before bed when you're supposed to have the highest amounts of melatonin. So, yeah, that's kind of, what I kind of do. Food intake, I stop eating, yeah, something like five hours before bed. I've noticed that it's good for my sleep. If I, you know, eat large dinner too close to bed, then my deep sleep is slightly lower and and, it takes me a bit longer to fall asleep. But, if I go to bed slightly hungry, then I get, like, super good, deep sleeps. And in the morning, you know, I wake up between six to seven. But, yeah, like, if I wake up too early, then I'm gonna feel a bit tired. So I ideally want to aim for, yeah, something like seven seven and a half to eight hours, per night for sleep. So that that that that's when I feel, like, predict the best, with that. Blackout shades? Are you paying attention to room temperature and humidity? Do you have a bed cooling, like, any of those? Yeah. I do have blackout curtains. So in the winter months, it, doesn't matter because you go to bed and wake up when it's dark outside anyway. But, in the summer, the sun does rise pretty early here. So it rises even, like, 4AM. So I even though I would have the blackout curtains, some of the light might come through. So I'll use, like, a sleep mask. That's, like, the best thing in the summer. So, I'll use that. With, like, air quality, I just usually ventilate the room before bed. And in the morning, I'd open the windows and, let the wind in. There I do have, like, some air filtration, device as well. I'll I might run that for thirty minutes, a few hours before bed, but I don't have, like, any specific, like, like that. With cooling, I use this, eight sleep mattress that's, you know, summer is definitely super good because if it's too hot to then I don't really like, yeah, one of the biggest things that messed up my sleep would be if it's too hot or if it's, like, super bright lights, immediately before bed. So, yeah, like, the cooling mattress is pretty good. In the winter, I don't use it that much, but in the summer, definitely. With supplements, I take, like, a microdose melatonin every once in a while, so, like, zero point three milligrams. And, I take, glycine with my tea in the evening. So that's, like, two hours before bed. And, I don't take any other, like, real steep, supplements. So, yeah, that's pretty much it. How much, glycine? Yeah. Like, you know, I'm getting something like ten to fifteen grams of glycine per day. And in the evening with the tea, it might be one teaspoon. So that's, like, three three grams, I guess. And, I also put it, like, into my protein shake. So and, maybe with, the collared cheese as well in the evening. So, yeah, I'm getting at least ten grams, per day. And that's based on the glutathione studies and glycine restoration avoiding age related decline? Yeah. Partly. It's also with the the methionine balance. So, you know, excess methionine and too low glycine status, in animal studies are linked to shorter lifespans. You know, of course, in humans, it's not possible to know that, but in humans, they find that excess methionine and low glycine status also increases visceral fat or it's, associated with higher visceral fat. So, yeah, I think you need glycine for many things like the glutathione synthesis, collagen synthesis as well. You need it for methionine and glycine balance. It also supports creatine synthesis. It's good for sleep, lowers blood sugar. So I think, you know, most people just aren't getting enough gysine from the regular diet. So unless you are eating pork skin or pork rinds or or pure gelatin desserts, or just making jello yourself, then you're not really getting that much glycine. And chances are you're getting too much methionine if you're eating, muscle meat and eggs and those kind of things. So, yeah, I think most people would need at least, like, three, five grams. And, personally, I think, like, you know, ten grams up to twenty grams is better. Alright. So glycine sounds like that's the, dominant supplement in the approach. What else? Do you have any other how many supplements? And then what's, what's the top five? Yeah. Currently, I'm taking quite a limited amount of supplements. I'm taking, like, six or seven, and, they are yeah. Glycine, collagen So collagen separately because you only get three grams of glycine from ten grams of collagen. And, there's, you know, a lot of the studies that, collagen peptides improve skin and aging and skin elasticity. So, yeah, I'm using kind of for that reason. The third supplement is, TMG, so trimethylglycine, and that's I take that for my homocysteine levels. For my homocysteine was slightly elevated. It was, like, 12. I started taking two grams of TMG, and it, dropped to nine. And, yeah, I'm trying to see if I'm getting it closer to five, which will be more, optimal. And, four supplement, creatine, I don't take creatine, like, every day, but I take it, like, 80% of the time. So, creatine, you know, obviously for muscle strength and muscle power, it also helps with, some of the methylation. It's good for the brain. It's not necessarily useful for sleep, but it, can counteract, like, sleep restriction or the negative effects of sleep restriction, and it can, like, I guess, yeah, reduce sleep demand. So you're able to get away with a slightly less sleep. So, yeah, it's one of the most, like, research supplements for sports performance specifically. I take that. And magnesium is the fifth one. So I'll take I try to yeah. Maybe even, like, four hundred milligrams of magnesium a day, sometimes less, but, that's because, you know, magnesium deficiency is very common. And, I'm just using that as more like insurance policy, to, like, prevent any, like, magnesium deficiency. What else? Sixth supplement, is omega threes. So I'm taking one point five grams of EPA DHA combined, and the reason for that is to increase the omega three index. So it was nine percent, which is above the optimal, you know, but, we'll see maybe ten maybe maybe it goes to ten percent, but I'm not, like, really pushing it that hard. So nine percent is pretty good. So over eight percent is is, like, the best optimal zone. And the last sub yeah? Go ahead. Go ahead. Last supplement? Yeah. Last supplement would be melatonin. I don't take it every day, but a few times, a week. So in terms of what's optimal for the omega three index, I mean, you could technically look look at the if you have tracked biomarker data on the same day as omega three index, you could look at correlations. Right? Because just because, you know, there you're you have this reference range and what's considered high. In your case, is that significantly correlated with more biomarkers going in the right direction than wrong. Right? And then if not, maybe it's not 11%, maybe, actually, 8.4% maybe best in your case. Right? So just just an idea for that more titrated For sure. Yeah. Yeah. But my yeah. My biomarkers have improved as well while I've increased omega threes. But, you know, I've done things to my biomarkers that don't include omega three supplement. So what about weak spots? So you mentioned homocysteine and then taking TMG, but what do you have current weak spots, whether it's biomarkers, whether it's training? And, actually, wait. Before going there, I going back to the training real quick. So what about I'm guessing you're you're doing obviously full range of motion or or, you know I mean, the bench presses, you know, touch the chest to the bar, you know, ass to grass with the squats. Or is it 90 degrees? And then are you doing any flexibility training, mobility work, you know, balance training, or is this just, you know, you you're doing a lot already, so you're you'll have higher than usual levels of all these things, but not specifically training it. Right. Yeah. I try to do full range of motion with most exercises. With the squats, it kinda varies if I'm doing the high bar versus the low bar squat. So if it's the low bar squat, then I'll go, yeah, like, slightly below 90 degrees. So, like, you know, just the hips slightly below the knees. And with with that, the the weight would be heavier. Whereas if I'm doing the high bar squat, then the weight would be lighter, but I would go, deeper. So, yeah, like, glutes touching the the the calves. Calves. Yep. So, yeah, depends on a lot of the exercise. But, you know, bench press, I'll go full range of motion, rows, pull ups. And, yeah, with flexibility and stretching, like, I do some, like, easy stretching exercises. So, like, some, like, easy front splits. So I'm not I'm not as flexible as to do a front split right now because I'm not, like, directly training it, but, I could, you know, get it in a in a few weeks if I were to, train it. So I'm, like, you know, decently flexible, but not, like, crazy flexible because I'm not, chasing it, specifically. So I do, like, some mobility exercises. Like, every day, I'll try to get into the the the deep squat position even when I'm, like, you know, checking my phone or playing with my dog or something like that. Like, it just take a moment to do some mobility at the same time. I tried to do some of this this knees over toes kind of exercises slightly where you're, like, doing, like, a lunge with the knees going over to toes, so, like, a full range of motion. If I if I've been sitting a lot, like, after driving or something like that, then I'll do the what's it called? The couch stretch or something where you're stretching the front hip part. I you know, a few times a day, I'll do the touch the floor with the hands, stretch or touch your toes with the floors. Every day, I'll try to hang from somewhere to kind of decompress the spine and loosen the shoulder joints. So if I'm not even training pull ups, then I'll still, you know, hang from somewhere. You know, every every workout at the gym, I'm hanging there for, you know, a minute or two on the bar. And, yeah, that's pretty much it. Like, you know, I do a deep squat, I hang a little bit stretching for the for the front front split, exercise. And, yeah, that I think that covers most of what I need without, like, specifically training for, mobility and flexibility. Totally underrated. I think flexibility, mobility. I mean, you it sounds like you're doing a lot there. Right? So you're good. But I think most people, especially in longevity, even health and fitness, pay almost zero attention to these things. And just using, like, the knees over toes as an example. I mean, the strengthening in the knee joint itself and the ligaments there, you don't you're not I mean, you'll get it from a squat, but by actively going knees over toes, I mean, it's a totally different feeling. Even doing, like, sissy squats. I mean Yeah. I'm doing squats and deadlifts and and lunges and doing the sissy squats. There's so much stress on the joint itself that it's gotta get stronger and, you know, more fit. Right? So I think Yeah. When you consider joint mobility in older age, I mean, you could make an argument that joint mobility may be a huge underlying factor in terms of the youthful gait and phenotype. Right? Because if you can barely get off the floor because your joints are weak, even if your muscles are strong, you're gonna look older. Right? So Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. It's, pretty underrated for sure. Yeah. Alright. So weak spots. So do you have any weak spots right now do that you consider weak spots, whether it's it's biomarkers or stuff you're trying to get stronger at in certain movements, or everything is good? You know, you're, hey, you're just, you know Yeah. I mean, for sure, the homocysteine would be a weak spot. Well, not right now anymore. Has been like it's been normalizing, but, yeah, it's something that I'm, like, trying to optimize even more. Any other weak spots? I'm sure you're like a lot of people. They like to point out some specific, small things like, okay. Your this marker isn't in the exact optimal range or something like that. But the other person, I don't consider them like a weak spots. So Like what? Yeah. Like what? Except the homocysteine, part, which, is is improving. Which which biomarkers would people think that yours aren't in off the overhangs? I've seen your data. It's all pretty close. Yeah. Well, I mean, there's always some people who say, oh, your cholesterol is high or your cholesterol is too low. So you'll you'll never be able to, like, satisfy everyone with that number. So even if my LDL is, like, 77, I I mean, that's pretty pretty good. And even even then some people will say, oh, it should be 40 or, you know, or it's too low. Like, your LDL should be a 150 or something. Depends who who asks. So I don't take, like, those kind of, comment seriously because, you know, I've I've seen the data myself. I've looked at all the research regarding, like, what are the optimal ranges for these markers. So I'm I'm, like, pretty, happy, with that. And, you know, the most important part is maintaining it. So right now, it's relatively easy for me to do, you know, the the challenge is to do that in ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty years. So, that's where the real, like, you know, fun or the challenge, begins. So LDL, it it's inverse u. Right? It's in terms of aging. So it's low in youth, peaks in midlife, and then it's low older at an older age, advanced age. So for the people that are saying that it's too low, most of those studies looking at all cause mortality risk are looking at people basically in their fifties or people in their eighties. And clearly, people in their eighties I mean, it it's the downward sloping thing. Right? So how would you know if you're on the lower side of youth or age? Right? Well, if if your albumin's high and lymphocytes are high and inflammation is low, it's a part of the youth phenotype. You're good. That's how that's how I rationalize it. But, I mean, more direct measures of atherosclerosis. I don't know if you're looking at, like, the ankle brachial index, which is a pretty good measure. You know, because if you have low LDL, but then you've got high lipoprotein a or high you don't have high triglycerides, but high APOB, it is possible to have relatively low levels of certain lipoproteins and higher levels of others that are unmeasured. Yes. Yeah. I mean, yeah, the LDL is it's itself isn't the only thing that matters for sure. Like, other lipoproteins. My l p little a is low, fortunately. It's actually like 2.4. So you you so that's, like, you know, genetically determined. My APOB is also pretty low. It's, like, again, 73 or might be even lower than that. Maybe it was in sixties or low seventies. So that's also, like, pretty low. So, yeah, VLDL is low. So yeah. So those are actually if you if you look under the hood for Dunedin Pace so Dunedin Pace was trained on 19 biomarkers. Mhmm. Besides PO two max was one of them. So, obviously, you're good there. Right? So I think it was what? Over 60? 60 more more recently. Right? So Season two. LDL is on is, with so right? So you've got these nine 19 biomarkers, and then what's the epigenetic profile of people who had the quote unquote youthful data versus the age data? LDL was there, like protein a was there, April b was there, so you're all good. I mean, that probably contributes. I don't know. Maybe it's the o two max, the epigenetics related to that that's contributing more. I don't know. But Mhmm. All those other markers that are relatively low and on the youthful side, that's the argument against your data being too low. Mhmm. Yeah. I mean, well, you know, the too low argument, like you said, comes from the studies where low cholesterol low cholesterol was linked to high mortality, but that's because they didn't account for things like malnutrition and cancer and, frailty and those conditions. So, yeah, like, if you're 80 years old, you're malnourished, you're underweight, your LDL will go down because of the malnourishment and you die because of breaking your hip or something like that. Yeah. Whereas if you account for those, then low LDL isn't, harmful at all. And, especially in the younger age group of, you know, 18 to 45, it's, there's no there's u shaped association. Like, it's kind of a linear almost. So why do you think going back to homocysteine, do you think that's maybe the first weakness in the chain in terms of it increases during aging? Mhmm. Why do you think do you is this is the sign that, you know, maybe methylation is is one of the first things that may go wrong and you've gotta actively work to reverse that? Yeah. Yeah. I think I think I might have something, yeah, methylation related genetics or, like, shortcomings with there because, you know, almost 16 also I've seen it varies a lot between people. You know, Joe Cohen is another person who has high homocysteine levels, and he takes, like, a ton of different supplements to lower it. And it still isn't, like, optimal. Whereas, you know, you have some other people who even, like, take steroids and stuff, and their and their homocysteine is five after just taking a few of these, methyl donor supplements. So and, you know, steroids will increase homocysteine. Whereas, you know, me and Joe so I I've recently introduced some of these, methadone or supplements. So it's going down. So for me, it appears to work. So I I just need to, like, measure it again, maybe change some of the supplements I'm taking, maybe increase b b twelve intake or something, increase DMG, whatever it is. But, Joe, for example, he's taking already a lot of supplements, and he's almost I think he's also, like, nine right now. Has Joe always I mean, is maybe it's a genetic issue in his case, but has yours always been has it been lower in the past, and now it was at 12 where it's increased during aging? Because it that would argue against the genetic component. It's always been something, yeah, like 11, 12, 13, something like that. As far as I can remember from my blood markers or as far as I measure them. So for Joe, like, you know, he tracks everything pretty much as well or, you know, he he has a very thorough understanding of his of his blood work over time. So for him, it's appears to be genetic. For me, I think it might fix more easily than for him, perhaps, but I'm I'm gonna go measure it, like, next week after having taken, slightly more TMG. So I'm gonna see if the higher dose of TMG because in the clinical trials, four to six grams is what they've used with TMG for homocysteine. So I've been increasing it to four grams over the last maybe month, and, I'm gonna see if it, lowered to homocysteine more. But they there's also the studies that TMG over two grams increases cholesterol. So I'm I'm gonna measure that again as well to see, okay, is there a trade off? So then you need to kind of, okay, what's the trade off? Nice. So I I don't know if it's specifically related to homocysteine, but there are gut bacterial enzymes that, degrade, that remove methyl groups. One example being, there are caffeine. So caffeine has methyl groups at three nitrogens. So there are caffeine demethylases that are, the the gut bacterial that their activity increases with an increasing gut pH. So more alkaline gut. The gut becomes more alkaline during aging. So I don't know if that's one reason why homocysteine would increase during aging because you've got a lack of methyl donors, maybe because the gut gets more alkaline. I don't know if that's the case in your situation, but, yeah. That's something that's yeah. That's something that's on my mind. Alright. So so let's, alright. So let's get into some of the fun stuff. So, like, favorite movies, favorite music, what makes, you know, what's what makes the scene tick? Mhmm. Right. Well, my favorite movies are probably like the Lord of the Rings movies. The trilogies are like you know, I've always been, like, a fan of, that kind of, those kind of movies. I don't, like, watch a bunch of movies right now. Like, I'm not, like, tracking new movies and then, okay, I'm gonna go see them. I watched, you know, things like Dune when it came out. Yeah. Like, occasional few movies. But the my favorite genre is probably something fantasy related, like, Star Wars, Lord of the Rings, Dune, or those kind of things. Music music wise, I like, like, heavier music, so, like, death metal and those kind of things, which, yeah, I've I've liked since, since as a child almost. Like, I think I started listening to this music when I was maybe 13 or something like that. So as yeah. Seventeen years ago. So over half of my life, I've been listening to that. And, yeah. I mean, that's yeah. I I other than that, I, like, you know, pay with my dog, spend time with my wife, and, yeah, kind of a I don't have any, like, specific hobbies besides, like, you know, research and, exercise. Oh, wait. So I have two another question that leads off of that. But wait. Which bands? Which death metal bands? Like, is Metallica rage against the machine? Or how how how hard is right? Right. Well, I think yeah, like, I mean, metallic isn't, heavy enough. So, I like more like a new wave of this death metal. So, like, it's called actually death cores. It's not, as, like, old school metal. But, you know, my favorite band's something like, Lorna Shore, Whitechapel, Signs of the Swarm. What else? Immortal disfigurement is one. Yeah. Like, I mean, I can name a few more, but, you know, I don't know if you've even heard of them. No. I I'm gonna look them up that way. And so do you listen to death metal when you're working out? What's the workout music? Yeah. I mean, usually, this it's, the death metal music. I might listen to some podcast as well when I'm working out. If I'm writing or, you know, working on a computer, then I'll listen to the music. If I'm taking a nap, I'll listen to the music. But but is it exclusively death metal, like, during the workout while, like, while writing, while researching? Or is it or is this, some variance with other stuff too? I mean, there are, like, some sub genres of that. You know, there's, like, metal core. There's, like, post hardcore or something like that, but they're all in the kinda same ballpark with that. So I don't like, like, rep or EDM or or acoustic music or something like that. Alright. So cool. Alright. So then what does in the world know about you? Like, what actually, in along those lines. So is is, you know, making content related to longevity, is that the goal for as long as you, you know, as long as you can or want to? Or do you see other stuff that you're interested in that you'd be making content on? And then you said you have no hobbies, but, like, are there things that interest you outside of, you know, 8,008 references, you know? Yeah. What what are your thoughts about that? Well, you know, I studied anthropology in university, and I like, you know, history. I like philosophy a little bit. I like just the human species or, like, understanding human species. I I, you know, I pay attention to, like, politics a little bit, and I pay attention to, culture and those kind of things and anthropology in general. So I I I like the idea of human evolution and, advancing the human species. So that's why I'm interested in the longevity idea that I think that's kind of the next step in the human evolution of, you know, extending human lifespan. We're obviously not anywhere close to that yet, but I'm, like, interested in, researching that, and I think it's, you know, the most interesting, problem to solve. So, like, you know, weight loss is relatively easy in terms of, like, the mechanisms and, understanding, how it works. But, you know, aging and longevity is much harder. Like, we don't even know how it works yet completely. So, that's why I'm, like, interested in it, as a, like, a from an anthropological perspective of how do we actually extend human, lifespan. And I think that's that's the future kind of, for the human species in the next few century or or beyond. And, Yeah. What no one knows about me or, like, the future plans with my my content at such, is, I am planning to, like, evolve myself as a well as well. I don't think I'll be staying only, like, as a content creator. I have, like, a few business ideas that I'm gonna work on with some people over the next few years as well. And, it's kind of but it's in the vein of this, longevity and life extension area. So, yeah, I mean, the business part is, like, a mandatory part of this as well. You know? I don't consider myself like a researcher, obviously. I'm not a scientist, but I'm not like some sort of, I I I don't like to think myself as some sort of a regular influencer either. So, but I I do like to, yeah, like the idea of contributing to the fields in some shape or form and, yeah, actually providing some sort of a service to people that would support their longevity, in a more, like, meaningful and effective way in the future. So so that's indefinitely the the you know, it's you see yourself continuing on that path for as long as you can or there's like you said, I I I heard you say about evolution, but are there so let's assume that, you know, there is no more death, there is no more aging. What are you doing then? Well, I think I'll I would I would, think about it when we actually reach that immortality. So, like, what do you do when you're immortal? Like, let's first try to get immortality, I would say. But, you know, I mean, you know, I I would probably, like, spend so if you have an infinite amount of time to do everything, then you would end up doing everything almost, like, you know? I don't know. Maybe not. Because, you know, you could you could travel everywhere. You could experience all the things in the world related to culture and, adventures or something like that, food, entertainment, like like that if you have infinite amount of time. So, you you know, I would probably end up doing a lot of that those kind of things. But I I like like my routine. I, you know, I would exercise and kind of follow the same routines even if there was, like, no health benefits to it almost. Like, I like that kind of, those activities. My wife is also similar that we both are health conscious. We, take care of ourself, and, yeah, we enjoy spending time together as well. So, you know, I would, you know, spend more time with my wife doing different things and, yeah, experiencing, the world. But right now, I'm already super happy already. So, yeah, I don't know if what what it would change if there was, like, no no mandatory need. So if you could just take, like, in the future, you take a pill that, you know, gives you all the benefits of exercise and, makes you live longer. I would still probably do some of my exercise. Like, I would I would probably make it more fun. Like, I would do, you know, bouldering. I would do, you know, some maybe gymnastics exercises. So I would still do some form of, like, movement. Like, I like to hike in nature. I like to, do some cycling. You know, that's kind of enjoyable for me. Yeah. So I already know what I would do, but, you know, that that's a story for another day. But I I don't think I don't think you know, you were saying that you don't see yourself as just as an influencer, but not a scientist either. Right? Or scientist, researcher either. I mean, that that's a very debatable, you know, tip toe. Right? So the reason I say that is, you know, Harold Catcher Catcher, the e five you know about this, you know, where they're they they took the plasma fraction from old my old rats. They're trying to give it to young as rejuvenation factors. Right? So he just published, like, a short thing showing, like, some bad aging on one hand, and then he put he just happened to put on the other hand the e five. You know? Hey. Let's see. Right? And if you look at the two, one looks really young, his own hand, and the other doesn't. Right? So let let's assume he doesn't have the credentials, you know, a PhD. Right? And he posts something like that, which is literally preliminary data. It's not a study of 50 people or a thousand people. So, I mean, I I don't see it as this thing where you need to have like, you physically or anyone else needs to physically have the credentials. If they're doing these interventions and they've tracked it in a, you know, rigorously scientific way, you know, whether it's 10 blood tests or five blood tests or whatever it may be, that's science. That's actual research. Right? And I don't think you need to have the credentials. Granted, people who have the credentials probably would be more likely to be doing these things, but I think we're in a different era where, citizen science can be immensely powerful, and and the credentials don't there are plenty of people with credentials who don't train or take care of themselves, and what good what good is that. Right? So, so so that's how I see it. I mean, I see it as preliminary data at the individual level that may actually end up translating to the broad masses. So, yeah, you're right about this influencer stuff, but the the definition of what makes, a scientist debatable. Right? I I see you in that vein. I think you could put together a book like that and not have that kind of rigorous level, you know, understanding and training. So Yeah. Well, for sure, like, I also believe that, you know, what matters, yeah, like, is the actual message or the accuracy of of what said than rather like who says it. So, you know, you know, I I'm on I use x on the Twitter and, you know, there's a lot of doctors from all the different fields, spewing nonsense about, you know, diet or whatever it is. So, yeah, like, it's it's not exclusive to, regular people or influencers to spread misinformation. So, like, a lot of doctors all also do it quite frequently. So yeah. But not necessarily always purposeful misinformation. It could be just them looking at the data in a certain way, and then from whatever their background or bias may be, they've interpreted it in a in another way. Right? So Okay. If you don't that misinformation versus disinformation, unless it's actively intentional versus someone's interpretation of the data, and then that being interpreted as miss misinformation, disinformation, that's a very tricky tricky slope. Like, even when I hear politicians talk about these things where, hey, we're gonna crack down on misinformation, who decides? Like, that Yeah. That's a very subjective thing. Yeah. So, alright. Some more fun stuff. So aliens are real. Aliens make believe. What do you think? What do you think about that? I mean, it's, more likely that they are real than they're not, you know, because the vastness of the universe, you know, even though, like, it requires such perfect conditions for life to emerge, then just the vastness of the universe almost makes it impossible that it wouldn't have happened somewhere else. You know, I think there's a lot of different stages of evolution throughout the universe. Like, there's there's planets with, lower life forms than ours and higher life forms than ours. It's just that, yeah, the universe is so massive that it's, very unlikely that there isn't any, like, other, other life out there in my opinion. Not just the universe, the galaxy. Right? I mean, the galaxy, including all of the universes. But wait. You assume that so the Earth is what? How many four point something billion years old? Why couldn't they have evolved here and they're still here? Like, and just in in line with that idea, three hundred years ago, the idea that bacteria existed, nobody knew. Right? And then, you know, this scientist was studying under a microscope microscope and saw this stuff, and then, you know, three hundred years later, we know that microbes are everywhere. We live in their in their world. Right? So who's to say that at some point over the past four billion years or maybe multiple points rise and fall, some advanced civilization exists and have either cloaked themselves or live in the ocean? Who who's to say they're not already here? Right? For sure. Yeah. I mean, we we didn't know that. Yeah. Alright. Anyway okay. We covered it all, I think. So, so for everyone who wants to get Seam's book, it's at seamland.co. Giant giant juggernaut of 8,000 references. So, with that, thanks. It's it's current on Amazon. Yeah. Like, I switched to the Amazon right now. Cool. And you also do, consulting. Right? So people can, you know, use you, you know, use your services to to improve their health and potentially longevity. Right? So, so anyway, thanks, Seem, for, for being on today. Yeah. My pleasure, and, yeah, always happy to talk with you. Cool. Alright. Ciao.