Trigonelline, which is otherwise known as one methyl nicotinic acid or methylated niacin increases NAD, and these data will be in mice. So first, we're gonna take a look at NAD levels in whole blood. And then there are three groups. Controls and then, NAD levels in whole blood two hours after the mice were force fed with trigoneline, and then, NAD levels the next day after that trigoneline force feed. So first, we can see that whole blood NED levels were increased two hours after the trigoneline force feed but not the next day. Now, a common criticism about blood NED level measurements or blood intracellular NED level measurements is what's happening in tissues. For example, what happens in blood may not be representative of changes inside of tissues like liver or muscle. So they evaluated that in this study. And first, taking a look at liver levels of NAD, again, two hours or overnight after the trigoneline force feed. So first, we can see that liver levels of NAD were significantly increased two hours later, but were not significantly increased the next day. What about in muscle? And that's what we'll see here. They looked at the gastrocnemius which is the lower calf lower calf muscle. So here, two hours after the trigoneline force feed, NED levels were not significantly increased but they were significantly increased the next day. So from these data, we can see that at least in mice, trigoneline, increases NAD both in whole blood and inside tissues including the liver and muscle. Now, if you're familiar with the channel, then you know I've been trying to increase NAD by increasing dietary intake of trigoneline rich foods. Now another part of that equation is if trigoneline intake is high, will plasma trigoneline also be high? And that's potentially important because in that mouse study on the left, after the trigoneline force feed, plasma levels of trigoneline increased in conjunction with the increases for NAD in each in each area, whole blood, liver, and muscle. So if I increase dietary trigoneline but don't see a change in plasma levels of trigoneline, how can I expect at least blood levels of Trigonellium, of NAD to increase? So then there's a second question. Is plasma Trigonellium significantly correlated with NAD? And I have eight tests for both blood intracellular levels of NAD and plasma levels of Trigonelline. So first, the plasma levels of Trigonelline are generated by, an at home metabolomics kit using iolo's kit. And if you wanna track this yourself or it's other 600 other metabolites, discount link in the video's description. So what we'll see is that plasma levels of trigoneline can indeed be increased by diet. So on the y axis, we've got plasma levels of Trigonelline. Again, tracked by Iolo's kit. So for the first five tests, and this is from 2023 into 2024 data, I wasn't I didn't have anything special in my diet in terms of Trigonelline rich foods. It's just eating my normal diet. And over those five tests, my average plasma trigoneline level was point two nine micromolar which is relatively low. And then after I saw the trigoneline story, I think it was on a modern health span that I was first made aware of trigoneline increasing. The preliminary data, it was it wasn't published yet, doctor Vincenzo Sorrentino was on Modern HealthSpan talking about trigoneline. And then I saw the data in pre print and then in, maybe it wasn't pre print. But it was finally published, earlier this year. So once I saw that, trigoneline could increase NAD, I started to add trigoneline rich foods into the approach. Starting with fenugreek seeds. And we can see that that pushed plasma levels of Trigonelline closer to one micromolar. So about a three x increase for plasma Trigonelline. But then, there are other foods that may be more rich in Trigonelline. And for the test after that, I included foods like chickpeas and alfalfa sprouts which have been reported to have Trigonelline. There too, I saw an increase for plasma Trigonelline. Now pushing it closer to two micromolar about seven x higher than my baseline. But the biggest jump, you can see that there's a green dot in the right corner, That's with clover sprouts and clover seeds have been reported to have the highest content of Trignaline relative to other foods including coffee. So more specifically, it increase plasma Trignaline to 6.9 micro molar which is a 24 x increase above my baseline. So from this, we can see that plasma trigoneline can indeed be increased by diet. But what about the correlation or or the correlation for plasma trigoneline with plasma levels or blood intracellular levels of NAD. And here too, as I mentioned earlier, I have eight tests, which is what we'll see here. On the y axis, we've got blood intracellular levels of NAD, and these data are generated by Ginfinity. If you wanna measure your own blood intracellular levels of NAD, discount link in the video's description. So when looking at these data, plasma trignelli on the, x axis, we can see that there is not a significant correlation between plasma trignelli with NAD. As the p value is far greater than 0.05 at 0.49. So no no significant correlation for plasma Trignelli with NAD. Now, it looks like there are a couple of outliers on this plot. The one at the far right at seven micromolar is clover sprouts induced. So that's not likely an outlier. But for this, data point here, that was six hundred milligrams of nicotinic acid per day which increased NAD. But you can you can see that trigoneline levels were relatively low. So it's not a trigoneline increasing NAD story. So even if we take out, that that data point is a potential outlier, which it's not again because nicotinic acid induced it. The data looks pretty much flat for the correlation for plasma Trigonelline with NAD. At least within the zero to two micromolar range. So what we can see from both of these plots is that diet can indeed increase plasma levels of Trigonelline but not high enough to impact NAD. At least for me over a test. But there may be good news to the story and I thought the Trigonelline story was over but Trigonelline is now available by supplement. And I started that experiment. I'm gonna do a ten day experiment with one gram of Trigonella per day. That's a 10 x further increase above my highest dietary intake of Trigonella, which I achieved with clover sprouts about a hundred milligrams per day. So supplementing with a gram a day. So five hundred milligrams twice a day to separated, you know, early early in the morning and later in the day. So we'll see if one gram makes a dent. Now, I haven't decided if I'll go higher. I think the human equivalent dose that they used in the mouse study was about one point six grams of Trignone per day. So I may go as high as that. But I'm gonna wait to see what the results show for blood, intracellular levels of NAD. And I'm planning on sending metabolomic data out on that day too. So next Friday. So we'll see if one gram of Trigonelline supplemental is able to increase plasma levels of plasma levels of Trigonelline but then also blood intracellular levels of NAD. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links that you may be interested in, including discount links for at home metabolomics, NAD quantification, epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing with Syphox Health which includes ApoB but also GrimAge, diet tracking or green tea, diet tracking with Cronometer or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or dietharing brand as I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.