Welcome to the Joe Cohen show. Join me as I share my experience with biohacking and invite top health experts to explore the latest technology, supplements, research, and resources for optimizing your body and brain. Hey, everyone. I'm here with doctor Michael Lustgarten. He is a scientist and the person behind the YouTube channel, conquer aging or die trying, where he details his biohacking journey to try to live longer than everyone that has ever lived. So this is the second time he's on the podcast. He's written a number of papers. I actually invited him on the podcast because I saw an interesting paper on the gut microbiome and skeletal muscle mass and physical function that he published in it was a review paper, I think, in 2019. But in any case, he knows a lot about lab tests, and I wanted, the last time I had him on, we spoke about lab tests. I wanna pick his brain about new insights he has, what he does to live longer or die trying, and, you know, what kind of testing he does, what kind of markers he's looking at, what kind of, things he does to get in the optimal range. So let's just you know, let's make this a little casual. I wanna shoot some questions, see where we're gonna go with it, and and then we'll go down some kind of rabbit hole. But, essentially, I think, overall, we're gonna talk about markers, lab markers, and how to measure what you're doing is working. Right? Because I think that's extremely important, especially if your goal is longevity. You have to use objective markers. You can't just be like, I feel good. Yeah. Then somebody else may feel good, and you might die in a heart from a heart attack or from something that you could measure. So there's all kinds of tests that you could measure. And one of the things I really love about lab testing, it's something I've realized over time, is that for every marker, you have an optimal range. Right? And I think you agree with that. Is that correct? Yeah. Yeah. So you have an optimal range, and that optimal range is the the ideal range for the lowest risk of mortality and the lowest risk of dying. And sometimes it's just an association, in which case it's still valuable. Right? Because if it's just an association, you could still see if you have that association. Right? And sometimes it's causal as well, which is even more valuable because then actually changing the marker will change the result. You wanna but so the idea is that you wanna try to get as many markers as you can in the optimal range. And sometimes if there's if you have a genetic predisposition for something just being a little higher or whatever, that's also fine. And that's why it's also good to know some of your genetic predispositions, especially for markers that are not causal. And, yeah. And and then doing as much testing as possible to see where you're at. So let's get into it. How many let's can we start with how many supplements do you take a day? I have no idea. Wait. So first, hey, Joe. Thanks for having me on. So I I supplement based on demonstrated need. And not just demonstrated need on it's demonstrated need after I've attempted to tweak everything by diet, exercise, sleep, etcetera. And then when I can't make a dent there, then I do supplement. So for example, vitamin d, I take that probably eight or nine months in the year because I'm in Boston. I'm not on the beach in Miami year round. If I was, I wouldn't be taking vitamin d at all. But then I also my NAD blood levels of NAD are relatively low for my chronological age. So I've been tinkering around with all the NAD precursors and trying to get that up higher. But even there, I've trying to tweak the diet. So, basically, if when a given biomarker is, quote, unquote, out of range or not youthful, I'm trying to make little tweaks in the diet to get them into that, quote, unquote, optimal range without messing up all the others that are already pretty close to the youthful or optimal range. So in terms of supplements right now, methyl b twelve, vitamin d, that's it. Nothing else. Oh, wow. Okay. We have a very different approach with that. I I go more the Brian Johnson approach, but I I'm very curious to see what kind of results you have with that approach because So, wait. So the the worry that I have with the supplements is tolerance, potential tolerance over time. Like, now would tolerance be a real thing? I don't know. That's one factor. But the other side of that is if I can't do everything I can just by the foods that I'm eating and and it doesn't have to be food. I'm open to the supplements, like I said, but demonstrate a need. If I can't do everything by food, what's gonna happen when I really need that supplement? Right? And if I take the supplement only when I really need it, I think that would be the most efficacious. That should be when it works the most. But if I've been taking that supplement for thirty years and all of a sudden, I'm taking metformin for glucose and then it stops working, what am I gonna do? Right? So I don't wanna be in that in that boat. Interesting. That's a interesting that's an interesting perspective that I I hadn't heard of before. Meaning, like, you're saying that if you take it now, if you really need it, it's not gonna be as effective. Maybe. It might not be. I just don't know what the tolerance effects would be over time, but that definitely is a possibility. For example, type two diabetics that are insulin dependent, eventually, it it it just doesn't work as well as it used to. And then what do you do? And then conventional medicine, their approach is, which is give you more insulin, which is a disaster physiologically. Yeah. I I do everything I can. Like, I'll give you an example. Blood glucose increases during aging. I started to see that, but I was playing with my diet because of this heavy pop culture focus on go high fat if you go high fat you shouldn't have high glucose right okay let's see so I went up to 120 grams of fat I don't know whatever it was that for me that right now that's high 120 grams of fat per day And in conjunction with that, increasing glucose. And I should say too that for every blood test went up when you increased the fat that you ate? Yep. And not just fat. This wasn't seed oils. This is from whole food. I don't just have blood test data. For every blood test, I track my diet every day, weigh everything I eat, literally everything. I don't need out. If I do eat out, it's a rare thing. Every blood test has a corresponding average dietary intake. If there's sixty days in between tests, the sixty day average corresponds to that test. And because I've got almost 50 blood tests now going back to 2015, I can look at correlations in my data, like statistical correlations, not just one test or two tests. So I could see with the the total fat with glucose the positive correlation and so I cut the fat intake and sure enough glucose came down it was like something like 18 consecutive blood tests in the 90s for blood glucose And as soon as I cut fat and I'm not talking about fat, like, cutting it to 50 grams. No. It it was just from, like, a 115, 120 to 80 grams per day, which is where my data currently is, and that's still 40% of my calories coming from fat. So Interesting. But but even have that, like, it could be, like, genetically related. There's no genetics thing there. So the reason I don't think that's true is because 2015, blood glucose was consistently in the low to mid eighties. And then all of a sudden, it started to increase. And so what it's gotta be something that caused that or, quote, unquote, age. Right? Are you talking about fasting glucose or you're talking about Fast fasting glucose. Fasting. Okay. What about the h b a one c? Did that go up as well? So I've only started to measure that recently. And on my last test in October, it was 5.1, which is super super good. Right? Okay. But the fasting glucose doesn't really mean that much if the h b a one c and you also have a now I'll I'll give you an example. Like, for me, my fasting glucose does go up probably with a higher fast higher fat diet. However, my h b a one c does not, and I've been measuring h b a one c for a while. And, also, I used a continuous glucose monitor for two weeks, and my glucose was quite stable throughout time. Sometimes you could have some kind of messed up number from h b a one c or whatever that's not accurate for whatever reason, but it coincided with my continuous glucose monitor. And so the fact that my cortisol was high in the morning, I think just means that I had a spike in cortisol in the morning when I wake up. And if it's higher by a couple points, I don't what does that really mean? Is that a bad is that bad, do you think? If the higher even glucose is bad? So h b a one c is just one measure of glycation or, yeah, glycation. Right? So lots of other proteins in the blood can be glycated. And I'm not saying that h b a one c is a bad measure. I'm not saying that at all. But, I'm thinking about doing my glycan age to see the, at least for the immunoglobulins, to see what's the full spectrum. But to properly control that experiment with the glucose being relatively higher in the nineties, I didn't track h b a one c for all of those tests. I only have it after shifting my fat intake back down into the eighties. And I should say too that it it's not just higher fat in my case being significantly correlated with higher glucose. Because I'm looking at, like, a panel of 25 or so different biomarkers, there were a ton of biomarkers going in the wrong direction versus right. So it was an easy cut. I should say two in the wrong direction. Oh, boy. Off the top of my head, I've gotta I've gotta open up my data and look at all the all the correlations. But prior RDW, CRP. But this I'd have to go back and actually look at the data. Go back. Went up with more fat? Yeah. Actually, my CRP has been less than the limit of detection for 14 or 15 consecutive tests in a row. Yeah. It was So you're contesting the HS CRP. Right? HS HS CRP. Yeah. It's below the limit of detection. The HS CRP, which is what From back then, it was, point six to one, consistently, milligram per liter. But the No. But but but but what was the limit of detection? You said it was below. Point oh, the QuestLab here is point three milligrams per liter. I've had I see. I've Yeah. But I'd I'd have to look at the correlations, my list of all the data. Actually, red blood cells, which is interesting because they declined during aging, I quote, unquote reversed that. But then when I looked at the correlations, higher red blood cells in my case above five, higher it was significantly correlated with higher glucose. So those are two of the fat was significantly correlated with. So there is data for example, hemoglobin which declines during aging. You'd expect that higher levels of hemoglobin should be good knowing that it declines during aging but even too high going above 16 grams, milligrams per deciliter increased all cause mortality risk. So for whatever reason, going higher fat in my case, higher red blood cells, higher hemoglobin, higher glucose, it's probably without measuring it, probably increased blood viscosity too with the higher red red blood cells. So, What is your red blood cell number? Right now, it's 4747. Okay. And hemoglobin 15.1, which is exactly where I want it. Those are as close to youthful as you can get. But there isn't there's a higher range, basically. It's not just red blood cells and hemoglobin decline during aging. In my case, there seems to be the opposite extreme where if I go too high for red blood cells, that ends up being too high for hemoglobin, too high for glucose. That's going in the wrong directions. Okay. So you're saying if you have too much if you have too much fat, your hemoglobin and red blood cells go up too much? In my case, yep. Okay. Interesting. So it goes up beyond, let's say, 16 for hemoglobin. And what do you wanna keep your red blood cells under? So 47, 48, or in the 46 to 446 to 48 range for me. I I wanna keep it there. And not just that, I wanna avoid any age related decline. But it's easily malleable. I I find that it's easily malleable by diet. And I have the correlations with what there's stuff in my diet like flaxseeds, which are inversely correlated with red blood cells, meaning lower red blood cells with higher flaxseeds. So I have to be careful not to go too high for that to try to, make sure I don't. So it's all about finding what's the optimal dose for the even some What is the highest more like, when does mortality start to go up with he with red blood cells? Is that beyond 4.8? So red blood cells, there are very few studies that where that's been looked at, but hemoglobin is extensively studied on all cause mortality risk and hemoglobin's in inside red blood cells. So most studies, unfortunately, they're only looking at, like, anemia when red blood cells get to the point of anemia or hemoglobin getting below, I think, twelve milligrams per deciliter. But I think in men, it's less than four increase. I have to look at the data. I don't remember it off the top of my head. But Yeah. I'm we have let's see. What do we have as the optimal range here? We have up to 16 for men, for hemoglobin. And, again, I mean, there might be some increased mortality, but I can imagine we put a little higher hemoglobin because there's also benefits. Yeah. The risk there I think well, yeah. I think over 16 in the study I have in mind, it was, like, three hundred thousand people, men and women. Over 16 increased all cause mortality risk. It could just be men. I've gotta pull up the data, though, to refresh that. Over 16. So then under six so up to 16 is fine. You just don't wanna have under 14 to meet up to 16. Yeah. That sounds about I may have helped design that range, which is crazy. It sounds like my range, 14 to 16 for men. It could be. Yeah. We did review all the ranges somewhat recently to see what the new papers were like. But it's not just that stayed consistent for a while. Yeah. It's not just, 14 to 16, maybe the optimal range in men. It's then avoiding the age related decline. So maybe you start up at 15.8, fifteen three, fourteen eight, age related trends, something that's going in the wrong direction. So I'd look at it as both. You need both of that. Is that because testosterone is important for red blood cells and hemoglobin? Right? Could be it could be one factor for sure. Yep. Kidney function makes EPO. So it could be testosterone, kidney function, red blood cell. It could be yeah. Okay. That makes sense. That's I find that really interesting that you don't take any supplements. That's, like, very unique in this field. Right? Because you're really into antiaging. You got your conquer aging sir shirt. Or dietitize. Or diet okay. Yeah. And that's and you don't take any supplements. Because what I find is that if I don't take any supplements, my I have a bunch of lab markers that are not in the optimal range. And there's certain I need to okay. Do you believe in the true diagnostic test at all, for example? You were on that board. I think that Oh, leaderboard. Yeah. What what what was your number? Let's see. Rejuven do you remember? Yeah. So I they have two different leaderboards. One is most improved, and then the other is the absolute six month three test average. I should be on I'm more interested in the absolute three test average over six months. I should be on that leaderboard, but they Brian Johnson and and, his doctor, Ollie Zolman, they have some screwy rules about if I had three tests in five months, I don't get on the leaderboard. If I had six tests in five months, like, how do you take the most recent three tests? How how are so the So what is it what's your number here? Most recent test is you got a point seven six, and your oldest two average is point eight five five. So that's because oh, here's the interesting story, which goes to supplementation. You know, I said I mentioned my NAD levels are low or relatively low. So I was taking six hundred milligrams of nicotinic acid per day to try to boost NAD. I tripled my NAD levels, but my done eating paste. 60 wait. Six hundred milligrams of what were you taking? Nicotinic acid? Yeah. So it I have 10 tests for true diagnostics since 2022. Eight of those tests are point eight two or lower. Point nine eight on the day, same day as the test, six hundred milligrams of nicotinic acid, which suggests acid increases your rate of aging? Very high dose. Because then I repeated the test with, sixty milligrams of nicotinic acid. It raised NAD to 39 micromolar, not as high. And the epigenetic age on that day was, like, Dunedin paste was, like, point eight or something reasonable in my normal range. Okay. It's it's very high dose. Now the question, is it a high nicotinic acid dose or is a high NAD dose? So I did that experiment. I took two grams of NMN per day. NAD, sixty micromolar, just like with high dose nicotinic acid. I don't have those results yet back from true diagnostic. But if they're point nine something, again, ridiculous, which is, an outlier in my data, the very high NAD could be bad for epigenetic aging. Okay. That's very interesting. So you why did you decide on six hundred milligrams? Is that because you were is it because you were checking your NAD levels and that's where it got optimized? So there there's a paper that shows that it's called niacin cure systemic NAD deficiency r RCT in people. I think they use the higher dose. It was, like, a thousand milligrams of nicotinic acid. I've actually used up to three grams in the past for lipoprotein a. So I was like, alright. 600. I don't know. I'll just let's just see. And then once I saw the Danita Pace and and it didn't affect glucose, which has been shown to do in my case for that one test. But, yeah, I cut the dose down. No flush. The flush on six hundred milligrams per day is outrageous for me. So I'm happy to make that change. But now I'm actually trying to I took nicotinic acid out, and I'm actually trying to increase NAD without messing up the donated pace by using by increasing trigoneline in my diet, increasing dietary intake of that. I don't know if you've heard of trigoneline. One second. Trigoneline? I heard of it. Yeah. No. It's, it's on my radar, but I don't know. It's a metabolite. Right? How do you you also supplement with it? No. Diet. First diet. Okay. What do you do within your diet to increase trigonal you're trying to increase trigoneline? Yep. So trigoneline is is methyl nicotinic acid. It's just a methyl group added to to niacin. Right? So chickpeas, coffee is a great source, but I'm not a coffee drinker. I have green tea every day. I I just don't have the hydration space for more fluid. And I hate the idea of coffee breath, but chickpeas are a pretty good source of chignonillin. So I didn't have any people have been on me for a long time. I don't you have legumes in your diet. It's a pro longevity, blue zones, all this. And I'm like, look at my data. What's it gonna it hasn't done I don't have any room. So I took out barley and oats, which isn't a only like six 60 grams per day total. It's not a lot. But in making that shift, I can get about twenty milligrams of trichinelline per day from chickpeas, which doesn't seem like a lot. But consider that sixty milligrams of nicotinic acid per day increases NAD. This is really interesting. So I took the dunin duninin PACE test twice. Yep. And the first time I took it, I was on high dose niacin. High dose and I was also trying I was doing it to get my LPA down, and it didn't work, so I just stopped it. And it also messed up other labs like h b a one c. It messed up it increased my liver enzymes a little bit. Things that are actually shown in the research, and it also lowered my thyroid hormones. So it was an experiment, and the reason I did the experiment is because I realized that I did a couple tests that indicated that I needed more niacin. And and then I took niacin, and I felt really great on it. And that was, like, one hundred, two hundred milligrams, basically up to five hundred milligrams. I feel really great on it. More than that, at at some point, I don't know exactly what that point is yet. So I that's what I have to figure out. Where is the turning point? Is it two hundred milligrams? Is it three hundred, four hundred? My rule of thumb now is to keep it under five hundred milligrams. And yeah. And but I was taking at that point, the first test, I was taking about thirteen hundred milligrams. My Dunedin Paste was, wait for it, 0.72. I was taking I I I was probably taking about two hundred fifty milligrams of niacin. And my second result I'm gonna take the test again in February, but my second result came out as 0.63. Nice. Alright. Wait. You don't was so you had nicotinic acid for both. Right? Yeah. But one was higher dose niacin. And then I realized I actually didn't realize what it was doing to my pace of aging. Right? I wasn't taking it off. I was mainly doing it because there were certain labs that I saw were that I knew were actually that this is a side effect of niacin, and the benefits weren't as large as I had expected. Meaning, there is a very big there's a significant dose response curve. The more you take you take a little bit, all of a sudden, you get a really good effect, and then you take up too much, it just keeps going down from there. And that's just something I measured, which is why I do the pretty extensive lab testing. And then I also go based on how I feel plus the lab testing. And I'm at a place now where I'm pretty sure two hundred milligrams is completely fine for me. I even if my methylation even if my pace of aging goes up because I feel like meaning, like, I don't trust it to the point where I'm gonna be like, oh, it goes up a little because of this. I'm not gonna do this because there's a lot of other factors I look at, and I feel like two hundred milligrams a day is for me. Then the question, is it three hundred? Is it four hundred? More than five hundred, I start to realize it's probably not good. So it's I'm still trying to see what is the optimal dose for me, and that's something I gotta figure out. But, essentially, I also took it for other reasons to counteract food sensitivities. It actually niacin deficiency and the lack of I've I've always had a niacin deficiency, and I think that was in part causing a lot of food sensitivities. And so I was trying to reverse the food sensitivities with that. But, yeah, it caused side effects. And when I think when that was the it seems from my notes that the zero point six three was I was taking about two hundred milligrams a day, maybe a little more, two fifty. So two fifty for that lay latest test. For the first test was thirteen hundred. Worst done eating paste, better done eating paste with the lower dose nicotine. There may be something to I I made other changes, though. I made other changes. Yeah. Yeah. So it's with the dunedin paste, it's a little hard because I'm making a bunch of changes. And I'm making changes based on how I feel, what's going on in my body, based on my lab markers. So I look at specific lab markers and see, okay. My what what would you say? My approach was do the kitchen sink, go push as hard as you can, and see what happens. Right? You see things worsening or getting better. What are the most supplements that I can take until things start to get worse? That's essentially what I did. Just, alright. Let me keep oh, I'm taking so I went up from I think when we spoke last in 2018, I I was probably taking twenty five a day. And then and it was consistent. That's been, like, pretty consistent for number of years. And then a year and a half ago, I said, okay. That's it. I'm gonna I I I think I no. It was, like, two years ago or two and a half years ago, I think I went up to 40 already a day, and then it went to 50. And then all of a a year and a half ago, I said, okay. What's the limit here? I'm gonna do everything that I can to, like, optimize every biomarker, and then so I just went I I went at it hard. And so then I remember I had this video that went viral. I said I was taking seventy supplements a day. Right? And that that was about a year ago. And then it went to eighty and then ninety and then a 100. And then at my max, it's about a 150. And then I started to see that, hey. There are some side effects. So the side effects that I was getting, number one, was my thyroid hormones went down. So I had to look at every single supplement that I took and saw which ones lowered thyroid hormones, and there was some random ash. Some of them I already knew, like niacin and carnitine. And so those were just like, okay. I know this is I gotta there were a lot of other reasons why I was taking those, so it was a little it was a little tricky. But I just said, okay. I'm taking these out. Whatever. And so that that helped my thyroid hormones. And then there were some of them that were just like, I didn't realize, and it was like, I would've never known, like propolis. Who knows? Who would know that propolis lowers thyroid hormones? So you took out thyroid thyroid one thousand? Took out everything. There was about 10 things I took out that hurt thyroid hormones. I was like, okay. Out it goes. And and then I looked at my test again, and number not only did my I also took okay. So then, basically, I've been pushing my body also more than ever in my life by far. So I used to never work out. What I did always was probably, like, one push up a day. I would walk a lot. No. What like, one set, and then and I would walk a lot. That was that would be my exercise. So I'd get, like, a little bit of a and then maybe once in a while, I would jog or once a blue moon. I used to bike or whatever. I I always tried to be active in the sense of like, I had a treadmill desk, and so that was my exercise. Just walk as much as I can, and it would usually be one, two hours a day, maybe three sometimes. But, essentially, try to get two hours in and then try to get at least one set of push ups in or something like that. Different time periods in my life, but try to get a little bit of strength or with a little bit of cardio or whatever it is. And then a year and a half ago, I basically said, okay. I have all this knowledge about all these lab markers and all these supplements. I'm like, I'm not even using most of the knowledge I have on myself. Let me use myself as this guinea pig where I'm just gonna go full hog, supplements, diet, everything. Boom. And the other thing is I also have these limitations where it's okay. I there's certain things I do that I know are not good. I go to sleep late. My I screw up my circadian rhythm, which is pretty basic, but it's just like there's there's a trade off. So the question is what would happen if you took out all the supplements? Would your Tanen and PACE be point six? Would it be point would it be worse? No. I'm pretty sure it would be worse. I don't know. I'm pretty sure. I can't know until I do the test. But when I take out the supplements, I notice things are worse. In for example, doing doing doing it in PACE has to do with how stressed you are. There's 10 supplements I take to reduce psychosocial stress, and and when I take them, I'm not stressed. So I think that, for example, just helps me not be stressed. Whereas if I don't take them, I will be very stressed. I'll be more of a more of a nervous kinda guy, and now I'm just, like, pretty chill. Like, I don't get stressed. It's very hard to stress me out. Yeah. So that's one thing that that that and and that's, like, the number one thing. They they have, like, these things that that help the most, and stress is, like, number one. Yeah. Right? You can quantify why I'm saying I do know. You can quantify stress. Granted, emotional stress is gonna be different from the actual physiological stress, but you can quantify you track heart rate variability and resting heart rate. I've had workdays where just crazy emotional work stress. It looks like I ran for two hour two hour half marathon the next day. So for me, I I get it. Stress is a big deal. It could be quite It only I it might only hurt my HRV if it hurts my sleep. So it doesn't it's not really measuring stress in the day for me. So I could be stressed, and then as long as it doesn't hurt my sleep, which it does often, so in which case, it will hurt my HRV. But otherwise, no. But I also think they they have some data about things that help reduce the biological agent. There's a lot of supplements on their list. Yeah. So my latest test was, like, I don't know, point seven five, so not too far off. But the other variable here is chronological age. It increases. The median pace increases with chronological age. Right. So I think so someone who's 80 has a an average that need and pace of one versus someone like Seamland who's in his twenties, averages, like, point seven just without doing anything. So you've I I think how old are you? Only thirty thirty six. Alright. So I'm a little 14. I got fourteen years chronologically. I I'm not playing that game. Can we no. Let's play that game. If we No. I think it's a little bit great to play. Yeah. Yeah. I wanna be great at any year. Let's convert, dude. So I actually asked Ryan this. What would be the what's the coefficient every year to to keep it to standardize it across age? Yeah. Because like you say, if if somebody who's a 100 has a dude in a pace of point that's gonna be way better than Yeah. Someone who's in their twenties. And that it's like the the person on the leaderboard is 15 years old dude who's a private participant. Oh, that's probably Brian Johnson's son. There's a woman on there. She's 55. I think her Dunedin pace is, like, it's really low point six something. Right. I saw that point six five. Yeah. The other side of the equation isn't just that Dunedin pace increases during aging. Women live longer than men. Right? So wouldn't you expect that women should have a lower Dunedin pace? So automatically the test is I don't wanna say biased, but the youth young the younger you are chronologically, and if you're a woman, you should have great data. It's gonna be harder for Let's try to standardize it. You're saying if somebody's 80, they they would have a one? Something like that. Yeah. I'd have to pull up the plot make sense, though, because you're saying if they're assuming they were, like, really good, they'd have one. Average. The so if you look at their average. Okay. It it's in their it's in their report. Right? So if you pull up their report at some point see it exactly for each one. It's It's it's line. Yeah. You see the line. You see the data point. Yeah. You see the slope with all the data points. And then chronologically so you could just extrapolate 80 year old, it's approximately one. And then six 20 year old, it's whatever the number is, I don't want mine to increase during aging. So this just saying, let's say we we standardize it and you're 14 years older. Oh, right. That would give that means that if we standardize it, you should be, let's say, four four and a half points. It should be four four and a half years. Point four five. Wait. That might be very high. Point five. It might be a hundredth point zero one per year. Right? To go from 20.7 around 20 years old to one point o at 80, You have point three units over sixty years. So you just divide that. Right? What do you get? One at point two. Point o two. It's Point o two. Point o two, I meant. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, no. Yeah. Point o two. Per year. Something like that. Yeah. Something like that. Yeah. I I because I I think it's important to make that equivalent because then we could really see who's also, there's a lot of genetics to this as well. Yeah. And you could say, well, you have great genetics or whatever. Right? So that's another where they started. So, yeah, if you have longevity DNA in your family, if your parents live to a 100 or older, and then my parents were dead or grandparents were dead at 65, and my done eating pace is whatever lower at the same chronological age versus longevity genes. But so I I try not to compete against others in this. For me, it's what's the lowest that I can get to and then keeping it there indefinitely. I'm not opposed to the supplements that that may be a part of the approach eventually where just everything I'm doing doesn't work. So that if like I said No. So it's not if it works or not. The question is, can you get better results with supplements? Yeah. So Right. It it's not so then it's not just, like, one biomarker improves. It's gotta be the net effect for me. So, yeah, my most recent it's 0.78. That's from, oh, okay. I mean, November, that's old data. That's another thing that, how many of these tests did you take? So I tested seven times in 2023. Think about it too. Like, how many how many tests do you need on a yearly basis to get a true representation of where your data is for year to year change? And I care about year to year change. I I wanna make sure I'm keeping stuff youthful, so I need a lot of blood test data. Right? The thing is that I'm still unclear on exactly I mean, when you look at the data, they say you can look if somebody has a higher due date and pace or whatever, your mortality is one point six something. Okay? If you look at things like VO two max, it's gonna be much more significant than that. Yep. Ryan says that this stuff is all included, but I I don't see how the numbers add up. Right? I look at mortality rates for a bunch of lab markers. There's a lot of lab markers that if they're out of the range, your mortality is gonna be one point six something or whatever. Right? Somewhere in that between above one point five. Now some of them are a little lower. It depends on the lab. So I looking at at it like it's really like people on the cutting edge who are really because if you're not, just get a freaking CBC. Get your CBC, CMP. Right? Unless you really have all those lab results dialed in, you you're not gonna you're not gonna get the max benefit from these more advanced tests. But that's a good point about VO two max. The prediction would be somewhat the highest VO two max should have the lowest the need and pace. Right? But then there's probably some nuance there. Where does where's that upper limit? Right? Is an ultra endurance athlete who's doing, like, a seventy two hour run? Is there Dunedin pace gonna be point six, or is it gonna be, like, 1.3? Something outrageous. Right? So the thing is that's why the the problem whether it's Dunedin pace or any single lab test or VO two max, there's limitations on the test. Yeah. And so you wanna go for the most I think there's certain tests basic tests that you wanna they're most important for every individual. We actually have a suggested labs feature. I don't know, I don't know if you're on SelfDecode, but we have a suggested labs feature where we look at your genetic risk, and we tell you which labs are most important to check for. So I I the way and I think it's a pretty cool tool because it actually like, the the stuff that comes up for me is, yeah, these are actually stuff that are out of the optimal range that I had to get in the optimal range. And so it it's a cool test if you're not gonna do every lab test like me or I don't know. You do 50, but, like, I do 300 at a time. If you're not gonna do that number and doing it in pace and this, that like, I'm I plan on doing every test out there and doing them multiple times. Like, I haven't gotten to every test yet, but I'm gonna I actually saved the organic acids test till later because I've the my theory was the way I looked at it is, let me do all the let me dial in all the tests that have the most research behind them. And the organic acids is like it doesn't it just doesn't have the research. So it's you have to work based on theories and biochemical knowledge, and I feel like that's people are taking that test first. I'm like, no. That's the last test you take. You know what I'm saying? Like Agreed. So wait. I I I'm metabolomics, which goes to the organic acids point. So that is a part of the approach too. So it's not it's the CBC, which has about 25 biomarkers, immune cells, metabolic health, kidney function, liver function, inflammation. That's the standard. That's the foundation. But then I've added Dunedin Pace, Horvath, telomere length, which may not be as important as a biological predictor as some other tests, but it's still it's a hallmark of aging. But then the metabolomics, which has 600 blood test blood biomarkers. Right? So it's like you said, there's so much data. What's the most, what has the most research? So I've been focusing on things like the kynurenine to tryptophan ratio, which is an integrated measure of many pro and anti inflammatory inputs. EPA and DHA measuring that? So it's in the metabolomic. It's, there's a kit I use, Iolo's kit. Yeah. But so then so that's there's a ton of research behind it. It's just not popularized. EPA and DHA, fish oil fatty acids, which okay. Superficially, it's eat more fish. I have five blood tests, and I can calculate correlations and fish intake and and and I eat fish every day. And even fish oil, I supplement with fish oil, not significantly correlated with EPA or DHA. So making sure that doesn't decline during agent because that's associated with all cause mortality risk. So then, also, I'm tracking. So there are uremic, metabolites, which means that these are metabolites that are well known to increase in the presence of, like, chronic kidney disease. So creatinine is good. Cystatin c is good. Blood urea nitrogen is a marker because it increases with poor kidney function, uric acid. Okay. But then there there are these other, quote, unquote, uremic metabolites. There's like hundreds of them that are unknown to increase during poor kidney function, which may be like a first signal, you know, before creatinine goes up or plug urine. So I'm actually tracking that too. One cystatin c? Besides cystatin c. So it's indoxyl sulfate. These are gut bacteria derived Yeah. Yeah. These are uremic toxins. Okay. Yep. Paracresol sulfate, indoxyl sulfate, TMAO, which could be coming from FISH two, so I don't know. But so that too is on my radar. But then you could even take it elevated when you tested them? No. None of them are elevated. But knowing that they increased during aging, they increased the four g function. I'm trying to keep that figure out the recipe to keep them as low as I have a range, but it's still on the low side. And you're trying to do this all with diet, lifestyle. Yep. Just diet and lifestyle. You got it. Okay. Yep. For now. And I try to all do it with supplements. It it works, though. Do you wanna hear about the one health hack that is sure to change your life? Okay. Here it is. Subscribing to this podcast. 67% of listeners aren't subscribed to the show, so so please don't forget to show your support by hitting the subscribe button now. You'll not only be supporting the show, but also investing in yourself and your health journey, all while helping keep us ad free. So, like, I used to be, like, a a, like, a little bit of a loner in California, whereas I didn't really have friends, and I didn't go anywhere. I was just wasn't exposed to germs. If I bet I played volleyball and but if that's outside, you're not really gonna get sick. And then all of a sudden, I moved to Israel, and I'm exposed to I'm I'm going out, whatever, indoors, gym, this, that, yoga studio. Everything's indoors here, and I'm just but I I don't care. I'm just getting exposed to everything. I'm traveling more, and I'm just like, alright. That's it. Gotta expose myself and build up my immune system so that my immune system can handle all this stuff. And then at the same time, because my immune system was a breaking point. Right? Like, it was pretty weak in the past, where I, like, I I get exposed, boom, I get sick. So I'm on a roll now where I felt that my body fought off an infection four times now, and I didn't get sick, which is which is definitely a record for me by far. There there's so are it's all the fun stuff is good. Right? I did that I did that a couple of times already. I just didn't get sick. Right? Wait. So there is so cumulative burden I get the build the immune system part of it, but then cumulative. So there are viruses that could lay latent for decades until the there's, like, some mild transient immunosuppression. And then those viruses reactivate. Like, Epstein Barr virus is a great example of that, where you can be infected. I already have that. Oh, Alright. So that's not an issue for you, but I'm just the general idea of cumulative burden of infection can lead to problems later in life. So I get the build the immune system part, but I don't know. I try to be cautious. So what you got the found the foundation, though. So sleep. Right? I'm sure you got leaner, which means you probably lost a little bit of improved body composition, lost some body fat, right? And regular exercise. So that's like the foundation, how much everything else is adding on top. You've got a lot of that dialed in, but wait, so my 14 year old had COVID in, I don't know, May, April, something like that. So she tested positive, like nine days in a row. I'm in a two bedroom apartment. And so I'm like, oh, I'm definitely gonna get it. Didn't get it. Didn't get it. She tested positive nine days in a row. I didn't get it. So I don't know if that's my immune system. I don't know. Somehow, I was just able to stay away from it, but different approach, but still same results, staying away from getting infected. I was gonna say two concerns. Right? So liver enzymes, what are your liver enzymes with all the supplements? Because Brian's, he posts, like, single data points. He doesn't post I know. I I don't like it. I don't like that. I agree. This So I'll I'll show you the full data. Yeah. Here's the here's the full data points, and you could see what I'm talking about. So you tell me a marker, and I'll I'll give you my full data points. Let me bring it up. ALT AST. Okay. Let's see. I started taking them here. It October this is where I I went pretty hard on. So I started going hard on supplements. You see Can you zoom in a little one? It's a little small for me. I don't know if Yeah. Oh, too big. Alright. So you want it to be less than 30. That's for sure. Somewhere in the low twenties, lowest all cause mortality risk. I looked at the all cause mortality, though. It depends. I actually I only found forty mortality risk going up. Now some of the times I do take it, it it does like, here, it's twenty five, twenty five. But that's I'm not worried about this. Thirty is the ones that are thirty five thirty four, thirty nine. And then it's I I would take the average from year to year and then compare that. Oh, you tested a lot. Jeez. November 4, November 9. I can send you that paper. It's fourteen million people, all cause mortality. It's the biggest study I know, ALT AST. So low twenties was lowest risk. But that could be for other reasons as well. It's not because it's generally, it's a test for, like, fatty liver, which I have very low fat. Right. But if the liver enzymes are in the blood, there's an increased turnover of liver cells, meaning that there's an increased degradation, which suggests more liver damage at a thirties versus the lower twenties. What's the mortality risk increase from example from having let's see. So if we look at it, I'm just yeah. You tell us what the I think it's a thirty percent risk. Thirty percent. I think it's thirty percent for higher than around thirty. And then the lowest risk, it was, like, eighteen to twenty two median values. Alright. So I just looked it up, by the way. And, again, I'm just I looked at the first study that came up. So this one, it says lowest was 16 to 25. Sample size. You the sample size, 49,000. I've got a study of, like, 14,000,000 that I could pull up. Hang on. I gotta go to my notes. It's crazy. But it's saying let's see. It's higher than fifty six. A sick a significant association of higher mortality risk was noted. Highest mortality rates were also revealed at serum ALT levels more than fifty six. Yeah. But you wanna go with the largest sample size you could find. Fifty thousand is good, but 14,000,000 people, it's a huge population. Low ALT also predicts all cause mortality. Yep. That's true. Consider low as here. Low normal is less than 17, they say. Yeah. Yeah. Yep. And that's actually very significant, 1.6, which is like that doing it in pace. Uh-huh. We suggest that low normal may serve as an independent predictor for increased long term mortality. I wonder yeah. I'd have to see what their chart says, their graph. But so we see under 17 is not good. Yeah. That's why I think that's probably why we have 17 here. Couldn't make sense. There's probably more studies. But 17 you don't wanna have under 17. And then what do we have? Yeah. What is your So I'm looking at show. There we go. Alright. So what is, Choi? It's actually 16,600,000 people. AST median value, 20 so lowest so the referent was 20. And then '21 to '23, lowest all cause mortality risk for AST. And then the Yeah. But I what you have to look at what the rate of increase like, what is the mortality rate of having higher a little bit higher level? So let's look at my AST. For for AST, 27. An AST of median value of 27, thirty percent higher risk compared to a 20. Similar data for ALT. I gotta I'll send you the study here. By the way, this was higher when I was taking niacin. That was one of the reasons why. It does fluctuate. Let's see. Yeah. There's there might be a few supplements that's that are increasing a little bit, but I don't think anything it's not too significant. Like, my normal baseline without much supplements is, like, 23 or let's say without Yeah. So three would be good. Once it gets to 27, 29 in the thirties, Yeah. So it's going in the wrong direction. Now with something in the thirties consistently be thirty percent. Okay. How many decades do you need it to be 30 something versus 20 low twenties to make a dent on mortality risk? I don't know. But yeah, I try to get it for me, I try to get it out of the thirties. My data actually was in the thirties from too much omega six, just meaning, like, too many walnuts or I don't know what was correlated. Actually, too much fruit fructose too. I used to go eat a lot more fruit. Once I start once I saw that the correlations was like, alright. I'll cut the fruit down in half, cut the walnuts down. And now my day is consistently low twenties, but I don't have supplements. I don't have a 100 supplements to and Brian's got that same he's got his ALT AST was like 34. And then a comment commented that on Twitter under his post when he posted that. And somebody was like, yeah. He probably did a workout the day before. And I'm like, how are you gonna measure your blood test the day after you do a hard workout? That's just stupid. Like, you're confounding your results. Okay. So you're saying what is the risk goes up thirty percent of having, over 30? So it's for an AST, a median AST of 27 versus a 30% higher risk. I'll I'll send you the paper. This is, 16,600,000 people. It's, table one or two. Table two maybe. Let me open it up. As far as I know, this is the largest epidemiological study ever done for this. Okay. In nationwide population based cohort study. 22, it's pretty narrow. 20 to 43. Those are the median values though. And you can see the 95% confidence intervals. Is the median value? Yeah. Yep. For q four. But you can see the confidence interval, then it's 20 to 43. But look at the GGT, though. Yeah. You're good. The GGT is is I'm saying, like, it's let's see. Meaning, as what I'm saying is as the ALT goes up to, let's say, 29, GGT is skyrocketing, it seems. It it seems like GGT is a way more sensitive marker, but let's see what the table says. Okay. So the IR my death. Here we go. Yep. Yes. HR. Q two q two q four. No. But look at this. The risk of death goes down. Yeah. For q two and q three. Q four q four, you're goes up. That's right. And that was the one where it was 29 for AST, and I think, what, 27 for ALT? So let's see. Q two and q three have the lowest def. That means q two is 18 to 22. Okay. Yep. So the lower okay. So the lower portion is good. The lower number that we have, the lower optimal range, we have 17, which, I guess, makes sense. And then same thing for AST. Yep. Two two two Dose response. Lowest is best. This is it's dose response for GGT. Yep. Whereas AST and ALT are u shaped curve. U shaped. Yep. Or more like j shaped. Yeah. I guess it's we're we're not seeing people who are significantly low. It's it's it's a u shaped curve. Either they must be filtering out people who are on the ends. Adjusted. It's got the adjusted for age, sex, BMI, smoking, alcohol. It's a lot of conditions. No. I'm just saying that if they're taking they have to have been filtering out people who had higher levels than 40, which is gonna be quite a significant number of people and lower levels of than 17. So the 15. So in the, quartiles, it gives you these the 12 to 20. Interquartile range, which tells you that where is it? Let me go to it. So you can address that. Right? Q four for AST. So twenty five percent of the population had higher levels than 35, and twenty five percent had higher than 43 for ALT. So that's four million people or or in that group. So that's, like, one million people had AST or ALT greater than thirty five and forty three for AST and ALT. Okay. Because you've got So GGT is interesting. So my GGT would be in q '1. That's good. And and I actually find that yeah. I find it to be a pretty sensitive marker. The ALT and AST, yeah, it could be some supplements are bringing it up by by 10 points or something. Yeah. Or if I see something in my diet. Yeah. It it could be anything. Right? I don't know what it would but I see that same pattern in Brian's data too in the low thirties. And it's, I don't know which supplements or it's the cumulative because your liver the liver's gonna detoxify. Right. So, and for me, it's if the is the supplement making liver markers worse, but eight other biomarkers better. That's I'll take that gamble, right? Win eight and lose one, I'll take that risk. It's so it's just sixteen million people hard to argue with that data. Yeah. So based on this, like you mentioned, the lowest is gonna be q two and q three for both of this for Yeah. ALT and AST. And that means that the number is going to be what was that number again? 18. It was 18 to 18 to 22 median values for ALT and then 21 to 23 for AST. So those would be the targets. Right? But where it gets a little bit tricky is when you look at the IQR, right, the interquartile range. So for q four for AST, you can see it's from 22 to 35 with the median value of 27. So, technically, you could be in q four with a 22. Right? And that '22 could also put you in q three. It could also put you in the IQR for so the it's so that's the interquartile range. Right? So that means that 25% of that of the q four had values below 20, and then 25% of q four. So 1,000,000 people, basically. Wouldn't they but then wouldn't they be in q one if they had below 20? So the lowest end of the if IQR for q one, q two, q three, q four, you can see it goes from ALT. The lowest end is 12, then it's 14, then it's 16, then it's 20. So the you can see that the range shifts. So each of these quartiles has a range. Right? The median being so ALT, the median being 15, but then you have the interquartile range. You can break it down for it's like q one. For the lower end of that range, 20 of twelve, one million people had a l t less than 12. 1,000,000 people had 12 to 15, and then 15 to 21,000,000 people, and then 1,000,000 people had 20 or 15 to 20. So you can use that same, but where it gets tricky is there is some overlap between the quartiles. So that's why I was saying the median target. Like, shooting for the median, I think, is the reasonable approach. Why? I don't understand. They generally don't do this. They usually do it whereas each quartile is a discrete segment. Should be. Yeah. I don't know why. It's a little confusing. How they're doing this is because you could if you're, let's say, number 20, you could be anywhere from the q one or q four depending on Yeah. Because you can see that in q four, there's a range of 20 to 43. And then q one, there's a range of 12 to 20. I don't understand. But from their data, though, with the q one to q four base, you can see that the IQRs increase. Right? The rate the the it's not just 15 to 18 to 22 to 29. You can see it goes from 12 to 20 to 14 to 24. It's increasing with. So it basically shows that when you get to q four, if your ALT or AST is increasing over time, you're going in the wrong direction. Right? So but I I that's a fair point. Some of the data does overlap, so it makes it a little bit confusing in terms of interpretation if you only have one test. Yeah. But you've got a mix you've got a mix of data. We're a little bit in the thirties and a little bit in the twenties. All I'm saying is the target should probably be lower. I haven't measured my sperm count. Total testosterone last test was eight ninety six. Okay. I don't think that'll be an issue for me. Eight ninety six. That's pretty good. And that's naturally like that? Natural. No TRT. All just All natural. And what's your workout regimen? Whole body, compound movements, a mix of calisthenics, weight lifting, mobility, flexibility, and all. Like you're on the Peter Attia train in that regard. No. Definitely not. He trains way more than me. He's got these arbitrary standards of zone two for everything. And if you can't do a farmer's walk, carrying, whatever, it's nonsense. It's utter the other thing too, I guess I'll put a put him on blast. His book is basically eat real food and exercise, but I won't tell you which diet is best. Take a statin. That's basically what it is. Eat real food, exercise, and take a statin. That's also a lick that that's not an advancement to me. So Right. My approach is the precision nutrition. How can we use the biomarkers to guide what what's the best diet at the individual levels? Okay. What and your cholesterol is what? Total cholesterol is about one sixty. Generally, I can tell you the averages, but it's probably around 80 to 85 average. And did it ever go up? What was the highest? So when I was eating the high higher saturated fats fat, there was a lot of coconut butter. I got it up to 80. I could it's it's very malleable. Was one eighty? Oh, sorry. Total cholesterol. So LDL was, like, one twenty ish, somewhere in that range. Once it's through the poop. My highest was, like, two two thirty LDL. So where it differentiates is that high fiber diets have been shown to reduce LDL. So I'm eating 85 grams of fiber per day right now, which most people probably don't do. I'm guessing you don't get No. So I when I did an experiment where I ate tons of fiber, like tons. What? Five grams. No. No. Other no. No. Other ones. Oh, that including resistant starch, whole foods, everything. Salads, supplemental Fibers that are supposed to reduce your cholesterol, like glucomannan, all fibers really, psyllium husk, resistant starch helps a little bit. Like, they all help a little bit. No. Like, it it it maybe helped 10%, but Mhmm. I also think that was one of the factors lowering thyroid hormones. I was taking one, for example, glucomannan, and that lowers thyroid hormones. And glucomannan, propolis, carnitine, and and niacin, I had to either get rid of or the niacin, I I reduced it. Oh, one other thing, I got so bloated eating so much fiber. Like, I it was nuts. So that it depends on which vegetables too because I was eating, at one point a thousand grams of broccoli per day, and I had that problem. But so I don't do a thousand grams of broccoli anymore, but I have titrated the fiber down because there is an upper limit in my case. But in terms of bloating, I don't have that problem generally. But in terms of fullness, nothing else. I'm a volume eater. I've got, like, competitive eater DNA. So if I'm not eating big volumes of food, it's hard to be satiated. Okay. So you're you don't get gas from eating tons of fiber? Generally not. Nope. Which I don't know. There is some data linking, like, gas with short chain fatty acid production, which I wanna have a lot of the short chain fatty acids, acetate, propionate, and butyrate. So I don't know if that's a good thing or a bad thing. My soluble fiber levels are a lot or intake is, like, five x the standard American diet, So I can't imagine it would be bad. Mine was all mine was, like, really I was trying to really load it on for to reduce my LDL cholesterol for short chain fatty acids for a bunch of reasons to reduce the actually, indoxyl sulfate, one of the things you mentioned, and and just other kidney uremic toxins and just bunch of different stuff. I also try to get my urea down because my urea is always high. I think I may have figured out why. And so I'm doing more experiments now. But Wait. What so what's your hypothesis? Because I I could tell you probably exactly what it is, but let's see. What there's a very clear reason. Eating too much protein is gonna increase urea. Yeah. Assuming assuming normal kidney function. Because if kidney function is if kidney function is getting worse during aging, even with this, the same amount of protein, urea will increase. So here's an interesting thing. Did you see that new study with the biological aging using the UK Biobank that was more predictive than the PhenoAge? Do you mean only than Levin. Wait. Do you mean oh, wait. Which? Let me find that study. You know the Levin study with the PhenoAge. Right? Yeah. Of course. I use it. I use it every blood test. This is a new one, by the way. It's 10/26/2023, if you haven't seen it. K. If not but it says they they compared it to PhenoAge model, and they have a a 11% increase in predictive value. Alright. Wait. I think I did see this. So if you look at the c index or the area under the curve, it's very close to PhenoAge. Not that I'm saying PhenoAge is the best, but it's not like a 20% better. Well, you say 11% better. So wait. So so biological age clocks are Nida a part of my approach, but that that too is like the quick and dirty. And that's like the cutesy number, but they have blind spots. Like, for example, phenoH doesn't include blood pressure, increases during ages. Every test has blind spots. Right? There's no question about it. That that's why I was saying before. I agree with you, by the way. You there's we don't have to go through every blind spot of the phenoH because, obviously, they're not testing blood pressure. They're not testing a million other things. Right? It's actually just, like, simple CBC with a CRP or something. Right? Yeah. Yep. I'm curious what markers that they've, in theirs. Yeah. So that's what I wanna show you, some of the markers that are interesting and because it's actually relevant to what we're discussing now. Here it is. So we're actually gonna integrate a biological aging test. And because this is more predictive, we were gonna go with this one instead of the PhenoAge. But it's basically just gonna take all of your mark. If you have them tested already, we'll just give you your biological age. And if you don't, you could get the test buy the test or whatever. But you could see which ones are bad. Cystatin c means it's increasing your risk the higher it is. Okay? Yep. And one of the reasons why I'm not worried about my kidney function is because my cystatin when I take supplements, my cystatin c actually goes down, and when I don't, it goes up. Meaning, like, when I'm taking less supplements, it actually goes up. I I think that I know which supplements. I think like, the stuff that's good for kidney function, I think, makes it go down. But a quick point. So statin c was that besides age and sex was the, the highest predictor of biological the one yeah. That's what it showed. Right? We'll we'll go back to that in a second. I just wanna show you my cystatin c here. Yeah. Okay. You could see there was zero point six nine. This is without with less supplements, and you could see it's going down. And then it went down to 0.6, zero point six one. Wait. So what happened for that one milligram per liter? Oh, I this is when I this is the last time I got sick. This is an infection. Yeah. And then I was on the red eye. Ah. So, actually, this was before the red eye. This was I actually got good night's sleep this night, but my body was fighting infection. I didn't know it. So I think what would have happened normally is if I was living a good lifestyle, not and I slept that night, I probably would have fought it off. And what happens is because I didn't go to sleep that night and my body was already fighting the infection, I got sick. And so there was a lot of markers that came back weird after this one that would indicate that I was sick. Do you track I see a lot of data, but do you track it? Do you take the average for your year, you know, for cystatin c and everything else and then track that over time? Because cystatin c increases during aging. So you wanna make sure not just that it's low, point six, point seven, but you wanna make sure it doesn't go from point six, point six five, point seven five. I haven't been tracking it for too long. So the first time I took the test was zero point six nine, and that was five years ago, around Uh-huh. Almost. And I've gotten older, and it's gone down. Going in the right direction. Yep. Now, so cystancy was actually the number one test they have here. Right? Red blood cell, the the RDW was number two. Gamma GGT was number three. And like I said, my GGT was good. So if you actually look at all the tests they use here, they actually don't use even the LT and AST, number one. Yeah. Use that to predict. Like, in this test, actually, all like, this my biological age is gonna come down, like, quite significantly from this test because it happens to be that the markers that they're using here are the mark markers that I'm quite strong with. And in this case, urea, it actually shows an antiaging effect, like having so if you see, having higher blue indicates that higher levels reduce mortality hazard. Yeah. I can explain why that is. And creatinine as well. Look at this. So urea and creatinine, which typically come up a little higher for me. Like you said, creatinine is proportional to muscle mass. Muscle mass declines towards end of life. So lower muscle mass, lower creatinine. So that's probably one reason why people who had higher creatinine or higher muscle mass, higher creatinine, probably there was reduced biological age. Urea. What's interesting about urea is that it increases during aging, but then in terms of all cause mortality risk, it can be u shaped. So then how does that make sense where it increases during aging, but then mortality risk is u shaped. Right? It should be. It just pretty much increases just like the aging data. But urea is produced by the liver liver function also declines towards end of life but you could have deficits people who are very sick comorbidities with liver dysfunction you could have very low levels of urea productions to have low levels of urea and blood So that's how I would explain that one there. I wouldn't go too high on urea too though because that can mess up the gut. Could be my urea always tends to be high, but you could see it's like low twenties usually. Yeah. That's protein intake. You got a lot of Protein intake. I eat a I take in a lot of protein. Right? What's your CRP? What's your CRP usually? It's pretty low. So it's the h s CRP, it ranges, but it's you you here it's point 2.25. It's under one. Higher protein, higher urea. Urea can actually degrade tight junctions, intestinal tight junctions, making it easier for stuff to leak into the blood, activate the immune system, HS CRP, which could be Oh, interesting. Yeah. Yeah. I and I can send you all the data for everything I just said, all the papers. But so that that could be one of the reasons why, you know, fighting off infections a few times. And I get the the traveling lifestyle is a challenge, And you're out everywhere and doing all the things. And I get that it could be a challenge to keep CRP low, but it could be as simple as just so for example, protein intake, Stu Phillips, they've done meta analysis on what's the maximum amount of protein intake that maximizes muscle gains as a result of strength training, regular strength training? And it's 1.6 grams per kilogram. So I wouldn't go above that. If you can cut your protein intake to 1.6 grams per kilogram I think I have two. I'm pretty sure I have Well, maybe see, I'm eighty kilos. Yeah. So one twenty eight. Kilos. If it was two, then it would be one sixty. You're saying I should consume, like, one twenty eight. I One twenty eight. Honestly, I don't know. It's hard to know exactly how much I consume. Like, I could only know from the powders that I take, but I'm still deficient in certain amino acids, which is why I started supplementing with digestive enzymes. So if you look at certain amino acids, I'm low on them. Like So they come with low histidine I was low on arginine, for example, and histidine. Histidine is a big one. That's been shown to be associated with reduced all cause mortality risk, and it declines during aging. So look. So it was here, and you see it jump because I supplemented with histidine. Oh. Yeah. So I tested it twice to make sure that it's not a fluke, and it actually was lower the second time. And then I was like, okay. Let me, and I actually felt like a really good effect from it. That also is an indication that I was deficient. Do you have ergothione? Yeah. Do you have ergothione in in your data? No. I don't test for that, but I do supplement with it. Ergothyline is a big one. It declines during aging. You know this stuff on cognitive function, but I think supplementing with it may not be the best approach because so it can be the question is why would it decline during aging? And, it's actually it can actually be degraded by gut bacteria. There's long story short. I got a long story short, this right gut back gut bacterial pH of the gut becomes more alkaline, which is a bad thing because when the gut pH becomes more alkaline, that enables potentially pathogenic bacteria like enterobacteria to bloom, which are they contain genes that can produce in docile sulfate, pericrystall sulfate. The short chains acidify the colon, which help keep enterobacteria low. So, anyway, centenarians, for example, have a pH of gut pH of eight, and their ergothione levels are generally pretty low. The long story short there is ergothione can be degraded by gut bacteria, and the ergothionease ergothionease gene is maximally active at a alkaline pH. In other words, aging, more alkaline gut pH, more ergothionine degradation. And you know what it's converted into? Trimethylamine. So increased TMA, which potentially bad for the kidney, potentially bad for cardiovascular disease, all because of the gut. So, yep, Iolo's kit doesn't measure ergothioneine either. I'm trying to get them to measure that. I'd say I think it's a big one. And I I should say too, I've got insider info. We're looking at centenarian data, long life family study, and and and another one. And, we see the Ergothyanine to TMAO ratio. Centenarians have a a longer survival versus shorter survival. The shorter survival being they have a lower ratio, meaning less Ergothyanine, more TMAO versus the ones that have higher ergothioneine and and lower TMAO. So I think that's a big one. I'm actually gonna go after that in a grant for Parkinson's, disease and see if I can flip that ratio. Supplement with it, you're saying? Because So the reason I don't know if that's the best approach is sure, you'll increase circulating levels because when you eat it, it'll get absorbed through the small intestine. But if any of that gets to the colon, then you've got it being degraded by gut bacteria into TMA, which potentially may be shooting yourself in the foot at the same time. That may be why some of the RCTs that have used ergothione didn't see an effect on my cognitive function. I felt, good cognitive function when I first started it. I don't now it's just part of my protocol. So you're young. Right? So your gut pH probably more acidic than someone who's a lot older. Whereas for them, maybe it's more important to work on acidifying the colon, whether through its fiber or polyphenols or whatever can best do it. What is your urea, let's say, that you Consistently 10. Have. 10. Interesting. 10. It but my protein intake is, a 100 grams per day, so I'm at, like, 1.4, 1.5 grams per per kilogram. I'm trying to stay within that 1.6 window. Okay. Interesting. But like I said saying this is saying urea actually having higher levels can help. Again, this is a little different than certain data. It depends on with these biological clocks, it's it's not u shaped. It's if you're it's unidirectional. If you're in this direction, it increases your age or decreases your age. Right? So they probably had some segment of the population that was end of life where lower levels of urea, you could find that's the rare exception. I can imagine knowing that it increases during aging, except for the end of life where poor kidney function can't make urea because urea is made in the liver. Sorry. Poor liver function. So in that case, I can see how, like I said, the u shaped association for all cause mortality risk. So the too low would be at advanced age. So Technically, I'd be on the I technically, I'd be on the increased slope for all cause mortality risk, but low levels are found in youth. So so that that's a big part of this too, Joe, is the nuance. Right? For example, too, most of the LDL story where in terms of all cause mortality risk with LDL, most of the models haven't adjusted for comorbidities or all of them. There's a study that just came out with 5,000,000 veterans where they adjusted for, I don't know, 11 comorbidities or 14, something a lot. And Mhmm. The the increase because LDL all cause mortalities can be j shaped or u shaped. And that's why a lot of the high LDL people have been like, yeah. Look. If you're at low LDL, it's bad for you. Higher is better or relatively higher. But when they adjusted for comorbidities because LDL declines towards end of life, all cause mortality risk wasn't significant anymore at the lower levels. It was only above 200 where l d or a total cholesterol of 200 and higher LDL is a part of that where, all cause mortality risk increased. So in other words, adjusting the models for as many comorbidities as possible seems to be a limitation in understanding the nuance behind a lot of these biomarkers. And most studies, unfortunately, aren't adjusting for literally every comorbidity, liver function, lung function, kidney. It's mostly like hypertension, metabolic health, BMI, age sex. They're leaving other stuff on the table. Interesting. Also, they show cholesterol. Having higher cholesterol indicates lower mortality risk. So that might be with with the old streak you mentioned. Yeah. Yeah. End of life, it so cholesterol total cholesterol starts off low in youth, peaks at around 50 to 60, and then comes down end of life. So if you're if you're low as a 20 year old or you have relatively low as a 100 10 year old, how would you know the difference? Both of them would technically look youthful, but I'm guessing that for the people that in their study, lower was on that slope for end of life. For me, the nuance is if your cholesterol total cholesterol is low and albumin is low and HDL is low, that's the aged phenotype. But if you've got low total cholesterol, high albumin, high HDL, or relatively high HDL, fifty, fifty five, 60, whatever, then you're probably got youthful phenotype. So they're actually they also show, as you would expect, albumin and apo a that they HDL. Higher apo a is would be a surrogate for HDL. So Should be. Yeah. Album and APO a as the higher those are, the lower mortality. And then, like I said, they included they got urea here. They got creatinine. Creatinine is actually the most significant one. Yeah. Also, mass creatinine lower mortality. And then number two, by the way, was ALT. Ah, look at that. Interesting. They showed that as number two. So creatinine in terms of, effect size, it seems like creatinine higher creatinine was associated with lower mortality. And I'm assuming they're excluding kidney people with kidney disease. Right? I don't know. Maybe not. Maybe not. Even if the cystatin c is not muscle mass is proportional to creatinine. That's one reason for the use of cystatin c. It's less responsive to changes in muscle mass. So the higher cystatin c increases during aging, worse kidney function for sure. But knowing that muscle mass can be real or is proportional to creatinine, like I said, to me, that's a higher muscle mass, younger biological age. But if your cystatin c is high, worse kidney function, older biological age. That's What's your body fat? Body fat was I think it was 15. Same. Fourteen point nine, which is crazy. Interesting. What's up with the so the I guess there's some controversy there because when I looked at what's the optimal fat mass for lowest mortality, you actually see something like twenty five percent. Yeah. So what's interesting about that is I have an idea in on this. So, actually, I it was in my book, not that I'm trying to plug that. But so immune function of the client during microbial burden. Just if anybody books up my name on, Amazon, they'll see it. But so Okay. Immune function declines during aging. And fat adipocytes, they actually produce, caphlicidin, which is an antimicrobial peptide. So I can see that for people who, aren't lean for the duration of their lifespan and have declining immune function, that there's an expansion of fat mass, which is known. Fat mass increases during aging. And that may be that expansion of fat mass may be a compensatory mechanism to adjust for the immuno decline during aging. So in that case, you would see but you don't have an appropriate control group. Like, what about people who've been lean and fit in every way, not just metabolically, but no immune cell or functional decline? Has that been can compared against people who have a BMI of twenty eight and twenty per twenty five or whatever the lowest all cause mortality or some which is outrageous? Twenty two, something higher than fifteen. That control group doesn't exist because people like you and me with relatively lean body fats, this is the exception to the rule, not the rule. Right? There's some of them that are clear, and some of them are probably less clear. There's a lot of variables. Some of them, I think, are causal. Some of them are clearly not. Right? So it's if you're very sick, you're eating less. You're gonna be you're gonna weigh less. Yep. But, also, if you're when you're older, you're more prone to falls. If you have no fat or muscle on you, you're just gonna start breaking shit. Yeah. That's why I train I train all of that stuff, mobility balance. I'm not trying to my bone density was, I don't know. I I look I haven't looked up, like, the published studies. I only go by what the DEXA showed. So I'm at, like, the the upper limit for bone density, like, at the bottom of the upper limit. So my bone density is pretty good for Okay. I'm not worried about breaking some for, yeah, for any chronological age. Even the youngest, the 20, I'm still in that group. But so if my bone density was low, I'd be worried about breaking something. Okay. Yeah. I I see what you're saying. I guess my concern is with the the whole fat percentage that it's okay. One thing if I don't have to be in, let's say I think 25% is too much. I actually think 15% is probably optimal. But the concern is that you don't wanna go to eight or nine. So interestingly, I measured DEXA last year, different machine. Older machine, 12.9%. I this year, newer machine, paid for it. Last year, I got it for free at Tufts, 14.9%, and I'm 10 pounds leaner. No loss of strength, no loss in function. I see abs in the mirror, like, pretty close to ripped. So how many calories are you eating a day? What you're doing a 10% calorie restriction? No. So if you go by so because I've tracked diet since 2015, food scale, and everything, I know exactly the magnitude of CR. At my highest since 2015, 2,800 calories. Currently, 2089, so about 2,100. So that's about a 25% CR over the over the Yeah. And I didn't do I didn't just jump into that. I've been making very small cuts for every blood test for every two month or seven week period. So that's been like an evolution over about three years, very slowly cutting over time. They go from 2,800. Yeah. I've tried very big calorie cuts and just binged it back on in two weeks. So fortunately, that hasn't been the case. So Did you have any amino acids lower when you did the, test? So I do have the metabolomic data, but it's I think the amino app, they have ranges. I'm not low in any of them. But even determining what's low there is so tricky because all cause mortality data, aside from histidine and serine, there's so little quantified data. It's more untargeted metabolomics. You know what I mean? Where it's they don't give you the actual concentration. They just say one group had higher than the other. Based on the metabolomic hit I use, I'm not low. It's hard to say what exactly is optimal, I think, for the Right. Amino acids. What do you know about serine, like, serum, serine? So there is data, all cause mortality data showing higher levels associated with lower all cause mortality risk, and it declines during aging too. Yeah. For me, I've supplemented with it. I'm not sure yet if that increases it. I have to analyze that data, but that actually might be one where it's easy to increase for me. I'm not sure. Do you supplement with it? I do. Yeah. But see, for me, it's for me, it's more of why would it be low and how can I fix that mechanism? That's why I just haven't gone to the supplement road because I haven't fixed anything. I'm just trying to band aid on top of it without getting to the underlying. Have you ever done a biomarker versus biomarker correlation in your data to see if it's No. That'd be because you have a lot of data. You could technically do that to see if phosphorus correlates with creatinine, cystatin c. Yeah. I might do that at some point. That's a good idea to do it at some point. I feel like right now, there's enough to look at it and get, like, a general like, I take notes about what I was doing, and then I'll look at it and be like, what was what was I doing differently? And trying to just get some picture of that. Yeah. I'm trying to get the lowest hanging fruit, and then I could go deeper, do more testing for like, I'm not even at the point where I'm gonna I'm just getting to the point where I'm gonna do the organic acids testing, and I'm gonna also get into metabolomics as well. I feel like there's some room there, but, again, that's advanced stuff. Right? You wanna make sure you've got these things down. These are more important, phosphorus, than something esoteric, some metabolic product or something. Right? Potentially. Right? It's it's more studied. It's more studied. But that's the idea is that it's more studied, so you're prob at least you know it's more relevant rather than if you change something in your metabolome that is not as well studied, you might even be harming yourself. Or is there some correlation that it might be good, but actually it's not? Yeah. N acetylglucosamine. I don't know. I don't know if that thing is good or not. Like, I saw some studies that higher serum levels was not good. I was just trying it out again for the tendons. I don't think I don't know if it helped at all, but I'm experimenting. Do you know anything about that? No. So when it comes to the tendons and ligaments, have are you familiar with the knees over toe knees over toes approach? That whole his whole are you familiar with that? No. I do in my left knee, but that's been going on from, like, heavy squats for, like, decades. So it it hasn't gotten worse. And I may be making it better, but I'm not sure that any supplement would help with for me, I don't know that any supplement would help. But you can actually train, like, your ligaments and tendons by stressing them, by putting them in positions where they'd have to get stronger. Right? It's like full range of motion, squats and deadlifts and lunges. So I try to have as close to strength through a full range of motion as possible, which has helped with for me, for, like, knee joints, like, the actual joints feeling good. So I don't have any issues with joints or ligaments and tendons. Interesting. Yeah. Yeah. For me, I think there's some of those issues are somewhat genetic. Like, some family members have tendon issues as well. But, yeah, I but I think it seems that they've basically, like, my approach is try to do as much as you can with supplements. And then once you're whatever's then you could go to, like me, I don't it's just my personal approach. Then Yeah. Go to, like, physical therapy or do things like whatever you can't improve at that point. I'm still at a point where I'm making improvements, and I I think I I might not need any physical therapy. So I I think yeah. Meaning, based on my newest experiments with the higher dosages of the nostril, I don't think I need to do the physical therapy. Even though I'm sure it'll help, but it's just it's more time consuming. I'd rather figure it out from the supplement approach first. Like, I the first thing I do is go to supplements. So I've physical therapy, I've tried it before, and I found it completely useless for me. Yeah. Because they're just they're doing the basics. It's not a I'd look into I'd look a lot of people. Like, when you I just ask people, they're like, yeah, they helped me a lot. So there's only so much in terms of range of motion that the joints can move through. Right? So it's something I don't know. The the knees over toes approach for at least from my knees, my left knee in particular, I can see and feel a difference, by actually training the joints. You know what sissy sissy squats are where you you put a lot of pressure on the knees. It's almost like a lean forward kinda squat. You're on your tippy toes. It purposely stresses the knee joint, and that's gonna affect the ligaments and tendons, which should increase blood flow there, which blood flow there is already limited. So I wasn't doing any of that in the past. So for me, I think that's gonna have the biggest benefit versus a supplement. Maybe if I if it was lacking the precursors to build some of that, I'm not sure that I tried it. You never tried it. That's true. That's true. But I can say supplement approach. That not yet. Not yet. But for now, directly stressing it feels pretty feels pretty good. No range of motion limitations. So I do have a herniated disc in my back that I've been dealing with for, like, decades that I've gotta be really careful though. What? Where you from? Heavy squats and deadlifts, heavy squats and eagle lifting in my twenties like an idiot. What what was I even clean and jerks. I was trying to do I was doing clean and jerks, like, 200 pounds just like a madman in my twenties. What was the most you've ever weighed? One close to one eighty. Oh, wow. So you were like a a muscle. Yeah. Yep. Protein powders, protein bars, all that back in the day. Yeah. I weaned off it. I got I weaned off it. So Why? Because it's too much? No. I just try to for whatever reason, my body responds best on whole food, for now. And, yeah. Whey whey isopure, whey protein powder. It was usually whey that What makes you think, like, when you're doing the not whole foods, what is worse? I wouldn't say it's worse. I just get more nutrient density, and I don't but it's like the unknown of okay. Sure. I could get 40 grams of whey, But that 160 calories, I could also get maybe a little bit less protein, but a whole bunch of other nutrition that I'm not getting. So Interesting. Okay. And you don't get, like, bloated. You don't have any other problems from No. But I did. It's just, you know, evolving it to the point where I know how much of which of the foods trigger some of that stuff. Right? Like, the broccoli, like, keeping that relatively low. Do you eat a lot of whole grains? No. Not a lot at all. It's less than 60 grams per day, which is far less than Oh, that is a little. And, actually, I cut whole grains completely out. But once I saw the fat correlations in my data, I was like, where am I gonna get the calories? It can't be more fruit. Exactly. Not more protein either. I've gotta add some whole grains. What about beans? How much you you got the chickpeas in there. What else? Chick just the chickpeas, though, because I have food sensitivity too. I've done the IG. And it's crazy because, like, kidney beans, lot of pinto beans. It's like a whole bunch of them that I've eaten a lot of in the past. Like you're saying, I get the bloating, pain, all that stuff. Chickpeas, no basically no problem. Oh, interesting. Okay. So you're saying that you it's not like you you don't if you eat the wrong things, you will get bloating. Yeah. Yep. Oh, okay. So you're on a somewhat of a paleo diet, if you will. Right? Not too not much grains, not much beans. Fish every day. Yeah. No. Not that often. But I'm not opposed to it. It's just the fish, sardines. I eat I just So I'll tell you something. When when I eat a lot of fish, it harms my cognitive function. It harms your cognitive function. Wow. Because of because I know why. Basically, I take activated charcoal and it goes away. So it's the there's, like, fat based there's fat soluble toxins, like the dioxins in fish that activated charcoal seems to bind to that give me problems if I eat too much fish. So for me, it's only a hundred grams per day. I don't know how much what's that how much fish is too much Oh, I for you? Oh, no. I was eating, like, like a 500 grams a day. Oh, wow. Yeah. So that's for me, a 100 grams, no problem. But no, for the it it was I get the omega threes. I don't get that from meat. It's more satiating for me. I like meat. I like eggs are okay too. You know? What's your main protein source? Fish. It's the sardines. So today was, twenty one fifty workout day today. So, calorie intake a little bit higher than usual. But alright. Let's see. Protein. 113 grams of protein today. 41, I had two sardines. So 41.6 sardines. Chickpeas, 13. Collards, third, 10. Mushrooms, nine. Actually, mushrooms twice. You to measure all these things in a day? It takes a little bit of time, but I enjoy it. It's a hobby. Right? I've gotten shit from people in the past. Yeah. Why do you do that? But I don't feel right if I'm not actually weighing everything in it just doesn't feel right. It's Mhmm. You gotta be quantifying it. Are you still at Tufts doing research? Or Yeah. Yeah. Yep. You are. Still at Tufts. Yeah. What are you doing there for research now? I have a human study, it which is a high soluble fiber diet versus the USDA guidelines on the potential effect on muscle, gut muscle axis. Can we improve muscle mass and physical function if we four x your soluble fiber intake from a whole food based diet? It's It's basically the mic diet. Okay. In older adults older adults. So it's a clinical trial? Yep. Randomized control trial. How many people? Three people have finished. We've got it's gonna be 24 people. It's not that much. Three have finished. Okay. We've got six enrolled in January. The next few months, we should be ramping up. Okay. Do you also teach there? Or No. Occasionally, class here and there. But Okay. Reset. What do you teach on? The last class I did was a month or two ago. It was gut gut muscle axis, impact of diet on the gut muscle axis, two hour presentation, guest host spot. Impact of diet on the gut muscle axis. Okay. That was actually one of the paper the review papers I saw. So I've actually done that high soluble fiber diet in mice, aged mice, to do to test the same effect. And, you had no major it's crazy because if you look at we it was females and males. We tripled the soluble fiber content, just whole food. And, so it was nine like, 17 mice, which isn't a lot, but they're genetically homogeneous, so that's a decently powered study. High soluble fiber diet as a whole group, no difference in terms of muscle mass, grip strength, or treadmill endurance capacity. So it basically it doesn't impact soluble fiber doesn't impact gut muscle axis, three x ing it. But all of the high fiber mice, high soluble fiber mice got lean. They lost a ton of body fat. And it gets where it gets even more interesting is the female mice ate the same amount of food as the controls, lost weight, had better treadmill endurance capacity, which does suggest a role for gut muscle, but only in the female mice. The male mice actually ended up eating more calories on the high side of the fiber diet, but didn't have an impact didn't have an impact on muscle. No no improvement in muscle strength or muscle mass. So only in the females? Only in the females, but both the males and females lost a ton of fat mass, improving body composition on the high soluble fiber diet. And this is the animals have to eat exactly fat mass, but only the females increased muscle mass. It didn't increase muscle mass, but improved the treadmill, how far they could run on the treadmill and ate the same amount of food. Far. Yeah. I don't know. That, I don't know. I don't know. And they eat their own poop, which is even worse. They Yeah. So how do you measure how much the it it it's a confounding variable who's eating their own poop. They all eat their own poop. That's a limit and the CR mice is special that they're they're eating everything they can find in their cage. That's why I don't I don't know if you watch Rick and Morty. Do you watch Rick and Morty? No. There's a doctor, and they make a joke that she's the therapist, and on her door, it's the coprophagia. She's a coprophagia doctor, which is basically the shit eating doctor. Anyway, that's a joke. Yeah. Oh my gosh. The The mice are coprophagic. Yeah. They eat their own they eat their own poop. Gosh. Yep. Oh my gosh. So what about the best fiber for butyrate? Is resistant starch the best is that the best fiber? So I don't know the ants I don't think anybody knows the answer to that. So it it depends on your gut microbiome because if you don't have the fiber degrading bacteria, you probably won't make it. Right? So then and then it's not just one bacterium. It's probably a whole group. So you'd have to and then a whole group of bacteria working together because they can cross feed. So you could have acetate producers and not have the butyrate producers and have high acetate, but have low butyrate. I used to think it was super easy, just increase soluble fiber, but and but then which one? So many factors. Which how how what percentage of people do you think have bacteria to produce butyrate from resistant starch or soluble fiber? Probably everybody, but it's a matter of, do you have all of the bacteria? Do you have and and yeah. Yeah. And then which fiber do you respond best to resistant starch, pectin? There are so many different fiber types. Arabinoxylan, beta glucan. There's so many dim, inulin. Just from my own experiments, I've megadosed each of these fibers to the max of capacity where I'm, like, I start really getting, like, serious gut issues. The only one that I could notice was really having that butyrate effect was the resistant starch. But wait, butyrate effect, but did you measure I'm just no. I'm just it's based on, subjective feelings. So I feel when it hits me about ten to twelve hours later. And it I think it peaks at probably sixteen hours later or whatever. But, basically, like, I feel it. It hits me. How does it feel? What's the feel? It feels it's certain this it it's like sharpness. It's more relaxed, more focused. It's it, it has similar effects to when you take a butyrate supplement, like a large dosage, but it has that effect over a continuous amount of time. Personally, I'm convinced when it hits. Right? You could always argue that it's placebo, whatever, but I'm convinced that it's a real effect. Meaning, it's beyond what I would consider a placebo effect. So that at a certain point, if it's strong enough for you, then you realize, hey. This is not a placebo. Where it always could be, but I've taken it a thousand times at this point, and there's it's a very consistent effect. Even though even if I take it every day, I could still feel it. And, yeah, and I find that, like, forty grams of resistant starch, like, I actually sell the product. It's called Joe's resistant starch, but I found forty grams of that is is the amount where I don't get the gastrointestinal effects. Like, I don't get any gas or anything like that, and I feel the butyrate. So it's like a high enough dosage where I feel it. And I've taken a hundred twenty grams of it a day, and it's super strong. No. It's like really strong. Like, it's too strong. So that's how I know it's having I I I know it's having the impact, and then the and it even, ruins my sleep. I can't sleep if it's too high of a dosage. Right? Butyrate also is like you you want it to be in a certain range. You don't wanna have too high levels. But so I find, like, the perfect dosage for me is, like, around forty grams a day, and that's not too strong. It's great. And I try to time it. I don't I used to take it in the morning, but then it it was I think as I increased my motility, also, things changed. Like, I used to have much slower motility, and so the timing was different. It was like it used to be eighteen hours, and it and it moved to ten to twelve. And it should be ten to twelve for a healthy gut because that's the time it takes to reach your large intestine. So, yeah, it's based on my experience, based on the research that I've seen, and I and based on I've taken every fiber out there in megadosing quantities. So I butyrate's a good one, but see, I'm more interested in the gut pH, like luminal pH, fecal pH. So butyrate even though butyrate is important, especially gut muscle axis or gut adipose axis, gut brain axis, it compared to acetate in the gut, it's, I don't know the magnitude of the the difference, but acetate is far higher than butyrate. So if my interest would be, how do you acidify best acidify the colon? I don't know. Maybe that's an experiment to do where you take your, poop pH. I don't know if you can just dip a So I'll I'll I'll tell you something. Yeah. When I take too high dosages of the resistant starch, I'm talking about, like, a hundred over a hundred grams, it it some it actually hurts my large intestine. Like, I feel some pain there. And I think I think it's because it's too acidic. Like, I feel like it's too acidic. It just has that kind of feeling where it's, like, burning a little bit almost. Right? And and it's because it's too much butyrate. That's what I'm saying, like, I've done these experiments I've done over ten years. Not just butyrate. It's gonna be, they're gonna ferment it. It's gonna be acetate, propionate, butyrate, probably even valerate c five. It could be, but I find that the resistant starch really turns into butyrate more. And I guess it depends on which one. The one that we have is it's derived from corn, and it seems to work really well in converting to butyrate, just butyrate. So the other fibers seem to do random stuff. Meaning, like, it it seems to I don't have any, like, too significant effect on butyrate. It seems to probably be more broadly, like, acetate, propionate, increased acetate and propionate. But the resistant starch that I take, it seems pretty, focused on butyrate from again, I could be wrong. I don't know if it's not creating acetate. I just think it's focused. Yeah. The gut pH thing, that's the thing I'd be interested in the most. If the resistant starch so inulin, in the published re in your case, maybe resistant starch is better at acidifying the colon, but not going a 120 grams. But in the published re published research, inulin seems to be the best at reducing it. But like I said, gut pH. The problem is you can't take two out, let's say, g megadosing with inulin is ten, fifteen grams, and all of a sudden that's like, holy crap. It's like I'm bloated as hell. I'm farting. Not just that. There's there's published data that it increases liver enzymes in certain people at very high doses, thirty grams per day. So, obviously, you'd wanna avoid that too. So I I think it depends. Yeah. It it's for me, I the the only the best fiber by far is resistant starch. And, yeah, it seems like actually, like, a lot of my labs are, even better when I'm eating less fiber. Meaning Well more resistant starch and and not as much just general fibers. Yeah. That's what I do now. So I actually I'm doing an experiment where so I went on the high fiber diet, like, super high. I was taking, like, every fiber on the market, like, all these things. And then I was like, okay. It's not working. Now I'm just focusing on the resistant starch. Yeah. I don't take in any other fibers. And then I take nutritional yeast, which has beta glucans, so that's and then just certain things that have fiber in general. I'm not eating much salad. I'm trying to see a little bit. I used to eat, like, loads of broccoli and salad. I was like again, when I was eating lower amounts, my act there were certain things that improved including my biological again, it it you gotta look at these things in context, but what else is there? Yeah. So I'm doing that experiment to see what happens because I feel like in order for me to get enough protein, I can't without being too bloated, I can't eat too much fiber. There's there's limits. And so if I'm taking forty grams of the resistant starch, that's forty grams, but it's actually only 60% resistance, like, resistant starch. So what is that? It's point six Twenty four. Times 40. 24. Yeah. Twenty four grams. So that's twenty four grams of resist that's twenty four grams of soluble fiber just from that. And then for I'm taking forty grams of brewer's yeast on a lot of days, so that's probably half fiber. So I don't know. At least That's a lot. Probably half. And, yeah, just from those two, I'm getting a lot of pretty, you know, decent amount of fiber. Yeah. So your fiber intake your soluble fiber intake probably higher than mine even on 85 of total fiber per day. Oh, yo. I wonder if that's the reason for the biological age. So all part of it. Obviously, not all No. But I used to be on I'm telling you. I used to be on, like, 100 over a 100 grams for sure. I don't know exact I think it was probably, like, a 150 because I was every meal I had either, like, large amounts of broccoli and salad. And then I supplemental fibers, I was having, like, a hundred grams a day. I'm gonna look into the urea cycle some more. There's gotta be more inputs than just arginine and ornithine. I can't think of any other. All all directions point to the liver. If it's gonna be made in the liver and it's higher than it should be with normal kidney function, the question is why would you be making more of it? Why would the liver be making more of it? Right? I don't I don't know. Honestly, I don't know. I don't know. Yeah. I wanna get it down because of the mortality studies. But then on the other hand, this new study shows that urea has higher urea could even lower mortality. So it's I don't know what to make of this anymore. So UK Biobank has a pretty good study of 500,000 people showing the u shaped association for blood urea nitrogen. And if I remember off the top of my head, I think 16 was the lowest portion of the u. So, yeah, I gotta find this study for you now. Hang on. Yeah. Go for it. Yeah. 17. 17. It's here. I'll get you. I'll get you. This is an easy one. Lowest mortality at 17? Yeah. Yeah. That's one portion of this paper. They had two they had a longer study and a shorter study. The study with the shorter follow-up, it was 17. But wait. I gotta look at the other one. Alright. So it's in this paper here. This paper is a gold mine for optimal ranges for CBC stuff. So they had a small they had a in this study, there was a a cohort of 19,000 people who were followed for thirty one years. Higher levels of bond were not associated with all cause mortality risk. So smaller sample size, but a longer follow-up. But then when they had a 425,000 people, study that had a shorter follow-up, yeah, 17 was lowest risk. Uh-huh. But when you look at the all cause mortality data for the smaller sample size and the longer follow-up, it's right at that border of of, that has it being higher than a hazard ratio of one for all values above 16. See, this is a good one. I like this study. Yeah. Interesting. The uric acid here seems to be dose dependently higher the worse, whereas there's other other studies that show a u curve. For something? But wait. More more important, even based on the biological age study that you posted here, is the lymphocyte percentage. But even going beyond that, I track individually neutrophils, monocytes, and because the two of them increase percentage. 45. It's always pretty good. I think mine is over 50. Nice. So your lymphocytes are high or your neutrophils and monocytes are very low in order to have a high percentage. Because if your neutrophils and lymphocyte if neutrophils and monocytes are very low, like a a thousand for neutrophils and, like, 400 for monocytes or 300. Anyway, the part that part of the equation should be your absolute lymphocyte Here's here's my the lymphocyte percentage. Let me see. Absolute Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So wait. So 2%. 2,000. Two yeah. That's a little bit high, but I don't think that's associated with all cause mortality risk. 2,000 is lowest all cause mortality risk. Man, Joe, I'm gonna have to pull up that data for you because that's another good study. Let's see here. Please do. Two thousand. I it looks like I range. Oh, I actually just know. I oh, I would like to see that because I actually just researched this, and it seemed like I didn't I couldn't find any research for three three point under three point seven. I mean, 01/2005 to 03/2007. Okay. There there but I I I would like to see what you got there. Yeah. 1.5 to 3.7 for which? For what? Luke lymphocytes. For this one, it's a 108,000 people. I mean, I don't know how much the I I haven't seen a bigger studies. But if you've got bigger studies on lymphocytes, then yeah. Share. Okay. So these are my lymphocytes. What else did you wanna see? Neutrophils? Neutrophils and monocytes. So wait. So you can see in when you look at the lymphocytes are low. Yeah. But which is a good thing. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Wait. So lymphocytes, you when you look at the curve, you'll see that having low lymphocytes, they'll all cause mortality risk goes up. So you're at the right your lymphocytes being relatively high is is on the right side of history because they also decline during aging. So alright. Monocytes low. Neutrophils, what's the what's that absolute number? I can't see. It's two point four nine. So two thousand to three thousand is lowest all cause mortality risk. So, yeah, you're good. Around where it is. Yeah. Yeah. You're good. Yeah. Yeah. So that's a lymphocyte percentage then is good. Yeah. I don't Yeah. I I I measure total white blood cells, obviously, but I don't I pay no attention to that total number because it's more important to look at the neutrophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes, and that lymphocyte percentage. To me, that's more instructive than the total white blood cell count. So what are your monocytes, let's say? 0.14. That is pretty low. But this is also when my immune system is better than ever, so it's not like it's causing immunodeficiency. So the in my notes here, I'd lowest all cause mortality risk what sorry. Increasing all cause mortality risk is when monocytes are less than two fifty for CBD mortality. So you don't want all your data to be in the 100 hundreds or even less less than two fifty. It's two fifty to four two fifty to 100 for cardiovascular mortality. So, yeah, just for CBD mortality, less than two fifty would be a flag, but that would be your average monocytes being less than two fifty. If you took the average of all these data, it doesn't look like it'd be lower than two fifty. So I wouldn't pay attention to one test where it's low. If it's always low, probably red flag. So I don't do calorie restriction, by the way, which calorie restriction is gonna bring down your rate of aging. Should. Yeah. It should. That's what their data shows, their internal data. And it would make sense. Right? But so I don't do that. I don't do it on purpose. So I just eat to content. Do you feel hungry ever and you don't eat? Or So no. But generally not. But so I can always eat. Like I said, I I've got competitive eater DNA. So I'm, like, 99% satiated eating like this. Okay. So you have to eat, like, a whole a bunch of, like, fibrous foods in order to really fill your belly up and Yeah. Yeah. But it's stuff but it's stuff I like. Everything I'm eating is stuff I like. There isn't anything here that's just for volume, and I don't like it. And then I'm forcing myself, and then I have the willpower. There's none of that. There are dates organic? As almost exclusively as much as I can. Okay. Does that have anything anything? I'm trying to limit pesticide burden, but then even what's organic, you could have organic pesticides. Like, rotenone is technically an organic pesticide, but I'm sure you know it. Complex one inhibitor, mitochondria. Technically, the pesticide burden should be less. In terms of nutrient density, this I think there are studies showing there's no difference conventional versus, organic. I'm saying have you seen any differences in your blood test from conventional and organic? I didn't properly control it to to see. Even the eating window. So I'm in that I shouldn't say I'm in the Brian Johnson boat, but I've my eating window has been relatively short for a couple of years, but not because it impacts yeah. But not because it impacts the biomarkers. So for me, I've been trying to optimize sleep for as long as possible. And, because of the fruits and vegetables, a heavy volume of water that I'm eating in the past, I'd wake up every couple of hours to pee and I'd wake up feeling like terrible. So shortening the eating window gives me more time to pee every or pee out more of it. So I wake up at most to pee maybe once, twice when I'm finally ready to wake up. Interesting. My eating window is pretty yeah. I don't have it's probably, like, a twelve hour. Like, it's pretty standard. It's not like some people where they're eating right before bed, but it's twelve hours. So this is interesting because for me, the gold standard in life extension studies in mice, for example, is circadian alignment, which is a sleep, making sure you get the sleep when the sun goes down, not a couple hours later. I never do that. I know. Fasting. Right? Fasting. So I know. I know. Probably more than most people. Most people have an even longer eating window. And then CR. Right? So for me, that's like the cornerstone, of the approach. Of those. I know. And your data, your Dunedin pace is better. Yeah. That's the thing is I by the way, I mean, out of those three, circadian rhythm, I should do, and it would be much better for me, but I just can't. I I don't I'm not in that situation where I can do it. Right? Either I'm traveling or there's nightlife here. It's just I can't do it. I'd have to live like a hermit if I was gonna do the Brian Johnson approach. I'm I'm just not willing to do that. So I have to unless it was, like, really I was like, okay. It's just completely impacted my life. I can't live. Then I would be like, okay. I gotta do it. But I, you know, I'm still okay even though I know it's, like, I'm okay with some damage because of the trade off, right, the benefits. But that's why I'm saying, like, I'd rather try to optimize as much as I can with supplements so that I can live a better life in other ways. Yeah. Yeah. You're doing a pretty good job. So, yeah, for me, it's that I'd burn myself out traveling too much, and I've got a few trips scheduled this year, and I'm it's gonna wreck I know it's gonna wreck me for a few days no matter how much I try to, quote, unquote, biohacker. Yeah. I know. A 100%. Alright. Cool. It was it's been very fun speaking to you. And but, yeah, thanks for coming out. What was your book again? Just so people know. Microbial Burden, a major cause of aging and age related disease and how to fight back. And then the YouTube channel where I'm biohacking every week, making videos. How long do you have the channel on YouTube for? Twenty twenty. Three three years. Okay. And that's called Aging or die trying. Aging or die trying. Okay. I like that. Awesome. Great talk to you. Take care. 67% of listeners aren't subscribed to the show, so please don't forget to show your support by hitting the subscribe button now. You'll not only be supporting the show, but also investing in yourself and your health journey, all while helping keep us ad free.