Hey, everyone. Today, we've got Chris Mann Loomis back on the channel for episode number three. You know Chris Mann. In case you missed episodes one and two, I'll link to those in the right corner. So what do we have today, Chris? What's on the agenda? So, thanks again, for the opportunity to be back. It's always great to talk to you, Mike. We've got three things I think we can talk about today. We can talk about, the unaging system, which I'm developing, some recent, hard news for me at least about, fasting and my latest research into that. And then last, I thought we would talk about, my disastrous summer and, how you should take care of your skin not doing what I did. So I I think those are the things we've got to talk about today. Alright. So the unaging systems. So this is more of a cardiovascular marathon hit training. So why don't you if you could detail what the so first of all, what's the backstory on that, and then what's the goal? And then if you could tell us about the people that were involved. So basically, you ran like your own little study. Mhmm. And then go through the results. So basically, from start to finish. So, yeah, telling us all about it. Thanks. So, so after I did the marathon, which I talked about in our last podcast, I was talking to one of my friends of mine who's not as, not as fit, hasn't done as much as a younger guy. And, he said that was really impressive. I'm inspired. I'd I'd like to do something, but I don't know what. I still get out of breath walking up a single flight of stairs. And, it was funny for me because I've been like, well, I've been talking about how to live your healthy life, what are the exercises you should do, what makes the most difference for longevity for a few years, with this, this friend and others. And yet they really hadn't quite understood where they could step into it to to start the thing or what they should do. So after talking to him, I thought, okay. Well, I'm gonna put together a program and a system and, actually help people to be them best their best selves. And the thing that I've always focused on very closely is how to get the most benefit for the least time. Because, if you're a a multimillionaire living in your house trying to optimize your longevity, it's easy to spend an hour every day doing exercise in your own personal gym. Right? No names named. But for most of us, it's hard to find the time to do these things. But I've been working to find what is the what are the key components of exercise that would enable you then to be able to do spend less like an hour and a half total time in a week and still be able to add twenty years to your life. So, and I realized that, just writing a blog about it saying you should you should do high intensity of real training. You should strength train. You should, walk more. You should eat the right foods and stuff wasn't really getting across to people because it's kind of like a everyone honestly knows that anyway. Right? It's not a mystery that you should be exercising, but lots of the advice out there is much more general. So instead, I decided to actually put it into a system and say, okay. We're going to build lifelong habits that will make you healthy today and live longer tomorrow. And we're going to build them in such a way that it actually helps you to build those habits as part of your life. So it's not just, sort of like a a thing that you're thinking about or you do it for, like, a week, and then you have the next thing so you stop doing the previous thing. So, I'm designing a a one year long plan. Right now, I'm in the testing phase as you mentioned. So I have, 15, friends here who are doing it with me, friends and acquaintances. And, we've already finished the first three months of it. The first three months of it, I call the cardio kickoff. And, actually, all 15 of them were able to finish it. And it's, it's really inspiring because they're at all levels of fitness. One of the things I had at the beginning is, okay, have you cardio trained before? Have you done high intensity interval training? Hit. And we had a good mix of all kinds of people. Some people, like my friend, who had difficulty climbing a set of stairs, had really done kind of nothing, had done no, consistent work. And so it was, set up a community for it. So we had a chat channel that we were talking about. I set up spreadsheets to track it. Other people could see sort of how the thing was going, and, people could encourage the the other people. And, we found it to be very important to, first of all, have tracking. So everyone who is in the program got themselves some kind of a, quantitative watch or something that would then tell them, how are you doing? What's your resting heart rate? What's your VO two max? An estimate. All the wearables have an estimate. Right? What's your, heart rate variability? And so then we use that to go throughout the entire, three month period of the first cardio kickoff to track and see, okay, how is it going? And even before that, people were starting to realize, first of all, in the first month, it was quite hard. As I said, only an hour and a half a week, but, an hour and a half a week of, some hard exercise is still quite hard. And, some of them were surprised that it was hard. I'm like, it's hard for me too. Like, if you're doing high intensity interval training, it's maximum effort. And my maximum effort is no easier than your maximum effort. It's always hard. So the way it was a challenge for the first week of it, but, let me share sort of the some of the the ways that how it went for people. So for instance, here we've got, this is in the very first, a comparison between, the heart rate. This is taken, I think, by a Garmin, and he's doing high intensive interval training. So this is, one of the people who is untrained at the start of it. And he's trying to run full out and then do a light jog and then full out in a light jog. And you can see at the start of the program, it's really hard to see that there's even any difference there between the full effort and sort of the light jogs. But by the end of it, three months later, you can say, oh, wow. Like, first of all, when he does the jog to start it, it doesn't even move basically his his metrics. And then you can see that he's got these very clearly defined peaks and goes through that and then is able to rest after that. His heart rate recovers very quickly, which is, you know, is a is a sign of being, well trained and adapted to the exercise. So I was, really happy going through it. The people there gave about 93% of them gave it a four or a five out of a five scale rating. They had improved metrics throughout in their, v o two max, their resting heart rate, their heart rate variability. And I got a lot of fun Kielmots at the the feedback, from the group, sort of like talking and hearing how it's going for other people, hearing about other people suffering and triumphs, and also the the flexibility of, finding places, different ways to exercises and supporting each other to say, okay. Well, not everything has to be a run. Some of the people didn't like running, and so they would define a different, way of getting in their high intensity exercise, but always making sure to be consistent about that. So that was just the first, segment of it. Now we're already in the second, quarter of it, which is the strength challenge. So they've already dialed some of that high intensity interval back to be in a maintenance phase where they can continue to grow up at a slower pace. But that habit now is well established. Now for them, that's just kind of a a weekly thing that they do every week. And now we're getting in very deep and focusing on the strength training, what it is to have a maximally efficient time efficient strength training that you can do kind of just, in a few visits a week and yet still get significant gains during that period. So I'm, I'm really excited about it as, I've felt like, this is the first time that the advice that I've had is really making an impact. So I'm, testing with my friends with, these about 15 people, and and I'm hoping to have a large number of people who will test, this in the year of 2025. So I'm currently accepting preregistrations. For people who are interested, you can go to unaging.com and go to the unaging system and sign up there and, participate in it. The the program's all free. My my personal benchmark, because I like to keep track of it, is how many years of life has the research that I've done saved. Right? So this is 15 people. Okay. Twenty years per person. That's about three hundred years of life from these initial 15 people. Oh, wait. Couple quick questions, Chris. Go ahead. So the, the plot you showed with the, average heart rate, you know, and then the person right? So that's beautiful data. I wonder if so were there, physical and cognitive benefits or any benefits that the person notice that they felt better? Because so you'd assume left to right, you're, obviously, you're more cardiovascularly fit on the right versus the left. Right? So, was was there subjective feelings of improvement where they could feel that difference, or this is just something that that they've got going on in the inside? They don't even know it. Subjectively, they're the same. No. The the people definitely noticed it. One of the one of the guys who had had not done training before, basically, he he, he was doing runs because that was the best way to measure the heart rate things. And, basically, every week, he would have a new record, personal best record for the fastest he'd ever run. And I I noticed it with other fellows as well. The the fellow who had had trouble climbing the stairs by the end of it, we went on a a bit of a travel through the city of Tokyo together. And he was right on my heels, as we're going up and down stairs, throughout the stations. And it was immediately apparent that these are different people sort of than, as far as their ability to just move through the world had been significantly changed. Yeah. So the the numbers were kind of a nice way to keep track of it, but, the feedback that I got is that very much it was they just felt more comfortable and effortless, moving through their daily lives. Cool. And then, also, how did you how did each person or maybe you did prescribe their fitness days. Right? So were you using, like, HRV, resting heart rate to guide it, or it was just feel that, you know, you had you had a set was it you had a set time? It was the hour and a half a week. That was the goal. Or it was as many days as you can can get in get in. Like, so what was the prescription? How were people prescribed? Because I'm sure that there was a range of some people maybe did more than a hundred and fifty minutes per week. Maybe some people did less. So how is that how how did you come to or how did they come to that prescription? So, there was this, a protocol that was shared for everyone as far as amount of minutes of high intensity and low intensity. But the protocol started out a little bit less actually than an hour and a half as they worked into it. One of the things that I'll be adapting is that I really want this to be available to everyone. We did have some people who were very much out of shape, who was a real challenge for. And, from the feedback I got from them, and they still were able to complete the challenge is that they said, okay. Look. When I started, there was no high intensity. I was just doing the running or whatever it was, and that was enough. But by the end of three week three months, they were able to do that. So each person was able to, I mean, select for what they could do, and work through. But there was no, timing of it. Because of the outset of it, honestly, an hour and a half a week is not much. You would be doing two to three hours of yourself right now. Right? Depending on sort of your, biometrics. So because it was low enough, I felt comfortable saying, when you have the time. And, one of the things about aerobic exercises as well, is that, aerobic is pretty much straight linear. Like, as long as you're doing the time in the week and you're not doing too much, and you can do up to about I think I figured out before is about two and a half hours of high intensity total time before you start to crater. At that point, then you're no longer getting the benefit of the high intensity and your performance starts to degrade. But we were far below that for the entire time. So, as a result, they're able to time it when it worked for them in their schedule. They also eventually figured out that you didn't actually have to put a day between a rest between aerobic exercise. You can do that two days in a row. And in fact, if you want to, you can do two exercise, two workouts in a row. So they're like, wait. You mean I could just do an hour and a half and just be done in one like, on Monday of the week? And I'm like, you can. It's not fun, but I'm not going to tell you it won't work. So, not I don't think anyone ever took up that, challenge. But I did have guys who, like, the week got busy or something. And so instead on the Sunday, they would do an hour of, workout instead of doing two days or half hour. So it was very up much up to them on how they felt, but also what they were able to schedule in the work, within the week. Because it very much it's supposed to be something that you do, to help you live the rest of your life better as opposed to the new focus of your life. Yeah. That's great. So since you have the data, I mean, technically, you could compare for the people who did, you know, the hour and a half in one session, an hour a couple times a week, and then the twenty minuteers. Right? Mhmm. Even though it's you have a I think you said 15 people. Mhmm. Which approach may be best for, you know, improvements in cardiovascular fitness, whether it's, you know, HRV, resting heart rate, the average heart rate, you know, technically, you could compare. So for the person who says, I wanna do an hour and a half session per week. If you've got a group of people, what you do, that are doing twenty minutes a day, you could say, look. The twenty now granted, you have other factors, like, is is there weight loss? Are there is it adjusted for age and sex and all this other stuff. Right? But Right. You know, you could say, look. The twenty minute group had maybe it's true. Whatever the data went be maybe I'm presuming it. Right? But if the twenty minute group had better gains relative to the once per week or twice per week versus five or six days of shorter Mhmm. You could say, well, why not give this a try too and see how your body adapts? Maybe your body is more physiologically adapt to shorter more often. And then you could even go conversely. Right? So for the people who are doing twenty minutes a week, would they benefit? Like, what is the best approach at the end? I I get I get I get what you're you know, this is great, you know, as a start. Right? But my analytical brain wants to wanna try all the Yeah. Right. You know? So and maybe that's something down the road. At the beginning, it's it's it's it's behavioral modification and being able to consistently do these things over time forever. Right? Because which goes into my, you know, the idea of lives years of lives saved. Right? So Mhmm. Does three months of improving fitness translate for, you know, another fifty plus years, you know Mhmm. You know, so midlife rapamycin extends lifespan, right, just for a short period of time. So Mhmm. Does improving your fitness for three months, does that carry or you've gotta you've gotta maintain it. You've gotta do it consistently over the next, you know, fifty years to gain those benefits. So, no, it's a great start. Don't get me wrong. But Mhmm. You know, I wouldn't jump the gun on saying, you know, how many lives yet. You know, it's Oh, you're you're absolutely right. So I don't, if they start and stop, there's no I don't I don't think you you get any credit for that. I mean, high school athletes don't live that much appreciably longer, I think, than, people who never were athletes. So the the design behind it as a result of that is that, for instance, the the high intensity interval training then continues throughout the entire year. The first year the first, three months is spent establishing the habit, learning how to do it, getting comfortable with it. And then it's maintained throughout that entire year, so then it's a lifelong habit. Because as you point out, if they it's not you don't get that much life saving if you stop it. But if you continue that for a half hour or so a week for the rest of your life, consistency is is the winner in the the marathon of life. So I don't know about the, for the the trial that we did. I don't have enough data yet to make a distinction between the one hour a day versus the twenty minutes a day. Hopefully, maybe if when we have a 100 people or a thousand people participating, then I'll be able to do more analysis on those kind of things. Yeah. Believe it or not, even though I'm technically in the hour and a half twice a week, the twenty minutes or thirty minutes per day, that's probably gonna be gonna be the better group where they end up with fast either it's faster gains with less overtraining or, you know, just, you know, higher heart rate variability, lower resting heart rate. That would be my bet even though technically I'm not in that category yet. So we'll see how it plays out. Alright. So, strength. So what's the what's the, are you focusing on compound movements? Is it the same twenty minutes session? So what's the strategy in terms of, designing the approach there? So once again, we're looking at the the maximizing the immediate health and and all time and long term longevity. So for the strength end, we're we're dealing, basically take, from the they've been doing three high intensity workouts. So we take, two of those out and replace them with a strength training, and it's a half hour each time. So this is the optimal amount. When you look at the longevity studies for what gets you the most longevity out of strength training, it's very clear that the correct answer is an hour total time per week. So okay. So now we have half an hour of high intensity interval training, and then we add into that an hour of strength training in two sessions. And so very much so as you as you appropriately guessed, for the strength training, it's mostly focused on the compound movements. If you're only doing a half an hour and you wanna do a full body workout, then very much you wanna be getting into the big exercises. So we've been focusing on that quite a bit, and I have actually been meeting with every single person, in a one to one weightlifting session just to say, okay. Let's talk about this. This is how you do this. This is how you do, the big exercises, the bench, lat pull downs or rows for back. So a push, a pull, and also a leg exercise. And the leg exercise as much as possible focusing on just straight dead lifts and squats. Because those are great exercises, as you know, that are gonna give you a lot of stimulation for the strength training for them. And therefore, they're exercises that require precise form in order to do them safely and well. So I've I've got, some documents that I've been sharing with everyone. I've been going, okay. This is Ripto's YouTube guide on how to do a squat. This is Ripto's YouTube guide. He's one of the the, experts on, weight lifting of how to do deadlifts. And then I go and meet with them, and then we've also been talking through that to make sure that they have their form run. And it's really just three exercises, a push, a pull, and a leg exercise. And they get to pick sort of what they do with what they have around them. One fellow for a while was working, with kettlebells, basically, as his primary exercise. Another one has a holding gym, and he's using dumbbells for all of them. Many of them, then go to the gym and have been going to the gym learning how to use the the, squat bar and squat rack and then also be doing the deadlifts and things. So, people have been able to do it, but the fun the foundation is what I found that really helps people to say, okay. Look. These are the three exercises. We're doing it twice a week. It's half an hour, and we do that for the next three months. And then the goal is as many sets and reps within that thirty minute period, or is it, you know, x amount of each? So five sets of bench, five, you know, five five five it's it's just as much as you can do in that thirty minute span. Oh, we've got it all. I made a spreadsheet to track it for everyone, and then we've got a progress board so you can see basically how everyone is doing. And, I wasn't sure about the progress board. Right? Like, that's kind of part of the social aspect of it. But, many people found it very motivating actually to see, okay. Everybody else is doing this. Right? Like, I should be updating my, progress board. And, I use, one of the common weightlifting formulas then to calculate what the one rep max is. So if you, say, bench press 50 kilograms, or I can't do that off, I have in pounds, like, 50 kilograms, for 10 reps, then, there's formulas on the Internet that will calculate for you then what your probable one rep max is, what the maximum you could lift at one time is. And so then that gives you comparison. So if one day you do, say, 50 kilograms for 12 reps, and then the next day you do 55 kilograms for 10 reps, you can know whether you are effectively doing more weightlifting, whether you worked harder. And so then the spreadsheet then gives tracking for that for every exercise and shows how you did and then also shows how everyone else did so that you can see and kinda feel how you're doing. And everyone's been able to put that in and sort of entered it with their own thing, but it gives a structure to just say, okay. Look. We're doing three sets. They use three exercises, and you basically find something so that you should be struggling to finish on the last, reps of the last set. And after that, then you sort of select what works for you with the environment that you have. So, generally, there's about a three rep loss for each 10 pound increase. So if you're doing 10 reps at 50 kilograms well, let's say 50 pounds because it's easy for me, my double American brain, that think in pounds. Sure. I'd have to so it's a 100 50 kilograms is a 110 pounds. 2.2 anyway, so that so, 50 pounds, if you're doing 10 reps, a 100 pounds. Right? Mhmm. So, it's generally, your one RM would probably be around one thirty. So you just one ten, you could probably do one ten for seven, one twenty four, and then one one thirty for three. But that's just the general, you know, ballpark, estimate. So it's it's I think you said three sets of each exercise, so nine sets sets in that thirty minute, span. Yeah. So, you know, even even though it's only thirty minutes, technically, you know, it's you can do it where it's supersetted, and there may be people who are doing more than or can do more than nine sets. So for example, my workouts is are essentially circuit training based. So I'm not training for my one RM. I'm trying to keep it in that tendon while I do lower rep ranges sometimes, but still it's circuit training based where it's it's constant movement the whole time. It's not one set, wait three minutes, do another set. You know? So you could and probably get a pretty strong cardiovascular stimulus granted not as much as doing an all out sprint Mhmm. For twenty, thirty, forty seconds, whatever it is. But, so is it geared are you trying to do, like, a circuit training based workout or it's only nine sets? As long as you get those nine sets, just chill. You're good. So at at this point and, I mean, there's a there's a a flow of information as we're going through it. So that's one of the other things that I've worked to help support people and kind of keep them aware of the challenge and keep it interesting. Right? So, we don't say this is the this is what you're doing and then have them do it for, twelve weeks and then say, good job, and here there's the next challenge. So as we're going through it so, for instance, I hope well, I mean, if they're watching it, it's fine. I haven't actually talked about supersetting yet because it's a great idea as you point out, and it's a good way to compress the total amount of time. I was, planning to, tell them about that in, after the first two months are done. So at the beginning of the third month, I would say, by the way, you can further compress the amount of time that you take to do this by doing supersetting, which is then getting give you more benefits to reach them, and you don't need to put spend as much time waiting between. But, for this point at least, especially, I mean, in the first month was honestly most people were kind of figuring out getting a gym membership. Like, where do I do this? What are these exercises like? How do I enter into the spreadsheet? The second month now, I feel like they're starting to really hit the hit the road. Many of them are taking creatine, which is one of the things I offered is like extra credit. This is going to help you to lift. It's pretty harmless, and we'll definitely give you more rep reps. But that sort of, gives them something to work with so that it it continues, injures them. But, the offer though of, like, doing more things, they totally could. But the drive is to do is to say, this is what you pardon me. This is what you need to do. And once you do this, you're done. You get out of the gym. This is not of course, you could do more, but, honestly, it's gonna start to get more less healthy if you're doing more than a total time of an hour. And, like, that's an hour, I think, of normal people exercise. And as we talked about, compound exercises are much more stressful than normal exercise. So I've actually and many of them do do much more exercise. Some of them have said, you want me to exercise three times a week for thirty or two times a week for thirty minutes. I already do it every day. And I've been like, hey. Great. But my my advice is to say you don't need to do that much. This is a long term thing. You're already going to gain even just doing it twice a week. And so the program is just to do the three sets and superset them if you will to save more time and then to get on with your day. Alright. So then the third aspect, which I know is generally underrated in your approach is, you know, the flexibility training. And Mhmm. So paper was recently published, and I'm probably gonna make a video on this at some point. But they actually looked at, there's a a standard way to assess flexibility Mhmm. Of, I think, you know, all the major joints, ankle, knee, hip, shoulder, trunk. Mhmm. And so they looked at that in association with your favorite measure, all cause mortality risk. And as expected Mhmm. Lower a lower range of motion. So they're they're going on full range of motion like that and a scoring system based on that. So even like risk range of motion was a part of the equation. So so they sum the range of motion scores across all of the major joints and I think they it was something like 20 joints, which is crazy. And then looked at all cause mortality risk and as expected, you know, the the worse your flexibility score for the total, the higher risk for all cause mortality. So, any any plans to include some kind of flexibility training, you know, into the approach? Right. So, the, the the irony of it is is they've had a head to head, randomized controlled test where they had one group of people who's doing classic stretching. We're gonna be doing leg stretching and kinda bend over and reaching toes and that kind of thing. And another group doing strength training. So they're doing deadlifts and squats. And they found actually the people doing the strength training gained more flexibility than the people who were doing the stretching. So when I hear that, I'm like, okay. I'm good. And, actually, I I when you mentioned that study, I'm like, that sounds fascinating. If they're going into all cause mortality, that is my metric of choice. But I don't know then if it's, if they're the people who were flexible. Did they get that from doing stretching? Or did they get that from doing strength training, which could be just as good and also giving you the benefit? My my my desire is to find things as optimally as they can. So if you can get the stretching from doing the strength training, I think that's just the win. I haven't seen otherwise. So I'm interested in the study, of course, to see how it kinda lines up with other things. I have, one friend, who thinks that, to be truly athletic, you must be able to do the splits, Jean Claude Van Damme style. And so he's he's works on that and puts effort into that. And I'm like, I don't think there's all cause mortality tied to Jean Claude, you know, like, being able to do the splits between two trucks driving backwards. But, but if it's something that's key to you, then that's something that I'm also want to to bring into the program. As we come into the later stages of it, I'm, looking forward to working with people and finding, okay, what do you like, we're gonna give people the background so that they've got the exercise and they know how to do the routine. And then I wanna say, okay. What is it what would it be for you to be truly fit and to feel like you're meeting your maximum potential? And towards the end of it, I hope to help people focus on that. So, maybe I will be adding the stretching program at the end. I don't know. So I I don't disagree with the the data on static steps stretching versus the active movements. Mhmm. And even if you take, like, a static stretch, like, for a squat without being weighted. Right? So if you're just gonna try to stretch in a squat position, now you add a little bit of weight to a squat, you know, with whether it's a bar holding kettlebells or holding some weights. So you're gonna get an increased stimulus. You're building strength throughout that full range of motion, which should further improve your range of motion in that given movement. So I see how it makes sense where the, the weight lifting can be a better approach than the static movements. But, for example, if I think most people are focused only on the compound movements, so there are gonna be ranges of motion where they may be limited in. For example, you know, trunk trunk mobility stiffens during aging. So your ability to basically form an l. Right? So you're standing up like a good morning, and then you're able to just Mhmm. Basically, legs are straight. You're able to go there. Mhmm. So lower back gets weaker and your flexibility in the so unless people are training that, it's probably gonna get more stiff. And, that stiffness in that region increases, stress on the discs. So then even simple lifting movements may become, you know, more risky because now you're stiffer in that in that range of motion, and in the region. So, anyway, I I think it's a huge part of the I've trained clients in the past when I was a fitness trainer twenty years ago. People in their seventies and eighties who never trained, you know, outside even of squats, just the like I said, just trunk mobility. And just being able for them to go from a standing up position to even, like, 15 degrees of flex trunk flexion was was a challenge. So and that's gonna affect quality of life. Like, if you can barely move, how would a squat a squat wouldn't, take care of that range of motion, you know, nor would a bench press or a row. So, I find huge value. Granted, this doesn't mean you've gotta be a yoga instructor or John Claude John Claude Van Damme doing the splits. Uh-huh. Even though that is the ideal. You know? So, when you think about too, just taking this to a separate place, like, athletes, elite athletes who have strength through a full range of motion, not just static stretching, but strength in each movement. So if you're a basketball player and you actually train ankle mobility expecting that you're gonna roll your ankle at some point, but strengthening through those potential ranges of motion, your injury risk is gonna be limited. And a big part of consistency is minimizing injury. So if your joints are all flexible through a, strong and flexible through a full range of motion, you'd probably minimize injury risk, which should be good for, you know, consistency and training and, you know, dot dot dot potentially longevity. So Yeah. Like, the specific training for things is a is a great idea. In general, I I like to try and, and and I don't know. I'm I'm interested to hear, like, what you talked about about working with people who are 70 or 80 years old. I do have some people who I've worked with on that, but they're exceptionally athletic ones. So I'm not seeing seeing that kind of thing that you're talking about where they can't even do a little bit of a bow. But we'll see. I have, some of the people that I'm working with are are older than I and are having more kind of a challenge of the, posture for, say, the deadlift. And so I'm, hopeful that the the deadlift and sort of, like, learning how to get the posture right where your shoulders are down and back and that you're basically pulling up through, will help them with some of their posture challenges as they're getting older. The the strength training is doesn't actually add as much longevity as the, high intensity or some of the other things that we'll be doing. But, as far as quality of life stuff that you talk about, right, like, being able to have good posture and stay, looking vital and be able to put your suitcase on the overhead rack, these kind of things are or carry grandkids or whatever it is, as Peter Attia talks about, are very important. And the strength to deal with them, I think, is gonna be a big deal. Yeah. It's something it's something worth watching. Not just that. Picking stuff up off the floor is basically, it's a granted, it's a flexibility movement, but there is some strength there because if you don't actively train Yeah. That movement, which is trunk flexion Mhmm. And okay. Let's assume that you bend your knees, you know, when you do that. Maybe I don't because I'm still trying to I'm doing a hamstring stretch from picking something up off the floor. It's like an extra That's supposed to be good. Right? Like, I like, when I'm doing my laundry sometimes, like, I try and do the the backbend, right, so that I get the Yeah. The full hamstring stretch out of it. Yeah. But if for most people, they're not training that and and aren't practicing it or have limited or poor flexibility hamstring lower back. So there's gonna I know. Maybe I'm repeating, but there could be a point at later in life where the back is so weak and untrained and lacks flexibility where, oh, now you've got a herniated disc because even just a small amount amount of movement isn't is a strain on the discs. Whereas, you know, if you properly trained it, for decades, maybe not so much. Anyway But I I include it. I include it. I have Yeah. But I essential. So for me, I, I mean, confessions. I I never stretch ever. And, and I was paying the price for that ten years ago. Before I started doing the weightlifting, I couldn't touch my toes. And, since then, I've gotten back into the squats and the deadlifts. And now I have no problem picking things off the floor or touching my toes. So and that's without ever well, it's with never doing any stretching whatsoever. So I think it I think that it's a different road, but I think it can get some of that flexibility back where you most need it in the functional ability. Yep. Definitely. Definitely. Definitely. Alright. So next up, fasting. Okay. You've got some nightmare a nightmare story or stories on fasting here. Yeah. Well, it it's only for I mean, it's only for me maybe because, I have a long history of it. So let's see here. Hold on. I'm gonna come and, start bringing up some of the research that I did. This has actually all come up because of a blog post. Yep. So I was, looking at some of the the blog posts and, seeing that, some of the longevity and health experts, Peter Attia, Rhonda Patrick, had, looking were looking negatively at fasting. And they thought it was a good thing before, and it was gonna help them to live for such a long time, and they decided, well, maybe not. So then they started to talk about, look, if you do fasting, you start to lose muscle, and it can be very difficult. So this is a study specifically from Peter Attia's website. It's hosted there. And it talked about doing fasting. And this is intermittent fasting, which is to say that you within a week, you pick several days where you fast, don't eat anything for the entire day. And, specifically, these people ate zero calories on the fasting day. So it was a strict fast. So the result that he talks about when he says you lose muscle are basically these results here where you can see we have three groups here where one group has got, is doing calorie restrictions. This is just basically dieting, and they're doing 75% every day. So they're eating at 25% less than they would normally eat if they could eat what they wanted. And then we have an alternate day fasting. So these are people who are fasting every other day and then eating. And they're fast they're eating zero on the fasting days and a 150% of calories. So 50% more than normal on the days they eat. And then we have a third group where these people are doing alternate day fasting, but they're eating 200% of calories on the days that they're eating. So for them, you can see here that we have this is the the lean mass loss and the fat loss. So the people who are doing calorie restriction, and these are healthy people, by the way. These are already people who have a BMI under twenty five. They're lean people. They're basically losing all fat. So they're doing a great job. They're happy. They're losing just a little bit of lean muscle. But then the, the group that's doing the all day fasting is losing half of that is lean mass and half of it's fat. And then for the people who are getting all the calories they need, then they're not losing the fat. They're just losing muscle. And so you can understand why, someone would look at this and say, okay. This is a terrible deal. But, I had been fasting actually doing five two fasting, which is where you fast two days every week, for about ten years. And this was about the first five years was what I was doing was a protocol kind of like these where I would go to zero strict calorie, nothing. And I found just what they talked about. I found that I was losing a lot of muscle. Yes. I could rebuild it back, but I wasn't really maintaining as much as I wanted to. And that, continued for a while until I went and, read a nutrition book. There it is right there, my nutrition book behind me. And, realized that, one of the limitations of getting zero calories is that there are almost all the cells in your bodies have mitochondria and can use fat for energy. But the keyword there is almost all the cells in your body. The red blood cells in your body, do not have mitochondria, and they can only survive with sugar for energy. So when you're in ketosis and you have ketones circling through your body, they can't use any of that. They have to rely in your liver to basically catabolize to eat your muscles and make them into sugar so that the red blood cells don't die. So this is why with this kind of a protocol where you're going to zero for your fasting days, you're going to be losing a lot of lean mass in your muscles. Days, you're going to be losing a lot of lean mass in your muscles. So another study then that is more like the protocol that I use where instead they're going with a, 25% of calories, maybe 300 or 400 or so. So here's an another study, and this one was done with young overweight women, but it's another study pretty similar. It's about, six months long. And they were go also going on fasting and compared against people who are doing calorie restriction of just 25% less than what they would normally eat. And you can see here the results are quite different. So they're doing, again, 25% reductions of 75 of their calorie intake. And then they're doing intermittent fasting. So five two fasting. So two days, they would have 27%. So 300 or 400, 500 calories a day. And the other days, they would eat just slightly less than usual so that the both, programs are getting the same calorie intake. But you can see as far as the lean mass versus the fat mass here that much better if you get just a little bit of calories on your fasting days that you're doing a much better job of cutting the fat and saving the muscle that you want to keep. So I've been doing this for about five years and was feeling like I was winning the game, and I'm keeping my, weight where I want it to be by doing the fasting. But when I'm writing the article about, fasting, I also wanted to cover, time restricted fasting. So time restricted fasting, instead of fasting a whole day, you say within a day, I wanna compress the time that I'm eating. So I'm only eating, let's say, from 8AM until, two in the afternoon or something or, like, an eight hour kind of fast sort of thing or maybe until 4PM or something. So when I started to look at that, I found a study that said, basically, breakfast is really important. So here's another study where they looked at the randomized control for time restricted eating. And they had here, some people who are doing early time restricted feeding. So they were eating in the breakfast, lunch, and an early dinner at, like, 4PM. And midday time restricted feeding where they were eating at noon starting with lunch and then having a dinner at, say, four and then a separate 08:00 or something. And the results were quite, stark despite both of them eating in the same time restricted window. We find that basically, if you look at the body weight or the percentage of body fat or the body fat mass, only the early people had a significant difference from the control. So despite both of them eating in about the same kind of a time window, the only people who had the benefit for their effort was in losing fat and losing weight was the people who were eating breakfast and eating an early dinner or skipping dinner. So as I read this, I'm like, okay. This is interesting. So if you're doing time restricted fasting to lose weight, you need to be doing it in the morning and skipping dinner. But then I said, okay. Well, let me look. How much, like, I know that you should eat breakfast. If you don't eat breakfast, you'll probably die faster with an increased premature death. But if you don't eat dinner, how much life do you gain? Like, I assume it's better to always skip dinner. So then I found this study, which told me I was wrong about all of that. This is the meal skipping and shorter meal intervals. And this study went, with the NHANES, study of diet, which is about a 150,000 person years of data. And it's quite thorough. It's a American dataset. And going through exactly what it is that, people ate, whether they ate breakfast, whether they ate lunch, whether they ate dinner, how much time was between them, and then it tracks over fifteen to twenty years or so whether they died early or not. And this one, surprised me quite a bit because I've said, okay. Well, look. Here we go. Yes. If you don't eat breakfast, you'll have about a ten percent increase in all cause mortality or premature death. But that's just the start of it. If you skip lunch, you're gonna have about twelve percent increase in premature death. And if you skip dinner, you're going to have about a sixteen percent increase in a premature death. So this surprised me greatly because this is the opposite of what I had expected. I had thought that this would be okay. Skipping breakfast is bad. Lunch is so so, and skipping dinner is a good thing. Right? Sort of the old idea of eating a very, very small lunch or skipping or skipping a dinner entirely is a healthy thing. But in fact, all of them have about a ten percent increase in all cause mortality in the hazard ratio. And the study then goes on to say, in fact, you just should eat more meals a day. Like, using three meals a day is the standard. If you only eat two meals a day, we have about a seven percent increase. So it's just skipping one meal will cost you about a seven percent increase in premature death, shortened life. And if you eat only one meal a day or OMAD, you now have a 30% increase in all cause mortality. So and and even on the other side of it, if you're eating four meals a day, so you eat an extra meal on top of that, now you actually have better than the people who have three meals a day. Now you have it's a trend. It's not significant. But now you have about a nine percent reduction in all cause mortality. So when I looked at this, it's it was hard for me to justify going from this that if you're eating, three meals is good, two meals is not as good, and one meal is bad, that eating zero meals a day was going to be better. So, this I basically now have changed my entire approach to fasting. And now I realize that the the healthiest diet, if you will, is to get constant food in small doses throughout the day. Another, stat from the same study is that if you eat your meals too closely together, less than four and a half hours apart, then you have a seventeen percent increase in all cause mortality. So, again, this is very bad. So I realized that basically by skipping two meals every week, I was increasing the amount of food that I would eat at the other meals by about 40%, which then, if you remember from the the all cause or the the fasting before, I'll skip back to it, that if you look at this, you can see that even though this person was eating 200% of the calories, they were still losing weight. So your body is just not as metabolically efficient when you have too much food coming into it at the same time. So I've now, as of next week, I'm going to be stopping my ten year habit of five two fasting and, learning how to eat three square meals a day. I don't think I'm gonna go to four, but at least three squares of meals a day. And, eat with more reserve because one of the parts of fasting two days a week is you feel like you can eat, as much as you want the other days because you've already had a a significant reduction in your overall calorie count. But, it was, quite a shock for me, but, I live I I live by the all cause mortality, die by the all cause mortality. So, I mean, it's it's about a 10% difference. To put it in perspective, this is about the amount of benefits you get from eating three vegetables a day or eating two pieces of fruit a day. It's not as much benefit as you would get from strength training or doing high intensity interval. But at the same time, fasting would put me out of out of, sync with the rest of the world. And so I always felt like I was kind of doing something a little different. They're going off to lunch. I'm like, I'm gonna have a coffee with milk. See you later. So it's I'm looking forward to actually having more of a normal lifestyle to say that I'm eating sort of the meals that are common with everyone, and, hopefully, we'll get some better health and longevity and blood work out of it as well. Alright. Wait. So there may be some good news. May maybe you don't have to change the whole story yet. So Yeah. Okay. Let let's start all the way at the bat. Let's start all I took notes. So first was, how did they assess, lean mass? Is this DEXA or CT MRI? It's a good question. It's, and to be precise, they, had fat, and then they had fat free mass. Right? So Yeah. If they were losing bone mass or other things, that would also be counted as this. But, I don't think they had dex. It was probably done, with an elect electroimpedance instead. Yeah. So not as good. But did not that it is what it is. So that that's one. Number two is whole body lean mass, if this also included bone Mhmm. That's not necessarily ideal. If you're gonna look at lean and and also, so whole body lean mass doesn't just include muscle. Right? You've got organ weights there. You've got connective tissue. Mhmm. So we don't know that the quote unquote loss in lean mass is specific to muscle. Now Mhmm. If if they one way that, studies can get around this is by looking at appendicular lean mass. So lean mass of the arms and legs because no organs, you do have some connective tissue and that highly strongly correlates with actual muscle mass measurements. Mhmm. So I I haven't looked into this study, but, it's possible to have changes in lean mass and not have changes in muscle mass. So that that's that's one thing. And now note that granted I'm in that continuous CR group. You know, I'm just playing devil's advocate here, you know, where Okay. Yeah. I don't have any skin in the game. I'm just trying to trying to be objective and and, you know, not jump to, you know, the Peter and Rhonda conclusions of fasting is quote, unquote bad. So another factor to consider too in these studies is, and I didn't look at them, but, you know, if you're fasting so I think I think the assumption when people are fasting is it's gonna lead you to lose weight because you eat less. Right? So you're fasting, you're eating less, but it what about the overcompensation on the days when you actually have food. Right? So Right. And there are animal studies where if, you know, you it's not CR, but if you take food away for one day and then you leave the food there the next day, they actually double on the next day and end up pretty close to eucalypt. So the assumption with the fasting, studies and I think fasting in the pop culture all over the interwebs is, hey. If you're fasting, you're gonna lose weight because you're gonna eat less. That's not That doesn't necessarily have to be the case. Right. Anecdotally anecdotally, I can say that I've had days in the distant past where I'd eat six, seven, 8,000 calories in a day Mhmm. And eat it pretty early in the day and then fast for the rest of the day. Uh-huh. Technically, I'm fasting. Right? Right. Or or or or, eat, you know, six, seven, 8,000 calories that day, fast for the rest of the day, try to fast for the next day. So, technically, I'm in that fasting window too, but I'm in a caloric excess. So I don't know how carefully these studies are controlled for calorie intake, which is a huge part of that equation, which is which goes back to this is why I favor for me. Mhmm. And maybe different for others. If it works for others and your biomarkers are good, I'd say go for it. Mhmm. I wouldn't these are small randomized controls, studies in other people which can be a good guide, which could be representative of the population based average. But if being on a given fasting approach like in your case, five two helps you maintain a lean body weight Mhmm. And and which is a big part of this story. If that helps you stick to a calorie goal over a long period of time and stay lean, which is a big part of fitness and health and longevity, I'd say keep it there. And if you change your approach or anybody changes their approach and that messes up the system where now it's harder to maintain that caloric, you know, whether it's close to maintenance or below and stay lean, I'd say don't do it. Even even if the study show otherwise in in RCTs of other people, you know, it's all about, does that translate to you? So in my case, the time restricted feeding, I'm not doing it for any purported metabolic benefits or, you know, in my case, because the diet is so rich in fruits and vegetables. If I eat later than, you know, one ish, or the majority of it by one ish Mhmm. I'm waking up more in the middle of the night. It's bad for my sleep quality. If it's bad for my sleep quality, I feel terrible in the morning. So for me, a shorter eating window is more beneficial. I don't see a difference in biomarkers. I've had the OMAD where it was six to six to 9PM at night. Uh-huh. Not not eating the whole day. Wow. It was terrible to my sleep, but, yeah, I I changed it not because of what the published study showed, but because it improved my sleep quality and and performance. So, I think I think sounding the alarm is is too early on that. You know, I think individuality and looking at biomarkers, you know, is is key. Yeah. Absolutely agree. So, thank you. I brought that up on my blog post, but I didn't bring it up in my talking here, because especially initially. Right? When you go to, time restricted feeding or, intermittent fasting, either one of them is going to alter your sort of habits, and it's gonna help you to lose weight, and can be a useful thing. That's one of the things I was using it for for many years. So absolutely agree. That is one of the benefits of it. And, that could be more than enough to make it worth it to someone. If that kind of having that routine of it to say, okay. Look. I'm gonna eat by this time. And then after that, I'm done eating for the day, and I've eaten the portion that I that I decide that is that I should be eating, then that's absolutely worth doing. And then as can give you enough benefit to more than all reset the fact that you might be eating a little more. And you're calorie restricted anyway. So for you, I see, I see good things all over. So, yes, I agree very much that it, depends on sort of how you do it. For myself, I'm fairly disciplined, and I'm I'm pretty sure that I'll be able to eat. Although other people who know me are less confident I'm going to be able to eat three meals a day and and not gain weight. But, I'm always up for a challenge. So I'm going to do my best and, try and do that. And, honestly, if it doesn't work, you're right. I'll be going back to fasting because it's more important that I maintain sort of the the body weight that I want to have, than worry about sort of maybe a 10%, loss here. I've got I've got some buffer. Yeah. And so assuming that the tenth 10% would translate to you. Right? I mean, we'd have to see Right. Some changes, you know, whether it's is it metabolic health that improves? Is it kidney function, liver function, inflammation? If none of that improves with the change in, you know, five two to eating more meals per day Mhmm. Is there really any benefit? Right? I I I'd like to see objective biomarkers rather than this blanket of if you eat five two or OMAD or x diet, you know, this is the all cause mortality. But I I prefer, you know, I prefer greater specificity. What's specifically improving? And if nothing changes Mhmm. Biochemically, have you really improved anything? Right? So that that's that's exactly, that's exactly right. And in the studies, one of the things that's interesting is that they as they work through them, it's okay. We've had this person doing fasting. We've had this person doing calorie restriction. And it's known that there are benefits of doing calorie restriction and losing weight. Even losing a few pounds or so, even if you're very overweight, losing a few pounds is a huge change in the metabolic systems. And they basically found that both fasting and calorie restriction, the benefits that they have is basically the calories you cut out. So that bay and so the the tricky part about that is is that, if you're no longer still losing calories and I had been doing fasting for ten years, and so I had my own habits of eating more on the other days to compensate once I had reached the weight that I wanted to be at. So especially if you are using it to lose weight or even just to keep weight off, then that can be something that's very important. And it seems to be that is almost entirely benefit. They talked about autophagy for a while. Right? The cleaning out of the cellular mechanisms within the cell and some other things. But at this point, there's been nothing that's really come up as convincing, as a unique and independent benefit out of it aside from the weight loss or control. Yeah. I agree. Weight loss is the biggest thing, but I think the individuality is the is the big key here that you mentioned. Right? And I think people trying the different approaches and see, you know, whether it's OMAD even if OMAD what you showed, OMAD may be bad for all cause mortality risk. But if OMAD leads you to eating less calories than you would usually would, I think that's a benefit regardless of what the studies and other people show. Right? So Yep. But I think the the key is finding which of the approaches works for you to be able to stay as lean as possible, to carry as little visceral fat as possible, abdominal, you know, obesity. Mhmm. And for it maybe it's not OMAD or maybe it's not five two. Maybe it is a CR, maybe, you know, mild CR. But I think trying all the different things is a big part of of figuring out what works at the individual, level. So another thing to note is Mhmm. Is, you know, aside from the it's hard to control these studies in people, and granted they're short term studies. Right? So five weeks or so. And granted looking at animal models isn't ideal because it's not people. But Mhmm. At least in in mice, you're all the variables are controlled. How much they're moving. Right? They're in a cage. They don't have generally, don't have an exercise wheel. You can control their calories. You can control when they eat and how much they eat. So the one of the longest, you know, calories if you calorie restrict mice, but then shorten their eating window and allow them to eat during their normal circadian rhythm, which is during the night, not during the day. Mice are nocturnal. Their circadian rhythm natural is nocturnal whereas ours is awake during the, you know, during the night, during the daytime and asleep during the nighttime. Mhmm. That's the longest lifespan extension relative to fasting alone. So, that's a big but all of the variables are controlled. They're not overeating. They're getting a set amount of calories, and they don't have a choice but to eat those set amount of calories. So Uh-huh. So I think so that's what the animal model said. To me, that suggests what could be possible in people. So that's actually the approach that I favor. But the other part too is satiety. Right? So, and, actually, there's two other variables here. Satiety. Right? So which of these dietary approaches in terms of how often to eat, how much to eat one meal a day or two, whatever it is, Are you satiated? Right? Mhmm. For me, I can end the eating window relatively early and be satiated without wanting to eat almost never the rest of the day. But if if I had to force myself where it's like, alright, I ended the eating window at one and now 05:00 has come around and I don't have any more calories, that may trigger a binge and that's detrimental to the whole approach. I generally don't have that because the diet is satiating. So making sure your diet is satiating on any approach to be able to maintain maintain those calorie goals, is a big part of it. Now the other thing too about fasting and lean mass or fasting and muscle mass Mhmm. In my case, and I can't say if this is true for others, one reason I don't prefer the very long fast aside from the, you know, the ending the eating window early, you know, one ish and then going for the next day. That's basically a daily fast of, you know, fifteen, sixteen hours. In the past when I've gone beyond that, when it comes to doing a workout, I have malaise. I don't wanna do the workout. It's hard to be motivated, and that's gonna affect workout performance. And for me, my vitality comes from the workouts. If a workout performance is suffering, I'm technically on the road to declining function over time, and that's, you know, the antithesis of what I want. So that's just for me. Maybe for some people doing a long fast or fasted cardio, I can't even do that. I don't wanna do that either. Mhmm. It it affects my my motivation negatively. So I hate to say it it comes down to figuring out what works for you, but, you know, but that is. You know, figuring out what works for you with the fasting approach, with the with the calorie intake approach, with satiety, that all factors in for, you know, for me. Yeah. That's, it's a good point. Like, for me, I eventually like, you get used to it. Right? I think there's a certain period where you kind of, set into a new habit. And, like, hunger is one of those things. Like, if you if you eat a cookie every day at three and then one day you don't, boy, you really want a cookie at 03:00. So I didn't find that. I for me, I find I'm able to work out on my fasting days as well as other days. And I was able to go through that, although, my strength is usually down. I'm especially noticing that now. But now that I'm not doing fasting, maybe maybe we'll have a bit of a change for it. Yeah. It's, it's it's interesting. Kinda we all have our own ways of, adapting to these things. And I think there's a giving it a try of a few things and then seeing what it is that works best for you personally is very valuable. Yeah. Definitely. Alright. Next up, skin. What do you got on skin? Well, I mean, I I'm gonna start this one out with another confession. This summer, I went to the beach, and I scorched myself terribly. I just don't I don't even I mean, I was I I read a blog post on and everything. Here's how you should do sunscreen. This is how it works. You know, it's so important that you put this on. Right? And I went out to the beach. Then I'm just there with my friends. A typhoon has just come through, so we have some beautiful one meter high waves, great body surfing. And, I do like I do every year where I put on, okay, one coat of sunscreen before I get out of the out of the hotel and then another screen on the another coat when I get to the beach and then another coat at noon. But for this, I had a different brand of sunscreen than I usually have. This was recommended by Consumer Reports and shipped from overseas. I don't know if there was if it was older than I thought. It didn't actually have an expiration date on it. But, usually, when I come back from the beach, people ask me, like, wait. Didn't you go to the sun or something? You're still so white. But this time, I was as red as a lobster, and quite painful. So, that's my confession to start with. So I think I kinda wanted to trade from here, and then I wanted to hear you listen to you and and hear some advice for what it is that you do for your skin. What would you say is the best way to, take care of yourself? Well, so this is where, I've gotten criticized in the past. But, you know, people are like you know? So I do have some skin sag over here Uh-huh. On my eyelids. Uh-huh. So, I was heavier at one point. I was as heavy as, like, 175. Really? Five pounds. Yeah. I was big big gym bro, you know. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. So carrying less weight, now my body has adapted where whatever fat I was carrying there, now I've got a skin sag. Right? So, and that that's in other regions of my body too. So I'd say, you know, get lean, stay lean so you don't stretch your skin out so that at some point, now you're carrying around this excess saggy skin. Right? And I'm not I'm not the type to be like, hey. I'll go for cosmetic surgery and just get trim it down because that's how you end up looking like, you know, that's the the scary mask guy from from Saw. Right? So Right. Where you got everything's not messed up. So, that's one. The other thing too is, you know, this idea of doing it from the inside out. Like, there are things like carotenoids and, you know, some of the high fruit and vegetable intake, nutri you know, nutraceuticals and polyphenols that can impact skin from the inside out. But even that too, I'm not so sure on how much that can really make a dent. Right? So what I did what I did put together was some of the basic biochemistry of skin aging. Mhmm. The thing maybe some people don't know, and especially when it comes to sunscreen or moisturizers or even soaps, you know, these are things that can negatively affect our skin, pH, which can affect skin aging, which can affect the skin microbiome, putting us at risk for, you know, having a dysbiotic skin microbiome, which can't be good long term. So so, yeah, so skin pH increases during aging. So this is a skin surface pH, in women and in and in men. Uh-huh. Two different locations. Skin pH varies based on location, which is kinda tricky because, pH of the armpit, pH of the groin, pH of the palms, the hands, forehead, they may all all be different. Technically, we we would need different soaps or moisturizers Mhmm. To impact the pH of these regions, you know, but who does that? Right? So Yeah. Anyway, you can see the trend is the same. So skin pH plotted against age, birth through a 100 years, women and men, two different regions. You can see the slopes are pretty much increasing. So it goes from more acidic, and this is log scale. So even though a pH of 5.5 versus a pH of 6.5 is one unit and doesn't seem like much, it's a log scale, which means that's a pH of 6.5 is 10 times less acidic versus a pH of 5.5. So you can see that skin pH in both women and men becomes less acidic during aging. And that's important because, you know, even though I didn't include stuff about the microbiome, too much here, but skin pH is a major determinant of which microbes are on your skin or not. So the changing pH can make it easier for some potential pathobionts to settle on your skin and to be able to colonize your skin, increasing risk of infection and all kinds of bad stuff for skin health. So we're considering that skin pH increases during aging, and that's going in the wrong direction. You've been characterized by a more acidic skin pH. Most soaps have a pH greater than nine. Now it we'll see why a high pH makes a difference or doesn't make a difference on skin pH in a minute. But in this study, and I can well, of course, we'll provide all of the study, references in the in the show notes and video subscription. But they looked at 64 different soaps. And you can see 59 of them at a pH of nine. So if you're rubbing something on your skin that has a pH of nine and your youthful skin pH should be somewhere around five ish, that isn't gonna be good for your skin pH, which can, again, make it easier for the skin microbiome to become dysbiotic. Now this study doesn't, indicate which soaps are on that list. So I included a list from a different study that looked at common soaps. And you here too, you can see the majority of them. I mean, 10, you know, ten, twelve. On this list, there were only two that were even in the ballpark of having a, you know, a pH of five or less. Mhmm. Which would be and I'm not promoting either of these. This is just what the data shows. Uh-huh. But it was, where is it? Dove Dove liquid. So hand soap, 5.16. Not bad. And then, I don't know how to say it. Abacide, I guess, 3.61. So those would be the best of the bunch, with the goal of having it somewhere in the five region, for a soap. So what's what does using soap do to skin pH? Right? So that's what we'll see in this study, and they didn't indicate which soap they used, which is terrible in any study. You know, this was a randomized controlled trial. Granted, it's small for 14 people. And they also use a shower gel, which indicated the pH was six, but they didn't indicate which one that they used, but, nonetheless, skin pH. And then you've got three time points before washing, immediately after washing, and then two, four, and six, hours after washing with either the shower gel, water, or soap. Right? So you can see that after using that soap, immediately after, you can see that it's significantly different from the groups that use the shower gel pH six and tap water, which should have a pH of around seven. So this was probably a soap that had a pH of greater than seven in in order for skin pH to go, you know, from, or or to be from 5.8 to jump to 6.4. And then at every time point afterwards, you can see that using soap pushed skin pH. And remember, skin pH increases during aging, so it's going in the wrong direction Yeah. Using these soaps. So I wouldn't say I'm anti soap. It's just you wanna use a skin cleanser that has a pH around five. And I can tell everybody what I use, which is kinda problematic because every time I go to buy it, now it's out of stock and they're in for some price, so I guess supply and demand. But the one that I use, I I looked up the, MSDS on it, and, the pH is five. So now is that gonna be best for my skin health? I don't know, but I don't wanna do I don't wanna chronically, you know, push my skin pH higher and then, you know, with exogenous agents. Right? And, you know, Paul Saladino is, not to name drop, but, you know, he's he's he's always talking about, you know, these chemicals, you know, you wanna stay away from chemicals in toothpaste and soap. And on this one, he may be right, you know, where, you gotta pay attention to what you're rubbing on your skin, because it may be doing and my daughter, my 15 year old, she's constantly putting these creams and sunscreens and, you know, you've gotta know what you're you're putting on your skin, you know, with specificity. You know, granted the and I'm not anti sunscreen, but there may be things there to block UV rays, which are gonna limit your, ability to get burned. But if it's got all the chemicals in there, which are gonna be bad for skin pH and the skin microbiome, is it more harm than good rather than just being in the sun for ten or twenty minutes without sunscreen Mhmm. And then getting out of the sun. Right? So, But for the I mean, the sun the sun stuff at least, so I've got I mean, I can put it right here. I've got my Sarav. Right? This is a very common thing. I think, Brian Johnson also used the same thing, which gives me confidence because I'm sure he could buy something more expensive if he wanted to. But I've been using like, ever since I did the research on UVA on its, presence throughout the day. UVB is what gives you the the bright red sunburn, a lot of it. And a lot of the suntan lotions in The States are targeted at the the UVB because it's sort of the one that is the, has more of a peak in the summer in the middle of the day, but the UVA is sort of with you all the time, and it goes through windows and other things. So in my habit now, I wake up in the morning and immediately, put on put in my contacts so I can see and also put on the suntan lotion. But, I'm I'm really interested what you're talking about the soap. Up until now, I've been thinking that, the liquid soaps would be worse because sort of more artificial or something. But it's, fascinating to think that, okay. Well, actually, if you got, like, a more gentle one that is more in line with the body pH, it might over time be better for you. Yeah. It's not just the soaps too. It's, moisturizers. So you'd expect that the moisturizers should acidify the skin. And even yeah. I have this in my book. You know? I I guess we'll put that in the show notes too. Put my book from 2016, which had a section on optimizing skin pH with the goal of minimizing, you know, skin infections, which can then translocate into the blood. But moisturizers, which you'd expect to be good for skin pH, many of them are also in the same ballpark as pH soap where it's eight, nine, 10. Yeah. So, what what you put on your skin is huge, you know. Granted, how much going back to the sun exposure, how much UVA or UVB we get is debatable. Right? Because we evolved to be in the sun. Right? So we need it for vitamin d synthesis. So if you're gonna I'm in the boat where getting some sun exposure without any creams or anything on my face or body is essential. Right? Now what that u shaped curve looks like with too little being bad and too much being bad, I'm not sure. But Mhmm. I I tried my best to get as as much of that, you know, small window to get some rather than too much or too little. It's a good approach. Yeah. The, the avoidance is is great, and then that gives you sort of the more confidence that you can get a little bit and get the right dosage. Yeah. I I can say that I up to up until a couple of summers ago, I was going for up to an hour a day in the sun in the summer. Mhmm. And I started to notice some, like, white bleach spots on on my arm, which is characteristic of sun damage. So I was like, this is too much. I gotta come back. So now it's at most thirty minutes in the sun. No, obviously, no burning that's been, you know, the minimized risk. That's obvious. Who would do that? Ouch. But, yeah, it's fun being in the sun, being out, you know, on the beach is fun. Right? I I get it. You know? So Yeah. So then the the other stuff, I mean, I this is probably things that you're not gonna do just because it's a cream. Right? So I use tretinoin, which is, retin a as the brand name for that. Also, that's the prescription, which I goes through some hurdles to get a hold of. Retinols are very good. Those are sort of like the the time proven, gold standard, if you will, a cream that then can reduce aging and photo damage and other things. I I found it to be very frustrating trying to go through the studies to find out what is a good, antiaging face cream just because the the great majority of them are funded directly by the seller of the pharmaceutical company. And in general, I just can't trust them. So I just go with the straight, the SIRAF, which has an evening thing, and it's got, some very long technical chemical words that are supposed to be good for skin, and I trust them and let them do the work for it, and then the Retin A. The other thing I've done sort of doing for skin is, collagen. I, recently, for a while, I wasn't taking because I thought it was fully digested before it could be absorbed, so you're just getting the protein anyway. But, they have found that there are collagen transporters that then can basically transport those amino acids directly as collagen. So it's supposed to actually have some benefit for the skin that seem not to have been sponsored by a collagen seller. But it's, it's something I mean, the it lots of people are then doing things like you said. Like, they're getting sort of the Botox stuff, many other things to sort of smooth out the face. I haven't gone that thing, but I'm not sure. I still wanna see if there's some other way. In an earlier, trial period, I was doing actually, acid washes, which I kind of like because I felt a little, not that manly, worrying about my face so much. So I got rid of some of that by saying, well, I'm I'm rubbing acid on my face, which will then give you a red face and kind of, peel some of it off. But I wasn't really convinced that it did it, that much benefit. So at this point, I'm just, putting on the suntan lotion, usually, and, and then getting the retin a and then trying to take the collagen. And I'm I'm open I'll probably be doing more advanced things as I get older and have more things that I would like to improve. Yeah. The skin is tough because it's you know, how do you without doing skin biopsies from all the different regions, not just your face, you know, like Mhmm. Because as I mentioned, skin physiology may be different at least in terms of pH all over the body. Yep. You know, it's tough to quantitatively measure. I mean, technically, you'd have to do one side of your face with your intervention. Be your own your own control. Yeah. This is the experimental side, the control side. Yeah. I mean, I'm sure you've seen the truck driver who's in the sun, and you can see that there's sun damage on one side of their face. But who who's gonna do that? So that that's kind of the Mhmm. The drawback there for me. You know, it's how would I sub you know, objectively assess if this is working or not. You know? The other side of it too is I'm skeptical because, you know, if if the stuff that's been published to quote, unquote work, regardless of being funded by companies or not, which is always a potential confounder, but where are the 90 year olds if we look at them or older and we see they look like they've got the skin of a 20 year old? Is it with all the creams and everything else that we've got going on for decades. Right? So that's a rare thing. I don't think I've ever seen a 90 or a 100 year old where I'm like, your skin is a 20 year old ish. Right? You know? So Well, the the movies. Go ahead. I was just gonna say I'm optimistic. Mhmm. You know, that skin rejuvenation will be a real thing at some point. And maybe Brian, you know, with his laser treatments, maybe I'm behind the behind the game. Maybe he's ahead of the game there and, you know, that can keep the skin young. I don't know, though. I don't know. Yeah. They should they should eventually be able to do that with, like, the, you know, stem cells or something and just kind of grow it back. I'm looking for when I can get my my hairline back, from the stem cells. Right? Or or or get your hair back, you know, either way. Yeah. Yeah. So I think I think there's gonna be still better things that are gonna come there, but I would agree. Like, I don't I don't get the feeling that they have, like, kind of a one magic solution yet. It's sort of, reactive things at this point that sort of able to slow the tides, take care of yourself, and then hopefully in the future, they will come up with some more of a hail Mary that just takes care of the thing and fixes any problems you have. Yeah. So I'm most interested in the skin as its barrier function and it it as a protective mechanism, as a part of the immune system. Right? So skin infections increase during aging. Mhmm. And, you know, the treatments to address those, for me, that that's where I find the most interest rather than the cosmetic of, you know, is my skin more or less granted, I wanna have elastic skin. I wanna look as youthful as possible if if that's even possible. Right? Mhmm. But, you know, like my grandmother just anecdotally, she was, like 85, and she had, like, a chronic skin infection somewhere all of the time. And, you know, it's just her skin barrier function or skin immune defense just, I guess, weakened over time where stuff could colonize and and and then she's got this perpetual, you know, scab. So that to me, you know, the science of that, I find that, you know, most interesting for now and being a you know, because is it topical antibiotics? Is it top topical antifungals? For me, that's where I see the most interest right now. Yeah. It feels like, as we've been studying the biome and trying to figure out the, the the mic gut microbiome is the hardest to access. And then after that, we have the the oral microbiome. But then the skin microbiome seems like it should be able to just you could just sample at any time. But at the same time, it doesn't seem like they've really figured it out yet. So I'm hopeful that that will be something that they are able to then eventually just do a straight diagnosis and say, here's how we fix this. But I've got it the other way. So I actually see it as the gut being the easiest to optimize and the oral being a little bit more complicated because it's just less studied and the skin potentially being the hardest as because as I mentioned, the skin pH in all the different regions is different. You could have a skin microbiome that's different here versus here versus the bottom of the foot and the palms of the hand. So you would need to technically sample from all the different regions and specifically target those regions, you know, for some microbiome specific therapy or skin pH therapy or cleanser, whatever it would be. So I see the skin as the hardest of those to optimize. Yeah. We'll have to see. It's gonna, access is easier, but it could be more complex to if you just look at, surface. Right? Isn't the skin supposed to be one of the largest organs of the body? That too that too. Granted, you could say the the intestine, you know, when you uncoil it, it's like Mhmm. You know, meters upon meters long, longer than we are in height. Right? So it could be Mhmm. You know? But, yeah, that's relatively easy. I mean, I can go through mechanism, but that's another that's a story for another day, I guess. I think so. Okay. Thanks, Chris, for