For blood test number three in 2024, we saw that my biological age was 16 one years younger than my chronological. And that's when using doctor Morgan Levine's biological age calculator, PhenoAge. So, what might be contributing to these data? So starting off with prescription meds, I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in my twenties. So, I've been taking Levothyroxine hundred and thirty seven and a half micrograms per day since then. Alright. That brings us to supplements. So, a staple in the approach for the non summer months as I live in Boston, for eight to nine months out of the year is vitamin D, a thousand I use per day, and we can see that I took it for fifty six or all fifty six days that correspond to this blood test. So what is that fifty six day period? Well, it starts immediately or started immediately after blood test number two which was on March 4, and lasted until the day before this test which was on April 28. So, that fifty six day period is the period from test number two to test number three. I also supplemented with methyl b twelve, a thousand micrograms per day, but only 21 of the fifty six days, and that's with the goal of potentially lowering homocysteine. And from from putting, higher levels and lower levels of methyl B twelve in my approach, it seems to have somewhat of a 10% or less impact on homocysteine which isn't a big bump and I'm looking into other ways to try to reduce it. As a heads up on a future video, one strategy that I'm trying is increasing branch chain amino acid levels or BCAAs, and I'll have more on that in an upcoming video. Alright. So, I also supplemented with nicotinic acid, fifty to sixty milligrams per day for half of the days for the fifty six day period, twenty eight days. And that's with the goal of increasing N. A. D. Now, I haven't had it in there for every day because I've been playing around with when to include it with the rationale of using it on exercise days as that that's when I may need the NED boost the most. Alright. And that's it. No other purported geoprotectors or sinolytics which brings us to diet. More specifically, what diet composition corresponds to blood test number three in 2024. And that's what we'll see here, average daily dietary intake and note that I track my diet every day weighing all my food, then entering it into a chronometer, and then manually entering that data into a spreadsheet. So, we're gonna look at the fifty six day average from test number two through test number three. The first half of the diet is shown here and this list is ranked in grams, ranked on the left in grams on the right with the exception of green tea which is in ounces. And if you wanna use what I use for green tea, discount link in the video's description. Alright. So, were there any experiments for this test? The goal is to improve the weak spots while not messing up all the other biomarkers. So, there were two main experiments for this test. The first was, the LDL done need and pace experiment. So, in my data, relatively higher levels of LDL are significantly correlated with a slower epigenetic pace of aging. So, to test that, I've been trying to slowly bump, LDL above my normal range. And, if you missed the rationale, the full rationale to that, I'll put that video in the in the right corner. But that data is not yet in from true diagnostic, so I'm hoping to see how that data looks in about a week or two. So I added five eggs per week, and I raised coconut butter by a few grams per day with the goal of increasing LDL. I also added clover sprouts into my diet, and that's an average of 73 grams per day. But as we'll see in a minute, it was actually a lot more than that. And that's because crimson clover seeds or red clover seeds, which is what I used for sprouting, have high levels of Traganeline which increases NAD in mice. So to further test that, for eleven days prior to this test, I added, or I doubled clover sprout intake relative to an April test. Two hundred and fifty grams per day with the goal of increasing NAD. And whether or not if it worked, we'll see that in Wednesday's video. Alright. So, on to the second half of a diet as shown there, where we can see that I ate 54 different foods for this test. Now, the diet isn't always purposefully clean. I do include cheat meals as having no cheat meals can increase the risk of having a binge or overeating and I'm trying to eliminate and minimize that risk. So two cheat meals keeps me satiated with a little bit of junk while not obsessing about junk or food, with more cheat meals. So the standard for my cheat meal is chocolate mixed with peanut butter. So I make like a homemade Reese's peanut butter cup and I also sometimes add extra sweetener to it. So for this this test, it was sugar. Another test, it's been honey, sweetened condensed milk. I'm actually probably working on the recipe for how I enjoy it best. So, in in terms of how many calories the chocolate and sugar contributed in terms of their percentage of the overall calories in the diet, the chocolate chips for two days, two days of intake, there was about 606 calories. The sugar over two days was 311 calories and when adding them together, dividing them by total calorie intake for the sixty fifty six day period, the junk adds up to point 8% of total calories. So the diet is 99.1 or two, sorry, percent clean. Alright. So, this list is ranked in grams. What about ranking foods in terms of calories? And that's what we can see here. This is the top 10 list, and note that this these data are generated by Cronometer. If you wanna track your own diet like I do, there's there's a discount link for Cronometer in the video's description. So, in terms of the top food from where I'm getting my calories from, once again, as it's been for many tests, it's from sardines. So, I'm not a vegan unlike others in this space, not vegan. And the reason rationale for that is not is nothing other than my biomarkers are better when I include fish in the diet. Alright. So then, in terms of the list, the top 10 list. Nine of this, the the 10 foods that are on this list were also on the list for test number two. And the goal there is to not blow up the system. I'm trying to make small changes to improve the weak spot. So I wanna keep the overall structure while not messing up the system. So in terms of what came out and what what went in, I increased peanut intake because it's a rich source of tryptophan butane which declines during aging, and I cut down on almonds correspondingly for to match the calories. So I'm not increasing calorie intake. So almonds left the top 10 list and I didn't increase pistachio intake, but they entered the top 10 list for the first time. Alright. What about macronutrients? So starting off with calorie intake, average daily calorie intake was twenty seventy seven. And I've said this for many blood tests or many diets that correspond to blood tests, but this once again is the closest to lowest or close to lowest average daily calorie intake since I started tracking diet in April 2015. So my previous low was almost identical to this for the last test 2076. And as a quick heads up, for the first test in 16 tests where I've sequentially reduced calorie intake for each of those sixteen sixteen tests. The next test, I purposely increased calorie intake by a small amount. And that's to test, well, quick story. Red blood cells and hemoglobin and SHBG, those are the biomarkers that are involved. Those are the ones I'm looking to impact with a relatively higher calorie intake. Small increase for now to see if it moves in the right those three biomarkers move in the right direction. That story will cover that more for test number four's video in a couple months or maybe in a few weeks. Average day daily protein intake for this test was about a 101 grams per day, which was 19.4% of total calories. In terms of total fat, we can see that here. Average daily fat intake was 90 grams per day, which is 39.1% of total calories. And just to illustrate how this compares test over test, we can see test number two's data here. Average daily fat intake was 84 grams per day and that six gram increase, was made up mostly from saturated fat, coconut butter. I increased coconut butter as that's significantly correlated with higher LDL in my data. Again, trying to test that LDL Dunedin paste correlation. But there was also a small increase from monounsaturated fatty acids probably in part because of an increase in peanut intake. But as I keep mentioning, the goal is to make small changes without blowing up the system and keeping almost everything else constant. And we can see that for omega three and omega six as they were nine point five and sixteen grams for test number three, and also, nine point five and sixteen grams for test number two. Alright. Next up is carb intake. And total carbs were 257 grams per day, but note that net carbs equals total carbs minus fiber. Fiber intake that corresponded to this test was about 87 grams per day, and when subtracting that from total carbs, gives a net carbs of a 171 grams per day. We could then multiply that one seventy one by four calories per gram to see that net carbs yields 33% of my total diet for this test. Now, note that fiber also contributes calories to the diet and that's because within fiber, it's comprised of insoluble and soluble fiber. The soluble fiber fraction which is about 20% is fermented by gut bacteria into short chain fatty acids. So in other words, a fraction of total fiber is converted into fat. So for this test, that was about a 178 calories that was converted or potentially converted from fiber into short chain fatty acids which is 8.5% of total calories. So now that we know the breakdowns, we can look at net macros. And by adding the calories that came from fiber being converted into short chain potentially converted into short chain fatty acids and adding that to the 39.1%, we can see that net macros were 47.6% fat, 33% net carbs, and 19.4% protein. Alright. Note that within total carbs, I also track sugar intake, but more specifically, total fructose because the diet is rich in fructose containing vegetables and fruits. And in my data, higher total fructose is significant correlated with more biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. So I have to try to keep to aim to limit my fructose intake somewhat. So, sucrose is half fructose. So when dividing 47.1 divided by two, and then adding that to fructose, that yields a total fructose of fifty nine grams per day. And I know I say this in every video, that may seem like a lot but my lowest fructose intake since starting diet tracking in 2015 is 57 and a half grams per day. So 59 is pretty close to that. Now, I've since been able to reduce fructose intake a bit further. So, test number four, maybe the first test since 2015 where I've been able to go a bit below my lowest 57.5 and we'll see if that impacts biomarkers or not. I may not have been able to cut fructose by enough to make a dent on, potential weak spots or if it impacts anything. We'll find out. Alright. What about micronutrients that correspond to test number three? So starting with vitamins as shown full list. It may be hard to see so I'd encourage going full screen if you can't see it. Note that there is full RDA coverage and for anyone starting on this journey, that's what I generally recommend. Not trying to mega dose anything but just going for meeting the RDA for all vitamins and minerals. That's the baseline for a few tests. Now, many of these vitamins though are purposefully much higher than the RDA as I'm following correlations, their correlations with a panel of about 25 biomarkers. And if you're interested in those correlations, I post them on Patreon. So check it out. Just to highlight one of those real quick, you can see vitamin k at about twenty five, twenty five fifty micrograms per day. What's been defined as an adequate intake is only a hundred micrograms per day. So that's twenty five x the RDA and that's only because I'm following its correlation. It has a net positive correlative score with that panel of about 25 biomarkers that represent many different organ systems. Now, just to highlight to the consistency in the approach, we can see vitamin intake for test number two. And for the most part, almost everything is I or in the same ballpark as the same with very small exceptions. You can see that choline intake is a bit higher and that's because I added eggs which are a rich source of choline. Alright. Next up is mineral intake as we can see there and just to compare against test number two. Here too, we can see that it's almost completely identical test over test. So again, I know I I probably sound like a broken record at this point, but the goal is to make small targeted experiments without blowing up the overall system. And from vitamins and minerals, we can see that that's mostly the case. There is one exception though with a heads up now for test number four, experiments for test number four. I've since increased selenium intake to what's been defined as a tolerable upper limit, four hundred micrograms per day. And note that this is all from whole food, almost exclusively coming from Brazil nuts and mushrooms, which are my main sources of selenium. And that's because selenium is required for conversion of free t four, the thyroid hormone t four, into free t three. And I'll have more on that story a week from today. That's the plan to get out of thyroid focused video a week from today. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where I post data for daily diets. So rather than looking at fifty six day averages, once every couple of months for blood tests, I post daily diet on Patreon. I've also got a whole bunch of discount links that you may be interested in, including discount links for epigenetic testing, oral microbiome composition, any dequantification, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Scifox Health, which includes a different panel from the metabolomics including ApoB and GrimAge, green tea, as I mentioned earlier, diet tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or DIY Trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.