Hey, everyone. Today's guest is doctor Li Li, who is a postdoc in George Church's lab in the department of genetics at Harvard Medical School and at the Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University. Today, in hot off the presses research, doctor Li will present findings from her preprint, human skin rejuvenation via mRNA. And with that, welcome, doctor Li, and let's get into the presentation. Hi, Mike. Thanks for the introduction, and I'm honored to be here to give the talk regarding my, recent preprint. So let's go to the science. Hi, everyone. So welcome to the world of human skin rejuvenation. As Mike just introduced, I'm Lily from Georgia's group at Harvard Medical School. So as we know, like, we are experienced, aging every day. So during the increasing of the age, we can see the skin start to have wrinkles and start to be dry and have we have, like, different phenotypes as we can find here. So with advanced technologies directly in the world, and we are wondering, is that possible for us to rejuvenate skin aging? And how can we start from old skin and go to the young skin? It's kind of dream that everyone want to realize. So as a scientist, we are trying to make that happen. So first, let's have a understanding of the skin aging. So as we can see here from the age 30 to 40 to 50. So these, like, different phenotypes that we can visually to have this, and we can also know what's ongoing with the microscope. Like, for instance, like these, like, epidemics changes and elastin changes and the word like everyone heard a lot of times, collagen changed. So the understanding of, like, photoaging and a chronological agent at a molecular level actually is limited. So although that we know these like collagens and elastins they are changing but we do not know like which specific genes they are involved in the agent process. So for us to understand this process, so, we search a lot of literature that they published and and we can find that most of them, they focused on the fibroblast, which, like, shows, like, collagens are involved and has limited understanding about the other cells and what will be the driving factors of this agent process. So then that we came up with experimental design with different participants. So for us so we want to know the whole process about the skin agent. So we started, sample collection from individuals across different ages. So from young age to the middle age to the older age. And also we want to cover both photoaging and chronological aging. So with that, we collect the samples from both parts like the exposure part on the arm which stands for the portal aging plus the chronological aging and then the samples from the back area which is only the chronological aging. So after that, we did the single cell ion seek to know each cells, like, what's the, changes during the agent process. You might ask why single cell analyst? Is that because it's popular these days? Actually, this is just one of the rhythm. So another important reason is skin is considered a heterogeneous mix because it's composed of different cell types like keratinocytes, melanocytes, fibro fibroblast, and other cell types. So with this, if like we treat the tissue and do the bulk on sick, so we will mix all of these things together, which make us hard to find which genes actually they place a kilo during the aging process. And once that we introduce single cell inside, we can know specific cell types. And these each cell types, they will have different behaviors during the aging process. And it's better for us to understand the process of aging and for us to find the key genes that drives the aging process. So for, for this study that we developed our own skin tissue dissociation protocol so which that we can capture more cells and, more cell types off to the clustering. So with this, we will have a better resolution to understand the different cells to, in skin and for us to develop better treatment. So after this, like, sample collection and introduce a single cell, protocols on the tissue and we did tissue dissociation and we collected all these cells based on the single cell study. So we have more than 61,000 cells across different age groups and, we hope that we develop the comprehensive human skin atlas to date and covering both photoaging and chronological aging for us to study. So as we can see here, so this is a, single cell atlas. We can treat this as a kind of, Google map. So once that we have the Google map, we know from one destiny, one place to the destination. So we have a specific path. And with this single cell at least as a kind of aging map for us, we can know from young individuals to the old, individuals what's going on. And we can also know like specifically cells what they place the low inside. For instance, so a lot of studies focus on fibroblasts and for us we focus on keratinocytes which is the controlling like cell type or we call that the basal stem cell like skin stem cell for that to understand, like, which space of the cells to be involved in the aging process. So this Google map, we try to, like, build, like, the most comprehensive one, which includes all the cell types in skin, basal cell, spinous cell, granular cell, endothelial cell, also, like, hair follicles and other cell types. So in our preprint, like, we expand the details about all these cell types and their marker genes. So we are, like, briefly show here for us, like, each, subclusters, we have, like, the marker genes. And we can find, like, for instance, carriage one five, country one four, this is, marker gene, like, for the basal cells, and it's clearly, like, patented in the basal cell population. Then that we might have the question about what's going on about these cell types. Right? Once that we have the map, we want to know what's a map for the old cells, what's a map for the, like, young cells. So this, like, we showed, like, two different agent types, the combined agent, which is photo agent plus chronological agent, and this is a chronological agent. So for the combined agent, we can see from young unit individual to old to to middle to old, and these different percentage of the cells they are changing and a clear pattern is the immune cells. And for the chronological agent, because it's like more pure, it's not like photoaging involved. So we can see a clear pattern about the basal cells and we can also see the immune cells. It increased during the age process. So which match to the current studies where they show that actually aging is related to the immune system. So then that we did a very detailed, like, quantitative way to see which specific subtypes they are involved during this process and which will be enriched and which will be deplete. And we found that the skin stem cells, which is like basal stem cells three, four, six, they are mainly depleted during the aging process. It's like, in our daily life, we will see older skins, they will have, like, less, elastins and less collagens, and we know, like, maybe it's related to the stem cell, but we do not have evidence to show that. And for us, our data shows evidence of the depletion of the skin stem cells we cause the skin aging process. Then that we carefully understand the combined aging and the chronological aging of all these cell types. So as we can see here, so, during the aging process, so these different cell types, there are differential expressed genes they changed and combined agent actually they have more, differential expressed gene to be involved compared with the chronological agent. That makes sense because combiner agent includes the photo agent part. And it's very interesting for us to find that actually the chronological agent, which is the agent type related to our age that we can see on our ID card, is these differential expressed genes, they normally change for specific cell types. And they have each cell types. They will have a lot of, like, differential expressed genes. And for the combined agent that we can see, not only these specific DGs, they are also like a shared differential expressed genes. So which means that shared by different cell types. Okay. Let's think about what's the difference between the combined agent and the chronological agent. It's a photoaging. Right? And so photoaging, actually, they will cause those cell types to have, like, connected response. So that means, like, the UV lines, like, have have the effects on our human skin will cause different cell types to fight together. Then that we validate, this hyper our, like, thought, like, by the go tons. So we checked these, functions of these specific DHEs, and we found, like, for the combined agent, so they are more related to the general phenotypes. And for the photo agents, they will have, like, specific cell organ, cell parts, like, to be involved. So with that, we start to think. Okay. We know these, like, different cell types they changed, and we know human skin stem cells play a big role in the skin aging process. And which is the gene? How can we do that? Then that we start to take a close look of these changes in calcino sites, which is, category includes, human skin stem cell. So start with, like, this structure. So I will give a brief intro to the human, skin structure. So this is like young skin and the outer layer is those like the dead cells that we can see by our hands. And also like, so these are these different cell types, these are the, epidermis. So epidermis includes granular cell, spinner cell, and basal cells. And basal cells are the ones that we call human skin stem cells. So doing this we can see once the the skin agent come to young to the older part so these like cells they will have different response and go to these, like, gene level. So we did the clustering method based on our in house algorithm, and we found, like, eight groups, eight clusters in total, and two interesting clusters pop up. So one is a cluster that during the aging process, including both combined aging and the chronological aging, these gene expression increased. And another group is during the aging process, the expression is going down. And then we found those, like, clusters, so they have, like, increased expression. They are, like, enriched in granular cell, and those, like, have decreased expressions. They are enriched in the, stem cells. And then that we did the network analyst and we found the half genes of ATF three. And we measured that the expressions during, our studies and other studies to validate ATF three actually plays a role during the aging process, not only within our data, but also in other datasets. Then once that we figured out, ATF three might be the key gene for us to work with. We start to do the validation project. So the validate is, like, we start with the knockdown, which we see to the young cardinal sites. And then that we did the SIRA knockdown, which reduced expression of the RNA expression of ATF three in the cells. And afterwards that we measured the, beta gal, which is a senescent movement, KR67 which is cell proliferation and SASP which is, senescent marker gene. So after that we can see the results. So this is like the SASP like the, senescent related marker gene often knock down the ATF three that we can see their, expression is increased. So that means ATF three is related to the cell senescence. And also that we measured the, k I sixty seven, the cell proliferation. So after knocking down these cells, we are starting to have less proliferations compared with normal ones. So it's like a mimics aging process. Once ATF three expression is going down, the cells are still to have slow, proliferation. And we also measured the SA beta gal, so which is, cell senescence status. And we can see at the beginning, so those cells are mostly in blue. So they are not like senescence, but after knock down the ATF three that these cells are start to have the senescence level. So with this result that we have already validated 83 in the cells, actually, they play the role during the aging process. And then that we come up with our idea. How can we reverse gauging? Once that we know 83 plays a role inside. So as we know, COVID brings MI to everybody. So MI and MI treatment for, vaccine for the COVID days gives the public the confidence. MI is a great modality and reliable modality to, deal with diseases and also like the vaccines. And for us, leverage this knowledge that we build our in house MI treatment for skin rejuvenation. Start with the synthesis of the MI for ATF3. So we came up, with a specific design of the MI that which includes, the specific UTRs and the ATF3 genes and also the HbA one like UTR tails, which, like, make sure that the expression level is controlled and targeted to skin. So with this MRI that we put that onto the older carotenal side. So to validate the, response if, like, we use this treatment, will that be useful? So we start with, like, the seeding the older carotenal sites. You can think about, like, put the older cells there. And then afterwards, it apply the MI treatment onto the older cells. After seventy two hours, we measure these, like, index again, the beta gal, k I 67, SASP, and let's see what happened. So here's the result. So we can see, like, once that we introduce our MR therapy on ATF three, which all express ATF three genes. So the senescent markers that they have significantly done for all these, specific marker genes. Like, for instance, if in beta, I o one beta, I o six, IO eight. So we can see, like, several folders changes and they are both all of them, they are significant. And then also, were cells to be more? Yes. So cells like start to proliferate more than the control ones with our treatment. So we have like 20 percentage to 25 percentage, cell proliferation increase after the treatment and also the senescence status. So we can see significantly the senescence status changes. And this figure clearly show that before the treatment the cells are at the senescence status and after this treatment the cells are going back to the young a young status which has like reduced senescent values. And with this, we know, okay. So a t f three m r a can reduce the cell senescence, increase the cell proliferation, and how about the fibroblasts? How about the collagens? Then that we start our creative, like, ideas. So we saw, like, all of these cells within skin, they have communications like us. Although that we are, you know, in different locations, but we still can be connected by YouTube and by Zoom. So we think, like, there are ways for us to connect together. So then that we started to study the keratinocyte, fibroblasts, and other cell types of communications. As we can see here on the left panel, all these cells in skin, they are have, like, communications and with different range. So the number here is from, app, like, which shows the interaction values of the intensity. So we can see the chitinoside has strong interactions with endothelial cells, which which shows it's related to aging as well. And it has also very strong connections with, fibroblast. And which connections are them and how may that? So for that, we gather details, investigation about these, like, genes to be involved. And we found actually catenocyte crosstalk they are like a bulk of like genes including the collagen one seven a one, collagen seven a one and other cells other genes. So collagen one seven a one has already been published in many papers. It's a driven gene for skin aging. And, fibroblasts, they have these like genes. Once we took look at that, you might think no it's not related to collagen. Actually, they are related to collagen very, strongly. So a one b one complex, a 11 b one complex, and a two b one complex. All these complex are the collagen integrins. So that means collagen will bind on these like complex. So that's actually give us the evidence that calcino sites have the crosstalk with the fibroblasts and they are linked by these screeded proteins that we list here. And also they will have those like function genes like for instance collagens and collagen antigen genes plays a role in fibroblasts. Once we have these computational results we start to have our experiment to validate that. So for us, we introduce experiment. It might be complicated here, but you can think about, like, there are there's was, like, one paper pile billished on the cell cover. It shows they will have the blood exchange from the young mouse and the older mouse. And for us, we introduce that idea to our experimental design. So we will use like the young calcitonocyte condition medium. So you can think about it's like part of the medium that we can treat fibroids. And we will also have like the, old, cardinoside medium to treat the fibroblasts. And we can see what's the difference between after the, the treatment where the young and old cardinals are medium plays a role on the fibroblasts. Let's see. And also, like, things like we develop the new treatment. So we want to have, like, the MR treatment, like, to have the same effect as a, young cartoonocytes. So we did this as a control and MRI treatment experiment to mimic the young and old experiment. And we want to see if our MRI treatment will have the response as a young keratinocyte medium. Then, Dan, Dan, let's go to the redox. So the redox show that. So first, let's see, like, if we treat the keratinos of treat the fibroblast with young and old keratinocytes medium. So we can see so with the young keratinocytes medium, actually, they have less less cell senescence, and they have, like, four, four times, like, of the collagen production. And with old, cationocyte medium, they have, like we we normalize it to one. So it's like the one fold of the, collagen production. So that means with the young carytenocyte medium trait on the fibroblast, they have, like, three times of collagen production. And what about, like, our ATF three treatment? So our ATF three treatment compares with a control that we did same, and we found, like, ATF three treatment also reduce the selenescence and of fibroblasts and also that we have like 200 percentage of the collagen production. So that means like our ATF3, treatment, not only that we would reduce the, stem cells in essence, but also they we boosted the collagen production in fibroblasts around 200 percentage. So this, it gives us the confidence and kind of hope that it might happen and it will happen that, the MI treatment for skin rejuvenation. And we summarize that. So we found like caseinocide plays a big role during the aging process and it can be the target cell type for us to develop the treatment. And ATF3 that the calcinosides is a driven gene that driven the skin aging process and which it will like have connections with these created proteins from keratinocyte and have the effects on the collagens in fibroblast. In total that we bring up this, idea and the concept and the results of skin rejuvenation via MI by ATF3. And in the longer future, we hope it will be a product that we can wrap the MI into the lipid nanoparticle and put that into the microneedle for the product and everyone can use this. So then that come to the end. For scientists, we are very exciting that we developed this MRI treatment and we hope like it will be, way for us to treat like skin aging and expand to other aging types. And for us, we can conquer like aging like as Michael T shirt. Yeah. Thanks, everyone. That was great. Thanks, Lily. Are you ready for questions? Yeah. Thanks. Okay. I'm sure you've there are a couple papers that come to mind. So one of them is where senescent cells were transplanted into the skin. And then, not only did that induce localized senescence in the skin, also, there were, you know, multiple tissues were, had a had an a a more pronounced aging phenotype. Frailty was increased. Cognitive function declined. So did you did your group look at, not just what happened in the skin, but the effect of, you know, the mRNA and the, the skin rejuvenation? Did you look at the effects systemically in other tissues to see if maybe they were also had positive effects? Yeah. That's a very good question. So, for us, like, a initial study is, like, we focus on the skin aging. And seems like skin is attached to the muscles. So now we are expanding to, like, see see the, effects on the, like, you know, muscles. What's the response about our treatment? So nope. So you haven't checked yet to see if that rejuvenated other tissues too. Yeah. Yeah. It yeah. It's in the process. In the but muscle will be the first. Are there any other tissues you're planning on looking at? Brain or even looking at functional measures? You know? Yeah. So I think, like, brain, will be it's a very good topic. So brain will be the next one, like, for the scientific usage because a lot of, like as you just mentioned, they are trying to have, like, the cell treatment. So injector, those cells, like, the engineered cells, different differentiated, like, from the iPSCs, like, for the cell treatment. I think, like, for us, like, our studies can give them kind of, like, indicators, like, how they can, you know, change the MRI expressions and to have these, like, the cell treatment. Yeah. Nice. Alright. So I have questions related to the mRNA expression and, like Sure. Using metabolites. But before I go there, I have I have another, related question to senescent cells, potentially having, you know, systemic effects. So, you know, we we communicated by email where I sent that paper over where, ATF three activation, leads to reactivation of senescent, I guess, senescent cell infected virus. So senescent cells that are infected with viruses or retroviruses. Yep. So yeah. And there there can be an increase in viral burden during aging. And with that in mind, so that would suggest that maybe systemically, ATF three is downregulated. And then, you know, to protect the internal, but maybe as a consequence, it gets turned off, you know, in the skin too. Or is it that maybe the skin is, under some kind of viral burden and the skin compensates by turning down ATF three, which then makes me worried if you turn up ATF three in skin. Now do you have if those effects are systemic, do you have an a reactivation of senescent cells infected with, you know, endogenous retroviruses? So what are your thoughts? Yeah. So first of all, the, MI design that we created, so it's only a target to skin. So it will be local, like, delivery, and it will even though that we control that, it will only delivered to skin. And think about them, like, why would it it will be, you know, incidentally, like, deliver, delivered to other tissues, it will be fine because it will not be expressed because we control the several, specific UTRs. It can only be expressed in skin. And I totally hear you that you think about, like, you know, these, like, mechanisms, like, related to the virus. So will that be a kind of, like, concerns that we develop these, like, MRI treatment for that? And I think for us is, we carefully, like, measures, like, the response of other genes. So we did, bulk and seek, like, afterwards, like, to see all these, like, gene expressions changes after the mRNA development. So we will try to keep that the safe. It's like not other genes, like, will be involved and not where to treat like other response because of, like, overexpress one gene. Yeah. So because it's localized, because your expression of the MRA is specifically localized to skin Yeah. There shouldn't be an increase in muscle or, you know, liver, wherever there may be some viral Yeah. Wow. That's fantastic. Alright. So then also, why focus so mRNA has gotta be translated. Right? I mean, granted, you've got, you know, the nano Yeah. Nano what what kind of nano, not not nano cells, but nano you're embedding it in nano lipid Oh, lipid and nano particle. Right. Lipid nano particle. Right. Sorry. I couldn't. Those words come couldn't come to my mind. But, so that that's to get it into the cell. That makes sense. But it still has to get translated, right, into protein and, all the downstream effects from that. So have you have you looked into, like, the metabolomic profile, single cell metabolomic profile to see which metabolites may be response so ATF gets expressed and then which metabolites in the cell, are responsible for the rejuvenation effect. And then maybe you can just you know, you don't even need a a lipid, permeable nanoparticle. Maybe just, you know, you've got some metabolites that are soluble. Maybe they're ceramides or whatever they may be. So what are your thoughts about? Yes. So, once I do actually, we discovered ATF three is a driven gene of skin agent. So we developed the MRI treatment that we put into the print print. And then we also actually develop, like, some, as you mentioned, like, small molecules metabolize, basically, like, for instance. Can that be, like, you know, as a kind of treatment? It will be more easy to understand, and the public will be more easy to accept this modality. So, so the answer is yes. So since it's like tug as you said, it will be translated into protein and protein can have small molecules regarding to that. And, the reason that we are trying to advocate of MI treatment compared with these small molecule treatment is MI is, like, more easy to control the expression. And if you use, like and also, like, more effective. So if you use, like, metabolites or small molecules, so first of all, the, effectiveness will be not the same as MI. And the second is so those, like, metabolites, actually, they were even though it will be, like, for instance, topping that you can just put on skin, they will, like, bind to other proteins. So they are not, like, targeted and precisely. And for us, like, we do MRI treatment. It's only ATF three MI. So it will not be have, like, only, like, ATF four or ATF five. Right? So it will be more precise effectiveness and also controllable. For some people, maybe they have like sensitive skin. They are like, you know, metabolites they use, it will like trigger their other response. And for instance, the immune response, that's what we do not want to see. So that's a rhythm for us even though that we have two modalities to be prepared. We advocate, like, the MRI modality first. That that's a great point. Especially if it's one metabolite, does that reproduce the whole effect whereas you've got the transcription factor that's initiating all of the right? It's like you've gone after the biggest tree in the forest rather than 50 metabolites that maybe have to induce a similar effect. So what about effects on so skin pH, so skin acidity, which is part of the, you know, the the barrier, you know, skin barrier function Yeah. Becomes more alkaline during aging. So Yeah. Did you did you look at the effects of ATF three on on skin barrier, whether it's skin pH improving and becoming more acidic? Yeah. That's a very nice question. So for us, like, we show the data of the skin rejuvenation in the keratinocytes. So keratinocytes is a big part or let's say majority part of the epidermis. So which controls, like, you know, the, let's say, weakness, like these, or you just mentioned at the PhD, these things, like, on the skin. And it's like another point that I just mentioned is like the crosstalk to the fibroblast. So for us, like, 80 f three. So first, like, keeping the mind is our own self, like, in the young age, we have 80 f three, like, expressed. And in the old age, it's like they have another amount just like reduced amount. And for us to, you know try to control the response is we over express that to the young age expression. So we do not like say over express like to a huge or like uncontrollable like amount which so it's just say, like, at the young, at old age, we're trying to have a young age status. Yeah. So that's how we do that. Yeah. I I got all that, but then the effect on, like, skin barrier function, or is that first first, you guys do it in vitro and then it's look at it in vivo like mice or or some sort? Have you have you done any of the animal experiments yet where you've looked at skin barrier function as a result of increasing ATF three? Yes. So, now that we are currently, like, we are doing two parts. So one is a in vivo like wound healing and UV induced like odor mass. And another part is like we are doing ex vivo skin. So we tested these like on the ex vivo skin and we can see like the ex vivo skin actually they have the same like index as before and after using the ATF thirty treatment. So now that we are getting the data, hopefully, that we will have another footprint in the longer future regarding the UVB. Nice. Yeah. Alright. And then the other aspect of skin is not just the skin barrier function. It's the skin microbiome. So Yes. If if you restore ATF three d well, not if, but when you restore ATF three to youthful levels, is there a change in skin microbiome composition towards a more youthful state? And if so, does that help keep the skin, you know, well, youthful and functional and more functional relative to older skin? So any plans to look at skin microbiome as a result of increasing ATF three expression by mRNA? Yeah. That's a very nice question. This is a very professional one. So, actually, after this, preprint, there are several groups they want to collaborate. One is, like, the skin microbiome. So they are very interesting, like, to see the skin microbiome. I hope that is a plan and for us, like, we will have, like, more data to show how this treatment, like, will be changed or it will, you know, give the, evidence, like, the young age and older age skin. They will have specific microbiome and with the treatment, what microbiome that would be. Yeah. Nice. Not so very looking forward to see that. Cool. So then, also, why do you think ATF three is I mean, it's easy to say just aging ATF three expression skin goes down. But Yeah. Is it is it in part a consequence of, you know, you've got an increase in inflammation during aging and then the skin is just the bystander in that process, so that inflammation then leads to a downregulation of ATF three? Or do you think that there are more specific mechanisms that the skin is being targeted and ATF three expression is downregulated? Like, what are your thoughts about why ATF three will be down with aging in skin? That's a very good part. Actually, we mentioned parts of that in our preprint. So, so, we have the modules like that I showed. Right? So there's a the network, and we found, like, 80 f three in the hub gene. Actually, we we know that all these gene like to be connected in that module. And several genes actually downstream is related to the immune system. So that's a rhythm, like, for you, like, you ask what might be the mechanism behind that. And for us is, like, we will say, aging that now that we have some kinds of, like, evidence show it's related to the immune, like, the immune cells to be increased and the inflammatory of that part to be increased. And for the a t f three, that these connected genes actually shows, like, a t f three is exactly the up genes, like, upregulated genes, like all these, like, enumerated cell genes. Yeah. So so it sounds like, immune activation during aging is a part of the process that you think why ATF three is Yeah. Be down down regulated. Which I'm like I I I really like this part because now that actually, the follow-up study that we are doing is we are trying to gather, like, more samples. And, we also collected the samples, like, from acne patients. So these, like, shows, like, inflammatory, like, skin disorders. And we are trying to see if, like, these, like, genes, like, for instance, ATF three expression, they change during the inflammatory and what's going on regarding, like, the aging process and the disease process. It's a very interesting topic, but I really like this, and I hope that we can understand more about that and to understand more about the mechanism part, like how that makes, like, the age like, skin to be aged. Yeah. Yeah. So what do you think about biomarkers? So if it is immune activation related, that suggests that you could measure stuff in blood, and that can kinda be a corollary for maybe, you know, senescent cells in the skin. I mean, you ideally, maybe you need a skin biopsy. Right? But, you know, the skin, you know, I I'm sure you know. I mean, pH of the skin is different everywhere. I mean, armpits, you know, bottom of the penis. Right? So Yeah. Yeah. So, what are your thoughts about biomarkers, like circulating biomarkers and then linking that to senescence cell burden in the skin and ATF three expression? And then if that's the case, if there are biomarkers of it, not just skin related, that suggests that you can modulate the stuff in the blood to potentially slow your rate of skin aging. So what what do you think? Yes. So, actually, we have, even fancy way. So we are thinking about, like, the epidermis like skin, tape. So, blood is kind of, like, invasive, like, way, and, actually, people are, like, afraid of to do, like, blood test if they do not have deletes. Right? Now that we are, like, collaborating with, like, one group, so they have the epidermis like tape. So the tape is, like, kind of tape, like, put on skin, and then we can have the epidermis data. And then that we build our algorithm to link the epidermis data to our, like, transcriptome, like, data and to see the changes of that. And in the longer future, as you said, like, we will have these kind of, like, index, like, for us to measure that we know all what kind of, like, things like we see in the, epigenomics changes, and we can know the, how the healthy status of the skin and which we can do. Yeah. Alright. Wait. Can I ask more about what you mentioned? Like, how would you get basically a measure of the epidermis? I mean, what you're just break brushing off skin cells, I guess. How is that done? So it's kind of like specific tape. I'm happy, like, to send you more information. So, so the tape, like, on the, skin, and once I put that and you remove that, you can see some cells there. Right? So now the technology can do the, whole genome, like, epigenome epigenomic test. So after that, we will have these, like, epigenomic data. And the actually, the challenge for us to it's like to link the epigenomic data to to the transcriptome data. Right? So but for them, they have a specific, like, pull about a lot of, like, epigenomic data, and they also have some, like, changes of different genes. And for us, like, now we are building the algorithm to link these together. And then afterwards that we can see from the epigenomics change that what we are, gave us, like the, evidence to see these, like, derm changes, like, other changes of the body. So, it's a longer, longer future that I always dream about, like, epigenomic clock. So we can't we do not want, like, everyone to test, like, say, oh, we take a image. Image is a traditional way for us to give the index, like, how old, like, the skin is, the person is. And I think, like, for the bio, like, you know, as you said, like, biomarker, bio index, it will be more precise. And then we can get, like, the epidermal, like, epigenomic data, and then we can know how healthy the skin is. So that's my dream. Yeah. So this is a side comment, but, I used to be a 100% go on the epigenetic clocks as as as great. But when you think about, like, genomics, and I know you're gonna say it's not genomics. It's it's, you know, methylation tags. But Yeah. Yeah. Genomics is just the story of what can happen. And the genetics for me is is is starting to move into the same boat where, you know, you could have an increased methylation age. But the fact is, what are the actual biomarkers of stuff that's happening? Right? So that's proteins and the and the metabolites in the cells. Yes. So you could have two discordant data where, you know, the stuff upstream Yes. Versus right? So I'm not trying to throw throw water on the epigenetics, but, may I don't know. Maybe they're, you know, metabolomic clock or something else. I don't know. I'm biased. I love metabolomics. Alright. Also, so, wouldn't wouldn't getting the skin cells, they'd have to as I mentioned, they'd have to be in multiple sites, right, to see because, I mean, granted, old skin is generally senescent in many different places probably Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Credulously. Right? But Yeah. But is it the same ex you know, same expression pattern? Is it an ATF three story in all skin types all over, right, all over you know? So Yes. So, I think for us, like, we collected the samples from arm and back. So as you said, like, skin is very different, like, from the face, from the back, from the foot. It's basically like foot has, like, very 16. And for us, like, our data shows is, like, arm and back. And we have our, other datasets, like, we showed, like, in our supplemental figure. So you can see those, like, the data from the face also show, like, 80 f three changes. And the, I think we also got the data, like, from from, like, other resources, not only the face and arm and the buck. So so happy to, like, you know, give you more information and feel free to check, like, the submittal figure. Yeah. So the data was the same. So ATF three expression was down in all this all the different skin. Okay. Wow. Not all, like, the data that we can get. So, yeah, hope, like, we will get, like, more data. So, yeah, so in the longer future, I hope that we will have, like, more and more data, like, for us to have, like, better understanding. Now it's it shows, like, more than, like, four or five, like, locations, the AT and T three in the same. Yeah. Nice. Alright. So then are there there I guess there are if we fast forward and and, right, so clinical trials. So you have animal models, and then you go to clinical trials. But I also know that, the church lab likes to patent things. Right? So Yes. Yes. Are there plans to go to clinical trials or clinical trials and then patent this technology to market it? You know, but and then how long away would we be from, you know, mRNA expression as a way to rejuvenate skin? So first, the future plan. So, actually, I think we will do both. ChurchLab is very good, like, at commercialize these, like, research, and I think that's the reason I'm in ChurchLab. I do hope, like, our research is not only on paper. I hope, like, other, like, you know, specific public. They can know this. They can use this. So this is my hope, and the motivation that I'm, like, excited with this project and working on it for several years. And how long it will, like, let's say, dream come to our life. Right? Now currently so I'm very optimistic. So we are testing on the ex vivo skin, and I consulted with some people. They was in the, FDA process for the drug development for skin specific diseases. So they told me, like, once that we have the ex vivo skin data, and then we test on the pig and afterwards that we can apply for the FDA approval. And also these years, like, there are more genomic or gene therapy, they are be approved. And for this one, I hope it will be related not only for the aesthetic part. It's only useful for, it's not only useful for the aesthetic part. It's also, like, very useful for those, like, clinical part. Like, for instance, like, a wound healing burns and, there are, like, a lot of, like, skin disease related parts that we can apply for. It will help a lot of people specifically like for the only healing for older population. I have like one advisor actually in our building. So she is strongest part of my project because she got a surgery and the wound cannot heal. So she voted every time, like, you know, I propose it in our institution. She said, like, yes. We knew that for the older population. Not only those people, they are suffering from severe diseases, but also for the people, they have these kind of, like, concerns, need the help. So we will try to, like, push forward and try to speed up the process. Alright. So then without, you know, stepping on your own toes, are there things we can do now while we wait for the clinical trials and for the FDA approval to upregulate ATF three skin expression to minimize, you know, senescent cells in the skin and and potentially rejuvenate it on our own without the, technology. Are there any natural products that can can I'm sure you look at all kinds of ingredients in, like, skin cares, and you're probably like, that's all, you know, nonsense because you guys can actually change gene expression in skin. So Yeah. The things that can actually, you know, increase Yeah. Increase. And I think, what we are doing right now is, like, as as I just mentioned, we have two modalities. One is a MRI, and the second is a small molecule. In a small molecule part, like, we're we're we're also, like, try to move that faster and to let the public to use or, you know, benefit them. And as you said, like, the MRI part, so maybe we will speed up. And a lot of people actually are interested to do the test. They want to be the first one or second one to test the treatment. Yeah. I'm very excited about that. So there there as far as you know, there aren't any small molecules that are currently you know, that aren't, you know, that naturally existing that can upregulate ATF three expression. Yeah. Do you know of any, or do you wanna say or if you say maybe it hurts the patent because then it's like, why do people need to do the mRNA if you can just rub this stuff on your skin now? I don't know which and maybe you could compare which would be best. Right? So Exactly. Exactly. For us, it's like our institution, we want to cover, like, most of the modality. It's, like, ongoing. And, I think, like, I I advocate, like, a minor because it's more precise, more controllable, more effective. And for the small molecule, it can be, like, a complimentary, like, part. Like, for people, they do not like this modality or they do have, like, specific skin concerns. For instance, they do not have, like, sensitive skin. They want to try these, like, small molecules. I think it would be, like, different ways. Like, for instance, if we want to have, like, healthy life, we we will do sports and we will eat healthy. So those are different ways actually converge to the same risk stem like result. Right? And for us, no matter it's MRI or it's you like like metabolites or small molecules. We hope, like, eventually, it will come to the same parts. Like, let people to have, like, better looking skin, more confidence, like, healthier life. They say, oh, like, go or dream. Yeah. Yeah. So, is there any evidence about, like, specific diets, like a western diet versus, I don't know, would pick your diet Mediterranean or pie fiber or carnival, whatever. Pick what pick your diet of choice influencing skin expression of a t f three. Has anyone looked at that yet? I haven't looked at that for the a t f three, but I checked the, not specific diet. I checked those pathways actually, for the young skin and for the older skin. And, specifically, you will be surprised or maybe not surprised at all. Those pathways are related to the metabolism and also like as you said like these, like water or these like things like absorption these parts. So that means actually, to maintain good skin is do more sports, eat healthy, and sleep more. So it matched to the epigenomic studies in California. So they published, like, you know, one paper, like, how they have different, people from different background, but they have the healthiest status, like, for three months. And they they check their, like, epigenomic age, and they found that they are, like, more much younger than those ones with the without, like, healthiest data healthy, like, these, habits. So, yeah, so I think this part is like very, very interesting. So some part is like, I think this is a philosophy. Maybe I took too much. So complicated stuff, I think eventually will come to a very simple, like, part. So it's like philosophy. Philosophy, like, simple, complicated, simple. Right? So I think it's also for science. So at the beginning, then we think, okay. Skin aging is simple. And then we try to make that very complicated to know these, like, molecular changes or whatever. And then eventually, maybe that we end up with a pathways or treatment. It will be another simple way again. So, hopefully, that, you know, science is also, like, belong to the philosophy part. Yeah. Definitely. Alright. Well, that was great. Again, thanks, doctor Li. And I'm looking forward to see what you guys, you know, produce in terms of research in in the upcoming future. So thanks again. Yeah. Thank you so much, and thanks for this opportunity. And really nice for, like, to, talk about the science and share with others. I think I'm really honored to be here. And let me know if you have any questions, and and you are very, you know, knowledgeable, like, to have those questions and some parts that I haven't think about, although they are, like, talking with me regarding to those perspectives. Yeah. Yeah. Cool. Alright. Ciao. Yeah. Okay. Bye. Bye. Nice. Thanks, Mike. Yes. Lily. Yeah. Bye. Bye.