Trigonelline increases NAD in blood, liver, and muscle. But these data are in mice. What about in people? So to test that, for ten days, I supplemented with five hundred milligrams of supplemental Trigonelline per day. And note that that's a seven fold increase above my usual intake from diet. My usual intake is around seventy milligrams per day. So five hundred milligrams supplemental, seven fold increase. So to find out, I sent blood to Ginfinity for NAD analysis. If you wanna measure your own NAD levels, discount link in the video's description. For a June 28 test, NAD levels were 17.1 micromolar. So unfortunately, supplemental trichinelline did not increase NAD, didn't impact it at all. How do we know this? So how does this 17.1 micromolar compare against previous tests? So now, we're gonna take a look at 20 tests for NAD from early twenty twenty three to 2024 as shown here. And at the bottom bottom right, we can see the most recent test. And then without going through each of the tests, I've covered each of these tests in the NAD playlist which I'll link in the right corner. We can see that 17.1 is my lowest NAD test over all 20 tests. So does that mean that there will be no more future trigonelline NAD experiments as it seems that at least five hundred milligrams of trigonelline supplemental doesn't impact NAD. So there is one last question to be addressed. Was plasma Trignelli greater than seven micromolar? And I've used seven micromolar as that cutoff because my highest dietary intake, of Trignelli was able to push plasma Trignelli to 6.9 micromolar. So if plasma Trignaline was not higher than seven micromolar, that suggests that five hundred milligrams of supplemental Trignaline wasn't enough to impact plasma levels. And if that's the case, how if I can't if I don't get an increase in plasma levels of Trignaline, is it reasonable to expect that NAD shouldn't shouldn't increase either? So if that's if that's not true, if Trignaline did not push plasma Trignaline to greater than seven micromolar, then I'll potentially increase supplemental intake of Trignaline to one gram or more per day. But, if if plasma Trignaline was greater than seven micromolar, that argues against the role for relatively higher intakes of dietary and supplemental Trigonelline on impacting NAD. At least for me, maybe it's different for other people. I'd encourage others to do that experiment. To find out on for the June 28 test, I also sent blood for metabolomic analysis using ILO's kit which includes measurement of plasma levels of trigoneline. So stay tuned for that data, in an upcoming video as it should be arriving any day now. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links that you may be interested in including discount links for epigenetic testing, NED quantification, oral microbiome composition, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Cyphox Health, which includes ApoB, but also GrimAge, green tea, diet tracking with Cronometer. Or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Diet Trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.