Aging and disease are biochemical processes that happen over many decades. So if we track and optimize well established biomarkers of organ and systemic health, can aging and disease risk be slowed? So with that in mind, in late October, I blood tested for the seventh time in 2024, and note that this is test number 55 since August 2015. So with that in mind, what's my biological age? That's what we'll see here. This is using doctor Morgan Levine's biological age calculator PhenoAge. And this test is important for many reasons. One is that it's associated with chronological age or strongly associated with chronological age. A higher biological age using this test is associated with an increased risk of death for all causes and it includes multiple biomarkers of many different organ systems which addresses the central premise of this channel. In terms of those biomarkers, they include two markers of liver health and function, so albumin and alkaline phosphatase, ALP, kidney function, creatinine, metabolic health, glucose, inflammation, high sensitivity c reactive protein, two measures related to white blood cells, WBCs, the lymphocyte percentage which is total lymphocytes divided by WBCs and obviously WBCs, and then two measures of or related to red blood cells, the MCV which is the average red blood cell volume, and then the RDW or red blood cell distribution width, which is a measure of the variation in red blood cell volume. So if you wanna calculate your own biological age using this test, there's a free downloadable Excel file so you can calculate whenever you want. You don't have to use, enter an email like some other online sites do. There's a downloadable link in a link for my blog or my website in the video's description. So when entering these data, I get a biological age of 36.5 years which is fifteen point two years younger than the chronological. Now the theoretical maximum reduction for chronological age versus biological age using this test is twenty years. So fifteen years younger is about 75% of the maximum reduction that one can have using this test. So not bad. But note that this is just one test and it's important to not get too high or too low with just one test because in my opinion, tracking year to year change is more important. So with that in mind, let's take a look at biological age results using this test since 2018 as I had 36 tests over that time period which is what we'll see here. So in 2018 to 2019, I tested three times with an average biological age of 36.1 years. But then three tests over a two year span is probably not enough data to track year to year change. So I started testing more often. For test six tests each in 2020 and 2021, biological age using this metric was 35.6. So 35.6 at that time was probably a closer representation to a full year average relative to the 36.1 in 2018 to 2019. I then started to increase testing adding a seventh test in 2022. And I had it had my best data yet with an average biological age of 33.8. In 2023, it got a small amount worse, thirty four point seven years over seven tests. And over the first seven tests thus far in 2024, it's close to the same as last year, 34.9. So note that even if all biomarkers stay the same using this test, pheno age increases by point nine years for every year of chronological year that that passes. In other words, starting in 2020, I should expect to see an average pheno age in 2024 of thirty nine point two years. So point nine multiplied by four years and then adding that to 35.6. In contrast, I've avoided an age related biological age increase which suggests that I've improved these biomarkers resisting age related changes over the past four plus years. Alright. So rather than just looking at data entered into a spreadsheet, let's take a look at the full blood test report. And that's what we'll see here. This is page one of the report. Now note that I don't go to my doctor to get these data or to order the test. I go to ultalabtest.com where I pick the test that I want. I then bring that form to Quest Diagnostics which does the blood draw and then I get the results relatively quickly. So I test it on a Friday morning and I had these results within one day or the next day, on Saturday. If you wanna, support the channel while testing yourself, there's an affiliate link in the video's description. Alright. So some highlights and then room for improvement. So one highlight is HDL at 63 which is pretty close to the optimal range of 50 to 60 for men. And if you missed that video, I'll link to it in the right corner. So besides just being close to the optimal range for HDL, it's also now the twelfth test in a row where HDL is greater than or equal to 50 milligrams per deciliter. And that's important because for the previous 43 tests since 2015, my average HDL was about, ten eleven or 10 to 11 milligrams per deciliter lower at 44.7. So I've been able to consistently keep HDL relatively higher and closer to that optimal range over the past around two years. Triglycerides improved test over test from sixties and seventies for the past couple of tests to 57 and values around 40 or less is associated with lowest risk for coronary heart disease mortality. So the goal is to get it to 40 or less. So 57 is on the right track. HSCRP at point two milligrams per liter. This is now 20 tests in a row where my HSCRP is less than the labs limit of detection, less than point three milligrams per liter or less than or equal to point three milligrams per liter. And then also glucose at 90 which increased from 87 over the past test. But note that my 53 test average glucose since 2015 is 89.6 milligrams per deciliter. So 90 is right there. It's essentially my average over the past nine years. So that's good news. On to page two. Creatinine at point nine eight is not my lowest in 2024. I had values of point eight two and lower is better. It suggests better kidney function. And on the other side though, this is close to my average since 2015 as creatinine average is point nine five. Now, if point eight two was significantly better than point nine eight or point nine eight got significantly worse in terms of kidney function, I'd expect to see increases for biomarkers such as blood urea nitrogen and uric acid which increase in the presence of suboptimal kidney function. So in my case, blood urea nitrogen is actually towards the lower end of my range at nine milligrams per deciliter is relatively low too. So that didn't increase And uric acid, you can see that the lab flagged it as low so that's not high either or relatively higher. So the point nine eight for creatinine, even though that's on the high side relative to my average and the last couple tests in 2024, the other biomarker suggest that kidney function is is not adversely affected. And in terms of uric acid or in terms of the lab flagging uric uric acid as low, I covered that in the last video in the series, blood test number six. And if you missed that, I'll link to that in the right corner. So some other highlights, Albumin at five point o, once again, youthful. And then liver enzymes. So AST and ALT, I've had some issues with them being in the mid twenties which is a bit high because AST and ALT have a u shaped associations with, all cause mortality risk. So too low can be increased risk, too high can be increased risk with optimal being around the bottom of the u somewhere in the high teens to low twenties. So that's now true for AST but it's not true for ALT. 15 would be increased risk relative to values in the high teens low twenties. Now, a better marker of kidney health and function maybe GGT. And in earlier blood test, it was relatively low which suggests that ALT and AST that we see here may not be that big of a deal. But to confirm, I'll likely include GGT at future tests as it's easier to interpret it. Lower is better and as it increases, it's linearly linearly associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. I'm also tracking thyroid hormones so you can see free t four and free t three. Free t three is the active form of thyroid hormone and unfortunately, the conversion of free t four into free t three declines during aging so I'm tracking that ratio. Now for this test, these results are my lowest ratio over five tests that I've measured it in 2024. So I'll go to the correlations which I post on Patreon at following every blood test to see what I can do to improve the free t three to free t four ratio in my data. Alright. The MCV at 93.5 came down from the last test by a small amount, 94.7. And that may be in part because I followed a correlation with cocoa bean intake, relatively higher intake is significantly correlated with a lower MCV in my data. Now, I can't say if that's causation that there may be many factors but I'd like to get my MCV lower to lower end of my range as it increases during aging and relatively higher values are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So as of right now, MCV is a weak spot that I'm looking to improve. On the other side though, the the RDW is a youthful 12, 12 and that's one reason for my relatively young female age as that's a major driver of that biological age test or that the calculation involved in that biological age test. Also note lymphocytes. So I've had or I had three tests with lymphocytes less than 1,600 in 2024. This is now the second test in a row where they're close to 1,900 and note that optimal is around 2,000. Lymphocytes decline during aging so having three tests less than 1,600 is going in the wrong direction. Whereas, for the past two tests including this test, it's moving closer to that optimal of around 2,000. And then DHEA sulfate at one twenty six might be a bit low and I'm not sure about that. So androgens decline during aging. And in my data, I have a couple of data points from about fifteen years ago where they were at 300. But I was also experimenting with supplementing with DHEA. So I don't know and I wasn't I was far from as rigorous as I am now at tracking everything that I that I take in. So I don't know if that 300 was was because I was supplementing with DHEA or that was my natural youthful level. If it was my natural youthful level, the goal is to get it back from one twenty six to 300. And first without without using DHEA. I wanna see if I can rejuvenate my body's ability to get me back there. On the other side, I wanna resist any age related decline knowing that androgens included including DHEA sulfate decline during aging. So with that in mind, one twenty six is almost identical to my 17 test DHEA sulfate average over the past twenty six months. So I've been able to resist an age related decline over the past two plus years. Alright. So what might be contributing to these data? What diet and supplements correspond to a 15 year younger biological age? And I'll cover that in the next video. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more of my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where I offer blood test consults for those who wanna optimize biomarkers with the goal of, improving or optimizing their health and potentially longevity. We've also got a bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself while also helping to support the channel including altalabtest.com where I generate the majority of my blood test or get the majority of my blood test, Clearly Filtered which is the water filter that I use, epigenetic testing or microbiome composition, NAD testing with Genfinity, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Scifox Health which includes ApoB but also GrimAge, the DNA methylation test GrimAge, green tea, dye tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or DIY Tryin brand as I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. Hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.