With the goal of longevity, a major premise of the channel is to optimize biomarkers of as many organ systems as possible. With that in mind, resting heart rate and heart rate variability provide information about the heart, but also the nervous system and adrenal gland. And we can see that here. So obviously, resting heart rate and heart rate variability are measures localized to the heart. But they are impacted by the balance between sympathetic nerves and parasympathetic nerves in particular, the vagus nerve. But also, sympathetic nerve activation of the adrenal gland which leads to production of norepinephrine and epinephrine which impact resting heart rate and heart rate variability. So we can see in this image that these two measures are an integration of the heart, the nervous system, and the adrenal gland. So with that in mind, what's optimal for resting heart rate and heart rate variability? In today's video, we'll take a look at how these measures change during aging. And then additionally, I have more than two thousand days of data. So what's my data? So first, how does the resting heart rate change during aging? And that's what we can see here. And these data are generated by WHOOP. Not here to say they're the best. That's what I've worn since 2018. So on the y axis, we've got the average resting heart rate plotted against age from the 20 50 year age range. And for both women in red and men in blue, we can see that resting heart rate increases for both up to 50 years. But what about older than 50 years? And a clue for that comes from the data for women after 40 five years where we can start to see an age related decline. Now, changing into a separate graph, this is now Fitbit data in a published study of more than 90,000 people and all of the papers in this video will be in the video's description. So in this study which was average resting heart rate versus age, but now the age ranges from 20 to 85 years. In agreement with the WHOOP data, we can see that there is an age related increase up until about 50 years for women in green and men in blue. After 50 though, there's an age related decline for the resting heart rate. Now note that relatively low resting heart rates are found both in youth and in older ages. So how can we know if a relatively low resting heart rate is indicative of youth or aging? This is where heart rate variability comes into play as that provides more context. So how does heart rate variability change during aging? And that's what we'll see here. So this is a study that included 8,200,000 people. On the y axis, we've got the heart rate variability measure. That's the root mean squared of successive differences. That's what WHOOP provides so that's what I'm showing in this video. And then on the x axis, we've got the age from 20 to 60 years. And then there are two lines, the solid and the dash. The solid lines are data heart rate variability generated at six in the morning and the dash are heart rate variability generated at six at night. Regardless of when it was measured, we can see that there's a age related decline for heart rate variability. And I covered this in other videos and if you're interested in that, check out the heart rate variability, resting heart rate play playlist. But older than 60, heart rate variability continues to decline. So now that we know HRV declines during aging, we can address the question, is a relatively low resting heart rate of indicative of youth or aging? And pulling up our plot from before, we can see that at relatively younger ages, we'd expect to find a lower resting heart rate in conjunction with a high heart rate variability. Conversely, if at older ages, we'd expect to see a low resting heart rate in combination with a low heart rate variability. Alright. So now that we know what should be optimal for aging, a relatively high heart rate variability in conjunction with a low resting heart rate, what's my data? I've been tracking this since 2018 so I now have two thousand sixty one days of data since that time. And we'll start off by taking a look at taking a look at the average yearly resting heart rate from when I started tracking in August 2018 through the 2024, March 2024 of this year. And we can see the full data here. Each dot is a single day's worth of data. So when I first started tracking in 2018, average daily resting heart rate was about 51 beats per minute. And then I reduced that to 49 beats per minute in 2019, to 48 in 2020, 47 in twenty twenty one, an average of 45 in 2022, 43 in 2023. So that's the average daily resting heart rate and for each year, average yearly resting heart rate. And then, in 2024, thus far after the first three months, average resting heart rate is 42.1 beats per minute. Now, rather than looking at year to year changes, we can analyze these statistically with a two sample t test. So when I compare q one twenty twenty four versus full year 2023, thus far, the data is a significant reduction in 2024. P value 0.001. And when compared with when I started in 2018, q one twenty twenty four is significantly lower compared to, 2018. So from these data, we can see that I've consistently reduced the resting heart rate from 51 to 42 beats per minute since 2018. But remember, a low resting heart rate is indicative of youth but it can also be indicative of older ages. So, what's going on there? Now, in terms of the good news, I've avoided the age related increase for the resting heart rate as we can see that it increases from 20 to about 50. But am I just experiencing an age related resting heart rate decline as shown by the red arrow? So for more context, we look at we'll take a look at heart rate variability. And over that same time period, more than two thousand days of data, now we're gonna take a look take a look at the average yearly heart rate variability which is shown here. In 2018, average daily HRV was forty seven milliseconds. I increased that in 2019 to 56, around 58 in 2020. Then, I had a regression in 2021 to about 52 milliseconds. But then, back on track in 2022, '59, 66 in 2023. And thus far, after q one twenty twenty four, I'm up to 67.8. That's the average daily heart rate variability in each of these years. And when analyzing this statistically, two sample t test, q one twenty twenty four is better than 2023 up to now with a p value of 0.001. And when compared with when I started in 2018, 2024 data is currently better than where I started with that p value of one times 10 to the negative 47. So from this plot, we can see that I've increased heart rate variability from 47 to an average of 68 milliseconds per per day since 2018. And I think a lot of people say things like heart rate variability is an independent measure and, you know, it's, that's your data and don't compare it against the reference population but we can see that it can be improved. And not by a little bit, by a lot. In particular, I've been able to increase it by 43%. So now we can address and answer that question. Is a relatively low resting heart rate indicative of youth or aging? So we pull up that plot again or actually not in this case. So a high heart rate variability in conjunction with a low resting heart rate would be what we'd expect to find, in relatively youth relatively youth. In contrast, based on chronological age, a lower heart rate variability, 35 based on the plot that I showed earlier, and a higher resting heart rate of 57 based on the whoop data would be expected. So what's contributing to these improvements since 2018? And I'll cover that in the next video on Wednesday. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where I include daily data for resting heart rate, heart rate variability, and a whole bunch of other stuff. We've also got discount links that you may be interested in including discount links for epigenetic testing, any dequantification, oral microbiome composition, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Scifox Health which includes ApoB and now GrimAge, green tea, dye tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or DIY Tryin brand as I've got on here, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.