So what's been making the the rounds lately is, the idea that you wanna have VO two max as high as possible. And there's almost this skew of, you know, we need to be elite endurance athletes to maximize our longevity. And that's in part because of, not to name drop, but Peter Attia. And Peter is basically referencing this paper, and this paper will be in the video's description. So if you're interested, check it out. And what they did here was they compared, six groups of fitness levels from least fit to extremely fit. They quantified it by METS, which can be translated into VO two max. So the extremely fit group had a v o two max of around 51, whereas the least fit was, 17. So that's our range. 17 least fit to 51 extremely fit. And then when looking at mortality risk, which is shown here, all cause mortality risk. When using the extremely fit group, again, v o two max of 51 and comparing that against all the other groups, people that had that v o two max in the least fit of 17, had a four fold higher, risk of death for all causes. So the least fit fourfold higher risk of death for all causes. So that that's the, the idea that's been circulating that, you know, we need to have a v o two max as high as possible, but I haven't seen Peter mention any numbers. So it's important to put that into context because because as you mentioned, your pre marathon training was 53 or fifty five? Fifty five. 55. And this is without I mean, what kind of training volume running wise per week? Well, I'm I'm only doing, a half an hour, actually, two half hour runs per week, but I've been doing it consistently for, three or five years. So I think I'm pretty maxed out actually as far as my VO two max goes. Although, I did gain even more once I bumped it up to marathon level training. Yeah. But the point there is we don't need four hours or six hours. I mean, you're doing it from an hour, and you've got a VO two max of 50. So I think that's an important point because, like I said, the the the the data, the meme that's perpetuating on social media is that we've gotta be elite endurance athletes. And from your data, one hour in conjunction with all the all the other weight training and everything else you're doing, VO two max over 50, you're in the extremely fit group. So the the other thing too here is to to point out the extremely fit group, VO two max of 51, when compared with the high fit group, which had a v o two max of 42. And I should say, from my own experience, I've measured v o two max, same thing. Face mask, the whole thing, a real v o two max test, not this, you know, estimated stuff based on resting heart rate, which is not reliable or not nowhere near as close to reliable. I mean, there are, you know, people online or, like, my my Apple Watch says my resting heart rate is this, my predicted VO two max is is 60. And and and I'm like, dude, you're 60 years old. There's no way. There's just no way. So, so when comparing so from my own experience, three VO two max in the lab, from 2012 to 2017 or 2018, I was in the low forties each time. Now that's with my regular workouts, my full body ninety minute workout plus walking. It was 15 to 20 miles per week. No running at all. So you don't have to be any lead endurance athlete to be in the quote unquote unquote high category for VO two max. Now is my VO two max the same since then? I have measured that. Can't say. But at worst, I'd imagine I'm in the fit group, but I I who knows? I'd have to measure it. The the the the interesting factor here is that VO two max is milliliters of oxygen consumed per KG body weight. So I'm 20 pounds lighter or or 15 pounds lighter than I was then reducing the denominator. So assuming my maximum ability to consume oxygen hasn't changed or even if it has changed with the lower cardio training volume, I'm not walking 15 to 20 miles a week on anymore on purpose. I find it hard to believe that it would be dramatically different. But alright. Nonetheless, comparing the 51 v o two max versus the forty forty two, you can see that even having high fitness, thirty nine percent increased risk of death relative to the highest fit group. Okay. So that's big news. I mean, that's basically saying you wanna have your v o two max above 50 relative to the forties. Right? And to put that into further perspective, you know, people who had, CKD, chronic kidney disease, forty nine percent increased risk of death. So, you know, being high fit is almost as bad as having CKD relative to someone who's, extremely fit with a VO two max of 51. So so this is very pretty pretty astounding data. Right? But there is some devil in the details, and, this brings us to the mortality risk across fitness categories according to age groups. So this study included a very wide age range, from 30 year olds all the way up to 90 year olds, And you can see the sample sizes for each. They're very large sample sizes, which is great news. And then comparing at each each age group, getting all the way up to eighty to ninety five years from least fit to extremely fit. And now the reference is defined as the people who are the least fit, v o two max of about 17. So, again, once again, within every group, if your v o two max was, what was it, fifty one, around fifty one in the extremely fit group, you had an eighty four percent chance lower risk of all cause mortality for thirty to forty nine year olds, seventy eight percent, eighty percent, sixty six percent, seventy three percent reduced relative to the least fit group. But where the details start to become, you know, interesting at least for me is when you look at the highly fit group and see the extremely fit group, okay, now it's only a 10% difference in terms of lower risk. Now granted, 10% is still a big deal. I don't wanna throw away any, association for reducing mortality risk. But this idea that the forties versus the fifties in VO two max is this dramatic reduction, maybe as bad as CKD or other smoking, it's it's kind of overblown. I mean, here, for fifty to fifty nine year olds, there's only a six percent difference for the v o two max of 42 versus the the fifty one. Eight percent for the sixty to sixty nine year olds, thirteen percent, and, okay, fifteen percent. But where this the story gets a bit more interesting is, you know, when considering that the 50 group, has a the lowest all cause mortality risk at every age range and is even better than the than the high fit group in terms of all all cause mortality risk, then the expectation is, well, you must live to a 115. You must get or a 120. You must get to the maximum lifespan. Your VO two max is 50. You're gonna get to the max lifespan. What's your life expectancy if you have a VO two max of greater than 50? So they looked at that, and here it was men with peak exercise capacity of 10 to 12 meds. That's a VO two max of 35 to 43. So this is not actually looking at the, the greater than 50. So the fit and the highly fit, they only live five, four and a half years longer compared to the lowest fit. The people who had a VO two max of 17, I mean, that's a five year increase in average life expectancy. And those would be extremely fit higher than, 51 VO two max had a six year. This isn't a twenty five year. This is going from '73 to, you know, seventy nine years. Right? So one thing I'm always talking about is how can we do better than the eat real food and exercise approach? A VO two max of 50 is great, but if you're telling me I'm only gonna expect to live to 80, that's just not good enough. Can we titrate the exercise dose? Can we look at biomarkers of overtraining? Can we look at blood biomarkers to make sure our liver, as you saw, isn't chronically, you know, damaged or muscle damage? Alright. So what about for the women? So the story is about the same. In this case, the, the 10 to 11 and a half METs, so that's a v o two max of 35 to 40. They lived only two and a half years longer than the lowest fit group, which is outrageous. I mean, their v o two max is double. And, you know, if we only go by, you wanna have a v o two max as high as possible, I mean, that's only a two and a half year longer life expectancy, and I'm not trying to diminish that. It's important. I just wanna add context to what's already out there. And then for the highest for the highest fit group, just to finish it off real quick, for the highest fit group, it was about seven years. But, again, this is going from a life expectancy of 69 and lowest fit to 76. Again, not 95, not a 115. So right. So I I I agree with your point, and I think that as you brought up, the one of the more important things to look at is that this is divided by your body mass, your your weight. So this isn't one indicator of how your lung capacity is or your mitochondria is because as soon as you divide it by the weight, that can overwhelm things. If you're on the heavy side, then even if your lung, weight is greater than that, you're not going to be in the elite and the other elite despite the fact that you're could be quite, have quite a good cardiorespiratory system. So, in some ways, I feel like this is, they talk about it being as fit as possible. But in some ways, I feel that what they're really saying is that it's important to keep a low BMI overall. So that's an interesting point because I should have brought up, the the, demographics the subject demographics in the paper. And it it was the average the average BMI within groups, within each age group was overweight or obese. What that means is a BMI of twenty five to thirty is considered overweight. And, actually, if I remember correctly, the BMI for each group was closer to twenty eight, 29, 30 in each age group. So these were overweight people. And then in some cases, it was, an average BMI of thirty or more, which is clinically defined as obese. So but what that says is for this paper is if you are overweight or obese and can attain a VO two max of greater than 50, you will still have the lowest risk of all cause mortality. But their models were adjusted for age, sex, BMI. But what you're raising is the more interesting point of what if your BMI was lean and you have the b m the the the VO two max greater than 50, what's the life expectancy gain there? And I didn't see that as a subset. I wish they did, but now that population is unfortunately probably very small. We're talking a very, very small group in terms of maybe hundreds, not 20 or 30,000 that they had in each of these age groups. So just to finish off too with the, people who are older than 70 with a cardiorespiratory fitness greater than seven METs, which is a VO two max of 25, they only lived about three years longer compared to the lowest fit group. So again, you know, this idea of of, you know, granted that I goal is to be as fit as possible, not just, you know, strength and mobility balance, but also VO two max. This is only a two a three year gain in life expectancy. The you know, they lived to 87 years on average versus 85 years. So, so I I think it's important to frame the context of, you know, what what Peter's putting out there, you know, that v o two max is an important component, but I think we we need more specific markers. It isn't just, you know, eat real food and exercise, get good sleep. It's how can we, you know, get the exercise prescription and get the dietary prescription and, you know, look at biomarkers of organ and systemic function to really push us beyond these 87 and 95 year, you know, caps for life expectancy and studies. I mean, I'd I'd add to that, play the long game on this. When you're going for longevity, it's easy to if you're trying to maximize VO two or your VO two max right now this month, unless you have a race coming up, like a marathon, it it you can take your time on it. And over time, even if you're starting at a standard level, if you're continuing to practice it on a weekly basis, eventually, you will find yourself in the extremely fit group as sort of, time takes its toll, and you're able to reduce the normal loss as you just age from in a sedentary fashion. So what do you think about I agree 100%. The I I I have a couple of factors too. What do you think about the exercise dose that maximizes not just VO two max, but general fitness while also attempting to optimize heart rate variability and resting heart rate. In other words, high HRV, low resting heart rate, you know, looking for that dose that maximizes all three where I think most people are only focused on how high can I get my VO two max, and if my heart rate variability and resting heart rate looks overtrained and aged relative to my chronological age, who cares? Right? So what do you think about that combination as an exercise prescription? So I I keep it, minimal. I'm always trying to get the most benefit for the the least amount of effort. So, my aerobic exercise, despite being quite fit, I'm very consistent. So I virtually never miss even a week of exercising. But just the the, two half an hour sessions of doing running, I find enough to keep the VO two max as long as it's on a really consistent basis. If you take, like, a month off, then all of a sudden, then the low the low, the low dose doesn't work because it will take you too long to catch back up to where you were. And then if you lose another month, and now you're basically you're almost untrained. A study that I looked at that did VO two max training had basically a a twelve week washout period, to basically return the person their cardiorespiratory fitness back to baseline as if they had never done any exercise at all. So, it even before three months, or twelve weeks of resting, even if you're taking, like, two or three weeks, I think that if you're combining it with a a low regular dosage, it's going to be a problem. But if you're able to be consistent in it, then you can use that to optimize both your HRV and, high and your heart resting heart rate low by only doing a little bit of exercise each week. I actually find that on my exercise days, because it's half an hour, I know that your routines are usually more on an hour or so if I remember correctly. Ninety ninety minutes. Not there you go. An hour and a half. So I don't even notice an impact on my HRV or resting heart rate the day after I do those exercises. In fact, those are some of my better days because they're combined with my fasting and other things. So, I think the key to to to working all those dials is to find a very efficient, thing and then do the get the most benefit out of doing the least effort on it and then be consistent about it. Yeah.