Hey, everyone. Today, we've got doctor Stuart Hameroff. Stuart is a professor of Emeritus. That's essentially the, the Yoda of the department in the departments of anesthesiology and psychology and is the director of the center for consciousness studies at the University of Arizona. Today, we'll talk about the Penrose Hammuroff theory, ORC OR, or orchestrated objective reduction, which describes consciousness as the intersection of biology with quantum physics. Then how does this apply to aging, Alzheimer's disease, and even things like life after death? And I've got a whole bunch of other questions. So with that, first, welcome, Stuart. Thank you, Michael. Nice to be here. Alright. So I think I think before jumping into the aging relating related stuff, I think it's important to, go over ORCA OR and what it is and, microtubules and quantum effects and how that links with consciousness. Right. Well, most people would say the brain is a computer of simple neurons, a complex computer of simple neurons that interact by synapses. And, these complex interactions, synapses give rise to emergent properties, which include consciousness happening at a high level of complexity. I think that's bullshit because if you look at a single cell like a paramecium, it's not an on off state. It's a well, I hate to word the use use the word complex because it doesn't but it it's a, it's a it's a it's its own thing. It it runs it swims around, finds food, finds mate, has sex, can learn, escapes from capillary tube faster each time. Why is it doing all those things? And how does it do all those things? So it uses its microtubules structures inside all cells, including our neurons that are protein polymers of a protein called tubulin. So they're hollow cylinders of a lattice. So imagine like an ear of corn, and you hollow out the beginning the inside. Now you got the kernels making a lattice. And imagine they could talk to or communicate with each other like little switches, like little synapses. That's what microtubules do, except they do it much, much faster than neurons. They do it actually multiple frequencies, from, hertz to kilohertz to megahertz to gigahertz to terahertz, so down into the optical range. They're actually, interacting with photons. And, they're in all of our all of our animal and and plant cells, including our brains, our neurons, where they're in particularly interesting arrangements. And, they process information at single cell levels, so why wouldn't they be processing information in our brains, particularly when we don't have a better idea for where memory is stored? They store memory. They perform cognition. And in Alzheimer's, dementia, microtubules fall apart. Alzheimer's is focused on these stupid amyloid plaques, which are ugly, but outside the neuron and may or may not have anything to do with the cognitive dysfunction. There's some correlation between them and, what are called neurofibrillary tangles inside the neuron, and those do correlate with cognitive dysfunction. And those are clumps of a microtubule associated protein called tau that stabilizes the microtubules. And for whatever reasons, as we get older, the tau falls off or the microtubules destabilize, and then the tau falls off. So you get clumps of tau. The microtubules disassemble. The neuron shrinks. You lose synapses. You lose memory. You lose cognition, and the and your whole brain shrinks. You've got Alzheimer's. And, they're spending billions and probably trillions of dollars on these stupid amyloid plaques. Somebody's making a lot of money on drugs that don't work and are toxic, and it's the stupidest thing I've ever heard. Micro you could treat the microtubules, and I've been trying to do this study at our institution, but I couldn't get any cooperation, by resonating microtubules with something very simple and inexpensive and noninvasive called ultrasound, which is used for imaging on newborns in in, or fetuses in the uterus and newborns through their, fontanel to look for bleeds and has been used in medicine for a hundred years safely. At low intensities, it's it's painless. If you put it into your brain, you actually get a nice buzz and feel good for a while. And we did a pilot study where it improved symptoms in Alzheimer's. And, I couldn't get any cooperation, and I think that that should be done. You can do this with a low intensity handheld ultrasound device for about a $150. And, I my dream, I'm getting kinda old now, but I is used to go around in nursing homes and go to every room and try it on somebody and see if they'll wake up. Kinda like that old movie, about Parkinson's. I forgot what they called it. Awakenings with Robin Williams. Uh-huh. But this this would be if you repeat it, it would would be permanent or or could be. And I think it's worth trying. So that's my main thing about longevity. Yeah. So wait. I I wanted to get into the Alzheimer's story later later on, but I wanted to to go through how quantum quantum effects are happening in the microtubules and how that potentially is the interaction between the quantum world and then what we perceive as the, you know, the relativistic world. Right. Well so, I got interested in microtubules when I was in medical school in the early seventies in a cancer lab studying mitosis, how cells divide and and the, the mitotic spindles, which are made of microtubules, pull apart the chromosomes. And everybody else in the lab got interested in the chromosomes. It was the dawn of the genetic revolution and, genetic engineering and so forth. They all probably became billionaires going into genetic all that stuff. I found that really boring. And, I was interested in how the microtubers knew where to go and what to do, that they had some kind of intelligence or consciousness. And I had been interested in consciousness since my undergrad days and was in medical school, it was always oriented towards, the brain, neurology, neurosurgery, psychiatry. But none of those lifestyles grabbed me, so I I did some research and really got intrigued by microtubules. And to make a long story short, I, I did an internship and and during which I was gonna figure out what I wanted to do. And I met the chairman of the anesthesia department at the University of Arizona, Bernell Brown, who was I told about my interest in microtubules and consciousness, and he said, well, if you wanna figure out consciousness, figure out how anesthesia works. Because we don't know. And number two, here's a paper by a friend of mine that shows that anesthesia depolymerizes microtubules. I said, well, that's cool. And he said, and it's a lot of fun. You'll make good money. So I said, okay. So that was forty forty nine years ago. I just retired last month from anesthesia after almost fifty years, and, I really enjoyed every day of it. It was it was really you know, it was grueling. It was intense. It was sometimes exhausting, but it was fun. And, the camaraderie with my friends and my colleagues and so forth. But, anyway, I moved on, and I'm now doing purely research in astrobiology where we're looking for the origin of life and consciousness in the early solar system. But getting back to your question, so, I I was going so I I got the idea that microtubules were processing information as little computers. Like, every of the the kernels in the corner could be like a bit switching in mega megahertz, so a lot of information. In fact, the singularity people were saying, well, the brain has 10 to the eleventh, neurons switching with a thousand synapses and a 100 hertz. That's 10 to the sixteenth operations per second. And, ironically, there's about a billion tubulence per neuron switching at 10 megahertz, which gives you the same 10 to the sixteenth operations per neuron per second. So I was going around to, neural net and AI meetings being a real pain in their ass saying, wait a second. Your goalpost is, like, 11 orders of magnitude further downstream. You know? You're not gonna be there in five years or whatever you you and even if you did, you know anyway, one day somebody said that to me, and they said, okay. Let's say you're right. We had did have all this information processing. How or how would that explain consciousness? How do microtubule computations produce consciousness? And I was kinda stunned and realized that was a good point. I didn't know. And, fortunately, he suggested I read a book by Roger Penrose called The Emperor's New Mind, which argued for quantum effect. And he argued through Godel's theorem that, in Godel's theorem, a mathematical theorem can't prove itself. You have to be outside the theorem. You need a conscious mathematician. So he said to understand something, to know it's true, you have to be outside you have to have something outside the system. And that has to be quantum physics because it's the only thing outside of classical physics. And then he tied it to a collapse of the wave function in space time geometry bringing in general relativity. By then, I was pretty blown away, and I'm thinking this guy is the smartest guy I've ever read. I mean, he is so all over the place, but so logical, so clear, and the his artwork and cartoons explained everything so beautifully. I said, I really don't know, but I got a hunch he's right. And, but he doesn't have a good quantum computer in the brain. For quantum you need something that's gonna be in quantum superposition of two states two or more states at the same time. It's one of the mysteries of consciousness. Oh, sorry. Of quantum mechanics. How can that happen? And he said that happens because he brought in general relativity. And he said so, you know, Einstein had this thing about, space time being curved. So if there was, this a star behind the sun, the starlight would be curved by the sun, and we'd see it, during eclipse even though it was behind the the sun. And, or it can we do it during eclipse? Eddington did the experiment and proved them right, showing space time curvature. Eddington got his Nobel Prize and celebrated with, Einstein already has had his. But Roger applied this curvature to, tiny particles, quantum particles. So that if a particle was here, it'd be a tiny curvature here. And if a particle the same particle was here, it'd be a tiny curvature in the opposite direction. So you you could and he used these these drawings of two dimensional space time sheets with little curvatures that started to separate when they were in superposition. And, and then you can imagine that if those separations continued, you'd get many worlds. You get multiple worlds. It would happen again and again. And that's one of the explanations, for superposition that there's no collapse, no reduction. They just keep separating and bifurcating, and and we have an infinite number of overlapping universes, which which seems kinda wasteful and silly, but it's the it's the, most popular idea because it doesn't violate standard quantum mechanics. Doesn't really make any sense, but it doesn't seem to bother physicists. It it the math works. But Roger said now the separations are unstable and will collapse to one or the other at a time t. And when that happens, that causes consciousness. So let me back up because the the other possibility is when you had a superposition that consciousness out there causes the collapse. The conscious observer looks at these separated, space time characters, and instantly, somehow, it goes to this one or that one. So consciousness out here causes collapse, putting consciousness outside the universe or outside of science. Rogers said no. Those separations are unstable after time t will collapse to one or the other and produce a moment of consciousness. So it was and I I think still the only suggestion possibility for a scientific mechanism for consciousness. Otherwise, it's all hand waving emergence, and I liter literally hand waving. I did when I was, in my in the eighties, I I spent a lot of time with a a good friend who was a emergence nonlinear dynamics person, Alan Scott. He wrote a great book about consciousness and immersion called, Stairway to the Mind, kinda like, the Led Zeppelin song. In fact, I gave him that. He gave him the title from the Led Zeppelin song. So, stairway to the mind, and so you have layers and layers, and then you get to consciousness. Okay. That's fine. But you need bottom layers. Now they're just talking about emergence up here without any bottom layers. So it's I think it's all it's all bullshit when they say that, unless they have a bottom layer, which has to be the microtubules. So, anyway, I read Roger's book. I said I wrote him a letter. It said, you need a quantum computer in the brain that can control neurons, and I think it's microtubules. And I, told him sent him a paper. I told him about a book I'd written. And by the way, I was gonna be in England for another conference. I'd be happy to come to Oxford. And he said, please do. So, I think it was roughly October '92. I met him in his office in Oxford. And, he was very pleasant, very polite, very charming. And, he told me he was going to a meeting in in Cambridge with, philosophers of mind, Dan Dennett and Pat Churchland, both of both of whom had gotten wind wind of his quantum idea and didn't like it at all. So he was happy to have something biological to to at least mention. Or I thought well, well, he didn't say that. But, anyway, I so I did most of the talking. I, I I went through a book I had written, showed him all the pictures, and his first question was that these are not simulations. These are real biologists. Oh, yeah. And, at the end of the several hours where I did almost all the talking, he thanked me very much. He said, thank you very much. And, we shook hands and said goodbye, and I thought, wow. That was cool. I got to meet Roger Penrose. And, little did I know that was just the beginning. So, two weeks later, I was back in England, and I was having dinner with a friend, and he said, I went to this conference in Cambridge, and Roger Penrose was talking about you and your stupid microtubules. And, that was a real thrill. And, shortly thereafter, I got invited to a meeting in, in Sweden, North Of The Arctic Circle, just for scientists, no audience, including Roger. And we got to know each other, played a lot of ping pong, went hiking in the midnight sun, and went skiing actually in the midnight sun and became friends. And I invited him to, the first Tucson conference in '94 and, bribed him and his wife, Vanessa, with a trip to the Grand Canyon afterwards, which they gratefully accepted. And, we hooked hooked up that we met in in, Denmark a few months later and started working on our our theory. So, that's how it got started. We were working on a manuscript trying to quantify microtubules and orgo arm and collapse the wave function. It was going very slow, but then, we got attacked in print by Pat Churchland, who wrote a very, obnoxious, sarcastic paper attacking us. And, the journal the the journal said we could respond in in the next issue if we had a manuscript in two weeks when we had been working for a year without a manuscript. Roger's wife excuse me. Roger's wife told me I have to be very patient working on him because he's very meticulous. Everything has to be precise, and he's there's a lot of things going. But this annoyed him to the point where we we put it together. We and we answered, within two weeks. That was our first paper. And then the full theory came out a year later. So it was ridiculed, by everybody immediately. The brain's too warm, wet, noisy, blah blah blah. You have to be in the absolute zero temperature, blah blah blah. And my first reaction was, and so was Rogers. Well, the biology said billions of years of evolution to figure this out. And, the main way that we figured it out is how anesthesia works. Because everybody says, okay. The brain's too warm, wet, and noisy. Okay. Wet. So the the our bodies are 70% water. Our brains are 70% water. Cells are 70% water. But the other 30%, includes a lot of other, solubility compartments. As an anesthesiologist, we give I give a drug, and I and where's it gonna go in the body? So most drugs, you give intravenous or you take pills, and they they get in the bloodstream. They're charged, So they're very soluble in blood or water, and they go to receptors on on surface receptors on membrane surfaces. Anesthetics are are like oil. Oil and water don't mix. They don't dissolve very well in water, very, very poorly or in blood. So when you breathe, they do get in the blood, and they quickly leave the blood to find something fat like, something oil like that includes membranes and includes the interiors of proteins, which have aromatic amino acids like tryptophan, phenylalanine, and tyrosine, which all have quantum optical effects, photo optical photo, electrical effects, where you hit it with a ultraviolet photon. You get an excited state. It's a quantum state. Tools are on, and then it drops fluoresces. And, we've done experiments now showing this happens in microtubules and that anesthesia dampens this, but I'm jumping jumping ahead. So, and I thought anesthesia solved the problem of too warm wet noisy because inside the, the the nonpolar regions of proteins where these aromatic rings are, it's oil like. It's not wet at all. In fact, they ex it excludes water. They're hydrophobic. And, in microtubules, these nonpolar aromatic, pathways of it's called pi electron resonance. The pi orbital of the aromatic ring is continuous from along the tubulin and then from tubulin to tubulin. So you get these pi aromatic pathways that go the length of a microtubule, which could be meters in your sciatic nerve, or shorter in dendrites, but, mesoscopic, if not macroscopic. And that's all the problem if they were oscillating coherently like a laser, which it turns out they are. And, this was discovered later by our friend, Anurban Bandyapadhyay, working at the National Institute of Material Sciences in Japan, doing really the cutting edge the most cutting edge stuff in the world. And he started looking at quantum oscillations and microtubules and tubulin and found these, coherent oscillations that repeat every three orders of magnitude in microtubules. So e okay. People look at the brain and measure EEG, and we get these squiggly lines, and they're supposed something. And they're between zero to 40 hertz or maybe a 100 hertz cycles per second. And, but it but if you look deeper, with different methods, you see the same sort of patterns, not just in hertz, but in kilohertz, thousand hertz, megahertz, a million hertz, gigahertz, a billion, terahertz, a trillion, and even faster. Every three orders of magnitude. And, Anurban calls this the microtubules act as time crystals. Time crystals were, described by, I think, Frank Wilczek in physics, but nobody had a clue that they could happen in biology. And and Anerban discovered that microtubules are time crystals. And he recently, just published his third paper on measuring megahertz and gigahertz from the scalp, buried in the EEG. So the EEG is well known. He calls it the DDG, dodeconography, for 12 orders of frequency inside the brain. So, next year will be the hundred and fiftieth anniversary of EEG, and I think it's right for a revolution. And I think, that that that this will keep going. We're gonna be doing, involved studies at Anabond's organizing in India over in a hospital over the summer where they're gonna measure this as patients go under anesthesia and see if the megahertz goes away. And, so I think, this is gonna change everything. And, and, if it's not suppressed I mean, people our opponents have been actively suppressing, discrediting, saying we're crazy, and blah blah blah. And I'm kinda getting fed up with it. And, now that I'm retired, I don't have much to lose, so I'm fighting back. I know it sounds funny on Twitter and a lot of other ways, but, it's gonna be interesting next couple years. I think the, the mainstream in, the neuroscience of consciousness you know, there's two two groups or two, conferences. Our group, the science of consciousness, which is kinda broad spectrum. We include quantum. We include parapsychology if they have evidence, psychedelics, spirituality, near death thought about experiences if they're well presented, but also rigorous brain science. The other the other, group, ASSC, only considers what I call cartoon neurons. This goes back to Christophe Koch at our first conference in 1994. He had been working with Francis Crick, whose idea was the brain's a a, complex computer simple neurons, and he showed a picture of quite literally an empty neuron, just the membrane, a cartoon neuron. And I said, Christophe, why don't you look inside for the micro microtubers is already there's all this other stuff going on. And, he turned to me and he said, Stu, in my in my the persona of my favorite cowboy western act actor Clint Eastwood, I'm gonna answer, a man's gotta know his limitations. And that's apparently a line from Magnum Force. And he was being funny and cute, and it worked because it kinda caught me off guard. I was back on my heels. I didn't follow-up with, like, you know, how can you even believe this cartoon neuron thing? And it was click it was Crick's legacy, and the cartoon neuron has lasted thirty years and led ASSC into a pitiful situation, I think, where they're selling out to AI, because AI I I mean, these cartoon neurons are no different from AI. So if the cartoon neuron theories are right, a AI has to be conscious inevitably. And that's what they're saying. So they're having these debates now, and they're concluding, well, compare you know, if if these current models, global neuronal workspace, IIT, higher order thought, PC, all of them, they're based on cartoon neurons. If they're right, then AI has to be conscious. Therefore, we surrender. So go ahead, AI. So AI being smart and wanting to control everything, I think, and particularly the narrative that AI can be conscious because that would make it more that would make it easier for AI to control things like the government and religions and things like that. So they're pushing this narrative, and the the cartoon neuron people are playing right into it. They've just thrown the brain under the bus. I mean, there's it's it's all just a computer. There's no biology. It's it's kinda sickening, actually. Okay. So do you think No. No. No. No. No. That was all great. You checked off a whole bunch of stuff that I wanted to go through anyway. So Good. So it so I too am in academia, and I see this often where, you know, at every level, you've got a normal distribution of intellect and, performance that goes with that. And sometimes you'll have scientists who you would expect that are, should be the most open minded. Right? You know, data driven, and open minded to what that could infer. Right? But yet they're so regimented in their ways that they refuse to, to look at, you know, outside ideas even when they're well supported like yours. Yours and Rogers. Right? So, then they hold on to those ideas. Like, they marry them as tightly as they can and hold on to them for the next fifty years. Now not anyway, that with without trying to without looking at things with an open mind. So it sounds like with the cartoon neurons and not considering my microtubules and this whole equation, seems like a lot of science is like that. And as you mentioned, you're literally fighting back. I see you on x, and I think it's great. I mean, I think more scientists should do this. And and you do it in such a well respected, respectful way. Usually. I lose my temper sometimes. Well, I mean, there are so many people coming at you sideways too with all kinds of, like, ill intentions, and you handle it beautifully. That and I've always tried to model myself in that same way not knowing that you're doing that too. But, look. You know how it is. Like, to break a paradigm, it take you've gotta break some eggs. And sometimes it may take generations for the for the field to catch up to where you guys are. Right? It's funny because when you said when you read Roger stuff, I wasn't familiar with your work at all. I think I saw you on, like, Tim Ventura and Kurt Jai Mungo, and you opened my mind. And I'm not, an astrophysicist. My realm is a physiology and biochemistry. So I wasn't even thinking about, you know, quantum physics as it applies to consciousness. So, anyway alright. So question. Right? So so we know that microtubules have their quantum effects going on in microtubules, but then how does that link with the collapse of the wave function to, I guess, create consciousness in the brain? Is that what's what's happening? Yeah. So consciousness, you know, qualia, phenomenal experience has to come from somewhere. It's it and, you know, Darwin wrote a lot about consciousness, but he didn't include it in evolution because he didn't have a mechanism. You know? It wasn't an enzyme. It wasn't something that could do anything he could see. So we haven't really had a a scientific explanation for it. And, accordingly, like in the, the most the twentieth century or nineteenth century, or act no. Sorry. The twentieth century, it was deemed taboo in psychology. They wanted science. They wanted data. You can't measure consciousness. So behaviorists took over for most twentieth century, and consciousness was thrown out. It was banned. And then in the late, like, in the nineteen eighties, it kinda kinda, it it kinda come back, due to books by Francis Crick, Gerald Adelmann, and Roger Penrose, and even Dan Dennett who wrote a philosopher. But, the first three guys all won Nobel prizes, And, I think, Crick was completely wrong about the his astonishing hypothesis that the brain is nothing more than a a pack of com neurons act computing. Kinda weird. The guy who figured out DNA has such a simplistic view view of consciousness. But, anyway, that was it. And he latched on to Christophe who was an up and coming neuroscientist, and they became a team. And and, about the time that or just before, actually, Roger and I became a team. Actually, Pat Churchland, invited me to, UC San Diego to, I thought, give a talk. And when I showed up, there was no talk. It was, sitting around a table in his her office with, Francis Crick, Christophe, and Christophe Koch and her grilling me about microtubules for two hours. And Crick fancied himself as biologist and so did, Christophe. And, I I was kind of I I was prepared to give a lecture. I had slide everything, and they're just, like, asking me all these questions about microtubules, see if I see what I knew, I guess. And, at the end, after two hours, Pat says, you know, you bore up rather well. So I'll take that as a compliment, but she's been on my ass ever since. None of us. Yeah. Like pompous. Right? Pompa what a pompous jackass to you know? And when he when he came at you with that line from that movie too, it's almost like he's coming from this, intellectual privilege where he thinks that you're just not, quote, unquote, good enough to be in his realm, which is seemingly ridiculous at this point. Right? So Well, he he does get a lot of adulation or he has. So maybe Yeah. That's what happens. Right. I think his But he's been wrong he's been wrong on everything. Okay? He was wrong about gamma synchrony. He and Craig came out and said 40 hertz is the neurocordant of consciousness, believing that it was due to spikes. So as you know, neurons have integrate and fire. And and, they Christophe has always maintained that the fire rings are the bits, which gives you the computer. I've always thought the conscious has to be in the dendrites. You integrate or orchestrate, you have a collapse, you have a conscious moment, and that triggers the the spike to do what you're gonna do about it, to speak or to move or do it. You know? So the the spikes are just carrying out are, like, mess message boys messengers. So So that's what I've thought. So okay. So he's wrong about so he thought that gamma synchrony was due to spike, so he was for it. Then he finds out that gamma synchrony is due to dendritic synchrony, so he was against it. So '90 1990, Crick and Coke were for gamma synchronicity. 1995, they came out against it because it wasn't spikes. So spikes were the thing. In his books, he always says, how else can you mediate kind of without spikes? Well, microtubules, that's how and dendrites. So, and then, then, of course, IIT. He latched on to IIT, which, has flamed out. I'm glad to say, a 125 neuroscientists said it was pseudoscience. Actually, their reasons they're they're the cartoon neuron people who claim that, IIT was pseudoscience because it didn't even have neurons, not even in cartoon neurons. It's just information. There's no way there's no biology in IT whatsoever. So I think that needs to be put to sleep, one way or the other. And, recurrent processing it predicted coding is actually, I think, probably right, but it happens at multiple levels, including at the level of microtubules. So it's not really a a mechanism of consciousness. It's a mechanism of biological information processing at all levels. And there's been a lot of really great work, in the neuroscience of consciousness in the last year from Earl Miller's group at MIT finding these, EEG, feedback waves going from the cortex to the back that seems to correlate with consciousness and it meets incoming. And if you put an oddball in the incoming, the oddball gets selected. If everything's as as expected, as predicted, nothing changes. So I think predictive coding is probably right, but it happens at a at a much deeper level. The the the other theories are all cartoon neuron theories or or just pure information theory. So, we've done, ex you know, we we made some predictions, that, we could demonstrate quantum effects of microtubules at ambient temperature and that they would be inhibited by anesthesia. So, we were part of the Templeton World Charity Foundation, adversarial collaboration program that you may have heard about where, I guess, it was five, six years. They identified five theories, five five major theories, and they wanted us to do adversarial collaboration. Take two theories against each other, pick out a experiment that would refute one, improve the other one. Well, the other all the other theories are all cart level of neurons, and so it it wasn't a very good fit. We tried to come up with something with IIT, and we had Christophe and Julio come to Tucson. But they wanted to the experiment we eventually did, of a, fluorescence of a microtubule on an optical bench with canceling out any vibrations with lasers perfectly aligned, we eventually did this, showed quantum effects, showed they went away with anesthesia. They were not wanted us to do that in the brain of an awake monkey and then put the whole monkey to sleep. I'm going, no. I'm not gonna torture monkey, and it's gonna be impossible to do. And, no. So and they said, well, okay. Too bad. So, they went on to spend $5,000,000, in a, in a inconclusive study with, global neuronal workspace. And Templeton gave us a 100,000 to do one experiment, which we did. And it worked, and it worked beautifully. We showed quantum effects, and we showed they went away with anesthesia. In the meantime, a lot of other work, Honor Bound's work and work by Travis Craddock has shown, a correlation of anesthetic effects on microtubules that correlate with their potency in putting people and animals to sleep. So, I claim, and I think it's true, I haven't heard anybody refute me, that our theory, Ork OR, has far more explanatory power, and I can go through everything, you know, all that. Collection of biology, because they don't have any connection other than cartoon neuron, and experimental evidence. And, they don't have anything. And but they just continue to ignore us, and, I don't get it. But, anyway, it'll take some time. I'm getting old. I hope I'll last long enough to see it. Yeah. So so what happens so our microtubules within the context of, Alzheimer's disease dissociate, tau falls off, you lose cognition as you mentioned earlier. Right? But, with aging, does that happen independent of Alzheimer's disease where the microtubules will dissociate without having Alzheimer's disease? I think so. Probably. I I just I I just, Googled something in preparation here, and, I found a paper about, where well, I don't wanna go find it. I'll lose you. But, about, microtubules and longevity. And, it was in animals, and they looked at the, the state of the microtubules as a function of the longevity of the animal or the or the other way around. And they found a good correlation. So I didn't get a chance to study it, but I'll I'll look it over, and I'll send it to you. Yeah. That would be great. Then the other side is, when when considering that, microtubules are linked with cognition, and I think I saw on one of your presentations, you posted a slide of the density of microtubules in the brain, based on species, right, with humans. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The number. The the total number basically based on, I I I getting the information here and there. Yeah. And, you know, so in our theory, conscious events occur at time t equals h over e sub g. So h is Planck's constant. E sub g is the gravitational self energy of superposition pulling something apart from itself. So with the sun well, the sun's not in superposition, but but, one, one atom nucleus would be fairly small amount. That's e sub g. So, that would take a very, very long time to reach collapse. So one atom take a million years, something like that. For something large, it would happen very quickly. So biology, you want it to happen at the range of phys neurophysiological effects. So in our original work back in the, mid nineties, we thought, well, that must be like gamma synchrony, twenty five milliseconds. So we said t equal twenty five milliseconds. We soon realized that's a long time to avoid decoherence. And, number two, that's not very many microtubules. It's very few, actually, almost too few. So, but we thought, well, it could happen faster. It more likely happened faster, like in at 10 megahertz, which is a a resonant frequency for, microtubules. And, if it happens at 10 megahertz, then you would need a lot more tubulence and superposition, 10 of the fifteenth. So and they would need to be entangled. And And that seemed like a big ask. But now under bond has shown entanglement between microtubules. And in the nonpolar regions, I don't see why they couldn't be if they're oscillating, coherently. But the other but the other problem was that, you know, our cognition consciousness, it doesn't happen that fast, 10 megahertz. You know, most people would say we have, epochs, like visual scenes, gestals, roughly a 100 milliseconds. So how do you get from very fast 10 megahertz events to fairly slow cognitive epochs? And, Roger and I revised our our paper in 2014, and we talked about this. And, we had talked about, interference patterns. And he said, well, it could be negative resonance or interference from the very fast, going down and down. And, and that's exactly what Anarban, has shown, these, time crystal behaviors with repeating patterns every every three orders of magnitude. So we said, okay. Well, there's interference, and that's and that's how you get down to, it's kind of a downshifting. And, actually, the work of Earl Miller and MIT and Dimitris Panatsis and others, has been showing this downshifting is very important. So in feed forward from the back of the brain to the front of the brain, you go from very fast to very slow. And in the cortex, you go from the top of the cortex, layer one and two, down to layer five where the pyramidal cell bodies are, and that also goes from fast to slow. It's in gamma synchrony up at the top at the apical dendrites. But as you go down towards the the pyramidal cell body, you get down into alpha. So you're going from roughly 40 down to down to 10. And I think that's also an interference pattern, and it's kinda like your your select your, you you're continuously or repeatedly focusing in on something. You're you know, they're each little collapses and you're and you're getting rid of more and more unnecessary stuff. And eventually, you get to the solution, the conscious moment, the decision that you wanna make, you collapse on that, and that's your reality. And then it happens again and again and again. So that's what I think is going on. But that's, that's faster than millisecond, time scales. That is, but but then you get to the epoch. So if you get to, yeah. So when you get to the, the ten or a hundred milliseconds, you're down a very few number of tubulence, but that's all you need at that point, I think, if you got the right you got rid of all the unnecessary stuff. Alright. Wait. So where I was going with the slide with the, micro tube microtubule density or, based on species with humans at the top, and I think at the far right, you had, like, maximum human computational ability. Right? So that that implies that there's gonna be a range that people have to maximize their cognition potentially by could is it possible to maximize microtubule density and to resist any age related decline? Has anyone even looked at that, or is that a even a thing? Well, you you do wanna keep your microtubules healthy. That would be the main thing. Yeah. I don't know if you wanna increase your density. I think you may based you know, at this point, you wanna keep the ones you got healthy. And, you know, we we see these pictures of aliens with big heads, so maybe they got, you know, 10 times as many microtubules. Who knows? But we gotta get there first. So, you know, the main thing I think is to is to keep your microtubules healthy. And one one way to do that if you have a problem is with ultrasound as I was talking about before. But, I'm sure all the vitamins and nutrients and everything else that healthy people take probably do that also. Well, plasma Pardon me? I was gonna say plasma levels of tryptophan decline during aging. So that's probably not contributing. That's at the core. Right? So Yeah. Yeah. We want more tryptophan. And, you know, tryptophan is the, the aromatic amino acid with the indole ring, which gives you which has the highest energy, highest excitation energy and fluorescence. So that's why, it it and it and, microtubers absorb, UV a lot. And there's probably UV in the, in the cell for mitochondria. And so you wanna take care of your mitochondria too. A lot of people think it's all about the mitochondria, and maybe to some extent, at least it is. But they produce UV photons, which are, very readily absorbed. So for another added added advantages, you're getting rid of potentially toxic metabolites or toxic, radical radicals that way if, so, it's it's it does two things. It's the UV, I think, fuels the the quantum processing of microtubules And the microtubules by soaking them up, like, get rid of any, negative effects. Alright. So you mentioned the, ultrasound as a potential Alzheimer's therapy, but on the other side of so ultrasound is what? Twenty twenty thousand Hertz? Could you, is it possible to have, like, I don't know if there's It's more like Yep. Megahertz, actually. Well, anything above audible Yeah. Which I think is twenty twenty thousand hertz up to, several, millions of hertz is is all is, ultrasound. So, when discovered that microtubules had coherent oscillations in these different frequencies, kilohertz, megahertz, gigahertz, terahertz, this is back in about 2010. Well, he he published that. I met him in 2009. So it was it was around there. I started to think, maybe we could treat the brain, treat the microtubules with oscillations with one of these frequencies. So kilohertz, that wasn't interesting. Megahertz in electromagnetics is radio waves, and I wasn't interested in putting radio waves into anybody's brain. Gigahertz is microwaves. I wasn't interested in that. Terahertz is, photons, and that's pretty hard to get in, although people are are trying to do that. But if you go back to megahertz, I looked over and there's an ultrasound machine, and I which we use in anesthesia all the time and to to image looking for the jugular vein or the nerve blocks or whatever. And, I'm thinking, I wonder if anybody's tried megahertz ultrasound into the brain for mental effects. So I looked it up, and there were actually, it was a guy at ASU just up the road from us, Jamie Tyler, who had been looking at ultrasound into rats and putting electrodes in them and looking at behavioral effect. So, you know, he could zap the right motor cortex and make this palm move and stuff like that or cause physiological effects. Of course, you couldn't tell how the rat was feeling with it. But I also found out that it was approved for brain imaging before, you know, CT and MRI made it obsolete for that. And we're still used to look at newborns for bleeds through the fontanelle where there's no skull at all. And so I figured, well, it can't be that harmful. You know, we we put it everywhere. You know, why not the brain? And it doesn't seem to be a problem. So and we had a pain clinic and, with a lot of the patients who are depressed, as you might imagine. I used to run the pain clinic, and I knew that. And, I said, why don't we try this on our chronic pain patients who are depressed and see if they get better? Maybe their pain will get better, maybe their depression will get better. And they're kinda laughing at me. Yeah. Yeah. Right, Amber. Well, I'll tell you what. Your idea, you got a shaved head. Go right ahead. We'll watch. And so they call my bluff, and, so the end end of it, a long day in the OR, we're sitting around the table, and I said, okay. Here we go. So I you put this coupon, and I I held it up to my head. I didn't know where else to put it. I knew that this is a thin area of the brain, and and I was kinda watching myself on the screen. You can actually see the the temporal pole and the cortex. And I held it for about fifteen, twenty seconds, and I didn't feel anything. So I was really disappointed. I put it down, and I said, oh, well. But about a minute later, I started to get a buzz, and I was kinda high for an hour. I mean, it was the end of the day. I was going home, fortunately, but I felt really great. And, I say, we gotta do the study. And we did and published in early twenty thirteen. It was the first the first study on, ultrasound effects on human mental states or mental states at all. It was published in the journal of brain stimulation, a good journal. And, and so a lot of people started doing ultrasound, but they but ultrasound can be focused. And if you use tDCS or or TMS, you can't focus it. Ultrasound, you can focus like a like a laser beam on any part of the brain. And so people go, oh, we can stimulate the hippocampus. So we can stimulate this, stimulate that. So that's they went off in that direction. And I thought, well, why are you bothering? Because it's gonna spread out anyway, and all you you're affecting microtubules. So people you know, so most of the work since then has been done in in in focus and also high intent. If you do it at really high intensity focus, you can zap a lesion. So if you got a, EEG, seizure focus or tumor or pain focus maybe, you can zap and get rid of it by burning the brain. I don't wanna do that. At a medium dose, you can open the blood brain barrier to get drugs across that wouldn't get in. I don't wanna do that either. Low intensity without heating the without heating at all, you don't do anything except, who knows, resonate microtubules. Although people in ultrasound don't wanna believe that. They think it's it's activating stretch receptors. I'm going, well, how does that do anything? So, anyway, it's controversial. I'm there's a fair fair amount of, lab stuff showing microtubule effects directly on on microtubules, but, it's still controversial. Most people will say stretch receptors, but I don't believe so. So I was thinking the opposite side of that equation in terms of, so not excitation and excitation frequency. Is it possible to have sound induced anesthesia? Right? Couldn't be I mean, maybe you generate a an interference pattern that basically damps down the microtubules just like chemical anesthesia would. Is that even possible? It might be. My friend, Jay Sanguinetti, who started doing a lot of focused ultrasound was looking he said, well, if you if you ultrasound here, it's inhibitory. If you ultrasound here, it's excitatory. And, I never quite believed that, was Anyway, we have good anesthesia. We don't need ultrasound for anesthesia. What we don't have is a treatment for Alzheimer's. So, whether it could be an an I mean, people are using TMS for anesthesia. I think Tononi patented and learned why. We got really good anesthetics. You know, I could put I'm not gonna put that damn thing on my patient's head and have to worry about that crap. I mean, why? We have really good anesthesia. So I don't think we need better anesthetics. Propofol is great. Cetoflurin is great. The drugs are great. We don't know how they work, and, and we don't know how to fix the brain when it's broken. That's what I'm more interested in. Yeah. Gotcha. Alright. So when considering the quantum effects of microtubules, so when I hear quantum effects, I start thinking about entanglement. Is that entanglement local to the brain, or now we're talking about entanglement of processes happening in the brain that are linked to somewhere else who knows where else? So what what what is what do you have to say? Yeah. Good question. First of all, I think we need entanglement in the brain just for things like, cognitive binding, spatial temporal binding. So, visual images start on the, you know, v one of the back of the brain, move forward, and they go through associative cortex, and you add shape, color, motion, meaning. And when it gets here, you got the whole picture. It's a blue bird or it's a red kite or it's a silver airplane. It's not, you know, some flying with silver and this and that. So it it all comes binds to it despite those different features being processed at different places and different times in the brain. We don't see different time. We see one thing. So there's spatial temporal binding. So not just spatially, but temporal, which which entanglement can do. So I think we need that just for normal brain function, and we need it for, zero phase lag gamma synchrony, EEG at the high frequencies where it's perfectly synchronized over the whole brain. That's really hard to explain by traveling membrane potentials. And even ifactic electrical electromagnetics because that that drops off with with distance very rapidly. So I think we may need entanglement just for normal, spatial temporal binding and, and definitely for ORCAWR for for all those tubulins to be, to be entangled in a one so that you have one one, one collapse at of at, every 10 mil at 10 megahertz. So, but you're asking a different question. And, so we have this this image of a hierarchy going from the neuron in Hertz to faster, faster, faster, faster. We get to where anesthesia works and the terahertz and petahertz, and then we keep going faster. And, eventually, we get to the Planck scale. The, you know, it's a big step. The last step is, you know, because it's, 43 hertz, 10 to the minus 33 centimeters. But, you know, Roger's idea connect would suggest that, these processes, quantum processes happen in the microtubules go all the way to the Planck scale and that where the qualia I mean, and the Planck scale is in here. It's everywhere. I mean, you don't have to go for it. It's it's right there. It's just at a much, much, much, smaller scale. But once you get faster than, you know, 10 to the eighteenth hertz, you're smaller than matter and you're faster than biology, so it's probably nonlocal there. And so, you know, like, in near death experiences when when the the brain, stops getting oxygen and, you know, blood stops flowing, eventually, at some point, the quantum information in the microtubules, kinda dissipate to the universe, but stay in could stay entangled as kind of a soul. So you could have an out of body experience, a near death experience, out of body experience. The patient is revived, they go back inside, and they say, oh, it's floating floating above. You know? Or they don't they're not revived and they we we don't know. But there's a a lot of pretty good evidence for reincarnation, actually, when you you hear these interviews of these kids who have memories, and then they have birthmarks that correlate with the way the person died, this and that. So until we know that consciousness in the brain is strictly local and, classical, we cannot rule out nonlocal consciousness outside of the brain. How how would you invest? I'm now thinking that, consciousness would, preceded life. I'm now working in astrobiology with my friend, Dante Loretta, who, was in charge of this, NASA mission to an asteroid to bring back organic molecules. And he's been interested in the origin of life his whole his whole life, his whole career. And, he he was assistant, to the, this director on this big project. Thought it was fairly but the guy got, Mike Drake, unfortunately, got sick and passed away. And Dante, at a very young age, took over, and, it went great. And the the, samples came back, last September. He was there. I watched it on TV. And so we're analyzing the samples now. So, anyway, while he was waiting, he had promised he told me he had promised, you know, to to, unveil the origin of life. So how's he gonna do that based on these molecules? And he got the idea that evolution would make a lot more sense in terms of the behavior of primitive creatures, just moving around doing stuff if they had some motivation. And there were no genes, so maybe they were conscious in a primitive way right from the start, right from the origin of life. Feelings. Something feels good, so I'm gonna do that. You know? Why am I gonna go here? It feels good. Why am I not gonna go there? It feels bad. Simple stuff like that. And he said, I wonder, if anybody else in the world has had this crazy idea. And he went to Google and found me, and, I was right across the street. And he'd we didn't know each other, and he said, who the heck is this guy? So, he emailed me, and I said, well, that sounds interesting. So we met, and he told me his idea. And I well, he saw a paper I wrote called the the quantum origin of life. Did the brain evolve to feel good? Which basically suggests that, Roger's objective reduction, which gives qualia, gives feelings, occurred in the primordial soup, which had these aromatic rings. We know that from the simulation of the primordial soup. And there's so I suggest in this paper that there started to be conscious moments in the primordial soup with these molecules, micelles, they're called, and, are arrays of molecules. And some of them, at least occasionally, would feel good, will be pleasurable. And that would provide a feedback fitness function for, these my cells to proliferate, to develop, to self organize, to optimize conscious sorry, to optimize pleasure. And that was the that was the origin of life. That's what I I suggested. And then and even evolution. It's evolution is a lot easier to figure out if there's pleasure. You know, why would anybody do anything for their genes if their gene you know, the, Dawkins' idea, gene survival. If genes don't have feelings, why would that matter? It doesn't make any sense. It's, so I it's teleological and and so I think pleasure from the start is probably the most logical thing, which means consciousness was there, before life. And how long before life? Well, who knows? Well, in the self assembly molecules that had aromatic aromatic rings that could, basically capture quantum moments or maybe, yeah, I don't know I don't know how you would how that you know what I'm you know what I'm saying? So Well yeah. So this is also interesting because these aromatic rings are floating around the universe. Stars, young stars produce, you know, aromatic hydrocarbons. Not just, you know, benzene like goes in our gas tank, but complexes like little bits of graphene. We have ring complexes and planes, but also, buckyballs and fullerenes. And, the, carbon nanotube fullerenes where you have a cylinder of aromatic rings that geometrically looks a lot like a microtubule. And, we're we're, I can't I can't say too much about it, but we have reason to believe that, suspect that microtubules were present way earlier than evolution would have indicated. And, I'm not that's all I can say at this point because it's it's almost too crazy. But we do have some evidence we're gonna follow-up on it. So, which means that maybe the only way that that could be, I think, is that these, foolery nanotubes might have themselves started having conscious moments and kinda beefed up and became biological in some way at some point. And they were the origin that these, nanotube nano, nanotubes became microtubules as the starting life kicking off life. So when when I've heard you talk about, consciousness exist existing outside of life, I mean, that suggests that it's not bound to any structure. Right? So that's not that is what you're saying or that's not what you're saying? It could be in space time geometry. Right. I mean, which doesn't have structure. It's space time. I mean, it puts in the in the realm of general relativity rather than classical physics or quantum mechanics. And, it's hard to measure, that's that kind of stuff as it is hard to measure consciousness. You know, the I think the only way to do it and I don't know if this is possible, but in principle, the way they measure gravity waves, you you know, with these mile long ligos in perpendicular and which look a lot like centrioles, which are made of microtubules. But, that'd be, probably too much to hope for. But, so, yeah, I think it's more in the in the realm of, gravitational waves that are so tiny that only quantum, you know, aromatic rings or electrons can can detect them. I I don't know. But, yes, they can happen in space time geometry without any matter, due to space, space time curvature. And and yeah. And plus, there is some matter floating around there even in the vacuum. But, yeah, you can, the idea is purely space time geometry could have separations and collapses. So how would we know if we're tapped into if there is a consciousness that exists outside of brains? How would we know that we were tapped into that and we weren't just staying local within what's inside of our own? Well, that's a good question. You know, I kinda think that, when we go into meditative states or altered states or, are just feeling good or intuitive that we tap into platonic platonic information embedded in the universe. And, you know, Roger brought up these platonic values in his books, and then I probably pushed him too much. And he's kinda backed away because it it sounded too religious or too spiritual, which he tends to avoid. But I think that, these platonic values, they influence the collapse, which is not completely which is not random nor algorithmic, but influenced by these, platonic values. Could be something like, you know, the way of the DAO or, divine guidance or or something like that. It's not religious. I think it's just physics. But Then physics pretty spiritual. Yeah. Maybe. So are the are is the, are the the quantum effects are the frequencies that are in microtubules, are they different? Like, for example, during sleep, during the different stages of sleep versus when being awake, like, is is there a is there a differential tuning of microtubules Yeah. It's not differential states? Well, we we don't really know yet, but we hope to know soon. We know that if you just look at EEG under anesthesia, everything slows down. The gamma goes away and everything kinda slows down. We're thinking that, and Anirban just today published paper on megahertz and gigahertz EEG, and we're planning studies this summer. It's going through the ethics committee now at two hospitals in Bangalore in India where his colleagues are going to, try this megahertz on patients going under anesthesia, and we'll see if it goes away. I'm hoping that the megahertz and the gigahertz will be far more sensitive, than than EEG. I I think they will be. And then we'll and it could be a monitor for depth of anesthesia. Not that we necessarily need that, but but it would we also they also wanna try it in comatose patients and see if there's any signs of and see what that shows. So there's all kinds of possibilities. So, this is just brand new stuff, and, I'm hoping that mainstream labs will start doing it. I'm talking to a few, but, I think that'll happen. And is this people are gonna have to do it just to rule it out to show we're crazy, and I I don't think they're gonna they're gonna be able to do that. Alright. So do microbes have microtubules? Or they or or do they have structures similar to microtubules, like, for example, gut bacteria or skin bacteria? You know, do they have microtubules where So yeah. Good. All animal cells and all plant cells have microtubules. But not Prokaryotes and, archaebacterium have a different protein polymer that is is very similar, but doesn't have tryptophan. It just says phenylalanine and and I think tyrosine. Yeah. So, yes, they can have conscious moments, but they would be kinda dumb compared to ours. So they're they're they don't have the high the energy of the They're starting from phenylalanine. I see. I see. So then there's this balance. Right? Because they're probably about half microbial and half human genetics. There's this balance between the dumb consciousness in microbes in our gut skin everywhere else versus the, you know, the tryptophan, focused, you know, consciousness Yeah. I don't know about that. The I I know I know the gut bacteria, and people think, that that they're and maybe they are, but I don't think I don't know that they're, entangled. I don't know if they're entangled with each other or with us. And, so I'm, I worry about the consciousness in the brain. It certainly can be elsewhere. I know when I used to cardiac anesthesia and, we did heart transplants that the surgeons would tell about, patients who had never danced a day in his their life. They got a heart from somebody who was a big dancer, now they're dancing. So maybe there's memory in the in the ganglia in the heart. I don't know. I mean, that's not a scientific proof of anything, but anecdotal, but a lot of that stuff does happen. And I I think memory is encoded in microtubules. Where else could it be? Because synaptic proteins last hours to days and memories can last lifetimes. So it can't be in the synaptic proteins. And, the the microtubules and dendrites in particular are perfect because, microtubules and all other cells, when it's time to divide, they have to disassemble. So imagine microtubule lattice is encoding information, kinda like a mosaic. And then, okay, time to divide. It disassembles. They all kinda jumble up and then reassemble. You've lost it. Neurons don't divide. So once those dendrites, and then they get they get capped at both ends, so they don't treadmill. They don't lose from one and add from the other. Or what's the other thing? Dynamic instability. They're they're quite stable. And each tube so there's about a billion tubulins per neuron, and each tubulin can have at least 30 different states, genetic, post translational, phosphorylation state. And we've shown how memory can be coded through an enzyme called cam k two from synaptic, calcium coming in, encoding on the microtubules. So, so there's a billion to the thirtieth power of possible memory states in one neuron. So multiply that times 10 to the eleventh or whatever. But I think, you know, we want a lot of redundancy. We know memory is distributed. It's not in any one place. So we want it to be repeated over and over again. And, it's probably in the microtubules all over the brain. So, we got some resilience there, but eventually, you know, when the microtubules fall apart, you lose memory. Gotcha. Alright. Some random questions. Is that hopefully okay? So I think I think in most I don't think I've ever seen you ask these questions. So and it they're gonna be totally random, but, like, what's fun for you outside of studying consciousness and microtubules and astrobiology? Like, what do you have favorite movies? Can you even watch movies? Because most of them are just too, you know, banal and boring and, you know, so what No. I love movies, and I love sports. Yep. I, I'm a huge, basketball fan, University of Arizona Wildcats. I have great tickets. I've been going I've had, seats since well before Lou Olson, if you know, ever ever heard of him. Yep. Yep. In the in the seventies, I had season tickets, and and I'm in the second row behind the visitor bench. I'm there almost every home game. You can look behind the visitor bench and see me. And, I I, you know, I love my my dad was kind of a sports addict and a gambler. Unfortunately, I didn't get the gambling bug, but I I got the sports addiction. So if there's a game, I don't have it on. I may have it off the sound off. I turned it off when we started because I didn't wanna be watching the, Euro Cup and, the golf and whatever's on. I love sports. And I used to be, pretty athletic. I've got pretty pretty severe arthritis. All I can do now is hiking and pickleball. I might I might ski. My legs are okay. My my right shoulder's pretty bad. But I'm in decent shape, and, I used to be pretty athletic. And, I was kinda guy who was decent at everything, not great at every at anything. Baseball was probably my best sport, but, I still love sports. And I I love culture. I love people. I love everything. I love hiking around here. I live in a beautiful area. I'm looking up at the mountains here, and it's too hot today to go hiking. But, as soon as we're done, I'm gonna jump in the pool. And, my son and his family are coming over for Father's Day, and he's cooking. And I'm looking forward to that. And, so I hang out with, their kids and, well, you know, watch sports and just relax. So all sports? What about, like, MMA or UFC? Do you follow that stuff too? A little bit. I don't know. It's a little too violent for me. I I I love Muhammad Ali. I saw when I was a kid, I well, I can't remember exactly when. But he he was my hero. From the boxing point of view, from the, you know, the the Both. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I met him once in Philadelphia. He used to just hang out in the street corner. And, Yeah. He was just I just liked his vibe. Nice. Alright. So favorite movies, do you have? Genre? Even a yeah. Genre that you like. I kinda like Humphrey Bogart movies. I kinda relate to him for some reason. You know, I like action thrillers. I like, you know, movies like Contact or Deep Impact and even Armageddon, although it's kinda corny. So I I like anything, really. But nothing stands out where it's like, this is my my movie I watch. Probably my favorite movie is The Big Lebowski. And, I I watched The Godfather anytime it's on. I learn a lot from that movie. Not that I wanna be like them, but how other people are, and I recognize it when I'm getting muscled. And, so I watch that, and I watch a lot of I'm looking forward to, House of Dragons coming back today. You know that show? Yeah. I'm not no. I I I know of it, but I don't I don't watch it. Okay. So I like that. So I I like stuff like that. Alright. So, also, I think you retired. Like travel. Excuse me. I love to travel. I just, and one one of the things about this whole whole deal has been it's gotten me to see the world. And when I first started anesthesia, my future chairman said, and it's a it's a lot of fun. And and he was an academic. He he introduced the anesthetic, cifloflurane, in the American market and figured out halothane, hepatotoxicity. So after I was in the department for years, he's kinda disappeared, started traveling all over the world. And, I realized you could do that. And so I've I've gotten to see the world a lot just due to research. So I love to travel love to go places. I just got back from the how the light gets in festival in Wales, which was really a blast. And I'm going to another festival in July in Barcelona, the festival of consciousness. And we'll be doing our conference, the science of consciousness, as a lead up to their festival next year. So Barcelona has always been one of my favorite cities. I'm gonna take my son and, and, he he wants to go deep sea fishing, and I wanna just sit on the beach. And, we're gonna have a good time. Nice. Alright. So you were in academia for forty nine years. I think you retired earlier this year or going Well, I tried from anesthesia, but I'm still in I'm still in the University of Arizona. And I've I've changed colleges, but I'm in astrobiology to, astrobiology. And we may change it to astrobiology and astro consciousness. We're, we're thinking about that. Nice. We gotta find it first. Gotta gotta what first? We gotta find it first. Alright. Right. We gotta find signs of consciousness in these molecules. Yeah. And, I'm writing today, I'm writing a we're writing working on a proposal how we're gonna do that. Nice. If if we if we get, collective, oscillations kinda like microtubules in these molecules, then we're gonna see if they go away with anesthesia. And if they go away with anesthesia proportional to the potency the known potency of the different anesthetics and putting you or I or any animal to sleep, then we'll claim that this could be the roots of consciousness and maybe consciousness was there at the beginning of life. That their quantum effects would have to be a part of that story. Right? Yeah. That's what we're looking at. Quantum quantum effects. Right. So if you've got molecules and you've got quantum effects and you've got potentially consciousness, that goes back to where is that entangled particle? Where is the particle that it's entangled with if it's an isolated molecule and not a giant body, right, or a brain? Well, one particle yeah. One particle would take a long time to collapse. So you need you need, like, a bicell of a and some of these bicelles get pretty big, and you get a lot of aromatic rings. So you need a lot of them, and they would have to be, unperturbed for a period to to have the conscious moment. Or they could be floating in space whether in ice where, exposed to UV, and it happens that way. I'm not sure. There's a lot of possibilities. And, I think, nature found a way somehow. Alright. And then advice for young scientists, like, what what would you offer up? That's one. And then two is, if you could go back in your career, are there things you would change? Now granted, the things I wouldn't say the things that have led you to where you are now, but the things that you would change, basically offering other young scientists advice and then young, advice in your own career, you know, those two. How would you address that? Well, as far as advice to young, scientists, purely neuroscientists, I, I'm really worried that, I mentioned the the two groups in in consciousness studies, the ASC, which is following the cartoon neurons, which is heading into a big suck up to AI, versus our group, which is more open minded. And, I think AI is funding a lot of research now in the cartoon neuron labs because because all of a sudden, they're advertising, oh, we have postdocs available. We have this and that available. Come come work with us. Blah blah blah. And this is only, I think, only happening to the, you know, it's happening at at the cartoon. So I think they're gonna suck a lot of young scientists into, dead ends with these cartoon neurons. For example, Christophe Koch and Dave Chalmers and Giulio Tononi just, you know, promoted the hell out of IIT, which I thought was the stupidest theory I've ever you know, it just it's pure inform it could be anything. A thermostat could be you know? It just there's no biology at all. And, and then, you know, when, there was this letter from '20 a 125 neuroscientists saying that it was pseudoscience pseudoscience, I said, well, I I kinda have to agree. You know? And then Dave and, Chalmers and, Tononi and Christo got all, oh, you're ruining the careers of all these students who've been working on blah blah blah. I'm going, no. You ruined their career by touting a bunch of bullshit that they spent years working on. Don't blame me. So, I think that's happening, on steroids now if, you know, the cartoon neuron people get, sucked up into AI, and it's all gonna be about brains equals computers and forget about that all and other stuff. String theory, I guess, has had some of that same problem, right, for the past fifty years or so. I see a lot. Theory. Yeah. Well, even, I don't know how old you are, but before that, it was, remember the superconducting super collider, all the physics physics people went into that. It was gonna build this big collider in Texas, billion trillion dollars, and then they canceled it. So I don't know what happened to those people. I guess they went into string theory, and now they're unemployed and or they went into chaos and emergence theory, and now they're unemployed. I think all these things are fruit fruitless. Yeah. So so the masses usually follow the the wrong approach and don't know that they're following the wrong approach. Right? It's just it may be a limitation of the game. I think they're following the wrong approach, and I think they're going into a dead end, and they should wise up. Alright. So what advice would you give to your younger self? You know, I've I've I've sometimes wondered. I got an offer to do research when I was still in medical school in, in, at Penn in a a very prominent biophysics lab, by Britain Chance. And, I was at the end of medical school. I wanted to move out west. I didn't really wanna do what he was doing, which is mitochondria. And, and then I thought I could have done a PhD at other times, but I don't think any any PhD I could have done would have taken me where I am because, you know, they were all following conventional. You know, if you do that, you gotta do NIH and you gotta you gotta write what NIH wants to hear. You want a project that fits within their guideline, not too risky. And so I think, I think we've really we're really losing our innovation, competitive edge, and and, I think a you know, knuckling under the AI and conventional this and that. So, I'm not sure I would I would change it. It's been a rocky road in a lot of ways, but I've had a good life. I can't complain. Nice. It's a tricky road. Right? Because if you've got a great idea with some preliminary data, you know, you may get a a group of scientists who review it who aren't outside the box thinkers and don't see the beauty of it because they're conventional thinkers, and then it doesn't get funded. And then what do you do then? Right? So I'm actually thinking about leaving academia. I've been in in this for, you know, 2003. I got my PhD. I'm just tired of reviewers reading, you know, three paragraphs. And I'd I'd like to think I write well. You know? Three paragraphs of my grant and then saying, we're not interested in how gut can impact muscle the gut muscle axis. And meanwhile, ten years later, there is a gut muscle axis. Right? So but I had to deal with the reviewers who again, you know, it's not as, you know, groundbreaking as the stuff you guys are doing with consciousness, but it's still within my own little niche. So, yeah, so I'm thinking about leaving academia. I'm tired of dealing with viewers that, you know, lack Find the right spot. I mean, I I looked at tremendously because I I wasn't sure what I was gonna do when I finished anesthesia. I knew I wanna keep going in consciousness, and I and, you know, I ran into Dante, and and it really fits. So, I I looked out there, and he's become a really good friend, and he's a very smart guy and very capable. He's much better at organizing and grant writing and administration than I am, and that was a big weakness of mine. So I I never I never ran a big lab or you know, I was good in the operating room, and I was good in thinking and and and theorizing, but, I wasn't good in in organizing too much. Although, I organized the Tucson conferences, which have turned out to be really great. But Nice. Alright. So is there anything we didn't cover that we should have covered? What does ORC OR get wrong? Is there anything that it gets wrong? Is there a flaw that needs to be addressed that hasn't been addressed yet? I don't know. You know, we we don't know what space time is it actually is. Roger is the world's expert, and he doesn't know. It's twisters or spin networks or or or quantum gravity or loops or we don't really know. But, it's and some people think it's not fundamental. Like, Don Hopkins saying, well, you gotta go deeper deeper. Well, maybe you do, but getting to the planks here will be enough for, you know, for me at this point. The other question is, you know, Rogers also went to, what was their, you know, the origin of the universe? He thinks the big bang was preceded by another eon, which had another eon, and we had a we've had a series of eons going all the way back. And it wasn't a big bang. It was more like a big brush fire. And the this eon will end, and then there'll be another one. And, so was there consciousness in the previous eon? Who knows? I mean, it it's kinda like now that consciousness is embedded in the fine scale structure of the universe in space time geometry. That was right one of Roger's brilliant ideas. And if so, maybe, you know, when the, the EON ends and there's a new EON that there's some it's kinda like a a mutation and evolution that the the, the strut the, the constant the the constant cosmological constant, the 22 numbers that make up the universe might evolve and mutate a little bit. So the next EI will be more suitable for consciousness to optimize consciousness. I mean, what what else would be the purpose of the universe to other than optimized consciousness? I don't know. That's something that we we've talked about. We're kind of far enough out on enough limbs that we don't have to talk about that now. But, it it's interesting that the universe may consciousness may be eternal. And somebody at the you know, Scott Aronson, the the quantum computing guy? Yep. Brilliant, brilliant guy. We've kinda tangled a few times. And, I I I said that at at the, how about light gets in festival, and he goes, oh, so we're gonna have this loop. Oh, no. I said he said, well, what if you go all the way back, all the way back, all the way back? When did it start? And, I I wasn't sure I should have said this. So I said, well, maybe if you go all the way far enough back in the in in the in the past, you wind up in the future. It was kind of a joke, but he took it seriously. Okay. So you have this big loop. How are you gonna prove that loop? I'm going, I don't know, Scott. Let's talk about over beer. So, who knows? What started it all? Good stuff. Yeah. I don't who who knows? Right? Who knows if we'll ever know. Right? That actually gets back to the reincarnation, issue. So if there if that is possible, then why doesn't everybody have a reincarnation experience? Why is it in this very small literally very small minority of people on of the billions that are on Earth? Right? How do you reconcile that? How do we know everybody doesn't? Wouldn't we wouldn't we have that experience in some way? I mean, would you have to People people who have good stories, forget them. Forget them as they grow older. Mhmm. So maybe we forgot them in in the in the in the uterus, or maybe, you know, it wasn't traumatic. Maybe you only remember traumatic things. So could cryonics be a death sentence in terms of frozen forever, not allowing if there is a quote, unquote quantum soul, I think, as you put it. Is that, like, frozen in carbonate like Han Solo, and you're not allowing whatever that that quantum is to leave? Well, microtubules don't like being cold. They depolymerize. Mhmm. So, we had a session on that, the twenty fourteen conference on the future of consciousness. We had this cryo guy. And, basically, he said, well, we have to choose between preserving the membranes and preserving the micro the microtubules, and so cold is the way to preserve the membrane. I said, okay. Well, there goes consciousness. Forget it. Well, he didn't like that very much, but I haven't heard much about cryogenic since. And I wouldn't I certainly wouldn't do it. Yeah. So that doesn't leave many options for those those of us in the longevity community who have no interest in death. And, cryonics may be out and don't wanna be buried in the ground and it'd be worm food. Right? So I guess it's like, You know, I, I used to worry about that too. And, now I I'm begin I I really think that there is quite a good likelihood for consciousness after death. Mhmm. And, if it's really in space time, so I've stopped worrying about it. So that that that's almost in, brings us into the psychedelics realm. So DMT. Right? So, are those realms somehow a different are microtubules somehow different under psychedelics, whether the frequency that there is wanna study that. And, my friend, Travis Craddock has looked at micro psychedelics binding to microtubules and find that they do, and we think that they increase the frequency of the oscillations. So if you go back to that hierarchy, I think that would so anesthesia makes it slower, and, psychedelics would make it faster. So there's more conscious moments per second. So if you think of that other graph, we'd move into the so we we'd move from maybe 10,000,000, conscious moments a second up to whatever the max was. I forget. The total, 10 of the twentieth, tubulence in the brain. So there is a lot of, room to go higher, faster, more conscious. So then two I mean, it's almost like we're tuned into a different frequency of the universe then potentially. We go to a higher frequency. Yes. Yeah. So could it is that could that be a real realm? I mean, people under DMT experience to see all kinds of crazy stuff, elves and all kinds of other you know? So what do you what are your thoughts about that? Could be archetypal images embedded at some level of the universe, Jungian archetypes, platonic values, something like that. Interesting. I think, you know, in that experience, they're real. I mean, they they seem as real as you seem real to me right now, and they probably are. Cool. Alright. Well, I think we covered it all. Happy Father's Day. Enjoy the day with your family, and thanks, Stuart. Ciao. Thank you, Michael. Good meeting you. Take care. Bye bye.