Trigonelline, which is otherwise known as one methyl nicotinic acid, increases NAD levels in mice. And if you missed that video, it'll be in the right corner. But what about in people? In part two of the series for foods that could increase NAD, we'll take a look at fenugreek seeds. And that's because they contain Trigonelline. In this study, point 262% Trigonelline was in fenugreek seeds. In other words, two point six milligrams of Trigonelline per gram of Fenugreek seeds. And note that that's seven times more than chickpeas, which was in part one of this video. But in two other studies, they've been shown to have a lot more Trigonelline than in this first study. In the first, ninety one point two milligrams of Trigonelline per gram fenugreek seeds. And in the second, ninety eight point four. So when considering the lowest dose two point six milligrams of Trignelli per gram Fenugreek seeds, I then added them to the diet to see if I could increase NAD levels. So for eleven days before testing, I added an average of twenty one grams of fenugreek seeds into the diet. And first I tried them raw and almost broke my teeth. So then I ground them and added them to a cooked mix that I eat every day. And when multiplying twenty one grams per day by the trigoneline content, the lowest Trigonellium content in fenugreek seeds, that yields fifty five grams of Trigonellium per day. But other stuff from the diet also contributed albeit lesser amounts including banana, barley, chickpeas, oats, and oranges, which added an additional thirteen milligrams of Trignelli per day to yield a total of sixty eight milligrams per day. But nonetheless, fifty five milligrams coming from fenugreek seeds is almost all of the sixty eight milligrams of Trignelli. So then, did sixty eight milligrams of trigoneline per day impact NAD levels? So to address that on for a February 2 test, I sent blood to Ginfinity for NAD analysis. And if you want to measure your own NAD levels, there's a discount link in the video's description. So on that day, NAD was 26.6 micromolar, and this is only a minor NAD increase, if at all. It could be test to test variation. And we can see why that's true by taking a look at all of my NAD results over the past thirteen months, which is shown here. So starting with the most recent test, sixty eight milligrams of trigoneline, 26.6. In comparison with the last test, mostly driven by chickpeas, twenty seven milligrams of trigoneline. So why didn't I get a bigger increase for NAD with a big, a more than double or more than doubling for trigoneline intake? Well, as I was making this video earlier in the week, I came across a fourth study where trigoneline's content in fenugreek seeds was 1,300 parts per parts per million. In other words, only one point three milligrams per gram, for so one point three milligrams of Trignelli per gram of fenugreek seeds, which could knock the Trignelli content down from 68 to about forty milligrams per day. Now that may be what happened here as I'd expect going from twenty seven to forty milligrams of Trigonelline, relatively small increase, and then a relatively small increase for NAD, 25.6 to 26.6. That could be what happened, or again, it could be normal test to test variation. Now without any deep precursors, note that my highest value has been 25.6 micromolar. That was both for the chickpea test for the last month and also for the my first ever test. Now without any NAD precursors, it's never been NAD has never been higher than 26 micromolar. This is again why I say this is at best a minor NAD increase as it's never been higher than 25.6 and here I've got 26.6. Now note that for one of those tests though, it was 18.5 micromolar, which raises the possibility that increasing dietary trichinellium intake may have helped push my NAD levels, blood intracellular NAD levels, towards the higher end of my range, which is again 25.6 micromolar without NAD precursors. So at least now with then without NAD precursors, the higher end of my range may be 26.6 micromolar helping keeping me away from 18.5 micromolar. And just to illustrate with NAD precursors, NAD has always been greater than 26 micromolar. As we can see on all of those tests there, with the exception of one test, three hundred milligrams of NMN per day didn't make a dent 25.3 micromolar. So when considering that Fenugreek seeds didn't impact NAD, is the Trigonelline NAD experiment over? And for now, I wouldn't say it's over. I've temporarily paused it. I've added other things to the diet that have Trigonelline like alfalfa sprout sprouts and I'm thinking about making my own sprouts because they're pretty expensive, $5 for a 100 grams. And I've been when I say add them to the diet, not five or 10 grams but close to a 100 grams per day. So it can get expensive. So I may have to grow my own sprouts. If I grow my own sprouts, there'll be a part three to this series for foods that could potentially increase NAD with a focus on alfalfa sprouts. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links that you may be interested in, including discount links for epigenetic testing, including telomere length, NAD quantification, oral microbiome composition, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Syphox Health, which includes ApoB, green tea, Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Die Trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.