Hey everyone. Today's guest is Doctor. Roger Schwelt. Doctor. Schwelt is currently an associate clinical professor at the UC Riverside School of Medicine and an assistant clinical professor at the School of Medicine and Allied Health at Loma Linda University. Doctor. Schwelt is quadruple board certified in internal medicine, pulmonary diseases, critical care medicine and sleep medicine through the American Board of Internal Medicine. He's also the creative voice behind the popular YouTube channel MedCram. And for those who don't don't already know, I'll link to his channel in the video's description. So with that, welcome, Roger, and let's get into the presentation. Hey. Thank you so much, Michael. It's a pleasure to be here. And something really that's passionate for me is this understanding of light and what it can do to disease. I'm actually more and more surprised about some of the things that we're seeing. We'll get into that today. We'll get into the science of it, and then I'll actually do some case presentations as well. So this actually is a lobby of a hospital in India where they're actually constructing hospitals now to allow more natural light in, and it's because of the data that's coming out. And I think we're we may be a little bit behind the world in terms of this, and I'll explain why that's the case. Longevity, which is what we all want, is, hampered, and specifically the enemy of longevity is chronic disease. And we've seen this actually for quite some time now. Things like heart disease, diabetes, obesity, dementia, inflammation, long COVID, cancer. All of these diseases really are things that if you were to get it, it would sink your chances of having a long and fruitful life. Interestingly, all of these things have in common one thing, and that is mitochondrial dysfunction. And this goes along with the idea that mitochondrial dysfunction is the central core of the aging process. So as we get older, our mitochondria make less ATP. ATP is the fuel that allows your cells to be animated. And as we get older, these batteries in our cells make less energy. And that is presumably a lot of what we see as we get older. So heart disease, diabetes, obesity, all of these things are a result of our not being able to metabolism very well. So if you think of the mitochondria as a engine in your in your car, for instance, which gives you a loaf of motion, it makes your car go, but it also generates heat in the process of doing that. And the process of doing that, that heat can actually make the engine less efficient and actually kind of shut it down. So the mitochondria uses fuel. It uses, you know, proteins, fats, glucose, things of that nature, and it makes ATP. So this is really important about what it is that's going on because it also makes carbon dioxide and energy. So this is really important as you're young and these things are working really well. As you get older, they don't work as well. You don't make as much ATP, and that's the big problem. So just like the engine has heat in your car that you have to deal with with the cooling system, the mitochondria also makes something called oxidative stress. That is the heat. That is the the situation. That is the oxidative stress that can shut down the mitochondria and make it less efficient, and that's what happens as we get older. So we're finding out that, the science shows that melatonin, which is a very powerful antioxidant, probably one of the most powerful antioxidants known to man, can actually mop up this oxidative stress and keep your mitochondria functioning well. It's kind of like the cooling system of your engine. This is the the melatonin for your mitochondria. Now you may think, oh, melatonin, that's the thing that is secreted from the pineal gland. That's what we do when we sleep. That gives us great sleep. You're right. That is true. But in fact, a lot more melatonin is produced in the mitochondria. This is a paper that was published, and I'll show you this in a second, in 2019 that shows that there's way more mito way more melatonin that's produced in the mitochondria that is produced in the pineal gland. And here's the point. The point is is that we're now starting to show now starting to understand that there is a substance which is absolutely free, which is does not require a supply chain, which can actually increase production of melatonin in your mitochondria in your cells. And what is that? As it turns out, as you may have figured out by now, it is actually sunlight. So sunlight actually improves that. Now let let me explain. Sunlight is made up of many different types of wavelengths. The majority of the photons from the sun are actually made up of something called near infrared radiation. So let's take a look at that paper. Russell Ryder, Scott Zimmerman published this in 2019 in melatonin research, and this is an excerpt from that paper. They say now that it's now been shown that the mitochondria produce melatonin in cells in quantities which are orders of magnitude higher and that are produced in the pineal gland. This subcellular melatonin does not necessarily fluctuate with our circadian clock or release into the circulation system, but instead has been proposed to be consumed locally in response to free radical density within each cell, in particular, in response to near infrared light exposure. So look at that. The the pineal gland less than 5%, mitochondria all throughout the body greater than 95%. This is really the lion's share of where it's coming from. So if you want to understand near infrared light, you've got to understand a couple of things. It's it's outside of our visible spectrum. It's beyond red. You can't see it with the naked eye, yet you can feel it with the human body. It's that warmth that you feel when you go outside in the sun. And more specifically, it can penetrate through your clothes. It can penetrate through your skin, go deep within the body, and actually interact with the mitochondria in your in your body. This is something that, is well known. It is a well known characteristic of energy that has a low frequency. You may have noticed this when you are listening to an electrical storm and it's very far away. The first sounds that you hear are low frequency sounds. You know, when you pull up to a stop sign and that car pulls up next to you and they're playing that really loud music, all you hear is the the low frequency boom, boom, boom. That's because that's the only energy that can really penetrate through their car, your car, and vibrate the steering wheel. The the point here is that low frequency energy like infrared light can penetrate very deeply. This is a picture of doctor Robert Fosbury's hand. He's a astrophysicist that works at the European Space Agency, worked on the Hubble Telescope, worked with NASA, and he's putting his hand in front of a near infrared light source and picking it up with a near infrared camera. And as you can see, the light is going literally right through his hand. You cannot see bones because it's going through the bones. The only thing that's actually blocking it are the blood vessels, and that's because water absorbs infrared light. That's why that infrared light, when it goes into your body, it's gonna scatter all throughout your body and then get picked up by these weak absorbers that are specifically in the mitochondria. And there's, an amazing work that happens there in the mitochondria when that near infrared light goes through. As you can see here, the longer the wavelength, the lower the frequency to the right now on this side, the deeper that this light is gonna penetrate into the human body. Here's another paper. This is from Scott Zimmerman and Russell Ryder in 2019. Again, looking at how deep does this infrared light actually penetrate down and it scatters. Right? So it's not just like how deep does it penetrate, but it's also how long does it take for it to scatter and then finally get absorbed by a weak absorber inside the body. Eight centimeters. That that's a huge distance that this is able to penetrate down with just regular 900 nanometer infrared light. So this is a study that was done looking at the clothes that we wear and whether infrared light can penetrate through that. You can see here many different types of materials. And here's the point. On the x axis, we have the number of layers of fabric. Notice that we're getting up to, like, 13 here before we start to see any kind of diminution of the amount of energy from their infrared. Like, nobody wears 13 layers of clothing. Usually, it's one or two, and you can see here very clearly that you're gonna be getting at least 50% of the infrared light that's coming to you from the human from the sun to your body even if you're wearing one or two layers of any type of clothing. The other aspect of infrared light that's really interesting is that trees are highly reflective of infrared light, not just trees, grass, leaves, anything that's green. And so if you go outside hoping to get infrared light, you're gonna get it, but you're gonna get two, three, four times more if you're in a green environment because it's gonna be coming to you from all angles, and you're gonna be just lit up with infrared light. You don't see it. You just see green leaves. This is going beyond that, and you're you're seeing this infrared light. Now infrared light is something that carries heat along with it. You experience this heat. And, one of the ways that you know that this is true is when you go up to the trees and feel the leaves, even on a hot day, hot sunny day, those leaves are never hot. They reflect that light very well. In fact, the coolest place in a garden is underneath that tree because those leaves are reflecting away that very hot infrared light. So to review, near infrared light coming into our body, whether it's outside, whether we're in a garden, whether it's green trees, it's gonna penetrate deeply through that skin, bounce around. It's gonna interact with our mitochondria to reduce oxidative stress, increase ATP production, increase carbon dioxide production. And as a result, it's gonna use up fuel, and so your glucose levels are gonna drop. So you're probably saying at this point, okay. What's the evidence for this? Well, Glenn Jeffrey, University College London published this couple actually this year, showing that in in, subjects that were given randomized, red light, this was 670 nanometer light, those that were given a seventy five gram bolus of glucose had a had a low had a smaller increase in blood glucose than those that didn't. In other words, the blood glucose was reduced because the mitochondria were so energized that they were using up the fuel and they were producing more energy in this situation and more carbon dioxide. They actually confirmed that by measuring the exhaled carbon dioxide in these subjects and sure enough those that had the red light had higher exhaled carbon dioxide levels. So this has obviously huge implications when we're talking about diabetes and and glucose sorts of things. Here's actually the study you can see here. Those obviously the six the, the 75 grams of glucose made the blood glucose go up. Those in red, we're getting the red light. Those in gray, we're not getting the the the red light. And over here on the right hand side, you can see those that were getting the red light at higher levels of exhaled carbon dioxide. So proof of concept, physiology at the human level, it's actually working. So let's look and blow it up to the epidemiological levels. Here, here's a study that was done out of Oxford where they took blood tests on patients. They just drew blood and checked them for triglycerides and insulin sensitivity. And what they did was they looked at the previous seven days prior to that blood draw and they asked themselves in the weather report, how many hours of of sunlight were there? And you know what they found? They found that the more hours of sunlight that there were before the blood draw was done, not temperature, but sunlight, that correlated to improved insulin sensitivity and reduced triglycerides. Again, suggesting that more sunlight has an effect on the human body even within a few days. Alright. What about over years? And and what about survival? So this is a study that was done in Southern Sweden, published about eight years ago in 2016. And they took 30,000 Swedish women and asked them, hey. Do you avoid the sun? Do you go out into the sun? Do you avidly go out into the sun? Divided them up into those three groups. And what did they find? They found that those that avoided the sun had higher total mortality rates, higher cardiovascular disease mortality rates, higher cancer mortality rates, and higher non cardiovascular disease, and that the more sunlight that they actually went with, the lower the absolute all cause mortality got, not just all cause mortality, cardiovascular disease, mortality, cancer disease mortality, and non cardiovascular disease mortality. Now this is an associate of study, so they say, wow. You really can't say causation, but I would I would look at this, Mike, and that is that that there was a dose response curve here, which means, that this is highly suggestive of a, of a causation relationship. In fact, the magnitude of sunlight in the study was so large that nonsmokers who avoided sun exposure had a life expectancy similar to smokers in the highest sun exposure group. It it makes you wonder now that when we have people that go outside to smoke okay. What are we doing? We're having them go outside. This could actually be the best thing for them because the smoking is offset by the sunlight in in this type of thing. Obviously, maybe twenty minutes, fifteen minutes is is not enough. Maybe it needs more. Alright. And by the way, that study was replicated in a recent, Texas study that looked at, sorry, a UK Biobank study that looked at 10 times the amount of of, people. So not just women, not just 30,000, but men and women, 300,000 in the UK Biobank study. And you know what they found? Exactly the same results. People who are outside in the sun more had reduction in all cause mortality in, in cardiovascular disease mortality and, yes, cancer mortality. We're concerned that if we go out into the sun, we're gonna have more melanoma, more basal cell carcinoma, more squamous cell carcinoma. But in fact, the data shows that there's actually a reduction in all cancer mortality. So here's another, study that looked at this. Here we're looking at satellite data at night. Okay. So light in the day is good. What about light at night? Is that good or is that bad? And, the studies have shown that it's bad. It's based on studies that looked at satellite data and where people were living. This is the, the the type of of data that they're looking at in China to see where people are dying and how close are they to night light. There was this study that was published in the proceeds of the National Academy of Sciences titled brighter nights and darker days predict higher mortality risk. This was a Texas study that looked at 88,000 individuals, UK Biobank, but they were not looking at satellite data. They were actually wearing a device that was measuring light at all hours of the day. This is about 88,000, 89,000. They followed them for eight years. This is amazing what they found. So they looked at model one and, let me see here. Yeah. Model one where they looked at the time of day here on the x axis. So 16, that's about 04:00 in the afternoon to 04:00 in the afternoon. And they asked this question, compared to people who get fiftieth percentile of light exposure and less, what would happen to mortality for people that were in the fiftieth to seventieth percentile? That's here in blue at the bottom. People in the seventieth to ninetieth percentile, that's in purple here in the middle. And people who got the highest amounts of light, ninetieth to 100 percentile, and that's here in red. Notice, first of all, what happens? As we go from fiftieth to seventieth, seventieth to ninetieth, and ninth to a 100, do you notice what happens? The amplitude of this effect gets bigger and bigger. What does that suggest? Dose response curve. Again, it implies causation in the, Bradford Hill criteria. Okay. What else do you notice? Notice that sunlight at all hours of the day reduces mortality except for from about midnight to about 07:00 in the morning. So having bright light from midnight to about 07:00 in the morning is not a good thing. In fact, this thing stops to become beneficial at around 09:00 at night. And you can see that works in all cause mortality, cardiometabolic activity, and other cause mortality. Same sort of situation. We're seeing that light during the day is beneficial. Light at night is not beneficial. Okay? And this was the, findings. They said these findings demonstrate the importance of maintaining a dark environment across late night and early morning hours when the central circadian pacemaker is most sensitive to light and seeking bright light during the day to enhance circadian rhythms. Protection of lighting environments may be especially important in those at risk for both circadian disruption and mortality, such as in intensive care units or aged care settings. Across the general population, avoiding night light and seeking daylight may lead to a reduction in disease burden, especially cardiometabolic diseases and may increase longevity. Michael, this is exactly the same diseases that we're talking about the beginning when we're talking about the mitochondrion. We're actually connecting these dots. Let's connect it even more. We said that trees and grass and leaves, highly reflective of infrared light. What do we see when people go out into these spaces? We have known for decades that people who live in green spaces have better outcomes. Notice this, twenty eight percent reduction in diabetes type two, sixteen percent reduction in cardiovascular mortality, thirty one percent reduction in total mortality. And, you know, people say, well, look. Hey. These people who live in green spaces, they have more money. They have more status. They can exercise more. This is the reason why they have better mortality. Well, I got a I got a, I got a a study for you. South Louisville, Kentucky, four square mile area. They measured CRP levels, which is a surrogate for cardiovascular disease. And then they went and planted 8,000 trees, mature trees with leaves already on them. That's all they did. They just planted trees. Now according to what we've talked about today, that would improve and increase infrared light, especially when you go outside. That should have beneficial effects just by itself without exercising. Obviously, we didn't inject money into their bank accounts. We didn't do anything else. We just planted the trees. And then two to three years later, we measured CRP levels again. There was a mind blowing reduction of CRP in that in the same population by 13%. That may not sound like a lot, but that's about the equivalent that you would get with, exercise, regular exercise three times a week. So that's mind blowing. What did this study of meta analysis of everybody who gets outside into green spaces find? Well, let me tell you what they found. They said that we found that spending time in or living close to natural green spaces is associated with diverse and significant health benefits. It reduces the risk of now listen to these diseases. See if they sound familiar. Type two diabetes, cardiovascular disease, premature death, preterm birth, and increases sleep duration. People living closer to nature also have reduced diastolic blood pressure, heart rate, and stress. In fact, one of the really interesting things that we found is that exposure to green space significantly reduces people's levels of salivary cortisol, a physiological marker of stress. Alright. So with all of this evidence, right, all of this evidence, we took you we looked at individual physiological evidence with Glenn Jeffries' lab, and he's got a a whole bunch more tests and studies that we could talk about. Then we talked about the epidemiological test, and we just kept getting bigger and bigger and bigger and showing these things. You would think at this point that there would be something from the dermatological literature saying, hey. You know, we we don't agree with you. Well, in fact, there's a UK dermatologist who published in a very large dermatological paper, entitled the, the Journal of Investigative Dermatology published just this August in 2024 titled sunlight, time for a rethink. And this is what he says basically. He he says, hey. Look. There's a number of organizations that have just both produced position statements recognizing that sunlight has beneficial sunlight exposure and highlighting the necessity of carrying out further research into these beneficial effects, we should take note. So, in fact, even the dermatologists are recognizing that there are benefits with sunlight exposure. I took note. I'll tell you, there were a lot of questions that I had because I'm a pulmonary and critical care physician. I worked at the intensive care unit. I took care of patients. And I had a lot of questions in the last four or five years when I saw these COVID patients coming in. One of the first questions I had had to do with why these patients that were coming in all had these metabolic disorders. Because we were told initially at the beginning that the patients that we were gonna be seeing in the intensive care unit were should be respiratory patients because this was a respiratory virus. And and while we did have patients with COPD, we did have patients with asthma, that was by far and large not the people that we saw. We saw the people that we talked about at the beginning, the people with mitochondrial dysfunction. And I began to ask myself, why is that the case? So if we go back and look at the mitochondria, which we said the big problem there is oxidative stress, one of the things that we need to look at and understand is that the ACE two receptor is not just a receptor for the SARS CoV two virus. In fact, the ACE two receptor is as much more than that. It's actually the modulator of, guess what, oxidative stress. And so when the virus was spreading around all throughout the country, the world, what was happening is that we were knocking out the ACE two receptor in the entire population. Now some of our cars, if you will, were operating a little bit hot. Some of our cars were not operating as hot. Maybe they were they were in a better situation. But you can imagine that this was like a stress test. Getting SARS CoV two infection was knocking out that ACE two, modulator of oxidative stress. And for some of us, that was going up a hill called COVID nineteen. And for those of us that had hot engines already where our cooling systems were not working well, we didn't have a lot of melatonin. We didn't have a lot of antioxidants. We had oxidative stress. That was enough to shut down the engine for it to overheat. And the people that we saw that in were exactly the same people, Michael, that we talked about at the beginning of this presentation. Heart disease, diabetes, obesity, dementia, inflammation, and cancer. These were exactly the same people that I was seeing in my intensive care unit that were not doing well. But I said that I had a couple of questions. Here was the other question that I had. We knew very early on that people that were coming into the intensive care unit had vitamin d levels. Those that had high vitamin d levels or normal vitamin d levels did very well. Those that had low vitamin d levels did not do well. Now we know that correlation does not necessarily mean causation, but what we decided to do because it was very low risk was to supplement these people with oral vitamin d. And, you know, there were some studies that seem to show that it may have helped out, but there are other studies, plenty of those studies that did not show any benefit whatsoever. So I began to wonder whether or not vitamin d was helping a little bit, but was more of a marker of something else that they were getting that was helping them out. And, of course, the way that you get vitamin d levels elevated is to go out into the sun. So I began to wonder whether or not, in fact, people with high vitamin d levels were doing well, not just because they had high vitamin d levels from a fraction of the sunlight, which is UVB exposure, but in fact, from the rest of the 53% of the photons from the sun that are in the infrared spectrum that we've already shown improves melatonin in the intracellular area in the mitochondria. And, of course, that's a very powerful antioxidant. And, of course, if COVID nineteen is a oxidative stress disease, this could have very huge implications. So I began to look at data. And here we look at the data here. This is paper that was published in January 2021 in scientific reports. And what they did here was they looked at the surges of COVID nineteen in the 2020. So as the sun started to come down in the Northern Hemisphere and start to drop into the Southern Hemisphere, certain countries started to get picked off one by one, and we started to see one by one that these countries were having surges starting first with Finland ending up last with Greece. So this did not correlate with temperature. This did not correlate with humidity. What it correlated was with latitude, 100% perfect correlation. Then I began to think, okay. Maybe there's something here to this sunlight question. Then there was another study that was published in April 2021 in epidemiology. Again, looking at this time, not the amount of COVID happening, but the mortality of COVID happening. And what they found was that, sure enough, in not only The United States, but also in England and again in Italy prospectively, they found basically that the more sunlight there was, the lower the COVID nineteen mortality was in that area. And they published this. In fact, they said it suggests that optimizing sun exposure may be a possible public health intervention. Given that the effect appears independent of a vitamin d pathway, it suggests possible new COVID nineteen therapies. That was amazing. So I took that opportunity to look, and I actually teamed up with Margaret Scutch, who is a geographist. And she looked at the the global, situation, and we looked at countries that had a greater than fifty percent overweight rate rates. And we asked the question, does COVID nineteen correlate with latitude of these countries generally speaking? And the answer was absolutely. Limiting countries to more than to to just the fifty percent of the population being overweight or higher, there was a definite association. We actually published that in June 2022 in melatonin research. But let me just back up a little bit here because it's not just COVID. Truth be told here, if you look at every single natural cause of death, whether it be heart disease, stroke, chronic lower respiratory disease, Alzheimer's disease, diabetes, influenza, kidney disease, you name it, anything that goes on the death certificate from a natural cause. Look here, Michael. Look at look at this very carefully. They all peak right at the end of the year. So literally just weeks after the shortest day of the year, every single year. It's just incredible. And it's not just heart disease. It's all of them. So it's not just a situation where you say, okay. Well, maybe we're all going inside because it's cold, and we're spreading the germs around. Okay. I could understand that maybe for an infectious disease. But heart disease, kidney disease, these are not infectious diseases. Right? These are all peaking at that period and that time of year. Here's another way of looking at it. By the way, if I if I, were to to show you Australia's version of this chart, and I don't have it with me at the moment, but if I were to show you Australia's version of this chart, it shifted six months. So it's still happening about a week or so after the shortest day of the year, but their shortest day of the year is in July. Right? Because they're in the seventh Southern Hemisphere. Hemisphere. By the way, the coldest month in Australia is July. Yet the average highs in July is, like, in the mid sixties in Australia. So it's not even cold in December. You can't use that as an excuse that everybody's going inside and putting on the heating, and you're spreading around these viruses. This has to do with the amount of sunlight that people are getting, I am convinced. So let's focus it on the flu. Again, very clearly, this flu deaths, we can predict exactly when it's going to happen, and it always happens every year just a few weeks after the shortest day of the year. And we've already shown you that sunlight can have an effect on the human body literally within days. So that changes very quickly. But don't take my word for it. Let's look at the Harvard Kennedy School. They did a study that looked at solar radiation data from the National Solar Radiation Database and CDC data for influenza. And they were able to actually look at 2009, which you may recall, we had an epidemic of h one n one that year that came in really early. So, like, in July, August, September, well before the normal flu season, there was reduced sunlight across the country, and it was in specific areas. So we were able to actually look at this in terms of temperature, in terms of humidity, and in terms of sunlight. And guess what the Harvard Kennedy School found? They said, quote, we find that sunlight strongly protects against getting influenza. So it's not a temperature or humidity thing. Alright. So what is it that's actually happening? Why would sunlight be beneficial? Well, this is a study that was published, oh, back in 2021 looking at infrared light therapy. That's the majority of the photons coming from the sun, bar none. What they do is it actually shows that it reduces toll like receptor four dependent hyper inflammation. You can see the data here on the right hand side. It reduces I l six. We have we actually have drug medications in FDA approval that is supposed to do exactly that same thing for COVID nineteen. Guess what? Infrared light does the same thing. It drops, I l six, whether it's coming from an LED or incandescent bulb. It does exactly the same thing. I l eight, same thing. Tumor necrosis factor alpha, same thing. Interferon alpha and interferon beta are interferons which stimulate the humoral arm or the adaptive arm of the immune system. This is exactly what is ramping up after seven days of COVID nineteen, and you're getting that cytokine storm, getting into the intensive care unit, and getting intubated. This is what we want to reduce as opposed to the gamma interferon, which is more cell mediated, which is where it actually breaks down cells that are already infected. And guess what? Chronic exposure to natural sunlight actually has the opposite effect of that. Why this is so beneficial. Getting out into the sunlight when you come down with an infection is gonna help clear up the virus, and it's going to mitigate, reduce, attenuate that humoral response on day seven. So so impressive. But you're saying here probably at this point, Michael, you're saying, okay. This is a lot of circumstantial data that seems to suggest it. What we really need is a randomized placebo controlled trial that actually takes patients with this disease, gives some of them randomly infrared light, and some of them placebo. Well, I've got that study here for you. Published in a very top photobiomodulation journal, '95 percentile in terms of impact factor, published in January 2023 by Pereira et al. They did a, very carefully conducted, inclusion criteria, 30 inpatients between the ages of 50 and 80 with a diagnosis of COVID nineteen, BMI of less than thirty, no cancer, no photosensitivity, not intubated, but sick enough to actually be admitted to the hospital. And they did a very simple experiment. They actually made a jacket with infrared light LEDs that, of course, are broadcasting in a light that you can't see, so it's blinded by definition. And, it was at 940 nanometers, and they did this for just fifteen minutes a day. Just fifteen minutes a day. That was it for seven days. And they asked the question, what happened? Well, actually, the randomization of those two groups was a little bit off, but it actually turned out that the people in the intervention group, the near infrared group, were actually slightly sicker than those that were in the control group. So the randomization actually was biased against the intervention group. Nevertheless, what happened? In the NIR group, oxygen saturation improved higher and faster than the control group. Those patients were able to take deeper and stronger breaths after those seven days. The respiratory rate and the heart rate improved faster than in the control group. The lymphocytes, which are extremely important in getting rid of cells that are infected with the virus, instead of in the control group where they continued to drop down because the virus were infecting them, there was actually a an increase of 850, cells per cubic, millimeter. But here's the most mind blowing statistic here in terms of endpoints. People who got near infrared light for just fifteen minutes a day We're discharged a full four days faster than those in the control group. I don't have to tell you that has huge implications in terms of the finances and hospitals, actually, on the positive. So many hospitals, what they'll do is when they have a patient that gets admitted with a specific diagnosis, the insurance company will pay a block sum for that diagnosis. And it's up to the hospital to get that patient quicker, faster, better, and out the door so they can take the profits on that whatever was given to them and not have the expenses of a patient taking up a hospital bed and having a nurse. So that's called the DRG. There's also something called subcapitation or capitation where the hospital is paid per member per month. So I don't have to tell you that if if we can somehow get patients better, faster, and out the door, that has huge implications in terms of finances. Just to give you an idea, Tamiflu, which was FDA approved for influenza, was FDA approved on the basis of ending the symptoms of influenza twenty four hours faster. We're talking four times that amount here with just natural well, not natural sunlight, but infrared light, which is in natural sunlight. So when I learned this, Michael, I have to tell you that I was convinced. I was treating patients during the bulk of the of the pandemic, in the ICU phase with vitamin d, thinking I was doing them favors. When I started to learn this, by that point, many of the patients coming into the hospital were no longer requiring ICU care, and I vowed that if I ever had another patient like that, I would try it out on them. Them. Well, about a year ago in about October 2023, I had a patient that was admitted to the hospital for two days with COVID. And despite the fact that he was on Solumedrol, Azithromycin, some of these things that we treat the patients with, basically, the standard of care. For those two days, he went from four liters of oxygen nasal cannula to 10 liters oxymizer. Finally, they called me when he was on 35 liters, 100% f I o two, and almost ready to be intubated. I went down to his hospital room, opened the door after I gowned up and put a mask on, and found this guy in the dark with the window closed. And his daughter, he was depressed. He wanted to know how much time he had. I immediately felt the urge to get him outside, talk to our respiratory therapist, talk to our charge nurse. They put their heads together, put oxygen tanks together, and got him into a wheelchair. He didn't really wanna do it. We had to convince him to do it. But but we did it for about twenty to thirty minutes every day. I got him out into the sunlight. The next day, he was down to 15 liters oxymizer, then 10, then six liters nasal cannula, then four. And then by day 19, he was discharged from the hospital without the need of any oxygen. This is a picture of that first day that we took him outside. You can see that we've got a nice little garden in our hospital that's got nice green plants that are highly reflective of infrared light. We have some trees. It's in a private area in the hospital so that people from the outside can't look in. This is his daughter here on the left, the respiratory therapist Kim. My, charge nurse Peter, I had permission from the, from the patient to take this picture. I could he I could've taken it from the front. I just didn't wanna do that. So I took it from the back to give him some privacy. But, he he did he did very well. You know what he told me? About two weeks later, he said, you you know, that first day that you got me out there, doctor Schwelt, that sun felt so good. So good. I thought I had a new treatment for COVID nineteen, Michael. I thought this is it. We have discovered something new. But to quote a very wise king from the from the Old Testament, there is nothing new under the sun. Pun intended. A hundred years ago, there was a a lady by the name of Florence Nightingale who's actually the founder of modern nursing. She gave up, a very rich, family, lifestyle, and she decided to go into nursing. That was not something that young women did if they could choose not to do it. And, you know, she she took care of of British soldiers during the Crimean war. She was known as the lady with the lamp. She visited them. She was there at the bedside. This is what she said in terms of what helped. She says, well, the remedies that I've used are seen in use. I can find but one thing that I can call remedial for the whole disease, and that is a profuse supply of fresh air. Second only to fresh air, however, I should be inclined to rank light in importance of the sick for the sick. Direct sunlight, not only daylight, is necessary for a speedy recovery. You know, not just, Florence Nightingale on the on the European continent, but also here in The United States. There was a a health reformer. Actually, the the former, actually, the founder of Loma Linda University where I hail from, Ellen g White. This is what she said in 1871. She says the feeble one should press out into the sunshine as earnestly and naturally as do the shaded plants and vines. The pale and sickly grain blade that has struggled up out of the cold of early spring puts out the natural and healthy deep green after enjoying for a few days the health and life giving rays of the sun. Go out into the light and warmth of the glorious sun, you pale and sickly ones, and share with vegetation its life dealing health giving power. You know, the other thing that she said that I found really interesting based on that study that we looked at with light and not having light on at night, they could see this as well. She says, make it a habit not to sit up after 09:00. Every light should be extinguished. This turning of night into day is a wretched health destroying habit. And sure enough, this is exactly what they did. They practice what they preach. As you can see here, Michael, they they had they had hospitals that were specifically designed to get patients outside into the sun. You can see the doors and the beds are of exactly the right dimensions so that the doors are not blocked. The the, the the patio here is the right length to store them. This was built in to the architecture of getting people better in these hospitals and these sanitariums. Here we see girls postoperative, getting, sunlight for their for their, ills, and the the roof of the hospitals had beds out there for patients. This is something that we did, something that was very effective, and we could see it even without the scientific accoutrements that we have today. Well, what about the data that we see? Well, you know, one thing that's really important for hospitals is getting good surveys. And there's a lot of data on this. People who are in, rooms that are next to the window get better faster. This is a a study that looked at this, and they sound that researchers have found that a patient's hospital room might affect their outcomes after surgery. For example, having a window in their room was associated with a faster recovery after surgery. What about these CAP g scores? These are really important. And in every situation, whether you're talking about windows or no windows, the presence of windows, the view to a window, the view of the content in that window, whether there's green spaces. In all of these situations, when the patients fill out the survey for their experience in the hospital, it's always improved whenever these things are involved. You can see window size, more windows. So, look, this is something that is this is the the best situation you could possibly have. This is, something that is generally free. You don't need a supply chain. It helps the patients. It could help the hospital financially, and, you get better scores. There's really no downside to it. I mean, in terms of relieving stress all the way down the line, every single situation, we're seeing better scores in patients who are having that in the hospital. Alright. Last thing I wanna talk to you about is a is a case study that I found just absolutely astounding and and really told me and educated me on how powerful this effect could possibly be. So this is a lady that called me up a couple of weeks ago, and she doesn't mind me telling the story. She gave me permission to tell the story. In fact, she gave me the CT scans, which I'm gonna show you. Her 15 year old, son was diagnosed with a very aggressive form of b cell lymphocytic, lymph lymphoma back in September in 2023. Started chemo right away, and in May, developed a pneumonia. He had two to three weeks of cough, runny nose, went into the hospital with neutropenic fever. This is a very, common situation where the chemotherapy knocks out the immune system. It knocks down your neutrophils. You develop a fever. The typical thing is you go into the hospital, you get antibiotics, you get better, you're discharged. It's not what happened here. Unfortunately, he developed a pretty strong infection in the left lung, turned out to be a flesh eating mucormycosis or flesh eating fungus. So he was immediately put on very, very powerful antifungals and, had a bronchoscopy. It showed that it was getting worse. He had chest tubes. Finally, they came to the unfortunate conclusion that the only way to save his life was to remove that left lung, which he had done. And, soon after that, that was in, July. So he'd already been in the hospital for a month inside a hospital. No sunlight, no natural light under the LED bulbs, the ink the, fluorescent bulbs, the windows that blocked out infrared light, just basically in this hospital. Unfortunately, after that lung was taken out, that did not solve the problem because the fungus spread to the right lung. And, it showed that he was getting worse. His oxygen requirements were getting worse. And about six weeks after admission to the hospital, the unfortunate conclusion of all of this was that he was not getting better, and they were concerned that he was gonna need to be intubated on a ventilator. And if he was if that was gonna happen, there was no way he was gonna get off. So I show you here different cuts through his, chest. You can see here that the left lung here on this side is actually on the right side of the screen. It's all white because there is no lung there. It's just filled up with fluid. The top one here is the top, slice through the top portion of the lung. You can see here that the right lung is is very white and inflamed. That is what it was looking like. You can see here in the middle portion of the lung, same situation. There was a little bit of sparing in the lower portion of the right lung where you see more black. That's what it should look like because the lung should be filled with air. So there was a multidisciplinary care conference. They looked it over everything. We're talking about the oncologists. We're talking about the thoracic surgeon. There was nothing further they could offer the patient. Bronchoscopy, thoracentesis. These are procedures which would just sort of rearrange the chairs on this sinking ship. They basically had to come to the family, and it was a very emotional decision. But, basically, they had to tell this guy, this 15 year old boy, who was completely with it, completely understand everything that was going on, that he was about to die, that he had about probably two days left to live, because of the progression of this disease. So and I can tell you as a as a health care provider in that kind of situation, you feel horrible and you're willing to do anything that that person that that patient wants. He's about to die. You're look you're looking at a a dead man, basically. And if he asks for something, you're gonna do everything that you possibly can do for him. In this case, he expressed a desire on July 16, which is when the scan was done to just go outside. He just wanted to go outside because he liked going outside. Now at this point, I should tell you that, there was a device that the family had been told about during this called the firefly device, which gives off light in not only the ultraviolet spectrum, but also the infrared spectrum. And they had tried it occasionally, off and on during this six weeks while he was in the hospital. Obviously, didn't have much benefit. But what they decided to do on 07/17 because he made this desire, it was not easy to do. They had to, again, put tanks together, get a BiPAP machine, which he was already on, very high, a 100% oxygen to get him outside. It wasn't easy, but he was outside on 07/17 from two to 6PM. So he was out there for about four hours. He had a fever that day, and the white blood cell count was very elevated at 27.5. Most of those were neutrophils. It was fighting the infection. Next day went out for another about four and a half hours, and they tried the firefly at that point, which is that device I just showed you just for five minutes three times a day, plus he was outside. At that point, the fever had disappeared. The white blood cell count had come down precipitously to 18, neutrophils down to 13.7. Two days had come and gone. He wasn't dead. Went outside again, this time for about an hour, Firefly again for about five minutes, three times a day. Fever completely gone. White blood cell count continues to drop precipitously for to the, neutrophils down to four point eights. On 07/20, the physician team started to scratch their head. What was going on? His oxygen requirements were coming down throughout this period of time. He was actually looking better. He was outside for another three and a half hours. Again, firefly, five minutes, three times a day, fever completely gone. Oxygen requirements went down. At this point, they said, hey. Maybe we were wrong about something. If we can if he looks better and the and the antibiotics are working, then maybe we could try getting him back on chemotherapy. I wanna show you what happened when they got another CAT scan to see how he was doing. So, again, I put up here the three representative CT scans of what happened on the July 16 and how involved these were. And after just four to five days of getting outside into the sunlight and also using that Firefly device so I can't tell you which one it was, but I believe it was probably both. Just the sunlight. Look at the difference. Look at the difference between the circles. Circles on the left are exactly at the same place in the lung as a circle on the right, and you can see a dramatic improvement in the inflammation. So when I look at this, I think about that study with the toll like receptor four. Well, I think about melatonin. I think about reducing all of the cytokines. I think about boosting the immune system. I think about the lymphocytes that went up in that study, in that randomized controlled study. And, I can't help but think, wow. This guy asked to go outside. Imagine if he'd asked us to play a few video games. He might not be with us. And the fact of the matter is is that he continued to get better. And this was in July in 2024 and, was able to be discharged home, still battling the acute lymphocytic leukemia, still getting the chemotherapy for that, but no longer an issue with mucormycosis. In fact, this is the lung CT that was done last month. And I just decided to do one shot because it looks like this all throughout the entire lung. It is completely gone. There is no sign whatsoever of this fungal infection in this patient. Hard to believe, but incredible that the sun would actually have that much power. It began to make me think about how little time we spend in the sun. You know? I I can't help but think what, Ellen G. White wrote when she founded Loma Linda University, which is where I, graduated from. And she said this is what she said. I I I just putting all this together and how powerful this is, she says, I have a decided message for our people in Southern California. This is where I work. For months, I've carried on my soul the burden of medical missionary work in Southern California. Recently, much light has been given me in regards to the manner in which God desires us to conduct sanitarium work. We are to encourage the patients to spend much of their time outdoors. That is just incredible to me. And and I'll tell you why. I think that we need to be getting intentional sunlight getting outside for twenty to thirty minutes per day, especially in the wintertime when it's the hardest to do it, when the sun gets up after we go to work and the sun goes down before we get home. Yeah. It's hard to do, but I believe that that's the most essential time to do it. And let me explain why. We spend 93% of our lives inside. We are not able to get that infrared light because we're not outside to get it. It cannot penetrate through the walls. The lights that we now have in our homes are not incandescent lights that give off infrared light. They're LED bulbs that have had specifically that portion of the spectrum cut out of them in the name of energy efficiency. Same thing with the windows in our modern buildings. They are blocking infrared light from coming in because it heats up the building, and it causes air conditioning costs. And I can't help but think that this may be the reason why we have an increase in chronic disease. So we need an inpatient heliotherapy protocol. I'm actually trying to work on getting that done in some of our hospitals where I work. It'd be nice to be able to select those types of things in our patients. Say, yes. I want this patient to go outside. We would need an army of volunteers in the community to do that. We'd have to watch them very carefully because, obviously, it's not easy to transport patients that are critical. You have to make sure that if something happens to them that you're ready to take care of that. But think about what it could do to the length of stay, think about finances, what it could do with in terms of the beds that we have to take care of patients. If they're leaving the hospital faster, now we have more beds to take care of patients that are coming in. So we will end this presentation where we started it, and you'll see why I'm so passionate about this. Because I want everyone to have longevity. I want everyone to live as long and as healthy as they possibly can. The problem is is that chronic disease is the enemy of longevity and we know that chronic disease is everywhere so the next time you see or come face to face with chronic disease I want you to look it straight in the eye and and say, let's take this fight outside. That was great. That was great. Thanks, Roger. So I guess we'll take it off full screen and then questions? Yeah. I'm open to questions. Yeah. Alright. So, I think so there's obviously a u shaped curve with sunlight and health. Right? Too little. You get goes up to you and well, the argument could be made how much is too much. Right? Even though people who were, not sun avoider you know? So the people who avoided the sun had increased all cause mortality risk. You could make the argument that, too much sun exposure, photoaging, you know, accelerated skin aging. So there might be some you know? You're going up the u. Right? So you mentioned twenty to thirty minutes. How can we get towards a more precise dose? Or is how can we get to, yeah, the more precise dose? Or is that the more most precise dose for, getting, you know, minimizing risk? And, yeah. Good question. So we have we've got two extreme opposites, not just in terms of The U, but in terms of the types of data that we have. So we have epidemiological data that's really robust that shows not only in the Southern Sweden study, but also in The UK Biobank study that we have not yet reached a limit of sunlight exposure and then improvement in longevity. It wasn't like we saw a bell shaped curve in those epidemiological studies. Right? The ones that were exposed to sun the most have the best, have the best, longevity. But we know that we don't want people frying out in the sun. Right? We kinda know that intuitively. So the point there shortly is is I don't know where the upper limit of that is epidemiologically. I think we need more data on that. On the other flip side, when you look at Glenn Jeffrey and his lab, what he is finding out and he sees this not just in humans. What he this phenomenon that I'm about to explain to you is not specific to just humans. It's it's also seen in bees. It's seen in fruit flies. I mean, it's seen up and down across species, and that is this thing. This thing thing called the biphasic response of light, which is that it takes a certain amount of time for light to make its effect on the mitochondria. And what he's seeing is about fifteen to twenty minutes is what he sees. And then further exposure to light after that has diminishing marginal utility. So this is where I come up with I'm trying to marry these two things together, and I'm trying to say, that we don't need to be frying out in the sun every single day, and, certainly that's gonna cause skin damage. But perhaps, maybe on a daily basis, all it takes is for us to get out there for twenty to thirty minutes to get the effect that we need in the mitochondria and not accrue the the detrimental effects of skin damage and and, you know, all of this damage that we get from u v radiation. So there's a couple of studies in terms of that where he took this was published about 2021 where he took people who had difficulty with their vision. And it was re it was because of they could not sense the difference between colors. So what he was able to show was that when he exposed her to their eyes to red light, 670 nanometer light for just two to three minutes in the morning, specifically. It had to be in the morning. He was able to show that for the next three to four days, there was a dramatic improvement in visual acuity between colors. Now remember that the retina is the is is the tissue in the body with the highest concentration of mitochondria. So that's where we would expect to see that that improvement. But it seems as though just for some reason, just a few minutes, maybe ten, maybe fifteen, maybe longer. It's hard to say. And, obviously, we need studies to look at that. But the effect that he is seeing, it's like almost a switch turns on after a certain amount of time. It's not like this linear relationship, and the effect can last for days. Which then goes to, I think, in one of one of your videos, you mentioned, like, time of day too. So could the dose at time of day be an important factor too? I mean, should we be getting the sunlight near infrared and, you know, red photons, or is it we want a combination of, you know, midday UV and the so what are your thoughts on that? So it depends on the effect that we're looking for. If we're looking for the effect of light on the circadian rhythm, there's no question that time of day absolutely matters. And it's because that the intrinsically photosets of retinal ganglion cells, which are in the lower portion of the retina, are not as sensitive in the morning as they are in the evening. So it's much more important to avoid light. You have to do a a really good job of avoiding light in the evening, and you really have to do a tremendous job of getting light to the eyes in the morning time. Now if we're talking about infrared light going through the body and going into the mitochondria, this is a situation where we're not dealing with intrinsically photosensitive, retinal ganglion cells. I don't know whether or not there is a circadian rhythm situation there. It may just simply be that light needs to get into the mitochondria and has nothing to do with circadian rhythm. But I'll tell you this. Before when we've made assumptions that something had nothing to do with circadian rhythm, we've been wrong before. So it might actually be involved even at that level. So in terms of the circadian rhythm alignment with light exposure, I think, you also mentioned in one of your videos about, cortisol. The cortisol and melatonin link there. So I guess not getting the morning light, then there's gonna be a rise in cortisol and then nighttime awakening be, in the middle of the night, and you're not setting the melatonin. So could you just go through that? Because I think that's a brilliant, yeah. Absolutely. So cortisol is the hormone of the day, at the beginning of the day, and melatonin is the hormone of the beginning of the night. And the way the way you really want those are impulses. So if you don't get morning sunlight, that pulse of cortisol that you should be getting to get the body ready to go and tuned is gonna be more delayed, and you're not gonna get the effects of that cortisol as much as if you got morning light and that peak of cortisol to start your day off in the morning. It's like a cup of coffee. Literally, I mean, I've heard people talk about how they how it feels to them. Morning sunlight is is it gives them the energy of a cup of coffee, of course, without the coffee. The same thing happens in the evening time, except that it's the lack of sunlight that does it. It's the lack of artificial light that does this. So not having light around 09:00, 10:00, 11:00 allows this peak of melatonin to be able to occur from the pineal gland because it's not being shut down by the, the light being shone into your eyes. This also happens. And so you really need both of these things to to be able to occur. Lack of light after 09:00 and bright shining light at 09:00 in the morning to allow that cortisol level for the day. So if you can't get the sunlight in the morning, like you as you said, you know, most of us are getting up before the sun comes up. You know? So then is it is it a red light panel? Is it a combined red near infrared panel? Or how how would you I don't think it needs to be a red light panel to get the cortisol. So any kind of light. In fact, you could even buy these on Amazon for $20 called a SAD light or satellite. This this type of light is going to hit the intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells, which have their peak in the blue area, but the light that's in front of you is white. It's gonna have plenty of that blue light that it needs, and it's going to trigger that and cause two effects. The first effect is is going to set the circadian rhythm through the intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cell pathway. The second is going to the perihabenular nucleus, which is the nucleus of the brain that is, implied with seasonal affective disorder. So this is a disorder that typically affects, people in the winter months a little bit more females than males, and, it can it has a there's a trim you can basically eliminate seasonal affective disorder by buying a SAD light, putting it in front of you in the morning for about twenty minutes, about 11 to 15 inches from your eyes. And it's usually about a 10,000 lux, which is the the brightness that you need to have. So that would affect seasonal affective disorder, you know, in northern latitudes in the winter, you know, for example. But, does that cover the full spectrum in terms of, you know, the red light and near infrared light aside from effects on No. It wouldn't. So this is circadian, in general. So what do we do when we want to get the infrared light? That's really important. And, this satellite is not going to be able to do that. What you need to do is to get outside. Look. Even I I was just in Edmonton about a month ago, and, granted it's not the shortest day of the year yet. I was still able to get outside. I was still able to see that that sun even though it's low in the sky. Remember, the near infrared light is able to penetrate even at that low level. For those of you who live in cold weather climates, you know that during the wintertime, one of the most dangerous things on the road is black ice. How does black ice form? It's very simple. Black ice forms when precipitation comes down in the form of snow, and then the sun comes up and melts that snow. And then at night, it refreezes. That's how you get black ice. Realize that the sun is actually melting the snow to get that black ice. What portion of the sun is melting that snow? It's infrared light. So you have to actually get outside and get into the infrared light. Yes. It's cold. Put on a couple of layers. It should penetrate through, but you need to get that infrared light. Okay. Let's say that there's no way you're able to get it even with my chiding you to do so. What are other ways that people have gotten near infrared light in cold weather climates where the sun doesn't come up? Natural fires. So fireplaces, this black body radiation that comes out of the fire does actually give off a whole band of infrared light and near infrared light. Fantastic. Alright. So biomarkers of, sunlight exposure being vitamin d, you know, UVB. Right? So what about and granted in meta analysis, there may not be an upper limit for, circulating levels of vitamin d's association with all cause mortality risk. For example, just being higher than thirty nanograms per mil and at least one meta analysis from 2014 that I commonly cite, it basically, you know, you see all cause mortality risk come down and bit and then basically flat line even at very high levels of circulating vitamin d, which suggests that potentially sunlight even at very high amounts or mega dosing, d supplements, may not increase all cause mortality risk. But what about biomarkers for, you know, not just the u V UVB spectrum with vitamin d being, you know, a marker of that, but, red and and near infrared, you know, what would we look at? Would Yeah. It's could it be blood pressure when considering the nitric ox nitric oxide, or what would you think along those lines? So nitric oxide is is one that's emerging. It's very short lived, so it's, it's got a short half life. One they're actually working on, believe it or not, is melatonin in sweat. So, this is something that they're actually looking at look at seeing whether or not this could be a good surrogate for infrared light. There are developing light meters that actually measure infrared light. But if it's true that infrared light can stimulate the mitochondria to make melatonin, what they have been found finding in some of the studies that have looked at this is that they're finding that the melatonin concentration in the sweat is higher, obviously, than the melatonin concentration in the bloodstream. What does that mean? It's gotta be made locally. And so if it's being made locally, that's one way of measuring the effect of infrared light. It's difficult to do because the effects that we're seeing are occurring in an organelle of the cell. So this is not something that's readily available. You have to be able to get markers inside of organelles of cells to figure out whether or not the effect is actually happening, but they may have it with melatonin. We know for 100% sure that melatonin is made in the mitochondria. We believe that it's related to infrared light's effect on the electron transport chain, but that is still being worked out. So, the concentration of melatonin, in mitochondria should be proportional to the concentration in the cytoplasm in the intra in, you know, extracellular space and then potentially higher in the blood. Right? So, Well, I don't know if it's actively, transported out. I do know that melatonin that's in the bloodstream goes into the mitochondria because that's where it's being sorry. That's where it's being used. It's also being produced there. So I don't know if the melatonin is actually going down a concentration gradient outside the the mitochondria because it seems as though most of the oxidative stress and most of the use of the my of the melatonin is right there in the mitochondria. So, then a point of clarification because I've heard you mentioned that melatonin is the, I think, most powerful antioxidant in the mitochondria inside the cell. But I looked up I looked up the reaction rate constants for melatonin versus, superoxide and hydrogen peroxide, and it's, on par with glutathione. So the reaction rate constant being in the same ballpark for both superoxide and and and, glued to, eight hydrogen peroxide. But, as I'm sure you know, superoxide dismutase, which, scavenges superoxide and converts it into hydrogen peroxide, the reaction rate constant is, like, 10 to the ninth, whereas melatonin, I think it's, like, 10 to the third or 10 to the sixth. So, you know, a thousand times faster for the enzymes. So I guess with a point of clarification, would it be that melatonin is the non enzymatic, potentially best antioxidant or on par with the best? I I don't know. Could you clarify? The reason why I say that is because the the the next closest is glutathione, and actually, melatonin itself regulates the regulation of of glutathione and upregulates glutathione. So if you have a it by itself, of course, in a in a test tube in a laboratory where you're looking at enzyme constants, there may be ones that are on par. But the way that the the body is set up in the system, the melato when melatonin is being produced, it actually activates and upregulates glutathione. So in a human system, melatonin is is the most powerful antioxidant because of its effects, not just enzymatically, but also on regulation. So then alright. Now the story gets really interesting for me there because glutathione levels decline during aging. Melatonin levels decline during aging. Sunlight can impact intra, mitochondrial levels of melatonin. But where the story gets really interesting is that tryptophan is required to for you know, you got a couple enzymatic steps for conversion into melatonin. Tryptophan levels decline during aging too. So and part of that is because more of it reaches the gut where it's fermented, or converted by gut bacteria into other other metabolites. So, yeah, I don't know. I don't think I have a question there, but there's a lot going on with the melatonin, tryptophan, and and glutathione story. Sure. And so the question was is it will be important if tryptophan goes down if tryptophan is the rate limiting step. What we're seeing in individuals physiologically, at least in Glenn Jeffries' lab, is that that's not a rate limiting step. The the rate limiting step it appears is red light and its effect on the, electron transport chain. Interesting. Alright. Cool. Alright. So then the built space. So, I recently bought a house, and now I'm obsessed with, you know, the windows, what kind of windows should I have? And you mentioned, you know, the the the e windows, which, or e gain, I guess they're called. Low low e gain. Yeah. Yeah. So what kind of windows would be best for letting the red and near infrared in? And do they sell windows that block UV and the blue, but allow the red and near infrared in? They do. You've gotta look for them. It's it's not easy, especially if you're trying to get windows for a home. So I just recently put up a a greenhouse in my in my backyard. It's, it's a greenhouse actually out of, Belgium, and the the windows there are great. I can feel the heat. I can feel the warmth. Of course, the design for that. Right? They're designed for for heat and warmth and and multispectrum light to come in. Not so for the windows that I just, you know, when I bought my house fifteen years ago and I wanted to upgrade the windows, I did of course, I didn't know anything about this. And so I've got great low e glass, that doesn't allow it in. It's it's complicated. If you're able to get access to windows that don't have low e, it's possible, especially in Canada and in, higher latitude countries where you don't really wanna block infrared because it's actually a way of of help heating. It's another way of of reducing costs from a heating standpoint. Obviously, in Southern California where I live, that those type of windows are gonna be very rare because most of the problems that we have here is not a heating problem. It's a cooling problem. So you've gotta be creative. But I think at the end of the day, you know, what what is the what is this gonna depend on? When they're building homes now, at least where I live here in Southern California, they don't put sockets in where you can put, incandescent bulbs and and LED bulbs that screw in. They're on purpose putting in receptacles that where you cannot put incandescent bulbs in. You're forced to put LED bulbs in. And that's that's why I I conclude that, you know, there are some things that are out of our ability to change, be just because it's so difficult to do unless you have the money and the ability to do this because you gotta get signed off, right, by the contractors and and the the people that, inspect. So at the end of the day, what's the most important thing to do? You gotta get outside. You just gotta get outside. You gotta open the windows because up till now, they can't change light. It's it's, it's free. It doesn't require a supply chain. It's always gonna be there. We in Southern California have probably the probably the most amount of sundaes in the country. Maybe Florida might have more, but, you know, they got some rain counts there too. It's it's still good. For those that don't have it, like up in Seattle, I'm convinced that the the biological effects that Glenn Jeffrey is showing in his lab where he's able to shine light for just a few minutes in the morning and have effects for a couple of days might be the saving grace. Like, if you're able to get out when there is sun, that might that might be good for you for the next two to three days and help out. You know, that study that we showed at Oxford where in the previous seven days, every for every increased hour of sunlight there was in the previous seven days, there was a better lipid profile, increased insulin sensitivity. So I do believe that the effect of sunlight on the human being is very quick. It's very rapid, and I think vitamin d is just one slice of that. Cool. That was great. Alright. So what's what's coming next for MedCram? Are there videos that you're working on that are soon to come that, yeah. Yeah. So this is this is my perennial topic. One thing that I would really love to get into as well, and I'm starting to look at this, is the effect of temperature on the human body in terms of fighting viruses sauna data, whether it's hydrotherapy data, whether it's, you know, data where we don't treat a fever. There's a recent paper that I've just come across that was published a couple of years ago looking at the mRNA transcripts of particular viral fighting proteins that improve with just a small elevation of of temperature. I think this is something that, at least in the medical world, we're trained to treat as an abnormality. If somebody has a fever, the nurse calls the doctor, the doctor, orders Tylenol, and we we we bring the fever down and thinking we've done something good. I actually think that that's detrimental. And, one of the things that I'd love to do is not only talk about people getting outside in the sun at least for fifteen to twenty minutes a day. Hey. But the next time you have a fever that's reasonable, not above a 103, maybe worthwhile not treating the fever and maybe even going the extra mile and saying, let's say you're feeling sick and you don't have a fever, maybe instituting a fever, maybe increasing your body temperature to induce some of those innate immune system, reactions may be beneficial. Does thermoregulation decline during aging? Do older people have a harder time raising their body temperature? Absolutely. And, actually, that is exactly what the focus of this paper that I'm reviewing is is that, they're saying that this actually may explain why so many people during the pandemic, the COVID nineteen pandemic, who are older died of it because of exactly what you just said. Interesting. Alright. Fantastic. Thanks, Roger. I appreciate you, coming on, and hopefully, we'll have you back on at some point. Thank you so much. Cool. Thanks, Roger. Bye. Bye bye.