Hey, everyone. Today's guest is doctor Glenn Jeffrey, who is a professor of neuroscience at University College London. Today, doctor Jeffrey will present findings for red light red light therapy on improving mitochondrial function, eye health, and aging. So with that, welcome, doctor Jeffrey, and, let's get into the presentation. Thank you very much. Pleasure pleasure to be here. Let me, let me run you through a few slides telling you about some of the things we're doing and, hopefully, giving you a bit of background. I'm Glenn Jeffrey. I'm professor of neuroscience at University College London, and I'm very interested as I'm getting older, I'm particularly interested in the problems of aging, what we can do about aging, how we can make the quality of aging a better experience. So, let me tell you a little bit about my story and the sorts of things that interest me. So one of the key things about aging is really that as we get older, we're less able to do things. You know, we we find kicking our legs out of bed a little bit more difficult. We find doing 17 times table a little bit more difficult. And so what is the aging is a multiple multifactorial issue. But from my point of view, I'm interested in between the relationship between light and aging. There is a relationship between the two. So particularly sunlight. What does sunlight do for us? Because sunlight the light in which we live is changing enormously. Now we're moving into LED lighting and away from sunlight. So I'm quite interested in the way that we've evolved and what something called mitochondria do for us. Now mitochondria are our batteries in our cells. They provide us with energy. And for many, many billions of years, life on planet Earth was, was really very, very much a slime as you can see in the in the bottom here. It was a slime, but we progressed to a a situation where we have plants, we have organisms, we have animals. And the things that are driving that are our mitochondria. Mitochondria in our body consume oxygen and consume sugar, and they take us from something that really can't do very much to an organism that can function. So, I think very much about evolution in terms of mitochondria and what they do, the power they give us. So let's dig a little bit deeper and let's just cover the basics of what mitochondria are. Just think about them as a battery. That we don't have to be any more complicated than that. So they produce something called ATP, which is if you think that's the energy the battery produces. And ATP is a molecule and you produce your own body weight in ATP every day. That tells you how how critical ATP is. And it's the ATP that is the energy and as we get older, as we suffer with disease, as we suffer with a whole range of things, ATP goes down. So perhaps a key to us trying to improve the aging process is improving ATP. And so please think about mitochondria's batteries. That's all they are fundamentally. And this is kind of what they look like. And over on the right hand side, you can see a cell where all the mitochondria have been labeled in red. And you can see that there are vast numbers of them in in our cells. There'd be thousands of them in the cells. And like all batteries, as we age, the battery runs down, and then it does something that your car battery does as well. It starts to produce what we will call acid. It starts to leak something which is inflammatory and we call it reactive oxygen species. But let's just say it it produces something now which is working against you. And it's one of the reasons why as we age, we find, inflammation. We find inflammation in our joints. We find inflammation in our muscles, which we don't recover from quite as well because the charge on the battery goes down and the battery starts to produce acid instead of energy. So two things, can we increase the power in the battery? And can we also reduce the acid that's leaking from it? So one of the reasons that I'm particularly interested in why I think this is really relevant to us is that some parts of our body use a lot of energy and other bits don't. To a first approximation, your thigh bone does not use much energy, but there are two places in your body where you use vast amounts of energy. The first and the most surprising one is your retina. Your retina uses more energy than any other organ in your body. And it because of this, it ages rapidly and it suffers from inflammation. Why do we use so much energy? Well, you you don't notice it. But as you go from a darkish room to a very, very bright room, the battery has got to change the power it gives to the amplifier. The amplifier is always being turned up or turned down because of the light levels we go through. And the other organ that is not in the least bit surprising is the brain. The brain you consumes enormous amount of ATP. And when our energy runs down, we find we're getting diseases now that are very common. So we get Alzheimer's disease. We get Parkinson's disease. Parkinson's disease is fundamentally a mitochondrial disease, and we get macular degeneration. Macular degeneration in as with these other aging diseases, increasing enormously, and it's about mitochondria. So mitochondria regulating the way we age, regulating our health spans. So what's light got to do with it? Well, mitochondria are very sensitive to light. This is quite surprising. And our light in our world is changing enormously. So here is a diagram of the wavelengths of light that is in our daylight. Now we don't see most light that is out in the atmosphere. We only see a very, very restricted range, and it's marked on this diagram. You can see that is the light we see, but this is the light that is there. And because we don't see it, it doesn't mean other parts of our body don't see it. So we've evolved under this daylight. We evolved originally in Africa, on a twelve twelve light dark cycle because we were close to the Equator, so day length didn't really change. We were exposed to light because we didn't wear clothes. We were largely naked. And a lot of those long wavelengths of light, the ones that are deep deep reds that we can't see, they actually penetrate very deep in your body. And we've done experiments here where we've stood people out in our day of strong sunlight, and we can measure those long wavelengths coming through the body. We can measure them coming out of the back of people. So for millions of you millions of years, humans have had a wide exposure to light and that light has gone deep in their bodies, and mitochondria are paying attention to that light. So how do we divide those wavelengths of light up? Well, I'm gonna do it very crudely. I'm gonna divide it between the red and the blue. So the red is around six fifteen nanometers, which you can see. It's quite deep red. It's a bicycle light through to 900 nanometers that you can't see, and those are absorbed by mitochondria. And let's put it very, very simply, they recharge the battery. And that actually is really true. The mitochondria have got a charge on them, and when you put them under red light, the charge increases and you get more ATP. Remember, ATP is running down as you get old, so that's a that's a good thing. They also absorb deep blue light. Here, I'm saying that's four twenty to four fifty nanometers. That's a very, very deep blue color. What that does is it partially discharges the battery. There's less ATP. So if your, if your system is running down because, you know, you're like me, getting old, the blue light is running down your battery. Now remember, though, from that first picture I showed you, blue and red in sunlight have a natural balance, and sunlight hasn't changed over over animal evolution. It's roughly been the same. It's the balance that we're used to, and that's critical. So let's do an experiment. So in this experiment, we chose a wavelength of light six seventy nanometers that's fairly deep red, and what we did is we exposed mice to those long wavelengths of light. And there are some simple histograms here. There's red and there's blue. The red is the mice that were exposed to the long wavelength light, and the controls in white, they didn't get exposed to it. Well, the first thing to point out is that here in aging, we actually find that ATP is increased in the retina by giving red light. The mitochondria are absorbing it, and it is increasing the amount of ATP that they're producing. It's charging the battery and the battery is giving off that more power. So that's very much in the retina, but the same is true in the brain. So these two figures here are one from the cortex and one from the thalamus, which is very, very deep brain. The long wavelengths go through deep. So the the exposure of this light to this animal is increasing the flow of energy from the battery. This is a really complicated figure, but let's do it in one. So if you record if you increase the ATP, how do you know you're making something better? Well, one of the things you can do is you can record from the retina by putting a little piece of gold foil on the eye, and this was done in mice. We've done similar things in humans. And if we look here, we've got a young mouse and then we've got an old mouse. All you need to do is think to yourself, hang on. Young mouse to old mouse, the size of these waves that we're getting back from the retina are going down and that's because we're aging. This mouse is aging. Seven mount seven months is actually quite an old age for a mouse. But this mouse here who had a burst of red light, he's not been returned to a two month old mouse, but he's much better than the seven month old mouse that did not have exposure to the light. So we know what's going on at cellular level, the mitochondria approve improving, the amount of ATP is improving, and so is the function of the retina. The retina is improving. So we're going from light to molecule to cell to function. Now, again, don't worry about this. Don't worry about the about this graph. But if you shine light on a part of the body and you improve that function, what happens to other parts of your body? And what this shows you is two groups of mice, controls in black, experimentals in red, and we're taking the blood from those mice, and we're hunting for a signal that says to us, has anything changed after the red light? And we look at something called a cytokine. It's a it's an immunological marker. And the interesting thing is and the take home from this is if you shine a red light on an animal, and I think exactly the same as us, you change messages in the blood. And the messages you are changing in the blood are messages that are associated with improving your mitochondria and improving your function. So if you if mitochondria talk across the body now we had an idea that this was true some time ago, but, this study shows that not only do mitochondria improve across the body, but some of this signaling is going through their blood. Is it making any difference? So aging. What's the key thing about aging? Well, health span. How long do we live? Now when you're doing experiments on health span, one of the problems that you've got is that you can't really do on humans. That's a big population study. Even mice is a bit challenging because mice can live two and a half years, and that's not it's expensive keeping mice large cohorts of mice for two and a half years. So a good reason to go down and look at a simpler system. Now the key to looking at a simpler system is that everything we find in a human, we find in a mouse, we find in a bumblebee, we find in a fly, we find in a worm. This is a highly conserved function. So here, we take a cohort of flies, young flies and along the bottom, we've got their lifespan. Most flies die at twelve weeks. And half of those flies, we give red light to, burst of red light in the morning, and half are under normal lighting. And all we do, it's a simple experiment, is each day or each week, we count them. So with age, the number of flies goes down. But the number of flies we find present each day in the group that are exposed to red light is larger. And so by the time we get to around eight to nine weeks of age, we've got twice as many flies alive that have been exposed to the red light than those that haven't. Now we're not increasing absolute lifespan. We're increasing average lifespan, and what we're eroding is we're eroding all those of of a very large proportion of those middle aged deaths. The middle aged flies are living longer. And the great thing about it is if we look at this the red light and the non red light, we look at how far they can climb, they can climb further. So that means they're living longer and on top of that, they've got better motor function. Now wouldn't it be great if we could do that in humans because it might mean that you can walk further and you've got less chances of falling over and breaking your hip, which is very often, fatal in the long run. But it's more than that, you know. It's it's the fly doesn't have a big brain, but it's certainly got a brain. And here, a very, very simple experiment is we take flies that can't fly and we put them on an island in water. And the first thing a young fly will do is it walks around the island and it tries to find where the limits of its territory are. And you can see they just walk round and round and round in circles. And they'll do it they'll do it all day trying to find a way out because they can't fly. Now if we take old flies, six week old flies, we put them on the island and they don't walk around in circles. They get confused. They get very confused. And they'll try and walk around, but then they take odd trajectories. And the older they are, the more time they spend taking odd trajectories or simply not moving very much. So we take our old flies and we give them a single burst of red light and then we put them in the island. Now we don't make those flies. We don't take those flies back to being young flies, but we have a significant improvement in their ability to navigate around their island. So we're doing something which is we're doing something to their brain, we're doing something to the way in which they explore their environment, and they're now being much more systematic about it. Now we can we can we can play I I like the idea that we can do something with a fly that improves its cognitive ability. Right? Because there's another one that we we have with a problem with as we get older. I can't remember for the life of me where my door keys are. I can't remember where my coffee cup is. Simple little things are just deeply annoying, and, you know, they are annoying. I'd like you just to look at these two histograms that sets a histograms down here. Locomotor function. How well do you walk? Well, there's a big decline in how well you walk as you age. Your simple motor ability. If we give that old fly a burst of red light, its motor skill, not just its climbing, its motor skill improves. Not back to youth. It's suddenly not a 15 year old again, but it has improved. But the one that I love and we're still exploring is memory. We we do a horrible thing to a fly, which is we take a long tube and we shine a light at the end of that tube. And the first thing the fly does, it goes straight down the tube towards the light. Doesn't hesitate. Older flies, yeah, they, you know, they begin to they begin to have problems with it. But then we give them we do something absolutely awful to them. We take a piece of filter paper that was dipped in quinine and we line the tube with the quinine. The fly runs down the tube and it goes, quinine. I hate it, and it stays still. Now the young fly will learn that on two or three trials. The old fly just doesn't get it. You know, it time after time the light comes on, it runs down, it hits the quinine. If we take the old fly and we give the old fly a burst of red light, we find that it learns. That old fly learns that someone's put quinine down the tube and it doesn't try and go beyond it. So here we've got a number of different factors. We've got improvements in vision. We've got improvements in cognition, and we've got improvements in locomotorability. All the things we'd, you know, we'd love to have. So how do we know that we're doing what we say we're doing? How do we know that this light is affecting directly mitochondria and not operating in a slightly different way? Well, this this came to me, and this is a genuine story, cycling home, a long hill to get home in the rain. And I'd listened to a radio program, and that radio program was talking about the crisis that bees have got with insecticide. And the insecticide that the bees were being given induced what was fundamentally Parkinson's disease. Now as a great scientist, John Metrophanes, have been working on Parkinson's disease for ages in, primates, and on towards humans. And he pointed out to me that this insecticide undermines specifically mitochondria. Nothing else. It undermines mitochondria and produces Parkinson like symptoms. Parkinson's disease is a mitochondrial disease. So that started a very, very different line of research for us where we started buying honey bumblebee hives. And we we we then did very, very simple experiments to show that it was the mitochondria that was being affected. The insecticide we used was imacloprid, which was a really brutal insecticide. It stays in the ground for absolutely ages, very difficult to get rid of, quite cheap. And so if we look at how mobile an animal is when it's been given the insecticide, we can see it becomes very immobile. It starts to look really unhealthy compared to a healthy animal, and it just slows right down. If we get if we give the amacloprid with the six seventy burst of red light, you can see the first first couple of days, it's not very happy. It's a bit hungover, but he has improved very significantly. Very different from the animal that has just had the poison. So the poison is being blocked or the poison is being is correcting the disease that is inducing the Parkinson type symptoms. And lifespan, we can do exactly the same with the lifespan of the bee that we did with the fly. So if we look at the number of bees that survive once they've had the macloprid, you know, the numbers go numbers dive down. If we give the amacloprid with the six seventy, we correct that. We correct it. We're only giving amacloprid in a little we're only giving the red light in a small period, but we can recover them. But here's the really interesting thing, and and we're still talking about this today even though this study was published some time ago, and that is, okay, if we just give the animals red light, no immaculoprid, Just give them red light. Nothing else. Okay. They're doing very well. Doing very well. But the red light stops. And even when the red light stopped, the animals are surviving much longer. Again, absolute lifespan doesn't change, but the middle aged bees are doing so much better. So does that mean that if we can catch our mitochondria as they're starting to fail, let's say we catch our mitochondria when we're 40. If we give them a big burst of light at 40, is that enough? Is that one exposure maybe for a few weeks of red light enough to sail us through the period when we have middle age cell loss? That's something we're really working on at the moment. But this had consequences. It had consequences for America because in parts of America, so much insecticide has been used, particularly in Northern California, that there are very, very few pollinators. Very few pollinators. So when you've got a crop, it's very, very difficult for you to progress with that crop because the flowers are not being pollinated. So, in Texas and in Florida, there are companies that truck vast numbers of beehives up towards Northern California, and the lorries stop there and they open them up and the bees come out and they pollinate. Well, you know, this this is a a very it seems like a sledgehammer to crack a nut, but it works. The downside is those beehive about 40% of those beehives just don't make it back back to Florida or to Texas. It's super you know, it's stressful stressful for me to be in a car to drive from Florida to Northern California. But then to ask me to go there, do a job, and take me back again, it's stressful. It's very stressful for the bees. So a company called b Futures, we have no economic interest, is now putting red lights in those trucks, and I understand the, the bee loss is very much reduced. We've reduced the stress in the bee population because we've improved their mitochondria. Can we do this in us, in humans? At this point, we started to to to move right over to working on human subjects. We're all interested in that. We're all getting old. I'm in the Institute of Ophthalmology at University College London, so we're very eye oriented. And this was actually quite a simple experiment. We asked people, can you see a letter that we present to you in either blue or in red if we degrade the letter? So we the letter's becoming more and more fuzzy and we're saying, what is that red letter? What is it? You've got to identify an a, a b, a c. And it's called a threshold experiment. We work out the level of which you can detect the letter. And if you look at the black dots here for the blue and the black dots here for the red, that's before we gave you red light. We gave you a burst of red light, a single three minute burst of red light, and then we brought you back three hours later. Now that should remember, your retina has got more mitochondria than anywhere else in your body, your photoreceptors. It's a picture of the photoreceptors and the red dots of the mitochondria. More mitochondria than anywhere else and it ages rapidly. We brought the people back. Three hours later, we retested them and the retesting is the red squares. In almost every case, the red squares are lower than the black circles. That means your threshold has come down. That means you can detect something more easily. If we look at the population of people we did that in, there's a seventeen percent improvement in your threshold. That's that's quite an improvement, and it's slightly stronger for, blue than it is for red. But that's because your blue channel in vision is much frailer than your red. You you'll you'd really find as you get older, your ability to see blues is reduced more so than it is for reds. If you're diabetic, if you've got macular degeneration, your blues suffer. But three minutes exposure and tested three hours later resulted in a very significant improvement. How long can we keep it going? Well, we can keep it going for a while, but basically it's about a week. So we've redid the study a week later. We're running out of subjects here, so there's fewer people. But one week later, we don't get that seventeen percent. We get ten percent and we get eight percent. It's still significant. It's still an improvement, but red light, a burst of red light does not last forever. Whether you're a fly, a bumblebee, a human, or a mouse, it always lasts roughly one week. And that's that's telling me something about a mechanism. Only three minutes. I mean, now we do expose for much longer, but you can be exposed for two minutes and you can be exposed for fifteen minutes. The results are pretty much the same. So it's we we think this is a switch. It's a switch we're turning on. So remember I told you that mitochondria, they're a fuel. They provide fuel in ATP, but they need to be able to do that. They need their own fuel to produce the ATP, and their own fuel is glucose, blood sugar, and oxygen. So if might if we drive mitochondria harder, theoretically, they should consume more glucose. That's a that's a potential little avenue. And this this came, as a consequence of a long drive with a friend of mine to go and do a collaborative experiment. And Mike just said, hang on. If we if we drive the mitochondria harder, can we reduce blood glucose? It seemed to be something that was, you know, relatively obvious. We did it first of all in bumblebees. And we gave we made the bumblebees, we gave them the blood glucose test. We starved them overnight and then became a big drop of glucose in the morning. And some of them had blue light and some of them had red light. And those that had red light reduced their blood glucose levels much better than the ones that had blue. And so here's the human experiment. This is a difficult experiment because it's an unpleasant experiment, and getting subjects is always my my biggest problem. So we gave people a very large well, they first of all, they they had to starve overnight. They came in, and then we gave them a very large glucose load, which is just really horrible. We then pricked their finger every few minutes to test their blood sugar levels. And we also wanted to know if this is working the way we think it's working, then you should actually get an increase in c o two because you're using more oxygen as well as more sugar. Well, the control experiment here is in green, and this is done in a separate group of individuals. And this is where they drink the glucose, and you can see their blood glucose shoots up and very slowly after about an hour it comes down. If we give you a burst of red light, in this case only over a relatively small area of your back, Remember, mitochondria talk to one another. They'll run around saying, hey. Something's happening. I'm being driven harder. And if I'm being driven harder, you better be driven harder as well. We do that, and the blood glucose levels do not go up as much. To be sure that we're doing the right thing, we measured the c o two, and, yes, the c o two goes up because they're using the oxygen and they're using the, the glucose at the at the same time. Now interestingly, six seventy was the wavelength we use. You can see six seventy. It's a bit on the it's it's it's kinda brightish red light. We've now changed this, and we've gone over to deeper red lights that you can't see. So we've invited people in to have a cup of coffee. We've sat them down next to a panel which has got eight fifty nanometers in it. Can't see it. It's very, very, very deep red light. And we then invite them back a little bit later, and we measure their blood glucose, we measure their visual function, Everything improves. So it's not this specific wavelength, first of all. Secondly, we can now introduce this into your world without you being aware of it, and we can have physiological effects, and they're good. So if we think about someone with compromised mitochondria, we can potentially think about exposing them to light that doesn't disturb them. One of my dream tickets that we had was that when you go to a cash machine, you identify yourself by putting your hand onto the cash machine, which identifies you with a long wavelength eight fifty nanometer light. And while you're taking your cash out of the machine, you're getting exposed to that long wavelength of light that is potentially improving your mitochondrial function. Now we thought that was all we thought that was that was basically science fiction. It's not anymore. It really is not. It's perfectly doable. And one of the main groups of people we're currently working with are architects and lighting engineers. Architects and lighting engineers are very enthusiastic about this because they're being pushed very hard for healthy lighting. So healthy lighting is a very big issue. Remember this? This is the wavelength of solar light. Goes up to 2,000 nanometers, and it's the light I pretty much grew up with. And if you had an old incandescent light bulb that was hot, that was the kind of light that it produced, and that's the kind of light we've evolved under. But this now is the light that we have. It's an LED light, and it is very strong in the blue, and it doesn't really have much beyond about six fifty nanometers. That's a big evolutionary change. All these millions of years under one constant form of light, and then in the early two thousands, two people won the Nobel Prize for producing LEDs. And the great thing about LEDs is they don't waste light because all that heat that was coming out was wasted on the old light bulbs. But they are very very strong in the blue, and we've suffered from this in a number of other ways. Our old fluorescent lights were very, very strong in the blue. And, you know, to show you how little attention we pay to the potential damage of blue light, this here is the spectrum of light from a BMW new laser light, which is an amazing light in a car. It goes for absolutely everywhere down the motorway, but it's got a really massive peak in the blue that we know undermines mitochondrial function. So if we do we I'm very, very dubious about exposing people to blue light now. In fact, I I I really don't wanna do it. But someone else had done it some time ago, and this was an experiment done at the University of of Surrey in The UK. And they gave people an exposure to four twenty, four fifty nanometers. They exposed their whole bodies to it. Those wavelengths are very dominant in LEDs, and they cannulated them so they could measure a whole load of body features. This shaded area is when the light came on, and this is the systolic blood pressure. That is the blood pressure when your heart goes oomph and and gives you a squeeze, and it reduced very significantly. So the moment that blue light came on, there was a significant effect on the cardiovascular system. To compensate for this, you get an increase statistically significant increase in heart rate to make up for the drop in that pulse. So when you turn and now I don't know if when you turn on the LED that happens, but this wavelength of light, four twenty to four fifty, is a very big component to this effect in terms of your cardiovascular system. So people going into rooms and working in office environments in the built environment are now constantly being exposed to wavelengths that have a direct effect upon cardiovascular system as well as almost certainly a negative effect on their control of their blood sugars. So one interesting take for this is that we stopped doing experiments with blue and people. We just stopped doing them. I don't I can't do it ethically. But I'm very happy to watch what others do particularly with animal models. We don't work with animals really anymore. We really just work with humans. So if it is the case that red light makes mitochondria work harder, they draw more sugar out of your blood, and you move away from die from a diabetic position, And blue light slows your mitochondria down, so mitochondria take less sugar out of your out of your blood. What happens if you expose mice to blue light? Again, in that same range, four fifty, four twenty, well, they put on enormous amounts of weight very quickly. At week one, there is already a difference between those exposed to blue light and the controls. They by, you know, by the time we're talking about week four, they've more than doubled their weight gain. You're not using that sugar in your serum and the consequences, you're starting to store it as fat and these people these sorry. These mice are becoming diabetic. It's being controlled by light. So what can we take away from this? Well, I think we can take away from it the fact that, it we now have a public health problem with light that impacts on aging, and we need to be very, very careful about a light exposure. We're being starved of red light, particularly in the built environment. And one of my colleagues calls this modern scurvy because scurvy used to be a problem that sailors had because they had something missing. They had vitamin c missing, so they had scurvy and scurvy could kill them. We have something missing now, We have red light missing. So the built environment is now dominated by short wavelengths, and the longer wavelengths aren't there anymore. So this has an impact on an aging population because we know mitochondria are regulating, blood sugars, but they're also regulating degenerative diseases. There are lots of evidence now to show that mitochondrial failure is associated with dementia, memory problems, etcetera, and so it's a public health issue affecting aging. It drives aging. There's a thing called the mitochondrial theory of aging. It really it came out in the nineteen fifties, and it just said mitochondria will determine how long you live. And of all the theories of aging that come and go, this one has stuck to the wall. It's stuck to the wall really well. I'd love to meet the person who who had the generated the theory, but it's guided our research very strongly. So we need to increase the deep red light that we very often can't see, and we can do that in buildings. But we can also do that by just going outside into daylight. And there are some very interesting kind of observational things that come out from from this imbalance in lighting. The one that I really love is NASA published a study, very high profile journal called Cell, and they said there's something wrong with the astronauts on the International Space Station. They're becoming prediabetic, and they're aging more rapidly. I think those are big phrases. These people are super thick, super healthy characters. They're being monitored all the time. But look at a photograph in the International Space Station. What you see is you see an environment lit with hard white LEDs, and those people are up there for months under those lighting conditions. The other one that I like, which I think is also desperately interesting, is where is diabetes really peaking? Well, diabetes has many reasons, you know, for, you know, people sit in front of televisions. But one place that really peaks is in this is in the Arabian Peninsula. What happens in the Arabian Peninsula? You don't go outside. You don't go outside because it's too hot. It's too uncomfortable. So you sit inside so you don't get any natural light. But then what about windows? Well, architects now are building buildings in glass with red light blocking glass. They block the infrared so you can control the temperature within a room, within a building. So big glass structures, most people seem to have large amounts of glass in buildings. But But if you've got infrared blocking glass, you've now got two things working against you. You've got the LEDs, and you've got the fact that natural glass natural light is not coming through and infrared is being blocked. Quite interestingly, the Mayo Clinic is putting up a very, very, very expensive new building, in Rochester. And one of the remits they've given the architects is the building must be must be healthy in terms of its light and also healthy in terms of the air that's in the building. Now the architects that were given that brief, were a bit surprised about the issue of light because it was only just beginning to come out. But I'm very pleased to say they walked through the door here, and we had a long conversation with them. So how do you balance that issue of blocking infrared light at the same time controlling the temperature and the health inside the building. Well, we need to find filters for glass that block only partially the infrared, allowing you to control the light in the building, but also at the same time allowing stuff in so that you're in a healthy light environment. So I started off as a scientist, a visual scientist. Someone asked me what do I do. I'm a professor of neuroscience at University College London. You know, I do stuff on vision. If someone asks me what I do now, I say, I work in public health with an interest in aging, and that's where I am now. Thank you. Thanks, Clint. That was great. So questions? Please do. Alright. So, first, I'll put on my skepticat. And, so just to make an analogy, lab animals never see sunlight. Well, actually, let me take a step back. So if you feed mice a purified high fat diet, which contains no real food, so the mice get, obese. They have poor metabolic health, and they get obese. But then if you feed them, soluble fiber, so the high fat purified diet is not just a high fat diet. On the surface, that sounds terrible, high fat diet. But if you investigate deeper, they don't have fermentable fiber, soluble fiber. So when we supplement these mice with soluble fiber, that improves metabolic health. They get leaner, which suggests that soluble fiber plays an essential role, I e, it's an essential nutrient. Right? So when considering that flies and and, mice, at least in the lab, are essentially sunlight deprived. Right? Sunlight in that case would be like soluble fiber. So now is are some of the effects that that you see and others have seen, is that because we're working with, a deficient or completely, an aspect of health that should be there, and it's not. So when you're adding it back in, now we see some of these positive, you know, effects on, median lifespan, like in the flies or in health span related measures in in, in mice. So what what are your thoughts about I I well, I I'm in complete agreement with you. The first thing I you know, when I when I give a talk like this, you come away thinking Glenn's only interested in light. I know that I'm cutting on one edge and you cannot view lifespan and you cannot view health totally in terms of light. It's a big player. It's a big player, but it's not the only player. I think Dyer is massive. I think diet I look at I look at, primates that are kept in primate colonies that are fed, what we would regard as fantastic food, you know, basically fruit, fiber, and all the rest. They're not getting half the diseases that we as fellow primates are getting. They are definitely not getting those diseases. So macular degeneration in a primate, I have looked at hundreds of primate eyes. Never seen it. I've never seen anything that comes close to it. So listening to me, one is in danger of thinking that light controls everything. It does not. I think diet is if we if we're sitting in a room, we're saying, what's controlling aging? What's controlling health span? Light and diet are up there at the top and probably a number of other things that we're not aware of. But you are you know, the other thing is you are absolutely right to say, well, look. We're all you know, the mice, they're in rooms with LED lighting and all the rest of it. Even worse, the foundation of a lot of medical experiments is done on tissue in in in in tissue incubators. So they they're in the dark to kick off with. And then when they do come out, they're under hard LED lighting. So I did suggest to a few people here that first of all, they put a twelve twelve, daylight bulb in their tissue incubators. And it caused quite a ruffle because the the experiments were coming out rather differently. So that's I don't wanna cause too much trouble. I'll be really happy to go to the grave if we can just change the light bulbs for us as a public health. But when you think of the vast amount of science that's actually done or based on tissue culture experiments fundamentally in the dark and then just taken out occasionally under harsh blue light, that's not the way bodies work. So multiple factors and diet, high fiber diet. Yeah. Completely agree with you. Yeah. So that's a great point. I I wasn't even thinking about tissues being under what type of lighting which could impact the results, which is a great it it's almost kinda like working under anaerobic conditions, which may be in certain, you know, certain positions in the body like the intestine versus aerobic conditions. And if you're not controlling for that when you're doing experiments, you're gonna get results that may be not physiological. Right? Similarly, under the waiting. Yeah. I I I I we we you have to be careful about, you know, being called a troublemaker. But to be honest with you, if you stand back and you look at things, you think, hang on. This should all be done differently. The trouble is society has made such a big investment in doing it wrong that changing it is not acceptable. So should we be doing all these experiments on mice, which have been that the the main mouse model that's used, the c 57 black, has been inbred since 1937? If you take 15 in c 57 mice, you will find that the females, I think one one in ten, one in 12 has got a slightly smaller right eye. You know? Hang on. You know? We're we've drifted a long way here. And also mouse immunology is nothing like human immunology. So we gotta question the models. We gotta question the methods. Alright. So what would the data look like if, lab animals were exposed to sunlight from birth, you know, at for some regular amount each day? Would red light have any effect in that situation? And if not, then I mean, granted, maybe they're in other words, do you have to be, quote, unquote, deficient in sunlight in order to see positive effects of red light therapy? Well, I think that we all are deficient. That's true. We did do a series of experiments on mice just keeping them under daylight bulbs. Right? So things looked better, but I didn't carry on with it. I didn't carry on with it because I was having to deal with lifespans of two and a half years, and it cost me it cost me a lot of money to keep one mouse for a week. One other thing that we have done though is, you know, we run around the place very often just changing the light bulbs, taking and it's not that we we we give everyone red light. What we've started to do is we've taken out the LEDs and we put in old incandescent light bulbs. Now that has had really a very interesting effect both in the animal house and in our environment. I mean, it is very interesting. It's a problem it's a problem for me getting hold of them, but you can still buy them, on Amazon in The UK. America is taking the first steps to block it to to making the sale of incandescent light bulbs illegal. I cannot tell you how we're kicking against that, and the architects here are kicking against it. You've taken those steps in advance of what goes on in The UK. The European Union is trying to move to that direction as well. But the light that comes off an incandescent light bulb, an old light bulb, has got loads of infrared in it. It mirrors the sun. Really does. Yeah. I I I had dinner last night with two of my aunts, and actually I gave them two incandescent light bulbs. And I said, just do whatever you're doing under this for a few hours every day. Maybe we'll turn that around. Maybe we won't, but Phillips and and the other big lighting companies are not listening. Well, I mean, wouldn't the ideal be to get some sunlight and then maybe go no lights when one gets home? I mean, just avoid. When the sun goes down, there's no light on, and you just, you know I I yeah. Yeah. Again, I'm sorry. I'm agreeing with you. The natural history your natural evolutionary history is not to have light in the evenings and the night. This brings in another issue about this whole red light factor, which is it really only works very well in the mornings. Right? So it doesn't really work in the afternoons. Now and that's true again if you're a fly, a mouse, a bee, a human. I think it's critical that you get it in the mornings because when you wake up in your evolutionary history, you've been very vulnerable because you've not been paying attention to anything. So when you wake up in the morning, your blood sugars peak. It whether you've eaten or not, your blood sugars go up. Your hormones all change. You become a lot more geared up to running, doing something. In the afternoon, I cannot improve your mitochondria in the afternoon no matter what I do, how much red light I give them. I cannot improve them. We say, in the afternoon, mitochondria are doing something else. We know what they're doing. They're doing the washing. They're doing the ironing. They're doing their housework. It's in the mornings, and and, you know, they know it's coming. So might have ATP starts peaking just before when lights are on, so in the animal house. So I think we probably knew when we were in evolving in Africa and in the Equator, we knew at about 07:00 in the morning, sun was right going to be rising and mitochondria changed their behavior. We we've just messed that all up so badly. Is is that because of the, spectrum of some, you know, so I think you meant mentioned that it's an equal balance of blues and reds in sunlight, but is the balance of blue versus red more heavily weighted towards red and near infrared in, you know, at sun up relative to other times in the day? No. We find that a very, very difficult one to get our handle on. There is a change, and the change is because when the sun is low on the horizon, light has to pass through a lot more of the atmosphere, and the atmosphere can have a differential filter. I'm gonna stick with my idea that the morning is absolutely crucial. It is not immediately obvious that it is that globally red is much stronger in the morning. But, you know, when I talk about red light, we're talking about, you know, six seventy all the way through to 900. It's perfectly possible that someone's gonna come along and say, actually, did you know that eight two five or some freeze is the key one. And I don't have enough heartbeats left to go through all the wavelengths and check them and find out what's crucial. All I can do is say, look. Let let let let's let's get rid of floodlights. Let's get rid of LEDs. I know that's a step in the right direction. There's a lot of big unknowns here. A lot of them. Alright. So, changing gears. So the mouse study where you did the cytokines, where you looked at the cytokines, I noticed that upregulated in response to six seventy nanometers were a lot of pro inflammatory cytokines, t f alpha, IL six Yes. Interfere on gamma gamma. So how do you rationalize an increase in pro inflammatory cytokines with an improvement in, you know, health span related measures in the mice? So I can tell you in all honesty, we got that first set of data out. I was unhappy. There was a difference, but I was unhappy. But I had a couple of, you know, fairly long conversations with immunologists and lifespan people. We've got a big lifespan group at UCL here in London. And the issue really is that changes in increases in cytokines can be highly protective. And it's like saying something's coming, brace yourself for it. You make the system more robust. Now one of the issues about the the cytokine study is there were so many cytokines and their relative movements were so complicated. Now my first reaction was I went to discuss it with rheumatologists who kind of knew a lot more about about cytokines, and it really is a job for a a mathematician. And I only looked at 50. You know? 50 is a small sample. So the aging people did not have any problem with this because they said small levels of inflammation at certain periods at certain times is highly protective. I have to say, I'm not an immunologist. I I grabbed the low hanging fruit on that experiment. But the point is that all those changes in cytokines were strongly associated with significant improvements in aged health. Yeah. It could be that the animals at at that age have a problem in producing those cytokines. So, yeah, I I I'm on that side too where maybe that's, you know, a a stimulus, like so immunosenescence where, you know, you have a declining immune system. Maybe the red light stimulated the immune system to produce these cytokines as a potential compensatory effect to battle off whatever microbes maybe, you know, they couldn't normally, fight off. So Yeah. No. I I I agree with that. Again, I have to say that this area of science is is is is kinda like being in physics in the sixteen hundreds. There are so many massive gaps. However, I can also say that we've got enough information to make some big stabs at things. So, you know, we we've got some children with mitochondrial disease, and that's that's that's a killer. You know, lots of them don't make it beyond twenty five thirty because their heart gives out. We've been giving them a red light and and, you know, can get very significant results. In fact, we got the we we tested them on how well they could open their eyes, their eyelids, because it's a muscle, simple muscle. And when we saw the when we saw the first, first set of results, photographs, I must admit, I I left the room because I was too tearful, you know, these young kids. And these kids now some of these kids are walking reasonable distances. It's a systemic effect. But all those little all those little details, we we we don't know. But I can I'm gonna stick my neck out, and I'm gonna say we've never found a downside. We found situations where nothing happens. You have too much red light, nothing happens. Overcharge your battery maybe. I I don't know. But it's safe, and I'm being pragmatic. It's very effective in some cases. And what can we do with an aging population? You know? We've gotta give them everything we possibly can. Especially a sunlight efficient population and, you know, exposed to the, unnatural lighting also, right, which may be heavy in the blues. So the the lifespan data suggests that or some of the lifespan data suggests that there may be or in your you know, the the stuff you presented, suggested there may be older ages where red light therapy just loses its efficacy and that it's gotta be done at sort of middle age or even maybe before. So how can how do you rationalize that where it just seems like, you know, maybe whether it's mitochondria or other systemic effects where, you know, the body is beyond rejuvenation at that point. How do you balance that with, you know, doing it at younger ages where you seem to get some effects on health span related measures? Well, you picked on a point that that is an important one, and let me fill in a bit of space around that. So, when we did our first study on macular degeneration, we got nothing. We got no result at all, and I I went away thinking, you know, really questioning questioning what I was doing. And then, you know, I spoke to John Metrophanis about it who's been doing lots of work on primates and Parkinson's disease, and he said, Glenn, you gotta catch it early. If it's gone beyond a certain point, it's not gonna work. So I went back and I looked at the data from the patients that we'd recruited and they had disease that had dug in. You know, they had you could look at their retina and you could say, oh, they're starting to lose lots of cells. Now someone's replicated my study, and they've done it on people at a much earlier stage of disease, and I'm pleased to say they got great results. So whatever you do, there's a window for catching things. If we take someone who's got really bad macular degeneration, I I I don't think anything can happen at all and they shouldn't get their hopes up about it. It means that we've gotta look for disease early. We've gotta catch disease early. Macular degeneration, very unfortunately, people turn up optometrists and optometrist said, well, you got to start a macular degeneration. Nothing we can do. And so you go off. We don't get those patients. We tend to get the patients once before they come to the hospital, by which case their retinue are something like a car crash. You can't deal with that. So there is something and then maybe we can say the same about aging. Maybe we should be saying, let's get those red lights back into your environment when you're 35, 40. Right? Maybe that's when we've got a we've got a a key window for maximum improvement, but I don't know what that key window is. I don't know what the best wavelength of light is. Actually, there's a whole series. I've got the big picture. It's good, but there are a lot of unknowns. But the the b experiment I keep bringing this up with my colleagues. The b experiment is telling us something very important, that you've got to give it early. Alright. So what about, the fire spectrum, the spectrum of fire? Right? So clearly, that's in our evolutionary history. Maybe not every day. I find it doubtful that, you know, prehistoric or however you wanna define them, humans, were lighting fires every day. But when we did light it, it was a part of our evolutionary history. Right? So what's the, balance between reds and blues in fire? And, yeah. That well, that depends what you burn, to be honest. Right? But there is a lot of infrared in firelight. And, actually, there was a there was a physical anthropologist who picked up on this and talked to me about it. And it never occurred to me. Never occurred to me. I think it is important. Fire is important in human evolution for lots of different reasons. I mean, we cook food so it lasts longer. It's easier to digest. Lots and lots of but fire light in early humans that moved north. Okay. So they moved out of Africa. They moved through the the Levant, and they ended up in I always I always say this just, I suppose, annoys a few people. I say they ended up in Tooting, which is a really pretty poor suburb in South London. You know, it's just grim, gray, and unpleasant. You start wearing clothes, because you're cold. It's gray all the time. I think that's where it punched. I think that's where it could well have punched. So the fact that red light penetrates so deeply through the body, it does affect physiology. There's something in it. And and I'm still talking to the anthropologist because it's a great new angle on the whole thing. It it really is. That they jumped on it immediately. And they were telling me that there is a, an open zoo in Japan where they've got rhesus macaques, and they started lighting fires for them. And they said it was just like the humans. They all sat around, stared at the fire in little groups. The only thing that was missing is they weren't holding a can of beer, you know, which is what people tend to do. But if if there's one thing I wanna get hold of before I die, it's that thing on firelight. What what is it about firelight? I know it goes deep in the body. I suspect we might be able to measure it coming out the back. What's it doing? That's a big question. Alright. So the other side of that coin is too. What's the, light spectrum? What does that look like in moonlight? Reds, blues, how does that look? And yep. The energy is so low. So so I one of the guys that I work with, Bob Fosbury, he's an astronomer, and, he's responsible for the spectrometry on the James Webb Telescope. He retired, and he walked into the lab saying, this is interesting. Can I join? And and he knew about light. I don't know anything about light in honesty. You know, I went to university, and I did a degree in experimental psychology. I didn't really even have a biology background. The light I I I asked about starlight, and I asked about moonlight. And, apparently, it's so weak that it's it's not a player in this field or not at the moment anyway. Gotcha. Alright. So the next steps, what what studies you have currently, underway or grants that are in preparation, for next steps? Next steps. Next steps are how do I bring back red light into your life in a way that you don't notice and is good for you? So it's all about, it's all about cheap devices that you can have in your home. So, redesigning light bulbs, taking LED light bulbs, and sticking an 800 nanometer chip in there and being able to have that light available for you for very economically. That is what I really, really want to do for impact. I want to understand what the different wavelengths of light are doing in development. I was contacted by a really charming nurse in Texas, and she rang up and she's talking about blue light for babies that don't have their liver function isn't isn't as good as it could be. And so you give them blue light to break down bilirubin. And I said, well, you know, my actually, my youngest son had that and he was under blue light for twelve hours. And she said, no. No. She said, because you can make money by keeping babies in hospital, our babies are here for five or six days under blue light. So that kicked off the whole issue of what is blue light potentially blue and red light doing in development. And I'm very happy to hand that on to colleagues, and I'm I'm actually doing that. I mean, I probably won't be here in ten years, so I'm handing that on to colleagues. And the other one, as you say, to be absolutely honest, is is about firelight. And if you go back through my history, you'll see I spent a lot of time working in the Arctic. I spent a lot of time working in the Arctic on what light is doing and how animals responds to light. It's the bigger questions. The real bigger questions that I you know, I'm not doing experiments and test tubes anymore. I'm not doing experiments on mice. I wanna know about evolution. I wanna know about development. And I want my two aunts to still be with me in ten years years' time as they are today, hopefully. But, you know, someone walked into my lab once and said, have you read this paper about red light fifteen years ago? And I went, that's rubbish. That's absolutely rubbish. Typical response. And I was wrong. Someone walked into my lab. Again, it was John Mitrofanis and said, do you know that two cells can talk to one another in the body by light signals? And I said, that's rubbish. And, again, I I examined the PhD last week in London, and their results were stunning showing that light light could transmit signals between two cells in the body. Wow. We didn't know that. Yeah. There's a lot to keep you busy. Yeah. So, I mean, this gets into the realm of the quantum. Right? Quantum effects, which happen in mitochondria, and there's some evidence published evidence that quantum effects may be at the seed of consciousness, you know, in microtubules. So in microtubules yeah. So, yeah. Alright. So how can people support your work? I think when my work started, no one believed it. And I did take a lot of stick, particularly from the clinicians. They they they they they were very negative, whereas the architects were going, wow. This is great. I think people keeping an open mind would be by far the best thing they could do. I mean, if there are any multimillionaires that wish to make massive donations, I'd be very happy to have them. But, you know, I've always felt that in science, sitting down and thinking and getting the question right is a lot more important than spending a lot of money, and not thinking about what the question is. So often, we get a result and we didn't get the question right in the first place. So the result is it's not worthless, but it's not that. It's not it's not that important. I think I I would like people to live healthier, longer lives, and they can do it really simple. And don't believe anyone who comes along and says, you really need to buy this this light bulb that's gonna cost you $500. That's rubbish. One little story. I've said this a number of times. I had to reject a lady from a clinical trial for red light, and she was very annoyed with me. And, alright. Fine. It happens. She came back a few weeks later, and she had a battery in her hand, and she had an LED. And she joined the two together, and she stuck it in front of her eye. And she said, will that work? I I was appalled. I was absolutely appalled. I said to someone in the lab, would you mind, while I give this lady a cup of tea, would you mind having a look at this LED and this battery for me? And they came back twenty minutes later and they said, that will probably work. So you don't need high technology. You just need to bring that light back in. I don't recommend people buy LEDs and batteries and stick them in front of their eyes, but it was a good example where she'd gone away and thought about it. She'd resourced it, and she got it right. Yeah. I felt an I felt an absolute I I felt very bad about the fact that then that I've rejected from the trial. But if I hadn't rejected from the trial, she wouldn't have done that, so I wouldn't have known. Yeah. Alright. So I also have to ask, why do you think you're not gonna be around in ten years? So a major focus of my channel is, you know, to conquer aging or die trying. So you look like you've got well beyond ten years. Well, I'm lucky on that one, but I'm I'm 70 at my next birthday. The university will keep me on. They don't have a policy on you having to retire. I'm I'm fortunately aware I can get away with being a bit younger than 70. But one's gotta be realistic. There has to be a point where I mean, I'm never gonna retire because I'm always gonna be thinking. Right? But I may not be thinking in a in a in a lab environment. But there again, if I'm thinking about human evolution, I don't need a lab. I just need more time to think. So but I will. I mean, I cycle I cycle, eight to 10 miles every day. I know that cycle ride home is just take up the hill. It's taking me just a little bit longer. But as my son says to me, you've gotta carry on cycling. And I promise myself I will do. Yeah. And maximum human lifespan is a 120. I mean, alright. 80 is the average close to the average for a man, you know, but you should be well beyond ten years, you know, way more than that. You know? So Well, also but the other thing is we shouldn't be I'm I was started off get being quite concerned about lifespan. I'm now much more concerned about health span. Yep. So health span is where is where we wanna is where we wanna put our finger. We wanna keep people out of hospitals. You know? We wanna make sure people do go for walks. So but but we all have to come to terms with aging. There's no point me sitting here saying a 120, I'm gonna be, you know, cycling 10 miles a day because I probably won't. Right. So when you consider, though, that the rate of aging is pretty much a constant, I mean, you can accelerate that with a pretty bad diet, and you can slow it down, maybe calorie restriction and other stuff. Where where are we in terms of knowledge, in terms of the rate of aging? Right? Are we down here, stone ages, or are we somewhere pretty close to matching those rates? Now is that gonna happen in the next ten to fifty years? There you know, our natural remaining lifespan? I don't know. But, eventually, those slopes are gonna match, and then it's a matter of flattening the curves. Right? So Yeah. I agree. Yeah. I I I I I agree. I think also the aging pea the the people in aging research have got very, very caught up in a number of issues, telomere lengths. Yeah. I think there are a lot more basic things going on that we, you know, we we should be aware of that are much lower technology. Much lower technology. Walking. Just walking. Right. You know? But at some point, we would need the rejuvenation tech. Right? Because even for people who are active and eat a healthy diet and stay relatively lean, they're not living past one twenty. Right? I mean, we get this in animal studies. Studies. Right? So there still will have to be some rejuvenation technology, whether it's epigenetic reprogramming or maybe red light therapy to rejuvenate eyes and mitochondria as a part of that story. There's gotta be rejuvenation tech at some point to push beyond that. What now whether that's gonna be within the next, you know, fifty years, two hundred years, eventually, it's it's only a matter of time before those slopes. The question is It it will happen. I am a little pessimistic about it happening in my lifespan. It will. Someone will be able to go back and reprogram. That will happen. I personally, having looked at it, I don't see a doorway at the moment. I just don't see I I I I have experienced lots of stuff on stem cells, and and stem cells may actually be absolutely fine in cardiac tissue. I've yet to see anything that really impresses me on stem cells in the retina. But, you know, in fact, actually, I'm I'm extremely negative about it because I don't see the door forward. This is people rushing in, not asking the question carefully before they do it. But you're right. Someone somewhere will find a way of reprogramming. Click clearing out the debris. You know? I I remember guys from Pfizer talking to them about this, you know, this they called it gunk cleaning. They're gonna perfuse you with something that was gonna clear out all the gunk. And I thought, yeah. You know? That's that's somewhat we'll get that right. Yeah. So how would you rejuvenate the aged eye? I mean, independent of red light therapy, I mean, you know, what what would be your bet on what would be the best way to rejuvenate the eye? Well, that's that's a real difficult one because if you go back to the stem cell technologies, even if you got the stem cell in there, which a few have done, and the stem cell lives, it doesn't connect up properly. Right? It's it you're you're then gonna have something in there that's gonna be confusing. You know? It's gonna be send the wrong message to the to the to the cells that it talks to. I don't know about the eye, and I don't know about the brain. I just genuinely don't know. I have certain things that you know, we know that we know that that reducing inflammation is important. Diet is age related macular degeneration in the aging eye suffers in exactly the same way as in cardiovascular disease. These big deposits behind your retina are associated with, age related macular degeneration. There's loads of fat in them. Right? There's loads of fat in them. And it's it's about a dirty membrane that restricts the flow of oxygen. So if you could do one thing for it, my first step, my first pragmatic step is a plumbing job, which is how do you clear the debris that accumulates at the back of the eye, under the photoreceptors that restricts the flow of oxygen and nutrients. And that's a clear target. I don't know how you do it. I'm a visual scientist. I've been doing vision since I was my last year as an undergraduate. I don't know how you do it. But maybe someone in a drug company will go, we perfuse you with x or y and it will clear the gunk out. So much of so much of aging aging has got so many different features, but so much of aging is about debris. You know, build up of debris and what happens when you build debris up, how you stop the flow of things that you need. Yeah. My initial thought is, what are the factors that lead to the fatty buildup? And if you don't address those, sure. Maybe you could mechanically remove it. But if you haven't addressed the underlying root factors, alright, is a poor diet and sedentary lifestyle. Alright. So now if you clean that up, does the body then start to clean it up on its own? And I bet that that that would probably be the case. Now there's probably a limit to that, but then it also becomes a matter of, what's the recipe for rejuvenating whether it's the immune system or other cell types that would clean the debris out. Yeah. Right? I look at I don't necessarily look at it from a top down where you give these drugs, but how can you stimulate the body to endogenously do it on its own, which it does at a younger age and just does it less well at older ages. It's reprogramming again. It's reprogramming. And you're right. You know, I I can see pathways through where we can clean debris. One of the things that was really good was was that if we give large doses of statins, we clear some of the debris behind the eye. The trouble is, you know, the maximum dose of statins in The UK is eighty milligrams, and I think it was a hundred and fifty milligrams you had to give people before that happened. You know, there are problems about giving people vast quantities of statins. You are right, but you're you're you you you I think ideology may get in the way of where you wanna be because I don't I don't see how that I don't see how it's reprogramming and I don't even know what to reprogram. You know? And I yeah. It's reprogramming. Alright. So then an argument against the mitochondrial theory of aging is, evidence from SOD two hetero heterozygous knockout knockout mice. So if you knock out one copy of the SOD two gene, which is exclude is I can't I can't talk. Exclusively localized to mitochondria Yeah. They don't give a shorter lifespan, and they produce more hydrogen peroxide. So that would argue against in contrast, SOD one knockout complete knockout, which is in the cytosol. They have a shorter average lifespan, shorter maximum lifespan, reduced mitochondrial function, increased oxidative stress, which suggests that it's the oxidative stress in the cytosol, not necessarily in the mitochondria that may be may be the worst part of the story. Yeah. But we, you know, we could we could sit here and we could talk about lots of things like that, and you get overwhelmed. I agree with you. I agree with you. You know? And that science seems to me to be solid. You know? What do we do about what do we do about I mean, I suppose it's a it's it goes back to the cytokine story, Ross. You know? Ross we all started off thinking Ross was really bad news. You know? Ross actually can be pretty important, can be pretty, you know, significant, as a protector. You know, Yeah. I mean, I I I play around a lot with the idea of metformin. You know? But these are the wrong things that we need to reprogram. Yeah. Alright, Glenn. That was great. I appreciate you coming on, and hopefully, we can have you on again at at another time. You know, I I've really we I said to the lab, we've got this if if if if I stop doing science now, we can carry on publishing for probably another five or seven years. I've said that the aim of the lab must be now that we spend 25% of our time trying to get the story out, taking the story to people who are influencers. So health care people because there's no money in red light light bulbs. There's no money in walking out in the in in the park. We've gotta get the story out, and so I really appreciate the fact that I've been invited onto onto your program. It's it's important. Yeah. Well, you don't know, I guess, but I'm a little bit of both. So my PhD is in physiology. I've got a pretty I I mean, I'm not an extent as extensive as you, PubMed, you know, citations, But, you know so I'm a little bit of both where I'm classically trained and educated as a scientist, but I've got my off my feet also in this world of, trying to, like you said, promote, you know, the health aspects of so many things. So but you're you're an anomaly in some ways because most scientists are not thinking about it like that. They're it's very tunnel vision. Even even if you said I've I've heard you say on other podcasts, you know, I think you said, on Sundays, you're responding to emails all day sometimes. And from my experience, just dealing with scientists for twenty years, almost fifteen to twenty years post PhD, just getting an email response on a simple question from someone in your field can be either they they don't respond, they don't check it, or they don't care, which is obscenely disrespectful. So I agree. You're fantastic in that. You're the opposite of that. And I think if there are any junior scientists that are watching or people that are thinking about getting into science and pursuing a PhD, you're a great example. Even talking about responding to as many people as possible, I do the same thing on YouTube. I'm responding to comments almost everybody if I can. Even on emails, everywhere. I wanna help and promote, you know, health as much as I can. So I appreciate this mindset that you put out there about that. No. We've we've gotta get that mindset. And I do spend I do try and answer every email, you know, because you get an email from someone, you know, in some small town in Arizona. It's important to them. It's really important to them. So and and, you know, taxpayers pay my salary. So yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Great. Anyway Yeah. Thank you so much. No. Thank you, Glenn. Alright. And we'll talk again soon. Ciao. Yeah. Okay. Take care. Bye. Bye.