For blood test number five in 2024, when using doctor Morgan Levine's biological age calculator PhenoAge, we saw that my biological age was 17.6 years younger than the chronological. So what might be contributing to these data? In the last video, we covered supplements and if you missed that, I'll put the video link in the right corner. But what about diet? More specifically, what diet composition corresponds to blood test number five? So for here, for now, we're gonna take a look at average daily dietary intake. This is from May 28, that's immediately after blood test number four through July 25, that's the day before blood test number five. And that period is fifty nine days. So immediately after the last test, through the day before the next test, that fifty nine day period, I take the average, daily intake, average dietary intake as I weigh all of my food. So the full list is shown here. So I ate 54 different foods for this period, and this list is ranked in grams from highest to lowest with the exception of coffee. I had one twenty ounce coffee. This isn't anything from Starbucks or anything crazy like that. Just black, made it home, brewed myself. So that's in ounces and also green tea is in ounces. And if you want to use what I use, there's a discount link for organic loose leaf green tea in the video's description. Alright. So what about experiments for this test? So the goal is to always improve to optimize all of the biomarkers simultaneously not just focus on a few. So to do that, I run several experiments and then calculate correlations after each test. So what experiments did I do? So the most important one potentially was reducing mushroom intake from an average of 250 day for for test number four to ninety five grams per day for test number five. So why did I do that experiment? Mushrooms are a rich source of Ergothenine, Spermidine which extends lifespan in mice. So why would I cut mushroom intake? Well, mushrooms contain niacin but as nicotinamide or nicotinic acid. And I raised that question because if it's nicotinic acid, I'd expect my NAD levels to be higher than they usually are as they generally track on the low side or age expected, which is a dirty word in my approach, age expect being a dirty word. So that they're not relatively high with high dose mushrooms which are rich in Niacin. That suggests that mushrooms contain a lot of Nicotinamide. And that's potentially important because as we'll see in the next video, Nicotinamide increases plasma levels of Homocysteine a lot more than Nicotinic Acid. So I did the experiment that maybe having mushrooms a mushroom intake a bit too high may be contributing to my age expected values or current values for Homocysteine. So did that work? Stay tuned for the next video for that data and the story. I also added broccoli sprouts into the approach so I grew them myself at home and then reintroduced broccoli into the approach. As for test number four, I cut it out for most of that period. And I did that because both broccoli sprouts and broccoli are rich sources of sulforaphane which can reduce oxidative stress. Oxidative stress can limit telomere length and knowing that my telomere length has also been trending on the lower side for the past due test, I want to reverse that trend and try to get it closer to as close to you full values as possible. Telomere tests aren't yet in. Those results are expected in the next week or so. So stay tuned for a video update for whether any of these changes impacted, telomere length in an upcoming video. Now also note that to maximize Sulforaphane content which is lost in cooking. So I added the broccoli sprouts to a cooked mix after it was done cooking. But still that the temperature of that mix is 212 f or a 100 cell Celsius. So it's possible that there was some degradation of sulforaphane induced by heat. So to help minimize that, I added mustard powder. And in terms of how much mustard powder to add to cook broccoli or when eating broccoli sprouts, I'll post that in a relatively short video coming up in the near future. I also reduced coconut butter and cacao beans as these are my two primary sources of saturated fat in the diet. And I did that following the correlations with an older epigenetic age using the Horvath test, which is the best epigenetic clock clock for asking, how old are you? What's your birthday? So in my data, total fat and a relatively higher saturated fatty acid intake are significantly correlated with an older Horvath epigenetic age. So to test that correlation, if I cut saturated fat and if I cut total fat, I should see an improvement if correlation equals causation. I don't know if that's true. I have to do the experiment. So for this test, I cut the two primary sources of saturated fat in my diet, coconut butter and cacao beans. I also added kimchi into the approach as it's fermented cabbage, and I did that because fermented foods including kimchi contain certain lactobacillus species, which have been shown in both animal models and human randomized controlled trials to have a positive impact on the gut muscle axis. In other words, improving muscle mass and function with specific lactobacillus species isolated from fermented cabbage. If you missed that video, it'll be in the right corner. Now, in terms of dose and people, completely unknown. I have no idea how high to go, but I figure at least having some may be better than none. So kimchi will be in and out of the approach at relatively, low amounts for future videos, future diet composition videos. I also increased Brazil nuts to close to their highest intake since I started tracking diet in 2015. And I did that exclusively for their selenium content as I was trying to make a positive impact on the free t three to free t four, ratio. These are thyroid hormones. So that ratio declines during aging. Selenium is a required cofactor for converting t four into t three. So I tested the hypothesis that if I increase selenium intake, I could increase that conversion of t four into t three and improve the free t three to free t four ratio. Unfortunately, it didn't make a dent increasing, selenium intake from about two hundred and sixty up to four hundred, micrograms per day. Didn't make a dent on either free t three or free t four as they were exactly the same at both the lower and higher selenium intakes. So for the next test, I've reduced Brazil nut intake back to where it was prior to these changes. So around seven eight grams per day relative to fourteen grams per day. I also increased sardines and this is about a 45 per day increase relative to the last test. And I did that because sardines have a plus six correlative score with a panel of 25 clinical chemistry biomarkers that I track for every test and that I calculate correlations on, and that doesn't include correlations with epigenetics or metabolomics. So that net that strong net positive correlative score suggests that if I eat towards the higher end of my intake range for sardines, that should have a positive effect on more biomarkers in terms of aging and all cause mortality risk. Now, increasing sardines for this test didn't make a dent on PhenoAge as it was almost exactly the same test over test. Number four versus number five. And almost all of the other biomarkers didn't change with the exception of blood urea nitrogen going up up by a bit and uric acid going up by a bit, and that's not a surprise as higher protein intake, probably more of that converted into bun. And sardines are a meat source so they're they probably have a high purine content which can be converted into uric acid. Nonetheless, it didn't make a big dent on at least the clinical chemistry biomarkers. So for now, I've cut them back down to where they were for test number four. And that story will be more in the, next video when we talk about mushrooms and homocysteine and nicotinamide. Alright. So what about other, aspects of the diet including cheat meals? So the diet isn't always purposefully clean and I do that because if I try to go completely cold turkey, no junk ever, I get to a point where I start thinking about junk food and that can increase the risk for a binge, and I'm trying to avoid any excess, eating over the calorie goals that I set every day, trying to be mild CR for as long as I physically can. So with that in mind, I include a couple of cheat meals for at least two days out of every dietary period. So for this test, it was no baked cheesecake, the kind of stuff, you know, you can buy it at the store in a in a container already premade and mixed in two separate containers on day one. Raspberry jam on the first first day or actually raspberry jam and caramel sauce, two separate containers. And then I decided which one I like better and had the raspberry jam mixed with cheesecake on the second day. So that's only two days of junk and then after that I shut it off. Fifty seven days afterwards, completely clean, no junk at all. In terms of the calories that were provided from the junk from these three foods, about 1,600 from cheesecake, about 600 from raspberry jam, and about three fifteen from the caramel sauce. Together, they add up to a little bit more than 2,500 calories and when divided by total calorie intake for this fifty nine day period, it's 2% of total calories so the diet was 98% clean. Now for other tests, it's been 99% clean. So what these data suggest is that whether it's 99 or 98% clean, that doesn't seem to have a big impact on at least PhenoAge and the clinical chemistry biomarkers. I'm analyzing the metabolomic data now and the epigenetics aren't yet in. There may be some changes there but we'll have to see how that plays out. So the big question is how clean does a diet have to be to have one's most useful data. Right? I'm not against fun foods. Right? And and enjoying my diet which I generally do. But is it 95%? I'm not trying to do that experiment. I think one to 2% for me is the lowest limit. I'm not trying to mess around with how clean or not. Others can do that experiment but for me, this is what works. Alright. So this list is ranked in grams. Which foods are are the top contributors in terms of calories? And that's what we'll see here with the top 10 foods. And this list is generated by Cronometer. If you want to track your own diet using Cronometer, there's a discount link in the video's description. So the top contributor for calories as it has been for many tests is sardine. So apologies to the vegans but, this is just what works for me. In terms of the other foods on the list, nine of the foods nine of the 10 foods that are on this list were also in the top 10 list for test number four. At this point, the goal is not to blow up the system. It's to opt is to keep biomarkers that are already mostly youthful as evidenced by PhenoAge and a few others. Blood pressure, lung function, etcetera, strength, body composition. I'm not trying to blow up the system. I'm I'm trying to make small changes to improve weak spots like homocysteine, Horvath Horvath's epigenetic age, increase DHEA sulfate sulfate by bit, increased telomere length back to youthful levels, but without blowing up the rest of the system. So you can see for nine of the 10 foods that were on this test in the top 10 for calories, they were also in the top 10 for test number four. Alright. So what about macronutrients? So first starting off with calorie intake, the average daily calorie intake, the fifty nine day period that corresponds to this test was 2,162 calories. Now this is the second test in a row since 2021 where calorie intake was not sequentially lower. So for 21 consecutive tests over the past three years, I cut calories by a small amount for every test. Very small amount. Not 500 calories per day, not 200 calories per day. For me, losing, cutting calories too fast and losing weight slash fat too quickly has led to a rebound gain and I was trying to avoid that as much as possible. So that's why I made very small calorie cuts over a very long period of time. Now, two tests ago I stopped that And I increased the average calorie intake for test number four by about 40 calories per day. And I did that because I started to see a strength decrement for things like pull ups and the overhead press, overhead shoulder press. Now, the goal is to be as lean as, at least my goal, is to be as lean as possible without any deficit in strength. I don't care if I'm a hundred and sixty pounds or a hundred and forty, hundred and forty one pounds. I don't want to lose an ounce of strength regardless of which body weight that I'm at. So I started to see a strength decrement so I added calories by a little bit for the last test. For this test, I increased to a little bit more. So now I'm about a 100 calories higher than I was two tests ago at twenty one sixty two and I have no plans to change the calorie intake going forward. I'm gonna stay at this calorie level as strength has somewhat come back. So I don't know if that's for because of calories or because of I've increased NAD by a little bit. Both of those may be involved but those are stories for another day. In terms of average daily protein intake for this test, 112 grams per day which is 21% of total calories. In terms of fat intake, 83 grams per day, which is about 35% of total calories. And then for comparison, let's bring up test number four. So you can see that the major cut was first total fat from about 93 to 83 grams per day. So 10 cap 10 gram per day cut with the goal of improving the Horvath epigenetic age. In terms of where that fat hit fat cut came from, you can see that it was from saturated fat at about, eight grams per day. Now, also note that I didn't change omega three and omega six as they were nine point six and sixteen grams for this test and in the same ballpark for test number four. So again, trying to keep other aspects of the diet stable while make making specific cuts or reductions or increases to other areas but very specific cuts while not blowing up the rest of the system. There was a small decrease from monounsaturated fat but as you can see the biggest cut was to saturated fat intake. Again, for Horvath, China test that correlation. Alright. Next up, carb intake. So total carbs were 281 grams per day which I say a lot that may seem like a lot but net carbs equals total carbs minus fiber. Average daily fiber intake for this test was 88 grams per day. So when subtracting that from total carbs, we get a net carbs of a 193 grams per day. We'll multiply by four calories per gram and then dividing that by calorie intake multiplied by a 100, net carbs that correspond to this test was 36%. Now note that also fiber also contributes calories to the diet and that's because, fiber comp is comprised of insoluble and soluble fiber. The soluble fiber is converted by gut bacteria into short chain fatty acids. In other words, a fraction of fiber about 20% is converted into fats. So the about that 20% equates to about a 188 calories or 9% of the diet coming from fiber being converted into fat. So I can add that to total fat with and then we can calculate net macros which for this test were 43% total fat, 36% net carbs, and 21% protein. Now within total carbs, I also pay attention to sugar intake. But more specifically, sugars are there's a big wide net for sugars. But more specifically, I track total fructose intake because the diet is rich in fruits and vegetables, especially fruits and vegetables that are rich in fructose. And in my data, total fructose is significantly correlated with more biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. So I have to make sure that it's towards the lower end of my range to try to minimize any adverse effects of too much fructose on blood biomarkers. So for this test, when taking the sum of fructose plus half of sucrose because sucrose is, fructose bound to glucose, so half of sucrose is fructose. When summing them together, I get a total fructose for this test of fifty six and a half half grams per day which may seem like a lot, but that's close to my lowest of fifty six point two grams per day. And I've been able to make another fructose cut so expect to see fructose being a bit lower than 56.2, my lowest ever for test number six which is scheduled for, around two weeks from today. Alright. What about micronutrients? So the full list of vitamins as shown here. And for anyone starting on this journey, I I always recommend covering the RDAs. Now how high you should go above the RDAs is very debatable and, probably very individual. What works for me may not work for others in terms of how high or not to go for for specific vitamins and minerals. Just to highlight a couple, in terms of full RDA coverage, it looks like choline is not above the RDA, but unfortunately, Cronometer doesn't have choline data for sardines. When adding the choline from sardines, I cover the RDA there. And also, for vitamin d, that looks like that's not meeting the RDA. But as we saw in the last video, infrequent vitamin d supplementation plus infrequent sun exposure, and I'd love to get more sun exposures. There just isn't too many cloudy days and rainy days in Boston in the summer, unfortunately. But we we saw in the last video that the even with infrequent vitamin d and infrequent sun exposure, circulating levels of vitamin d were 38 nanograms per mil, which is associated with lowest risk of death for all causes. So all good there. Many other micronutrients are purposely much higher than the RDA, and that's because I'm following correlations with blood biomark blood and other biomarkers including blood pressure. And if you're interested in that data, it's on the correlations tier on Patreon, So check it out. For comparison, let's bring up test number four and highlight niacin. So for this test, I purposely raised it a bit higher to around seventy one milligrams per day. The majority of that coming from nicotinic acid with the goal of increasing NAD. And you can see for test number four, it was forty two milligrams per day. And rather than just assuming that those levels can have a positive impact or not on NAD, I've measured it. And on the day of testing for test number five, it was around twenty eight micromolar in conjunction with that seventy one milligrams of nicotinic acid per day. But for test number four with a lower niacin nicotinic acid intake, we can see that NAD was on the lower side. And that's that's probably my lowest, limit for NAD. That That's where I started to see, strength decrements. So the goal is to keep it NAD away from 20 micromolar and keep it closer to 30 and that's the goal for the next test to increase, nicotinic acid and total niacin to around eighty milligrams per day. That might not seem like a big jump, but the goal is small, you know, progress. Now I'm not trying to again, I'm not trying to blow up the system but make small targeted changes. Alright. What about minerals? So we can see that listed here for test number five and then bringing up test number four for comparison. So first, we can see that calcium intake was about a hundred milligrams higher and I did that on purpose but because I increased collard green intake. Collard greens are a low oxalate containing vegetable that are rich in calcium and because they're low in oxalate that and because I'm increasing calcium intake, when considering that calcium binds to oxalate and then it's excreted, that limits how much oxalate is absorbed. So the goal was to increase calcium by a little bit, you know, more relative to the last test so I could potentially further reduce oxalate absorption and then maybe see if any biomarkers changed as a result of that. Alright. Also note that copper, it was one milligram lower which may not seem like a a lot relative to test number four, but that's a 25% decrease. And also zinc was a little bit lower too. Both of those are related to decreasing mushroom intake and decreasing, cacao beans which are my two major sources of copper and zinc. And then also we can see selenium. I increased that to the tolerable upper limit and that's not from supplementation. That's just from diet with the Brazil nuts and other foods like sardines which are selenium rich. You can see that for this test, it was around four hundred milligrams per day and that was a further increase relative to test number four. But again, no impact on thyroid hormone, markers like free t three and free t four. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more of my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where besides posting daily, the diet, you know, updates every couple of month after a couple of months after a blood test, I post diet data every day. So you get to see the day to day, struggle for how how I'm running the show or how I'm running the approach. But then I also have core biomarker correlations on Patreon. So after every test, I calculate correlations for diet, macros and micros with at least 25, standard clinical chemistry biomarkers. So if you're interested in that, check it out. But I also have been posting full metabolomic and epigenetic correlations there too. So it's a lot more than just 25 biomarkers in their correlations with diet. I also post daily data for heart rate variability, resting heart rate, sleep stages, and then if you wanna check out early videos before they're posted on YouTube and ad free, and I also provide blood test consult. So if any of that interests you, check it out. We've also got a bunch of discount links and affiliates that you can use to test yourself while also helping to support the channel, including Ulta Labs, epigenetic testing, any dequantification, oral microbiome composition, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Cifox Health, which includes ApoBEEP, but also GrimAge, green tea, diet tracking with Cronometer. Or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or dye trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.