In an earlier video, we saw that having a higher grip strength was associated with a lower risk of death for all causes or ACM risk, and that's what we'll see here. So this is a meta analysis of 42 studies that included more than 3,000,000 people. On the y axis, we've got the hazard ratio of all cause mortality or risk of death for all causes plotted against script strength in kilograms. In terms of what's significant, we put up a red line at a hazard ratio of one. And note that where the dash black lines, this is the 95% confidence interval. If that's completely below that hazard ratio of one, we have a significant association. And we can see that that's true for all grip strength values greater than about 10 kilograms with the greatest association or the greatest risk reduction or association with reduced risk of death for all causes being at a grip strength greater than 54 kilograms, which was associated with a sixty five percent reduced risk of death. Similarly, a higher v o two max is associated with a reduced all cause mortality risk, and that's what we'll see here. So in this study, which included about 750,000 people, also relatively large, we saw that having a v o two max of 50 was associated with a seventy six percent reduced risk of death for all causes, when compared with the lowest v o two max group that had a v o two max of 16. Now, an underrated component of fitness is flexibility. And whole body flexibility is also associated with a reduced risk of death for all causes. So the first question is then, how was flexibility evaluated? And that's what we can see with this list of 20 different movements. This is the flex index which is a body flexibility index which looked at range of motion or R. O. M. For 20 different movements which included all of the major joints including the ankle, knee, hip, trunk, wrist, elbow, and shoulder. And then, each of these 20 movements and I'll put screenshots for all 20 movements at the end of this video. So if you wanna calculate your own scores to see how well your whole body flexibility score might be or how good it is, that'll be, you know, at towards the end of the video. So each of these movements was scored from lowest to highest, from zero to four. So that raises the question, what's optimal since it's now scored whole body flexibility scored, what's optimal? So one way I define that is starting off with how does it change during aging. So it shouldn't be a surprise but whole body flexibility as indicated by the flex index declines during aging. And that's what we'll see here. With the flex index on the y axis plotted against age, and this is the age group is from 46 to 65 years. And in this study, it's relatively small about 3,100 people. But as far as I know, there are no other studies looking at a whole body flexibility met, metric index on all cause mortality risk. So as far as I know, this is the only study that exists. Alright. For both men in green and women in yellow, we can see that whole body flexibility index scores decline during aging. Also note that women at any age in this study had significantly higher whole body flexibility than the men. Alright. Now, a higher flex index is also associated with reduced all cause mortality. And that's what we'll see here with data for men on the left and women on the right. On the y axis, we've got the probability of survival. So who is alive and or how many people were alive and how many people were had died, plotted against days on the x. And in studies for survival studies, we generally look at median survival. This is the time at fifty percent survival. That's the time when half of the population has died and half is still alive. And I've indicated with the blue arrow that for the lowest flex index score which is highlighted in red. So at that time point, fifty percent of that red group were alive and fifty percent had died when compared with the baseline start, you know, starting from the beginning of the study. Now, at that time point, when comparing the group with the highest flexibility index scores, only fourteen percent had died relative to fifty percent in the worst scoring group. And for the intermediate flexibility group, about nineteen percent had died. So we can see that having both high and intermediate levels of whole body flexibility was associated with a significant significantly improved survival relative to the worst whole body flexibility index score group in men. What about in women? So first, looking at fifty percent survival or median survival, we can see that none of the groups made it there. So instead, we can look at sixty percent survival. At this time point, that's when sixty percent of the red group was alive and forty percent had died. And at that time point, when looking at the highest flexibility, index score for women, only about three to four percent had died whereas the lowest scoring group forty percent had died. And for the intermediate flexibility group, we can see that only about twelve percent had died. Again, in compared when compared with the worst flexibility group, forty percent had died. So here too in women, we can see that there is a significantly higher survival which is associated with both high and intermediate flexibility. Alright. So what is this just healthy user bias? Is this just a measure of people who have higher VO two max and higher whole body strength, you know, regular fitness enthusiasts. Is this is this just a healthy user bias where they probably also have, better whole body flexibility? So one way to account for that is by adjusting the survival models for factors that could impact the association. And to potentially, do that, they adjusted these models for age, BMI, and health status including major diseases like cardiovascular disease, cancer, respiratory disease, diabetes, obesity, and dyslipidemia. But these models were not adjusted for fitness status. And hopefully, in future studies, we'll see studies where they looked at whole body flexibility and associations with all cause mortality risk after accounting for v o two max and some index of muscle strength, you know, whether it's grip strength or something else. And that'll help to tease out how much of the flexibility, whole body flexibility index score is actually related to all cause mortality risk. It may be that v o two max and strength are better predictors and the flexibility really has nothing to do with it. So we don't yet know that. But this these data is are suggestive that it could be involved. Additionally, we don't know about causation. So if we improve somebody's whole body flexibility, range of motion for all of those 20 movements, do we see improvements in health related measures and potentially longevity? As far as I know, there are no randomized control trials for that. So we'll have to wait for those studies to be published. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more of my attempts to biohack biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself while also help to to support the channel including Ulta Labs, which is where I get the majority of my blood test, epigenetic testing, any dequantification, oral microbiome composition, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Ciflox Health which includes ApoB, but also the epigenetic test GrimAge, green tea, diet tracking with cornimeter, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Die Trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.