To start today's video, let's take a look at data for people who have the same BMI, but different levels of visceral fat. And that's what we can see here with the top and bottom images. So first, starting with subcutaneous fat. This is the fat that's located just just beneath the skin, subcutaneous. We can see that the person at the bottom has a bit less subcutaneous fat than the person at the top. But what about visceral fat? So visceral fat is the fat that surrounds organs. And for the person at the bottom as highlighted in yellow, we can see that the person at the bottom has very little visceral fat. In contrast, the person at the top has a lot of visceral fat. So why is that important? So as we'll see coming up, surgical visceral fat removal at least in rats extends median and maximal lifespan. So before jumping into the survival curves, it's important to show some of the details for that for that study, for this study. So visceral fat was surgically removed when the rats were five months old. And then, at 20 old, how much visceral fat was present? And that's important because this is a longevity study. So if they remove the visceral fat at youth and then the visceral fat grew back, then we really can't assess the effect of visceral fat removal on longevity if most of it, you know, accumulated over time. So there were three groups in this study. A group that had their visceral fat removed but was allowed to eat as much as they wanted whenever they wanted. The group that ate as much as they wanted whenever they wanted ad lib or AL. And then CR, more specifically, 40% CR. So how much visceral fat was present in these three groups? For the group that had their visceral fat removed, they had about nine grams left, and this is fifteen months after the surgical visceral fat removal. So visceral fat didn't necessarily increase or didn't increase much fifteen months later as we'll see, in a bit. Then the ad lib group had about three times higher three times higher level of visceral fat when compared with the group that had their visceral fat removed. And we can see see that that's significantly different because the superscripts are different. B and a respectively for the ad lib and visceral fat removed groups. But what about NCR? How much visceral fat was there? So they had 5.9 grams of visceral fat. And interestingly, we can see that the amount of visceral fat in the CR rats was not significantly different from the group that had their visceral fat surgically removed. But the surgical removal group was allowed to eat as much as they wanted, and we can see those effects illustrated in body weight measurements. So when looking at body weight for the two groups that were allowed to eat as much as they wanted whenever they whenever they wanted, we can see that body weight in ad lib and v f remove were not significantly different as their superscripts are the same. But both of the groups that were allowed to eat as much as they wanted whenever they wanted had a higher body weight than calorie restricted rats. So to summarize this, for the group that had their visceral fat removed, they had a similar level of visceral fat at 20 of age to rats that were on CR. But body weight was not different when compared with the ad lib group. So in other words, if visceral fat impacts lifespan, it's they may be doing it without calorie restriction. Alright. So let's go back to the data in terms of the surgical v f removal extends median and maximum lifespan. And that's what we can see here. On the y axis, we've got percent survival plotted against age in weeks. And then for median and maximal survival, we'll take a look at fifty percent and eighty percent survival. This this is the time or these are the times when half the colony has died, fifty percent survival, and eighty percent of the colony has died, twenty percent survival. And for both of those time points, we can see that the visceral fat removal group had significant extensions for both median and maximal lifespan, but they don't have the longest lifespan on this curve. We can see that's reserved for calorie restriction. Now where I think the story is most interesting is that calorie restriction reduces visceral fat. As I showed earlier, the group the CR group had the lowest amount of visceral fat. It wasn't surgically removed. So when considering that the visceral fat surgical removal group had about a 20% lifespan extension both median and maximal, It suggests suggest that at least 20% of the lifespan extending effect of calorie restriction in rats may be due to, limiting visceral fat accumulation with age. Alright. So these data are in rats. What's optimal for visceral fat in people? And for that, we'll take a look at visceral fat accumulation during aging as it increases during aging with those plots for women shown on the left and for men shown on the right. On the y axis, we've got VFM or visceral fat mass plotted against age from 20 to about 90 years. And for both women and men, we can see that median values of visceral fat increase during aging. Now, the slopes of these red lines may not seem very high, but to put the data into context, to put this into numbers, so average visceral fat or median visceral fat for a 20 year old woman is about 200 grams. Whereas for a 70 year old woman, it's about a thousand grams. So it's a five fold increase. Similarly, for men, in a 20 year old, median values for visceral fat are about 500 grams. And for a 70 year old, it's about four times higher at 2,000 grams. So we can see the visceral fat increases during aging and not by small amounts, four to five x higher than in 20 year olds. So in terms of the longevity goal, it's to keep visceral fat relatively low and avoid its age related increase. So with that in mind, I I try to practice what I preach. What's my data? So, earlier or late last year in December 2023, I had DEXA performed, full body DEXA, which assesses body composition including levels of visceral fat as shown here. We can see that that was a 12/20/2023 test. My chronological age was around 51 years, and my visceral fat mass was point five eight pounds, which is 263 grams. Now, where does that number, where where can we put that number into context for the curve on the right or for the plot on the right? So from my chronological age, we can see that that's below average which is a good thing because we wanna have visceral fat be relatively low if visceral fat in people can indeed result in an extended lifespan. And we can see that it's below average as highlighted by that green green arrow there. Now, where my current levels of visceral fat are would be low for any age. So I can't I can't say that it's the levels of a 20 year old but it could be the levels anywhere from a 20 year old to a 50 year old. So the goal is to keep visceral fat, low for as long as I physically can and let's see if it'll impact longevity. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links that you may be interested in, including discount links for epigenetic testing, any dequantification or microbiome composition, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Siphox Health, which includes ApoB, but also GrimAge, green tea, dye tracking with chronometer. Or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Die Trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.