The RDW percentage is a significant predictor of biological age, and that's what we can see here. So this is these are the nine biomarkers and chronological age. These are the predictors of biological age using doctor Morgan Levine's biological age calculator, PhenoAge. So on the left, we've got those 10 variables and on the right, we've got how much they contribute to the prediction of biological age. Now, if you had to guess, probably glucose would be the most significant predictor or contributes the most to the prediction of biological age using any biological age test. But using this test, that's not true. The top predictor or the biomarker that contributes most to the prediction of biological age using Levine's test is the red blood cell distribution width or RDW percentage. So what is the RDW percentage? So it's a measure of the standard deviation for red blood cell volume. Intuitively, that still doesn't make any sense. So visually, we can see what that means here. On the left, we've got the situation where there's a low RDW percentage. In other words, all the red blood cells or mostly all of the red blood cells are the same volume. So the standard deviation for red blood cell volume is relatively small. That's a low RDW percentage. In contrast, on the RDW percentage. In contrast, on the right, you can see that there's a heterogeneous population of red blood cells in terms of size and volume with some that are very large and some that are very small. A large volume and a small volume. That will be a situation where there's a relatively higher RDW percentage. Alright. So then, what's optimal for the RDW percentage? And also, which factors may optimize it? So first, the RDW percentage increases during aging, and that's what we can see here with RDW percentage on the y axis plotted against age from about 20 95 years on the x. And then we can see that there is this, an age related increase for the RDW percentage. Now the significance of the age related increase for the RDW percentage is that a relatively higher level is associated with an increased all cause mortality risk, and that's what we can see here. So there's a lot of different colored, shapes on this plot and that's because the shapes, different shapes, red, blue, and green are the adjustments that the model was, was included in the model for the association with for RDW percentage with all cause mortality risk. Now what I care about the most is the fully adjusted model and that's the data in green that included adjust adjustment for demographics, morbidities, and other lab values. And then in terms of what's significant, we put up a red line at a hazard ratio of one and note that this is a study of three point two million people. If anyone's come across a larger study for RDW and all cause mortality risk, please post it in the comments. And this study and all the other studies will be in the video's description. So in terms of what's significant, we put up that hazard ratio at one, red line at one. And then when the 95 confidence interval, that's the horizontal line to the left and right of the green circle, when that's either completely below one or completely above one, we have a significant association. So in terms of that, we can see that lowest all cause mortality risk was associated with an RDW percentage in the eleven point four to twelve point six range. And then an increase significantly increased all cause mortality risk in this study was associated with RDW values that were greater than thirteen point seven percent. Now note that also very low values of the RDW, less than 11.4, was significantly associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. But you can see in the RDW percentiles, that was in point one to point zero one percent of the population. In other words, one in a thousand to one in ten thousand had, RDW levels that were less than eleven point four percent. So very rare. It's more likely when considering the age related increase for RDW to see relatively higher values compare when compared with values less than 11.4. Alright. So in terms of what's optimal for the RDW, based on the all cause mortality data, 11.4 to 12.6. And when considering the aging data, we don't want it to be eleven five, eleven eight, 12 two, twelve five. That's still an age related increase. We wanna try to resist any age related increase for the RDW even within that quote unquote optimal range, which then brings us to which factors may optimize the RDW. So in at least one study, the omega three index was associated with a relatively lower RDW, which we'll get to in a second. So first, what is the omega three index? That's the proportion of omega three fatty acids including the sum of EPA and DHA that are found in red blood cell membranes. And then in terms of the data, we've got the RDW percent on the y axis plotted against the omega three index on the x. And here we can see that as the proportion of EPA and DHA in red blood cell membranes increases, and that's up to about, an omega three percentage of about 5%, we can see we can see that RDW percentage declines from about 13.8 to 13.5. And I've written but only within that range because we can see it higher omega three indexes up to more than 9%. So more than 9% of the total fatty acids that are red blood cell membranes were EPA and DHA. The RDW percent was still around 13.5. Still too high when considering that the all cause mortality data suggest that 11.4 to 12.6 is associated with lowest risk of death for all causes. Now we can, in contrast to measuring it, measuring the omega three index, EPA and DHA in red blood cell membranes, plasma levels of EPA and DHA can be tracked. And I've been doing that using IOLO's at home metabolomics kit. And if you wanna measure your own plasma levels of omega three, there's a discount link in the video's description. Now I measured, five times in 2023, but unfortunately, only two of those tests. I also did venipuncture. In other words, I have RDW values that I can correlate with plasma levels of omega three and, of, omega three EPA and DHA. Now I plan on testing at least five more times in 2024. In conjunction with all of those tests, measuring the RDW on the same day. So I'll be able to evaluate whether plasma levels of EPA and DHA are correlated or not with the RDW percentage. In contrast, I've been tracking diet since 2015, weighing all my food with a food scale, logging it into Cronometer, and then putting that data manually into a spreadsheet. So I can address the question, is dietary omega three intake significantly correlated with the RDW percentage? And since 2015, I have 46 blood tests over that period. So what does that data have to show? And that's what we'll see here. So on the y axis, we've got the RDW percentage plotted against my average daily omega three intake in grams. And for those who are new to the channel or who may be unfamiliar, for two blood tests, say there's a sixty day period in between, because I'm tracking diet every day and I know my dietary intake, the average dietary intake for that sixty day period then corresponds with the latter test. So every blood test has a corresponding average daily dietary intake. And because I now have up to 50 tests for many of these blood biomarkers, I can look at correlations in the data to see which aspect of diet may be driving blood biomarkers and I try to improve the blood biomarkers to move them towards health and youth by altering diet, by following the correlations. So when considering the, the the data here, average daily omega three intake versus the RDW percentage, we can see that there's a significant inverse correlation. In other words, for relatively high average daily omega three intakes that correspond to blood test, the RDW is lower. In contrast, when my average daily dietary omega three intake was lower, the RDW, that was core significantly correlated with a higher RDW going in the wrong direction. But another variable has a stronger correlation with the RDW percentage and that's calorie intake, which is what we'll see here. So same setup, RDW percentage on the y axis, but now on the x, we've got average daily calorie intake. And here we can see a significant positive correlation between average daily calorie intake with the RDW percentage with that correlation coefficient of 0.68 compared to the negative 0.41 for the, omega three daily omega three intake. And note that the p value in both situations is less than 0.05, so we have a significant, correlation. So in other words, when calorie intake is relatively higher, that's significantly correlated with a higher RDW, at least in my data. And when calorie intake is relatively lower, that's been significantly correlated with lower RDW lower RDW percentage. Alright. So this raises the question though, is a lower calorie intake driving the significant correlation for dietary Omega three with the RD RDW percentage? In other words, after adjusting for calorie intake, is dietary Omega three significantly correlated with the RDW percentage? So to address that, I derived a, multivariate linear regression model which sounds a lot more fancy than it is. In that model, we've got omega three and calories. So after adjusting for calorie intake, is omega three average daily omega three intake significantly correlated with the RDW? And as we can see there, it's not. So this suggests that if the goal is to reduce the RDW, at least in my data, reducing calorie intake may be beneficial. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links that you may be interested in including discount links for epigenetic testing, any dequantification, or microbiome composition, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Cyphox Health which includes ApoB and a totally different profile or almost totally different profile than the at home metabolomics, green tea, diet tracking, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or dye trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.