There's a lot of talk about oxalates and that's because elevated plasma oxalate negatively impacts many tissues and or organs and that's what we'll see here. So a high oxalate diet on its own will lead to a buildup of oxalate in the intestine which will then be absorbed into the bloodstream thereby increasing plasma oxalate. Elevated plasma oxalate can then negatively impact tissues including kidney function where it induces tubular toxicity, obstruction, and a buildup of calcium inside the kidney which is known as nephrocalcinosis. In addition, elevated plasma oxalate is associated with vascular calcification and poor cardiovascular health related outcomes including coronary artery disease, sudden cardiac death, and congestive heart failure. To make matters worse, elevated plasma oxalate can lead to a buildup of oxalate in tissues including bone but also the thyroid gland, lung, and spleen. But besides dietary intake, there are other ways that plasma oxalate levels can increase. One way is with poor kidney function, and note that kidney function declines during aging, which would limit the ability of the kidneys to remove oxalate from the blood, thereby leading to its accumulation and increasing plasma levels. In addition, the liver produces it and there are specific gut bacterial species that can degrade it. So besides dietary intake, there are other mechanisms that can impact plasma levels of oxalate. For the purpose of this video, I'm only going to focus on dietary intake. I may focus on the others in an upcoming video. Now the good news is that less oxalate is systemically absorbed when it binds to calcium and then it's just pooped out. And we can see that mechanistically in this diagram. So dietary oxalate intake increases intestinal levels of oxalate as I mentioned earlier you can see the oxalate anions ox two and then in the presence of calcium ions which would be there because of a high dietary calcium intake, calcium binds to oxalate one to one which then we excrete it, we poop it out Thereby limiting how much oxalate is absorbed and less oxalate absorption into the bloodstream means that there is a lower plasma oxalate concentration where it can then potentially limit accumulation and structural damage to tissues and organs. Now with that in mind how much dietary calcium is needed to minimize oxalate absorption? So for that we're going to take a look at this paper which was a randomized control trial. People were fed oxalate and they're also fed varying amounts of calcium and then oxalate absorption was evaluated from from the intestine into the blood. So on the y axis we've got oxalate absorption so how much of the initial amount was absorbed plotted against the calcium intake in milligrams per day. So we can see that at very low calcium intakes, oxalate absorption is relatively high. So for a two hundred milligram calcium intake per day, there's about a 17% oxalate absorption. In other words, to put this into perspective, three hundred milligrams of oxalates is considered a high oxalate containing diet. So for someone who's only eating two hundred milligrams of calcium per day, fifty one of those milligrams of oxalate would be absorbed potentially increasing the plasma oxalate concentration. But as the calcium levels increase, as calcium intake increases from two hundred to twelve hundred milligrams per day, there's an almost perfectly inverse linear correlation between calcium intake with how much oxalate is then found in the blood. And you can see the correlation coefficient is negative point nine nine nine seven. A perfectly linear correlation in this case would be negative one point zero. So within that two hundred to twelve hundred milligram range for calcium intake it's almost perfectly linear linearly inversely correlated with how much oxalate is absorbed. Alright, so to put that into numbers for someone who is eating twelve hundred milligrams of calcium per day, there's only 2.6% oxalate absorption. So for that person who's eating three hundred milligrams of oxalate that means now only eight milligrams of oxalate in contrast with the 51 for a two hundred milligram calcium intake, two hundred milligrams per day. For someone taking in twelve hundred milligrams of calcium per day, now only eight milligrams of that three hundred would be absorbed and potentially impacting the plasma levels of oxalate. Alright. But what about at higher further further increasing the calcium intake? So from twelve hundred to eighteen hundred milligrams of calcium per day we can see that the correlation isn't as strong from two hundred to 1,200 but oxalate absorption still decreases as the calcium increase dietary calcium intake increases from twelve hundred to eighteen hundred. For example, for someone eating fifteen hundred milligrams of calcium per day only 2% of oxalates will be absorbed. So to put that into numbers for that three hundred milligrams of oxalate only six milligrams of it would be absorbed and then potentially impacting plasma levels. So if the goal is to minimize oxalate absorption we can eat a high calcium containing diet. Now that doesn't have to mean we're all eating dairy. For example, in my case, I eat a lot of collard greens which do have a very small amount of oxalate relative to other greens like spinach. They have nine milligrams of oxalate per 100 grams of collard greens, but you can see they also have one hundred and forty one milligrams of calcium. So I'm eating about a pound of collard greens a day which gives me about six hundred milligrams of calcium with only about forty milligrams of oxalate. So a net five sixty for calcium relative to how much oxalate is there. But for those who want a more specific approach, one way would be to measure plasma levels of oxalate to assess whether dietary intake may be too much. But also note that plasma levels of oxalate is going to be an integrated measure of kidney function, how much the liver is producing, and if you have gut gut bacteria that can degrade it. But there may be a more specific measure than just measuring plasma oxalate and that's by looking at kidney function markers. When considering that elevated plasma levels of oxalate can impair kidney function if we measure markers of kidney function including creatinine but then also as a better potential measure cystatin c. If those data are useful then one's, oxalate intake whatever it may be, may be okay and not potentially damaging to the kidney. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more of my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links including epigenetic testing, any dequantification, oral microbiome composition, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Scifox Health, which includes ApoB but also GrimAge, green tea, dye tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Die Trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.