Trigonelline, which is also known as one methylnicotinic acid, increases NAD levels in mice. And if you missed that video, it'll be in the right corner. But what about in people? Can dietary trigonelline increase NAD in people? So for today's video, we'll take a look at foods that could increase NAD, including chickpeas. So why chickpeas? Chickpeas contain trigoneline, three hundred and fifty micrograms per gram or point three five milligrams per gram. So with that in mind, for twenty seven days before testing NAD levels, I added chickpeas into the diet an average of sixty nine grams per day, and that's the dry weight, which yields a trogoneline content daily intake of twenty four milligrams per day when multiplying sixty nine by point three five milligrams per gram. But note that one of the foods that I took out, steel cut oats, also contains some amount of trigonelline, albeit not as much as chickpeas. So when subtracting the amount that's found in oats at the higher level, oats can have between point one and point two milligrams per gram of trigoneline and I covered that in an earlier video. So when subtracting out seven milligrams coming from oats with an average of about 30 grams of oats per day, that yields a net addition of seventeen milligrams of trichinelline per day. So did seventeen milligrams of trichinelline per day impact NAD, blood intracellular NAD levels? So to test that on January 15, I sent blood to GINFINITY for NAD analysis, and if you wanna measure your own NAD levels, there's a discount link in the video's description. For this test, it was 25.6, which, unfortunately, seventeen milligrams of trichanneline per day was not enough to increase NAD. And we know that by looking at my NAD test results from January 2023 through January 2024, which is shown here. So for the most recent test with seventeen milligrams of trigonally per day in average addition for twenty seven days before the test, we can see that 25.6 micromolar value, which is exactly the same as the first test that I ever took measuring NAD levels with no NAD precursors. In other words, this is essentially my base pretty close to my baseline. And we know that because for four other tests without NAD precursors, NAD levels have never been higher than 26 micromolar. But for a bunch of tests with with NAD precursors, we can see that blood intracellular NAD levels were greater than 26 micromolar for each of those tests, with only one exception. Three hundred milligrams of NMN per day didn't make a dent on NAD levels, essentially the same as my baseline, 25.3 micromolar versus 25.6. So with that in mind, is the trigoneline NAD experiment over? It didn't move the needle. It didn't get it past 26 micromolars, so why even bother? Well, it's possible that the the intake, seventeen milligrams of trigoneline per day, may not be enough. And with that in mind, fenugreek seeds, as shown here, have more trigoneline than chickpeas. So how much trigoneline do fenugreek seeds have? In one study, ninety one point two milligrams per gram. In a second study, ninety eight point four milligrams per gram. And note that these two studies, of the trigoneline content in fenugreek seeds is 260 to 280 times more that's found in chickpeas. But in a third study, trigoneline levels in fenugreek seeds were only point 262%, which is 2.6. Nonetheless, that's still seven times higher than in chickpeas. So to test whether adding more trichinelline into the diet, getting with the goal of getting sixty milligrams of trichinelline per day. So why that amount? That's because sixty milligrams of nicotinic acid and remember, trigoneline is converted directly into nicotinic acid. Sixty milligrams of nicotinic acid increased my blood intracellular NAD levels to 37.9 micromolar. So for a test that I sent for analysis, actually, today, I drew blood on Friday. I averaged about 24, grams of fenugreek seeds per day using the lowest content of trigoneline in fenugreek seeds, two point six milligrams per gram, I should have achieved at least sixty milligrams of trigoneline per day with potentially higher. It may be potentially higher based on the studies that showed ninety to a hundred milligrams of trigoneline per day. So with that in mind, did it raise NAD? NAD levels, stay tuned for that data coming in a video in a few weeks. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount links and merch that you may be interested in, including discount links for NAD quantification, epigenetic testing, or microbiome composition, at home metabolomics, at home blood testing with Scifox Health, which includes ApoB, green tea, diet tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or DIY Prime brand as I've got on here, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.