Taurine impacts many hallmarks of aging, and that's what we'll see here. Taurine inhibits cell senescence, telomere shortening, mitochondrial dysfunction, and has a positive impact on many other hallmarks of aging. But note that these are molecular, organellar, and cellular alterations. So an example of a molecular alteration would be epigenetic changes. An example of an alteration at the organellar level would be mitochondrial dysfunction, And at the cellular level, obviously, stem cells. But from the big picture, is taurine related to health? So taurine deficiency associates with poor health, including high glucose and correspondingly diabetes, hypertension or high blood pressure, liver disease, and many obesity related measures. Now, the good news is that taurine levels can be tracked and potentially optimized. And to do that, I've been using at home metabolomics using ILO's kit, which includes taurine levels, but also 600 other metabolites. If you wanna track your own levels of taurine and many other metabolites, discount link in the video's description. So, what's my data? That's what we'll see here. We've got plasma levels of taurine on the y axis, plotted against time on the x. In 2023, over five tests, average taurine levels were a 113 millimolar, which is equivalent to a 113 micromolar. And we'll see why that conversion from millimolar to micromolar is important in a second. Alright. So those data in 2023 then raised the question, what's optimal for taurine levels? So I think atop the list is avoiding taurine's age related decline. And that's what we'll see here. With serum levels of taurine on the y axis, plotted against age on the x. And this is from birth to around 60 years old. And then we can see that taurine levels do indeed decline during aging. So, have I avoided taurine's age related decline at least from 2023 into 2024? So, in 2024, I currently have data for five tests and over those five tests, their average average taurine levels is a 118 micro molar. So, at least for avoiding this, the age related decline over this relatively short period of fourteen months, so far so good. So we give that a check mark. But note that this is a relatively short period. The goal isn't just to optimize touring for, you know, fourteen month period, it's to optimize touring levels and keep them relatively high indefinitely. So stay tuned for that in upcoming videos over the many years coming in the future. Alright. So another way to look at these data is by comparing hundred and thirteen twenty twenty three data and a hundred and eighteen micromolar 2024 data with what's expected based based on chronological age. And when doing that analysis, we can see that based on chronological age, somewhere around an average of 75 micromolar for taurine levels would be expected based on my current chronological age of 51 years. In contrast, a 113 to a 118 micromolar twenty twenty three to 24 data would be what would what would be expected or higher than expected based on chronological age. It could be the average value found somewhat for someone that's around 20 years younger. But note that I could go higher. Values in newborns are somewhere around 220 micro molar. So should I go as high as 220 micro molar? So, I prefer to focus on post maturity levels of biomarkers in terms of what's found in youth. So with that in mind, I can indeed go a bit higher. We can see that values in 20 year olds, average values for taurine taurine are somewhere around a 130, 140 micromolar. So that's the plan. So how can I get there? And I think most people in this space are using supplements, taurine supplements, to try to optimize circulating levels of taurine. So, should I supplement to resist age related changes? Now, supplementation is a part of the approach but I try to save that for when diet fails. When I can't make, dietary changes to optimize a given biomarker. And in that case, I would then supplement. So with that in mind, are there are there any foods or nutrients that are significantly correlated with taurine? And then I can optimize diet with the goal of optimizing taurine. So how can I do that? What's the approach? And for those who are regular viewers on the channel, I I wanna say thanks and I appreciate you. This will will be a review and and it will be it will be a review for you but it will be new for people who may not be familiar with how I'm able to look at correlations for diet, supplements, and other metrics with biomarkers. So since 2015, I've weighed all of my food using a food scale. And then, I enter those daily food amounts into Cronometer which is a diet tracking app. And if you wanna track your own diet using Cronometer, discount link in the video's description. And then, I take the Cronometer data and I export that into a spreadsheet. So then, each blood test has a corresponding average dietary intake. In other words, if there's a fifty day period in between blood tests, the average dietary intake for those fifty days then lines up with the latter blood test. So now, each blood test has an average dietary intake. And with enough data for both diet and blood test, I can calculate correlations for diet or any other metric that I'm tracking with biomarkers. So, with that in mind, for this, following this test, test number 10 for Taurine, I looked at 91 comparisons for Taurine with foods, macro and micronutrients. And of that list, only one only one nutrient, zinc was significantly correlated with plasma levels of Taurine, which is what we'll see here. On the y axis, we've got plasma levels of Taurine plotted against the average daily zinc intake in milligrams per day. And then, we can see that the correlation correlation coefficient was 0.69, very close to a strong correlation. Anything greater than 0.7 is considered a quote unquote strong correlation. And we can see that the p value is below the threshold of significance less than 0.05. Now, as a quick aside, when you've got 91 comparisons, this could be a false positive discovery. But I'll address that, in a minute. I I try not to throw out data, but I'll I'll address why I'm not using that approach, in detail in a minute. So based on this correlation, I If if the goal is to keep taurine levels high, I should keep daily zinc intake, my average daily zinc intake, greater to greater than fourteen point five milligrams per day. But, sometimes I don't follow the correlations in order to test their strength, to to test if they're causative or not. So, following test number 10, my average zinc intake for test number 11 was thirteen point two milligrams per day. Now, based on the correlation that you see here, it If this correlation is real, we should expect to see an average taurine level that corresponds to thirteen point two milligrams per day of zinc of around 75 micro molar for taurine. Now, if Zinc is causative in helping to keep Taurine levels high, this correlation will either stay relatively high around point six nine, or it will get even stronger moving closer to one point zero. So, in in this case, as I mentioned for that thirteen point two milligrams of Zinc per day, if I see 75 for taurine, that's on the correlation curve and it's following the data. However, if Zinc is not causative and that thirteen point two milligrams per day of Zinc leads to something like a hundred and fifty micromolar for taurine, that would not be what the correlation predicts. The correlation subsequently following test number 11 or 12 or whenever that data would be generated would weaken. It wouldn't be point six nine, it would be some value lower and its p value would rate would go higher. So probably higher than 0.05. So rather than using the false discovery rate approach, in general, sometimes I do include it if I'm trying to prove a point but that's a rare, occurrence. This is the approach that I use. I try to follow correlations and then after each iteration following a blood test, the correlations either strengthen or weaken and I continue to follow the correlations that are atop the list in term in terms of their strongest correlation with a given biomarker. Now, in terms of whether this work, test number 11 results came in earlier this week. It took a while for the results to come in like six weeks, but it is what it is. It's out of my hands. So those results and dire correlation with taurine, plasma levels of taurine, whether or not zinc is still significantly correlated with taurine, are currently on Patreon in the correlations tier. So if you're interested in that, check it out. I also sent blood for test number 12 on September 6. So, about a week ago. So, those results should be coming in sometime in October, and expect an update video on the keeping touring levels relatively high, and avoiding an age related decline in an upcoming video. Alright. That's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself while also helping to support the channel including at home metabolomics, Ulta lab test, which is where I get the majority of my tests including the standard chem panel, CBC, HSCRP, all of that good stuff. Epigenetic testing, any dequantification, oral microbiome composition, at home blood testing with with Scifox Health, which includes ApoB, but also GrimAge, green tea, dye tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Die Trying brand, as I've got on here, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.