Hey, everyone. Today's guest is Kenneth Scott. Kenneth is a software developer, mathematician, biohacker, and a seed investor in biotech companies that address age related diseases. His mission is to challenge the conventional approach to health and lifespan by emphasizing rejuvenation as the ultimate goal for achieving longevity and possibly even immortality. Today, we'll get into Kenneth's approach for Kenneth's approach for longevity. So with that, welcome, Kenneth. Great to be here, Michael. I'm so impressed that you have a little time to chat. Yeah. That's great. So I think I think the biggest, fish to address first is most of us in the longevity space are relatively young. It's rare to see, you know, someone of your current chronological age running around and doing it well and with an interest in the science of the longevity too, which is also something I think that makes you unique and a unicorn in this space. So, for people who don't know, could you tell people what your chronological age is? And then we can jump into your longevity journey, how you got into this space. Yeah. So in about two weeks, I complete my 80 orbit of the sun. I'm in my ninth decade. You, a youngster, are two or three or four gen decades younger than me. And probably a lot of the people listening to this podcast are. When I go to concerts or conferences rather and I meet the young people who are so keen on achieving longevity, and I certainly encourage them. I hope they get there. But we're talking half a century of difference of age. So yeah. 82. Yeah. So you've you've lived it. Right? That makes you uniquely qualified, whereas most of us are are, you know, saying this is the science and this is the best way to increase our odds. You've actually gotten to the to the first part of it, which is living past the average lifespan, at least for a man. Right? So, so how did you get into, you know, the longevity space? So were you always interested in longevity, or did this change at some point in the past? Well, I think like a lot of young people today, it hit me when I was about 22 years old, I think. My grandfather died. He'd had a rough few years towards the end of his life. He was overweight. He had heart disease. He had diabetes. He started to suffer from dementia. And I thought, I don't wanna go that way. And at that point, I wasn't so much thinking I didn't necessarily wanna go. I sort of accepted I did. That evolved later. I don't really wanna go now. The but, you know, seeing an older person that you love pass away, go through decline can be very, very stimulating and motivating, in terms of your personal lifestyle. And I think pretty well from that point on, I tried to do what I could to not go down that path. And so, at that time, I was a young military officer, and so we had a certain, ethos for, you know, physical fitness and so on. And so I I did a bit of that. I've never been particularly athletic in the sense of being competitive. I'm a small person. I don't get into competitive sports like hockey or football. I would just get wiped out by one hit, you know. But at the same time, in my twenties, I was always jogging a bit. I always played a bit of tennis. I skied, things like that. Physical activities that were sort of non competitive, non sport or or non team at least where I could be, you know, functioning. I also was typically always several years younger than everybody else in my peer group. I finished high school when I was 16. I graduated when I was 20. Everybody in my work environment was two, three, four years older than me. And, of course, during the teen years, they were physically bigger than me. And so, from a athletic point of view or a fitness point of view, I did things all along that would hopefully keep me in reasonable shape. And that was, you know, sort of one thing. The other thing was food. And unlike you and people of your generation and younger people, my early years were very, very different in terms of nutrition. So I was born in Scotland during World War two. We had a diet that we now refer to in the longevity space as caloric restriction. There was no food, certainly no surplus food. We had very minor amount of food, and nothing surplus. And we had no meat. We had no fish. It was vegetables. So we were on sort of a whole foods plant based diet because all of the food was also organic. There were no pesticides, no herbicides, everything was very clean and pure. So for the first fifteen, twenty years of my life, that was my diet. And that gives you, I think, a very different kind of a body than someone who was born, say, in the mid fifties or later where food was now processed. There was lots of food, and people, really ate food that was not organic. It was, you know, grown in fields that were sprayed with pesticides and herbicides. I can remember some of the first spraying of crops in the about '53 or so, in Western Canada at my grandparents' farm. And, you know, it was recognized that these pesticides were bad, and we all had to stay inside when the spraying was done. And my grandfather, who was out there spraying, took, significant precautions to his own health, that is he put a kerchief over his face. And, you know, that was the way the world was in those days. But what it meant was that people in my generation, generally, as children, had a much different diet and I think are fundamentally healthier as a result of that. Certainly, if you grow up, with the over caloric, world that we have today, we see children who are obese at the age of five or something. That never happened. There was nobody obese in my childhood. None of the adults were overweight. I saw an ad on, or an article on the Internet the other day, and it was a picture of a couple in the early fifties. And the caption under the photo was, why were people in the fifties so skinny? And I looked at the photo and I said, that's normal, you know. So, those were sort of the two things that were in my mind in those days that, you needed to eat properly and you needed to get some exercise. And I think those are certainly true today. And the fact that we were eating basically wholesome food made a lot of difference. Over the years, of course, I got into eating some of the processed food, and that led to me ultimately having stents put in my heart. Probably not necessary, but that's a different story. In any case, the nutrition and the food were what started it. Then, when I was about 40 years old back in '82, I guess about the time you were born, the book came out called Life Extension by Dirk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. And they were big on really pushing the exercise and big on supplements. There weren't that many supplements on the market in those days, so lots of vitamin c and so on and so forth. But I can remember reading that and, I guess, in part, being motivated motivated by the fact that here were people interested in this topic, which is something that interested me. And that was a bit of a a boost, and it got me back into it a bit. But there really wasn't much in the long excuse me, in the longevity space at that time. Then about 2002, a situation where I was suffering from, infections, sinus infections, and so on continually. And I'd been to doctors, and they'd put me on antibiotics. And I really went through about twenty years of far too many antibiotics to treat treat this, problem. And eventually, I remembered something that my grandmother taught me. And, you know, if you're lucky, your grandmother taught you this too because my grandmother, when I was about 10, really taught me what I needed to know about nutrition. She said you are what you eat. And she also said eat your greens, by which she meant vegetables. But I remembered that. I was, you know, 60 years old or something, and I thought, gee. Maybe the way I solve this is to stop eating. And I stopped eating. I fasted for about a week. My sinus infection went away. Amazing. Right? So imagine, you know, you know, if you if you're on a a water diet for a week or so and you're gonna come back into the food domain, probably the first thing you do is have some bread. A diet of bread and water. Right? Nice simple diet. Started eating bread, my sinuses plugged up. Stopped the bread, sinuses cleared. So eventually determined that I had a gluten sensitivity, which was frustrating and started to open my mind a little bit more onto the whole medical thing because I've been to doctors many times and been tested for allergies and so on and so forth, and they've been feeding me antibiotics and antihistamines and so on. And sure it was that I had a gluten sensitivity. Well, if they couldn't figure that out, you know, sort of struck me a little bit at that time, I really have to know my body. And so, you know, one of the things that I tell people today is listen to your body. Know your body. You live with it seven twenty four. In today's world, if you go and see a medical practitioner, you spend ten, fifteen minutes with them, and they give you you know, they go to the computer screen, and they type in some data, and they come out the prescription. I'm afraid that's not really medicine, and, you you really have to look after yourself. And I would say that virtually anybody who is going to achieve longevity has to take responsibility for their own medical care. Yes. You can work with and interact with the medical profession and they have access to tools and testing and so on that you don't necessarily have, but you should drive the process. And one of the ways that I do that is that for me, when I meet with a medical practitioner or doctor, he will usually call me Ken and say I'm doctor so and so. I then reply saying hello, Joe or whatever his first name is. And that usually stuns them. But look, this guy is just a partner of mine looking after my body. And he's a junior partner. And I'm not calling him sir or doctor. He knows less about my body than I do. I can respect that he has doctor, you know, an MD or whatever. Well, I got some degrees, but, you know, what he knows about medicine has very little to do with my body. Can I tell you quick, just quick interjection? I don't wanna interrupt your story because I know that there's more to it, but, I do exactly the same thing. That's why I was smiling. And but granted, I'm coming at it as, you know, I have the credentials. I have a PhD in physiology. Right? And and actually in terms of the biochemistry, I probably understand the CBC, you know, kidney function, liver function, immune function. I mean, they're looking at a reference range and I've studied this so heavily. I probably understand it more than them. So I'm exactly the same that when they'll say, oh, it's doctor so and so, I'll say, hey, Jacob or whatever their first name is. And like you said, it stuns them, you know, but they're used to dealing with people who are and I'm not anti medical establishment establishment by any means, but they're used to dealing with people who are subservient. And I do that so that they know, look, we're coming out at least on an even playing field. If not, you should be listening to what I'm saying in this situation because I've studied this heavily, whereas like you mentioned, you're looking at a screen for five minutes, ten minutes, and trying to get a guess on what my actual over overall history is. So, totally agree. Exactly. And, you know, I don't have d degrees in, medicine or bio, but I've been studying this for sixty or seventy years. And you learn not necessarily through getting degrees, but through various processes. And, I haven't necessarily taken the courses. There's a pile of books back there. I've read them all, and I've got the experience. And as I said, these medical doctors who are, say, in their thirties or forties if I'm dealing with them, you know, I think it's something like less than 7% of MDs over the age of 70 are working and more than half of those are probably in administrative positions or, you know, doing a couple of hours a week. So, what are the chances of me finding a medical doctor who has the experience of working with 88 80 year olds, the firsthand experience of understanding what they're like? Virtually zilch. Okay. And healthy 80 year olds, not dependent on chronically dependent on medications with the goal of optimal health, not sick care. Right? It's an even smaller, you know, bubble. Yeah. So, you know, given that, as I say, I I I interact with them mostly to get access to testing that's not otherwise accessible in our society, without me going offshores, which I sometimes have to do. Yeah. So we'll get into the rejuvenation, in a bit. But so okay. So it there I had a whole bunch of questions in there. One of them is longevity genes. But before we get there, because you mentioned your grandfather and Alzheimer's disease, so in your twenties or so, even in your teens, probably Jack Lane was a big deal on television. And he was talking about health and fitness and longevity, and he couldn't die. It'd be bad for his image. So did that have any impact or that that was kind of, you know, not on the radar as deeply at that time? Well, I'd like you to understand that I never had TV before 1960. Okay? TV was not really part of the society that I lived in, and, you know, there was nothing like an Internet or any of that sort of stuff. So no. Just really didn't see any of that kind of, information. Just wasn't there. And then, so you mentioned Dirk and Sandy Shaw. So, it's funny because I too probably one of my earl earliest motivations in this field was going to the mag to the magazine store, which there were such a thing at, you know, at at the time when I was growing up and and seeing Life Extension Magazine because that's the only place that would highlight their work. I didn't read their book, but I knew of their names and who they were because Life Extension Magazine was highlighting them in the thing. So and I read, you know, Life Extension Magazine basically, religiously every time it, you know, came out from my teenage years probably till about, I don't know, ten years ago. So that had a huge impact on me. So was it the same for you where Life Extension that was one of the few places that was on your radar and reading the magazine? That was the only book. I never saw the magazine. Bill Falloon. Well, I was living in Canada at that time. Okay? So, Life Extension Magazine comes out of Bill Falloon's organization. It was an American marketplace at that time. I was chatting with Bill a few months ago, and he said the biggest thing that ever happened for his business was the the book by Dirk and Sandy because all of a sudden, you know, life extension was all over the place. So Yeah. That's really quite interesting. Ah, so interesting. So the, so the magazine wasn't so much on your radar, but the book was so, okay. All right. So then taking it back to longevity genes, I think a lot of people are gonna say, well, all right, you're 82, your parents and their parents probably lived a relatively long time. So how long what was the age of your grandparents and then your your parents? Are they still are are your parents still alive or everybody has gone? No. My my father died, twelve years ago, and I'll talk about that a little bit later maybe. And my mother died back in '86. Okay. My mother in her last ten years had Parkinson's, and ultimately died of a heart attack, at above the age of, I think, 68 or nine, something like that. My father was 88 when he passed away, but one of the things that we always have to look at when we're looking at numbers is how alive was that individual. So for the last five to eight years of my father's life, he was in decline. Having TIAs, these trans systemic act activities. What are their strokes, mini strokes. Yeah. And, so, that was my immediate parents. My father's parents, my grandfather died at the age of 62. My grandmother, rather interestingly, was about the same age, and sorry. He was 72, in '62. And my grandmother at that age was 70 ish. She changed careers. She repurposed. She went out to work, and she started looking after old ladies who were younger than her. And then she looked after children, and she kept on that kind of stuff until she was in her early nineties and died at about the age of 96, I think. And my maternal grandparents, my grandfather died from a perforated ulcer, which this was back in about 1922 in Wales, which was a poverty stricken part of the world. And, he died from that. You know, never killed anybody today, but in those days, it did. And then, his wife, my grandmother, very sadly died from a botched abortion a few years later. And, of course, that wouldn't happen anymore. But it was the sign of the times, you know, the kind of medical care that existed. So medicine has done some things that are beneficial. But on the other hand, they keep people alive a lot longer than they might otherwise be. My grand my father died probably seven or eight years after he would otherwise have passed away from one of his strokes. My mother probably would have died five to ten years earlier when shortly after being first diagnosed with Parkinson's. So do I have a long to you long lived genes? Not particularly. Brothers and sisters? They're all alive. I have a sister who's a half sister who's 87 now, five years older than me, But she's had heart attacks, and she's kept alive through medicine. I have a younger brother who had a brain aneurysm, which would have killed him, except he had. His wife was a ER nurse, and she recognized the symptoms and was able to get her him through the system quickly and get him operated on within a couple of hours, which, you know, was amazing. So he's still alive. And then I have a sister, and she's got heart problems. So there seems to be, you know, a cardiovascular problem probably stemming through from my mom's, lineage. As I said, I've got stents in my heart, although I think that they should never have been put in. One of the problems back, twenty odd years ago was that if there was a blockage detected, they immediately they stuck stents in. There was little understanding of the angiogenesis that was probably occurring and little understanding of the fact that diet would probably change it, which is, you know, what Esselstyn basically did in his book that that I read and it changed my life. Alright. Yeah. Wait. Before we go into the stents and changing your diet, your sister, how old is your sister? I have one that's Sadie's seven, an older half sister, and I have a younger, sister who is, 80 now. So every all of your siblings still alive and in their eighties? My brother is 72. 72. Okay. Alright. So nobody reaching a 100, you know, at least not yet. So Well and, you know, quite frankly, my siblings are not in good health. Right. They're they're kept alive by the medical system. And, you know, you can argue argue the ethics and the value of all that. But I talk of the concept of vitality. You mentioned, you know, sort of reaching, like, expectancy or get exceeding it. I sort of look at that as being about 80 years old. And most people at this point in life are under care. They're being cared for medically. They're being cared for with respect to mobility. They can't move. Most people who are 80 years old can no longer travel by themselves. If you're 80 years old and you go to The UK, you can't rent a car. And if you go to Panama and you're 70 years old, you can't rent a car. Okay? So, mobility clamps down on you, but I see elderly people in the airports. And, yeah, they may be traveling, but they've all got a travel companion where they're being cared for by an organization which takes them from the curb onto the aircraft and they're met at the other end by a similar organization which gets them, you know, out. So the kinds of travel that I do, I've been in, I think, about nine different countries this year. I just got back from London a few days ago. Most people my age don't do that. Yeah. I I hadn't even thought about countries or even states that could ban above a certain age from driving. I mean, that would make me crazy with anger. Like, especially when I get I'm the far from that. But when I do get there and I'm expecting to be in good health, I I'd imagine I'd be furious that, you know Well, it's ageism. Right? Yeah. Yep. And it's it's a bureaucratic law. In The United States and Canada, if you have a valid license, you can generally rent a car. Now, you know, in this country, I don't in in United States, I don't think we tolerate that kind of imposition. But, yeah, those are the kinds of things that happen. Here's another example. We would probably talk about biohacking a little bit, but, if you are my age and you wanna get involved in a clinical trial, you might be prevented because you're too old. It's a clinical trial that's dealing with something that's related to longevity, but you're too old to go on the trial. You know? Which studies which studies so they had a hard cutoff, what, less than 80, I guess, 65 to 80? I think 80 is in some sense a cutoff. I know that I went through the process of, filling out a form online to have a, involved in a hearing test or or development, some therapy to improve hearing, and I filled it all out. And it was about three or four pages of all sorts of detail. And then at the last page at the bottom line, it says, now please attest that you're not more than 55 years old. Well, you know, people at 55 don't normally have hearing problems. Yeah. That tends to develop more in the 65, 70 age range. Well, maybe accelerating, you know, poor diets, ultra processed foods, overweight, obesity, probably increased risk factors for a quicker hearing loss. Could be. Yeah. Alright. So the stent so going back to the stent. So you, I I know because we talked about it in earlier calls that your diet was different. And once you switch that, you made the dietary change. Your health has been better since that time. So, for people who don't know, what was your diet before the stents? And this is for this isn't me promoting one diet over another. This is just your experience, your lived experience. It worked better for you. So I think it's important to hear that. So how did you make what was your diet before, and how'd you make that change? First of all, I would agree with you. All I'm all I'm reporting is n equal one results. This is my experience. Yep. But on the other hand, there's a lot of validation from the experience that I've had. And so my diet before I changed it, was by some standards cautious and not, you know, not not all that bad. I didn't eat a lot. I traveled a lot. And when you travel, it's hard to get food. And so typically, I would have breakfast when I was on the road, and I would typically have bacon and eggs, fairly standard American breakfast. I would usually skip lunch. Every other day, I would skip supper. So I'd have breakfast and then no other meals in the day. And then on the second day, I'd go to a good restaurant, and I would have, probably a nice steak and potatoes, and a vegetable and a glass or two of wine. And that was the kind of diet that I had when I was on the road, and in a sense, it wasn't too too different from that at home. We didn't eat fast food. I never was big on burgers and chips and stuff like that. We didn't have snack food at home. It was typically, you know, a reasonably good diet, but it was relatively heavy on meats and fats. And over a period of forty years or so, my weight forty five years, my weight from it went from being a hundred and twenty or so pounds, which I was at the age of 20, to a hundred and forty five. And people looked at me and thought I looked okay, and I didn't look particularly fat. But I changed my diet, and I lost 25 pounds, 15% of my body weight. And what I was losing was fat. So I had accumulated in those, you know, forty years, 25 of fat, and my belt size decreased by five inches. And then your cardiovascular status after the change That's what happened to that. And your cardiovascular status, so this end so your cardiovascular status, your markers of cardiovascular cardiovascular status improved. I mean, so I guess you were looking at calcification, and, you know, atherosclerotic plaque buildup before and then after, and then tracking progression over time. How is your how is your, status, your your cardiovascular health status changed since before the dietary change? Yeah. So what happened was that, although I'd had the stents put in, of course, that was just, you know, a surgical technique. It didn't really change my physiology. I hadn't changed my diet particularly at that point. But a year after my father passed away, I read the book by Caldwell Esselstyn junior titled Prodentum Reverse Heart Disease. And it's a nice book. I recommend it to anybody. Esselstyn, by the way, doctor Esselstyn, turned 91 two days ago. Quite a nice achievement, and he's quite a vital kind of guy. Anyway, his book was very straightforward, easy to read. I read it on a flight. It's, I think, 250, 300 pages. The first half of the book is the thesis and the second half is menus. And the thesis is, your diet should be a very simple one. And I like the diet because, I could memorize it very quickly, and there was no I didn't have to do any counting of calories or anything. And it was very simple dictate, and and it was four little phrases. Three phrases have two words, and the fourth phrase has three words. And even to make it simpler, the first word in each phrase is no. And so it was no fish, no meat, no dairy, no added oils. And I thought, gee, I can do that. That's simple. And I arrived at my apartment in Ottawa, which is where I happened to be heading heading at that time. And I went to my fridge, and I threw all the meat out. And I'd never been wanting to eat much dairy, although I used to drink a lot of milk when I was younger. And, I went on that diet. And, you know, over a period of two two to three years, it really, really changed, my physiology. The first thing that happened, and it happened very quickly, probably in a period of four to six weeks, is my cholesterol went from being in the 200 to two two twenty range down to about one sixty, and that's where it stays. Now that's total cholesterol, and I don't really look at all the little pieces, the triglycerides and the HDL and the LDL and all that stuff. If if your total cholesterol is down at one sixty, it's not really a big issue. Then I, in about three power three months or so lost 25 pounds. On that diet, you'll lose 10 pounds a month. And so anybody who's got an obesity issue, an overweight issue, and, there was something I was watching in the last day or two, somewhere near 80 I guess it was on the news yesterday. Somewhere near eighty percent of Americans are overweight or obese, and eighty percent. That's amazing. That means a BMI greater than twenty six or something. My BMI is seventeen point nine. And that on the lit you know, on the GATE scale, I'm underweight. But the BMI of virtually everybody when I was a child was around seventeen or eighteen or nineteen. I don't consider it to be underweight at all. I consider it to be normal. Anyway, I lost in about three pounds 25 or three months 25 pounds. And then gradually over the subsequent two or three years I noticed a number of other improvements in my health. I had always had a lot of trouble with allergies. Very allergic to animals, to dogs and cats, terribly allergic to goldenrod and, grass pollens and so on. Excuse me. And within a couple of three years, I lost my problem with, my allergic problem with dogs and cats. Just it's gone completely. With respect to the, plant pollens like, goldenrod and so on, I'm still sensitive, but nowhere near the level that I was before. So that's a huge, huge improvement in just my well-being. I used to have a problem where I'd get all excited in in work or community or whatever, and I'd be charging away doing things. And allergy season would come, and I'd just get wiped out for two months. And things would just go flop, and that doesn't happen anymore. I can keep going. So that was exciting. And then I think one of the things that really, struck me as interesting was one day I was driving down the street here in Florida where I live, and for some reason or other, I was thinking in German. And I hadn't thought in German for at least thirty years. And that was just amazing to me. Obviously, parts of my brain were clearing out. And so I think that there is clear reversal of the clot clotting or the blockage in the arteries if you get on to this diet. Now that's shown in one of the images in Esselstyn's book. And it's one of the reasons I I adopted the diet because he has a photograph in the book of a man's heart, and it shows the clear blockage of the LADP. I think that's right, is it? LADP? And then it shows that man's heart three years later after he's been on the diet. And the the photographs are really striking because you see this massive blockage in the first picture, and the guy could barely walk 50 feet without stopping to rest and so on. And then it's three years later, and in fact, in a month or two, he could walk again. But three years later, his heart is clear. And the thing that really struck me as interesting about that was I have similar photographs of my heart. And the first part was the first photograph was taken about three or four minutes before the second. The second was after they stuck stents in. And I thought, oh my god. I I had to have a surgical procedure when all I had to do was change what I eat? Like, you know, what's wrong with what we're doing? And we need to, you know, get this message across to people that the diet will make the difference. And it's pretty clear, and there's a lot of research and stuff. If you're on a diet which is a whole foods plant based diet or perhaps a Mediterranean diet, one of these diets which is very heavy on fruits and vegetables and minimal on consumption of meat and dairy products, you're going to be a lot healthier. You're not gonna be obese. You're not gonna probably get cardiovascular disease unless you've got a really terrible situation. And, you know, you're not you're not gonna get diabetes, not gonna get cancer. So I'm with you I'm with you on that. I'm just gonna play devil's advocate in that. You know, I think for your physiology, obviously, whole you know, at that time, you know, whole, eating real food, mostly plant or exclusively plant based, going full vegan was best for your physiology. But just to play devil's advocate, there may be people who don't respond well to that, whether they've got autoimmune issues or not, or other stuff. And for them, minimizing, you know, plant products is better. So I'm open minded that, you know, there isn't a one size fit all approach, but when to your point about the obesity epidemic obesity epidemic. So one of my, recent studies, we you know, so standard mouse chow is corn, wheat, oats, and then it's got some oil and it's got fish. Mhmm. So and that's like the gold standard of rodent studies because the worst study, the worst diet compared to that is they just feed them like lard and, you know, oil and casein, you know, milk protein. No real food. Right? So the chow is better than the the the processed version. So I designed a whole food, not vegan, you know, so it had fish, but it was also, rich in fruits and vegetables, which standard chow does not. It's just grain based. So, that diet ended up being three times higher in terms of soluble fiber content, as you know, soluble fiber being fermented by gut bacteria. So you anyway, so you've got that. So three times higher soluble fiber intake per calorie, and the mice were allowed to eat as much as they wanted. These were aged mice. So very old mice. It was, twenty two to twenty four months. These weren't like, you know, teenage mice. This is at least middle age. They could eat as much as they wanted whenever they wanted. Exactly what happened to you is what happened to the aged mice. About twenty percent of their body weight, they lost 20% of their body weight despite eating the same amount of calories as a standard child group, and we did body composition, analysis on them. It was almost exclusively from fat mass. There was almost no loss. You know, in fact, their body composition improved where a higher percentage of lean mass reduced percentage of fat mass. So now I don't wanna extrapolate and say that that will work for all people, but especially if you have cardiovascular issues, if you mentioned, and, being overweight is an issue, I think, eating a very high fiber diet, can most definitely help. Well, what I would say is that, we're gamblers, all of us. Every morning when you wake up, it's a gamble. Okay? Now I described my experience over a period of one to three months. If you're 60 years old and you've got an obesity issue, a cardiovascular issue, even a cancer issue, take a month or two. That's an incredibly small portion of your life, less than a percent, and gamble that 1% of your life on this diet and see what happens. If it works for you, great. Stick with it. If it doesn't, then you're still looking. Yeah. I'm with you a 100%, you know, but I also see the other side of the fence where it's, you know, there are just some people who don't react well to plant foods, you know, and, they have to know I'm I'm I'm not arguing with you on that. Yeah. But I'm saying if you've got a problem, then you should be taking action. Yeah. And this is this is an action that you can take at very low cost in terms of time or money, and you're gonna know the results in six weeks, two months. Yeah. So the only problem with that is when when you've got, you know, like you said, so your generation and, you know, maybe the generation after grew up on real food. And then, you know, later on, you know, sixties, seventies, eighties, growing up on junk food. So you've got people who are perpetually addicted to ultra processed food so that when they eat real food, it's like, this isn't hyper palatable. I I don't like it. And then, you know, they can't stick to it. So then they're dependent on the medical system to try to save them. Whereas, as you mentioned, maybe if you just change your diet, try it for a month. It, it could improve, but it's very hard because they haven't trained their brain. The signaling is so necessary. I I really I really don't like you to say it's very hard. I think that's a cop out by the medical profession. Not for me. For but I can for the people. I don't think I don't think anybody should be saying it's very hard. Yeah. Okay? I think that's that's a real put down. It's a little bit like Terry Grossman who runs the, clinic out in Denver, wellness clinic. And I went through the process of being tested by him and so on and so forth. And we got to the point of the diet, and I said, well, I should just go on a vegan diet. He said, oh, you couldn't do that. Nobody can do that. Okay? Because he couldn't do it. Yeah. Because he had the addiction. Okay? Yeah. Because because you might have an addiction, doesn't mean you should impose that restriction on someone else. And the reality is that as humans, we come into this world with only one taste, the taste for our mother's milk. Right. Every other taste is acquired. If you can acquire a taste, you can disacquire it. You can get rid of it. And it typically doesn't take more than about a week to break the addiction. Although, if you then relapse, it'll come right back. Okay? But you can kill an addiction up to just about anything in a week. You just keep away from it from a week, and you'll be able to keep, you know, the the lust for it will disappear, and you should be able to keep away from. So I really I really don't like it when a medical person says to me, oh, well, you couldn't do that. It's too difficult. So I agree. Don't don't undermine people. Yeah. Yeah. So I agree with you a 100%. I don't want you to think, you know, I'm off the off the track with this, and I have a quick story for that too. So I mentioned the study that we did in aged mice, this very high soluble fiber diet, rich in fruits and vegetables. Again, not vegan. Fish was a part of the diet. So I I also wanted to do this study in people, in older adults, older than 65. So I submitted the the same idea, you know, with all of the background and all of the logical flow. And I have a history of getting grants. It's not like this is my first trick at the, you know, at the at the song and dance. Right? So I submitted it to the NIH, and a few of the reviewers' comments actually said just what you said. Even if this works in your small study, most people are not gonna adhere to this diet. So what's the point? And they and they gave it a bad score. Fortunately, I was able to get that fund study funded. So we actually are we have an active clinical trial doing it in older adults. And I don't know what's going on in terms of the data, but that mindset, like you said so I'm with you a 100%. Like, there are still people out there that are like, I can't do it. So probably nobody can do it. It may take longer than a week, I should say. You know, as someone who has a a problem with the junk food and grew up on it, it it took me longer than a week to unplug that from that matrix, over a long period of time. I'll I'll reference you to Mary Riggins' book. You can get it on Amazon. She's a doctor of oriental medicine, and she's written a book on that subject specifically, and I think she indicates a week. And I certainly agree with that. Anyway, it's a free download for any of your readers. I'm trying to remember the name of it, but her name is Mary Riggin, r I g g e I n. Nice. Alright. So alright. So then vegan, but then recently you added fish back in? And Yeah. We eat some salmon, and that's related to my wife's condition. It was strongly recommended because of her mental issues that we get more salmon into her diet. So living with her, that's what we eat once a week. And then with the salmon, so when you cons when considering you cut out all animal products, have you had any relapse in terms of, you know, the allergies and the symptoms that you had before or everything still? I haven't noticed any. We do buy wild caught salmon, not farm raised. I wouldn't I wouldn't eat any of these farm raised fish. God knows what they're feeding. I have no confidence, you know, full of probably antibiotics and everything else. You know, just keep away from that. And it's one of the problems, you know, like, when you when you look at meat, for example, when I was a child, all meat was organic. All more all meat was non, genetically modified. Okay? Meat in those days was about 15% fat. If you buy meat today, it will be probably 50% fat, and that applies to chicken or, beef or pork or anything else. However, if you're a hunter and you go out and hunt deer or bear or something in the wild, that meat probably, you know, is not too bad. First of all, it's not gonna be packed full of antibiotics. Secondly, it's gonna be about 15% fat. And, yeah, and when I was a child, you know, we would eat, the roast beef, every Sunday, the family. And the roast had about a massive two to three pounds, and it served the five of us for five days, which is a little bit like meat eating today, where people will eat an eight ounce steak or something, you know, just just so different. Right? Yeah. I I wonder how much, you know, and just to play the devil's advocate, how much of it was the animal products and not enough plant based products? Right? It raises the question of of what is the optimal diet in terms of, and without even looking at biomarkers, just from a, you know, just a general recommendation, you know, it's how much animal, animal animal stuff and how much plant based stuff would, you know, keep you satiated and minimize CBD risk and potentially, you know, maximize your health and longevity? Well, you're taking a scientific approach to it. And my approach is, hey. If it works for me, that's all I need. And, I go back to if you've got a problem in, CBD or diabetes or cancer, do do a one or two month trial and see if it helps works for you. If it doesn't, you haven't you haven't lost a lot. Or at the very least, cutting out all the junk, cutting out all processed food, starting there. Right? That would be the first place to start, let alone, you know, changing it completely. Oh, it was sort of interesting. When I did this, I just went 100%. In Esselstyn's book, he has this lovely chapter titled moderation kills. Like, how much arsenic do you wanna eat today? You know? Like, just go for broke. And then if that doesn't work for you, okay. So it didn't. But I think that for probably eighty or ninety percent of people, it would solve a lot of problems. And also maybe, obviously, not eating as much in terms of calories. Right? So if you're eating more plant based foods, it allows you to optimize your body weight better. You can probably maintain a lower body weight, a multitude of health conditions, even if it's not CBD or kids. As you saw as you saw with your mice, when you got them onto a decent diet, it didn't matter how much they ate. But they were eating real food. They were this wasn't a purified diet versus just a lot of fruits and veggies. This was, you know, what the gold standard is thought of in in rodent studies, which is great. Yeah. Anyway, what I found is the Esselstyn diet didn't ask me to count calories, and I didn't. Cool. Alright. So what does an average day of eating look like right now for you? Well, typically, I don't eat anything till noon. Sometimes if I've done a little more of a workout and I feel hungry, I'll have a piece of toast with peanut butter. I have coffee in the morning, decaf, black, no sugar, no whitener or milk or anything like that. For lunch, I usually have a salad, and it's often the same salad more or less. So for example, today, the salad consisted of, a spoonful or two of five bean salad that we make. Mix of five different beans, some red pepper, little bit of frozen corn, I think. Whatever. Then we we make a batch of that every week or two, and it keeps well. Then, some lettuce, a handful of blueberries, a slice of papaya, some kimchi. I think that's probably what was on the plate. And then I had some hummus, and I eat some of the blue corn chips, which are almost junk food, but I have this issue of trying to get some, grains into me. And that's the way I get grains because I can't eat gluten. I it's we do make our own bread, gluten free bread, and sometimes I have that. But that that was lunch. And I also had some soup, which I make, in a pressure boiler. I take some lentils and some celery and carrots and, you know, two or three other veggies and throw them into the pressure cooker and cook it up and make a soup, and I do that. And then, I think this evening, we're probably having salmon. Otherwise, we might have scrambled tofu on toast or baked beans on toast or, last night, we had, slices of, tomato with basil, some olive oil, and a little bit of mozzarella cheese. So dairy there dairy has made up presence. A little bit of dairy. Yeah. Yeah. And that's a dish that I had in London, oh, two or three months ago. We've had that once or twice since. And then so there We would go through pardon? Oh, go ahead. We would go through a pound of cheese maybe. Yeah. The cheese Between the two of us. The cheese is a dangerous one for me. I have to avoid it as my biomarkers don't look better, unfortunately, when it's in my approach, but even I have it in the All different. Yeah. We're all different. Yeah. Alright. So your eating window then alright. So then after the salmon or the, you know, the tomato with olive oil and the mozzarella cheese, I'm guessing you're getting that fresh no. The ball. Right? The mozzarella ball, not this processed stuff in a can with preservatives. Mozzarella ball. And so one of those balls, we would use about half of that between the two of us. So it's not a huge amount of cheese. I think a quarter of a pound, something like that. And then anything after that or that's the last meal of the day? That's the last meal of the day. So your eating window is from twelve to around what time? Around seven. Seven to seven. So then basically a six seventeen hour fast, every day? Yeah. Nice. In terms of diet variety, I think you mentioned, you know, switching up a little bit, you know, salmon or the beans, you know, with on toast. How how how is is your diet basically the same every day? Or is there a lot of variety? How do you or you just eat whatever. It's just as much plant based as you can. So our lunch is usually more or less what I described, but we you know, it varies in terms of what's in it. You know, it's fruits and veggies. And then the supper, we have about seven or eight different dishes that we cycle through. What are some of the other ones? I mean, people wanna know what the diet is of someone who's, you know, right, and you're No. No. As I said, scrambled tofu and baked beans on toast, and, we have rice with some Indian curry type stuff on it. I I don't really focus on food as much as you are. Interesting. What about nuts, seeds, walnuts, peanuts, almonds, any of that? We eat some walnuts. We eat some, nuts. You know, those little cans of mixed nuts. Maybe a couple of those in a month. Esselstyn is very against nuts. Okay. What we do try and do is make sure we don't have seed oils. We do eat a little bit of olive oil. But, yeah, you know, it's just it's it's just not the whole focus of our lives, unfortunately. I'm sorry. No. It's okay. I but I I'm curious what your overall diet is. Right? You know, people are people may wanna try to replicate your approach, whether it's in terms of what you're eating. What what I would say is, you know, get Esselstyn's book, and the last half of it is, good recipes. And if not his book, there's a book by Michael Greger who's wrote the book How Not to Die, and that's a good book to read for anybody. But he also has the book that goes with it, which is how it how not to diet, I think. And he talks, you know, gives proper recipes in there. It used to be that there were almost no sources of, recipes in this area, and so we used to have quite a number of them on our website. But we really dropped that because there's so many books available now. And, you know, for people who really interested in this and want an interesting experience, there's a cruise that goes out of Miami called the, holistic holiday cruise, and it's about a week long. And you go out on this ship, and the people who organize it take their own chefs and their own food, and they take over the kitchens on the ship. And so you get fed this kind of a diet for the whole week. And, of course, if you're a little on the naughty side, you can go to the other kitchen, which the ship has. But they have really great food on this for the week, and they also have good speakers. People like, Esselstyn or Joel Khan, who's my cardiologist, who's, written the book. Oh, what is it? The heart the plant based solution. And, you know, a number of speakers like that who are very good. And so it can be very motivational, and you're there with a group of 1,500 or so like people who are doing the same path, which can be very supportive because it's difficult often for people to do something like this by themselves. And particularly, you know, I know in our family, the rest of the family think I'm nuts. And they're probably right, but I'm alive and healthy. You're eating real food. I don't know how that's that's it's it's crazy when that's what's nuts. Right? So alright. Wait. So, when when is the cruise for people who may be interested? It's in the spring. You should be able to find it with a Google holistic holiday cruise. I think it's in the March time frame, and I know they've been sending me emails. I've been on the cruise with Christine, my wife, about three times. We're not going this coming year. But very, very, very nice cruise. Very, very good way to spend a week. Nice. Alright. So back to the diet. So not counting calories, mostly satiated where, obviously, the drive to overeat in your case is I mean, I think most people struggle with that, but both of those things, not not a factor. You're not counting calories and, you're you're satiated where It was just so simple to do this diet. Nine words. Four of them the same. No fish, no meat, no dairy, no added oils. And I was on that diet completely for the first eight years after I read the book. And we only switched to incorporating, some fish when, my wife got, seriously damaged by ciprofloxacillin and fluoroquinolone, which, by the way, if you're out there and you're being treated for anything, don't let anybody give you a fluoroquinolone. They're banned in most countries, but in this country, The United States, they are allowed with what the FDA calls a black box warning, which means they give you a piece of paper with the prescription, and it's got a message on it. The message is enclosed in a black box, and you're ill, and you're eating this supplement, this drug to get yourself better, and you're not up to reading this legalistic medical type stuff that's on a piece of paper. Your doctor said take it, so you do. And unfortunately, my wife, after four days, could barely walk. Her tendons were almost destroyed and that's recovering. The tendons, as you perhaps know, turn over very, very slowly as cells, in a life of up to, what, ten years or something. She's been at this for five years, and so her tendons are much better now. But it's created permanent damage to her brain. We haven't yet found a way of recovering that, affecting her short term memory and her executive function, and very, very difficult. What were they trying to treat her for in the first place? Urinary infection. Standard standard diagnosis or treatment is Cipro, which is the short term for ciprofloxacin. And it's one of the category of about four of these which are called fluoroquinolones. And the damage that my wife had is bad. There are other people who have been completely damaged for life, but there's, if you go to the websites, you can Google these websites. A woman who, you know, was a competitive athlete in, I can't remember what sport, had this treatment, and now she's crippled. Yep. Just takes a few days. I know two or three doctors who have had Ciplo and are now injecting themselves with amniotic exosomes to counter the effects because, otherwise, they wouldn't be able to continue their practice. But they didn't know either. You know, the doctors don't know. So I was gonna ask about exercise, but this is a good segue into your your focus on rejuvenation tech, because I think you're you're doing a whole bunch of stuff that most people either don't know about or, you know. So, is your wife doing some of the rejuvenation based therapy you're currently doing in order to We we we do most of these, not together. I usually do them first. I'm a guinea pig. And if I survive, then we usually try them with her. And, yeah, I've done quite a number of things. So oh gosh. Where to start? I gave a talk on RadFest or or I guess it was down in Colombia or Venezuela earlier this year, and I realized at the end of the talk that I was talking to medical doctors. And and they were just stunned by what I was talking about and really couldn't absorb it. It was just too much, all the things I had done. So it's sort of hard to say where we'd wanna start. Let me mention a couple of things that you can do in The United States because some of the other stuff is more esoteric and you have to do medical tourism. There are things that are called peptides, cabinsons and peptides in particular. And I don't know what your audience is like, but I think probably most people know or have heard of amino acids and know that they're important to the body. And if you string amino acids together, in chains or whatever, you get, if there aren't too many of them, say, less than 15 amino acids, we usually call that a peptide. And if you get into larger numbers, then we typically call that a protein. So for example well, I'll come to that later. But, anyway, Cabinson was a research scientist in the the head of the Institute of Bioregulation and Gerontology in, Saint Petersburg, Russia. And, he developed a suite of peptides that are only two or three or four amino acids long. And these are available. Let me just regill it here. They come in little packages like this. This one is bisolutin. And bisolutin is to treat the eyes. And this will be a peptide of about two or three amino acids. And Hang on, Kenneth. Is that taken orally or that's like a drop that you put directly on the eyes? Well, this particular version is a capsule. And so I take typically, in a given month, I take about, five to seven different peptides from the Cabinson suite. I'm part of the ongoing trial to replicate results that have occurred been done in Russia. And so this particular package costs about $45. It has 20, capsules in it. You take two capsules a day for ten days and then that's it. Every month, I take a different mix of about five different, five to seven different, peptides of the Cabinsons suite. I've been doing that for about four years now, I think, three and a half years. And, it's difficult to say exactly what the impact is, except that occasionally we see very specific improvements. So for example, I know that the bisolutin, when I take it, helps my vision a bit. Okay. I can read the newspaper, spudming a little bit maybe, without my readers. Okay. There's a version of bisolutin which you can take sublingually to squirt it under your tongue, and sometimes I use that instead of the capsules. One of the, peptides is called, which is targeted at the brain. And the first time my wife took sirlutin, we saw a profound impact within a day or two. So we can sometimes see that impact. Sometimes it's more, evenly dispersed in terms of its impact. But taking this for, you know, three or four years, I I have to believe that it has helped me in terms of my general physiology. If I can't measure anything specifically, you know, try and keep up with me on the dance floor. Okay? Yep. So so peptides and then you've, also done, I think, follistatin gene therapy? Yes. Let me just say one more thing about the peptides. One of the things that they determined in the studies in Russia was that if you took this program for about three to five years, your, survival rate was double or triple your others in your peer group. So if you're trying to stay alive, which hopefully everybody is, this would be a good thing to get into. You take it for three to five years. As I say, I'm taking, five to seven of these at so it's costing me $350 a month. Okay. Keeps me alive. It's the bargain. So you were talking about follistatin. Yeah. Real quick. People keep people always are asking me on the channel. They're like, are you gonna take this peptide or that peptide? And my first response is, which of my biomarkers do you expect it to improve? So now I'm gonna have to do a deeper dive into, you know, the studies that you're mentioning, to see if, you know, there's something there that maybe I could benefit from. So yeah. So follistatin, follistatin gene therapy. Look. We can talk offline, but I'll I can put you in touch with the person who's running this study. Cool. Okay. Follistatin gene therapy. Okay. So this is not something that you can do in The United States. You can get this treatment offshore. I was part of the clinical trial as was my wife. I did it three months before she did. Polistatin is a protein. It has a weight of something like, I think, 235 k d KDA. And polystatin is a naturally occurring protein in the human body, probably in most mammalian bodies. It's being has been applied or used in the agricultural industry for years to bulk up the weight of, you know, beef cattle and so on. People who are into muscle building, weight building, and so on have been injecting themselves with follistatin into their muscles for years. It's it's safe. Follistatin, as I say, occurs naturally in the human body. But what happens is that for various reasons, our bodies start to deteriorate and we lose muscle mass and skeletal structure and so on. And so the body sensing this very wisely increases the amount of follistatin you have. However, it can't keep up. And so that's how people can end up being very frail and so on. Now, the polystyrene gene therapy is done by giving an injection of plasmids. And, I'm not sure how much your audience would know what plasmids are, but essentially they're just circular springs of DNA, which are encoded to produce the protein, follistatin. And as it's developed by MiniCircle, in addition to, having that piece of DNA to to create the follistatin, it it has another piece of DNA which is sort of a killer switch as it's called so that when you get this injection of the polystatin plasmid from, mini circle, if you were to have a serious adverse reaction and wanted to turn it off, you just take an injection of, I think, doxycycline or something like that, and that will wipe out what the injection was. So there was a, you know, a really nice safety factor. When I do these things, I'm really concerned about living and continuing to live. So I need to know enough about the science and the safety to actually do it. And so, as I say, everybody has follistatin. If you if you if you're losing muscle mass and bone mass, sarcopenia, whatever, you osteoporosis, you want to counter that somehow, and you can do that, it seems with, an injection of this plasmid from mini circle. Now I had the injection two years ago, and we're just doing now the two year measurements to see how it looks after two years. What we have seen are the following. We did a follow-up at three months. And in three months, the effect of I I guess I should also mention that these plasmids, they're injected into your abdomen, and they replicate. So you continue to produce this. You're creating essentially a little follistatin factory in your abdomen. And this follistatin factory in my body in three months doubled the amount of follistatin in my blood serum. Three months later, it was three it was doubled. Nice. Nice. And another three months that you've gone up another 50%. Wow. It it went from eight and a half, and I can't remember the units, whatever they are. It went from eight and a half to 17 in three months, and then up to 22 or four, twenty four, I think. But the big but the big deal would be an improvement in muscle mass. Right? So I think what follistatin inhibits myostatin, which allows muscle to, right, to grow to hypertrophy. Right? So Yeah. Did you notice two way two ways you can measure that. You can actually do a DEXA scan, and we did DEXA scans. And my lean muscle mass increased by, I think, about four or five pounds. Now I only weigh a hundred and twenty pounds, and you know more than I what percentage my body would be lean muscle if I weigh a hundred and twenty pounds. So a 5% or a five pound increase or a four pound increase, whatever it was, is pretty significant. But, you know, I don't measure things the way you lab people do. I measure it, and what does it do to me? And when I went to, this treatment was done in Roatan in Honduras. When I went to Honduras, I went through the Miami Airport, and I had my roll aboard suitcase with me. And if you've ever been to Miami Airport, it seems that you always arrive at a gate at one end and leave from a gate at the other end, and it's a mile away. And so I had to tug, you know, pull this thing the mile down there. But on the way to Roatan, I had to stop a couple of times just to rest and recover my breath as I was going from one end to the other. I got to Roatan. I had the treatment. I came back. And two months later, before we even did the three month follow-up, I was out running, and I can run now. Now I'm not, you know, a four minute miler, but I couldn't run before the colostat treatment. I can run now. I run a couple of blocks, rest, run a couple more blocks. I can do that. And that's just incredible. And even more important, because running is boring, I can dance. And you need to find that little video of, me dancing at, Dublin, at the longevity summit Dublin back in June. It was sort of funny because, you know, the music starts. And as music starts, I dance, and, I get up and I'm dancing. And then I sort of look around, and there's all these longevity, geeks, young people like you. And they're standing at the side looking at me. Some of them can actually sway in time to the music. Very few of them were moving. And, you know, that's what follistatin does for me. You know? So it's just really exciting. But the thing that is also really significant and important to me, with respect to the polestatin treatment is that it's truly rejuvenative in the following sense. It was one injection that took thirty seconds. And two years later, I'm still seeing the benefits. And we need treatments in this longevity space where we focus on rejuvenation, and we come up with therapies that are like that. Like, if I have to repeat this every two years, fine. What I don't want is something I have to do every day. Okay? That's that's not solving a problem in any sense. Creating this little follistatin factory in my abdomen is dealing with a real problem. And the other thing that comes about as a result of that, I think, is that and and essentially putting that colostatin injection into my abdomen was a systemic treatment. What it did really is it gave a resource to my body. Okay? And my body chose what to do with it. It was under control of my body. It wasn't a doctor putting an injection into a particular muscle to get me a bigger muscle. It was giving a resource to my body so that, my body could decide how to allocate that resource. And one thing it did very quickly is it zapped my heart. It gave me that extra cardiovascular capacity, and that was not necessarily predicted or expected or anything else. My body said, look. You need this, and that's what it did. Now the other side to that statement is that when you come up with a therapy which will do this kind of thing for a body, you're freeing up the other resources in the body to be better utilized. You're augmenting the total tool that's available, and your body will typically figure out how to use that most effectively. That's what our DNA, which is being coded through our evolutionary development, that's what it's designed to do. It's designed to use those resources if we can give them in a systemic way. And so what I look for in therapies for longevity is I look for rejuvenative therapies that can be injected or or otherwise administered systemically and let my body decide what to do with it. And then I really do get true rejuvenation, I believe. And so, you know, the follistatin, therapy, has just been incredible for me, and the results are there. Now I should mention that quite a number of people who get the follistatin therapy report no particular improvement in anything. And you might say, well, why is that the case? Well, quite a number of those people, as I understand it, were fairly young. Well, if you're young, your body is generating enough follistatin. So, you know, one of the things that I think is really true and and I think more people are starting to understand that is that if you're dealing with therapies for longevity, you really wanna be trying them on people like me who have, in some sense, degenerated to the extent that what you're doing can show improvement. And so please don't stop allowing people over 80 to to participate. And I'm hoping, you know, I'm very hopeful that the with the RFA junior, coming into the fold that we'll start to see some improvements in these areas because certainly on the nutrition side, he's got, you know, really important ideas and hopefully we'll see some improvements on approving things. You know, coming back to your comment on getting approval for testing on humans, I'm sick of people killing mice. You know, let's let's get this stuff to humans. We have, at the moment, at least three separate processes underway to deal with cardiovascular disease. And all of these have come up against the roadblock of getting approval to test in humans. Because what they're doing is they're not doing a statin like test. They're coming up with solutions that will remove atherosclerotic plaque. I'm invested in one of these companies, which is called Repair Biotechnologies. They have a protein, an enzyme that will catabolize the atherosclerotic packet. Basically takes that unsoluble chunk of goo and breaks it into something that's water soluble and it flushes out of the body. How does the protein get into the body? Does it have to be administered IV or orally? The testing that's being done so far is on mice and now on nonhuman primates, and that's all been through injection. Down the road, who knows? But the injections would be fairly simple. But the important thing is that, again, this is a systemic type of a treatment, and you don't do it every day for the rest of your life. You do it. It clears the mess up, and maybe you have to do it again in five years or whatever, but you're really removing and reversing the damage. You're rejuvenating. There's another company called Cyclarity. It's got the same issue, slightly different approach, deals with different aspects of the plaque. But again, it's run up against this roadblock at the FDA because they're not used to people coming up with therapies will rejuvenate. They can't cope with that. It's not part of their mandate, you know? Yeah. This this is, this is another can of worms. Right? The reg regulations. I know I've always heard, Bill Falloon, you know, life extension complaining about the FDA being in his way and allowing people to make their own choices when it comes to supplements. It's a big problem when the big when the big big bad government gets in the way of life saving interventions. So Well, you know, in our charter in this country, we have the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. And how did the government get into stopping me from deciding that I want to try something with my body? You know, absolutely atrocious. We're making a little bit of progress in Montana where they have a certain right to try legislation. But that only applies if the therapy has already passed a safety test. So, for example, if you have a drug A and it's been approved or at least gone through safety testing for some reason or other, a physician can then take that and apply it to some other application, because it's now considered safe. Now think about follistatin. You know, one of the safest things you could possibly inject. But, of course, now we're talking a bit of DNA. Oh my god. You know? And it's important to understand that the bureaucrats who have to deal with this and make these decisions, have an objective function, something that they're trying to maximize, and that is their careers. Okay. If you're a if I I know this, I was a bureaucrat in government in Canada at one point. You don't wanna make a mistake. If you make a mistake your career is shot. Right. But it's your choice. If it's your choice, how the problem becomes when people start suing other people. Right. But if you've made the decision for your body, your life, it shouldn't yet. You know what I'm saying? So Exactly. You know? It shouldn't be able to now then they say, well, you know, you're not educated enough to make a choice. That's a problem. That's all that's insulting on its own. Right? So which Yeah. Is if they know better. Right? So Yeah. Yeah. Come on. And I should be able to sign a waiver, and that's it. And, of course, at least anytime I do these things, I'm signing waivers. Doesn't bother me. I'm not worried about it. We get into some stupid things that add to the cost. One of the companies I've invested in has a treatment for the eyes, and, you might be familiar with Presbyopia. It sort of hits people at the age of 40 or 50 or so, and they have to wear reading glasses or whatever. Now presbyopia is caused by cross links in the lens, the cells of the lens. And so we have a treatment which will, you know, break those cross links and restore the flexibility to the lens and thereby avoid the need for reading glasses. And reading glasses, by the way, do not cure presbyopia. They're just, you know, the best we can do, but we tend to think of it as a solution. Anyway, the the problem we run into is that, even to try this on humans, the solution that we use, and we use it on rabbits and mice or something, we have to get it made in a special factory that's approved by the government because it has to be sterile under some kind of government requirements. Right? Now think about it. Have you ever walked down the street of a big city? All the crap that's going into your eyes? Take down down Boston some days. Right? I get I get I get the the the drive for safety on the one hand, but, yeah, just like you mentioned, we're living in in how how's junk food not you know, how's that legal, you know, and alcohol, and you've got all these things that are potentially bad, and yet you can buy them in abundant excess, and it seems like they don't care. Right? So Yeah. You you know the story though. You've got big corporations that are in the hands of government and government wants to yeah. Anyway, so Well, it drives up the price of everything, but what really annoys me, is, you know, take for example, the atherosclerotic treatment that repair developing, and I'm hoping that I will be able to get it in the next year or so. It won't be approved for maybe five years, seven years. In this country, somewhere else though? Who knows? You know, we're looking at those options. But if you think about it, we lose 600,000 people a year in this country to, to cardiovascular disease and another hundred and fifty thousand to strokes. But we can't administer this to people, now because maybe somebody will die. Hello? You know, like, this is just sheer stupidity. And that's that's the kind of problem that we need to get on top of. And for somebody who is my age chronologically, do you know what my life expectancy is at this point? Not sure. I mean, you've already passed your average life life ex Right. I'm past my life expectancy. But at at any age, you have a certain life expending. Remaining life expectancy. Yeah. So what's your expected remaining? I think six years or something. Mhmm. So now I gotta wait, you know, six or seven years for Yeah. It's alright. It's great. And this is where, you know, if I were you, it's like, I've gotta get in the face of these government officials who are getting in the way of promoting my health and and longevity. Right? So Yeah. And and so to the extent that I can get in their face, fine, but I also have to survive myself, and so I'll go where I have to. And, fortunately, I can afford to do that. And one of the great things that you have when you reach my age is you really become free. I don't give a damn. Okay? I don't care if you're a government official. You know? Forget it. And I'm fortunate enough to have a variety of citizenships. And if I have to, I can go to another country. Yeah. Alright. So with that in mind, so then stem cells and then also exosomes, I think you've done or are still doing both of those two? Yeah. So the stem cells, there's a whole range of different stem cell treatments that are out there. This, of course, all came out of the work of Yamanaka back in 2006, who developed the or determined that we could reverse a human cell back to a very primitive embryonic type state, through manipulating what he calls what we now call the Yamanaka factors. And so there's sort of two things that came out of that. One is that we developed, a whole range of stem stem cell treatments, but I think equally important, at least for many of us, is we now believe that it's possible to reverse the age of the body. And the difference between one cell in the body is like the difference between the Wright Brothers Spire and seven eight seven that you flew across the Atlantic on the other day. Okay? So two things came out of it. But on the stem cell side, the there are a lot of different people using a lot of different treatments and ways of applying stem cells. And most of them are creating stem cells for therapeutic use that are fairly large, in the sense that they can't get through the smaller capillaries in the body, so they can't be treated systemically. Now the stem cells that I've been getting are somewhat different, and this comes out of research that was done in Cambridge, England, And these are what are called VSELs, very small embryonic like stem cells. And the work in Cambridge determined that our blood cells contain, very small stem cells that become dormant during the fetal stage of development. They're in your body forever but they don't do anything. Why they're still there I don't know, you know, evolutionary wise, you'd think they might have gone, but whatever. However, what they determined in Cambridge was that it was possible to reactivate these stem cells, these VSELs. And the therapy as it now exists is the following. We take, a sample of blood, sixty, seventy cc, 66 cc, I think is what they use, of blood, and you spin it down using a centrifuge to create or extract the PRP, the platelet rich plasma. And then you take this platelet rich plasma and you activate it, which is where the embryonic stem cells are. You activate that using light of a particular frequency, laser light type of application, And then you reinject that into the body. So from a safety point of view what you've got is a very safe situation. You've got a bit of your own blood being extracted, being treated with a light which doesn't touch it other than to radiate it, and you stick that back in your body. So it really couldn't be anything safer than that. The question is, does it work? And what we find is that it's incredibly effective. Now the body can be targeted. As I said, this is a systemic treatment. So you you just inject it back into your arm with an IV push. But you can target to some extent where those stem cells will go by radiating parts of the body with that same laser light. And it's a particular, device. It's called an SONG laser, and it penetrates into the body tissues, and you can target, for example, the brain of the vagus nerve or a knee or whatever. And the VSCLs will be somewhat attracted into that area so as to be active there. And we have seen, both my wife and I, some very significant success with this. So for example, I had my vagus nerve treated, and the vagus nerve is the one that goes between the brain and the gut. And my digestive system has been a mess for decades, probably as a result of far too many antibiotics. And when I was treated with this, the SEL treatment the other week or a few months ago actually now, my digestive system changed overnight. How so? What did you notice that was different? Much much better. Much better. You know? My digestive system is just working a lot better than it did. The one thing that might be a little bit negative is I seem to put on a couple of pounds. I'm gonna have to take a look at that. So better digestion, maybe eating more food or extracting more energy from food? Probably exact you know, extracting more from the food. My wife has had, as I said, some mental issues from the Cipro, and we treated her brain with this. And, the day after she was treated, we were talking about taking her back to the clinic for some follow-up therapies. And so I said, well, I'll spend the morning with you, but after the morning session, you can go back to, my son's home where we were staying in an Uber because I wanna go to an AI conference. And she looked at me and said, AI conference? I'm going. And she's a mathematician. Not a surprising thing for a mathematician to say, but she'd been so out of it that I was just stunned. And then she said, oh my gosh. I've gotta get my hair done. Oh my gosh. I've gotta get a dress to wear. And she was just a different person in twenty four hours. So, you know, that was really pretty incredible stuff. It's affected my knees. They're much better. I had a problem where forty years ago now, I was running on a beach in The Bahamas, and I damaged my right knee. And, you know, I was back in the days when people said no pain, no gain, and it started to hurt. I just kept going. Now I know if it's if there's pain, you stop. Okay? Anyway, I had this injection, and my knee was repaired in about a week. Haven't had any trouble with it since. It's just just amazing stuff. And again, you know, you can target it to some extent. But on the other hand, it's a resource that's there if it's there and it goes where it goes. I've got a lot of respect for my brain and my DNA. I'm sure it'll look after me. Yeah. Right. Right. So then exosomes, have you also done exosomes? Yeah. Now exosomes, of course, again, there's huge variety in what exosomes are. It really just means small particles in a sense. The exosomes that I get are from amniotic fluid, and there's a company in Miami called CRM, Center for Regenerative Medicine, under a doctor Farshan, and they run the American Academy of Stem Cell Physicians. And they take the amniotic fluid from full term healthy baby births, and they process that in various ways including filtering it by size so that the exosomes that you're getting are less than I think it's a 125 nanometers, small enough that the immune system won't react to them. And we just inject that. Now this is a a somewhat riskier kind of treatment in a sense because every batch of amniotic exosomes is different. It comes from different births. And so the CRM do very detailed process to make sure that's as safe as possible. The treatments that we've taken have been very effective. My wife was damaged to her tendons with this Cipro treatment. And for the first year or so afterwards, she was just in continual pain. She had treatment of the amniotic exosomes. And three weeks later, she woke up one day and she said, I don't hurt. Now she still does have some tendon pain after five years, but the reduction after one treatment was just immense. And so we've done, each of us, probably half a dozen of these treatments. The first time I had it, I couldn't believe. I was just on such a high. But you've got these exosomes, which if you think about what they are, these are the things that take a a an egg, a fertilized egg, and turn it into a full blown human being. The nutrition that's in that is incredible. Not just nutrition. You've got signaling signaling molecule metabolites that could be, you know or and they're youthful in the youthful state. So A whole range of these things. Yep. Do you know who, Dave Pascoe is? The 62 year old, I mean, he's pretty popular these days. Well, all the days. But, anyway, 62 years old, in the same category as Brian Johnson. He looks about twenty years younger than he is. Fantastic shape. He mentioned the same thing that you said about exosomes where after he got them, he felt like he was on a high where he had a shoulder issue that, once he got the exosomes injected, it went away. And then he he he went back to the gym and overdid it, and and sure enough, it came back. But he couldn't it was only because of the exosomes that he he was able to have that healing in the shoulder in the first place. But the high that you mentioned, he also said that too. It's so amazing. Yeah. And, you know, relatively speaking, it's not an expensive therapy, and you can get that in The United States. Now one of the things is that every batch of exosomes is different. And so the FDA will never approve this because they believe only in pure you know, it's gotta be identical every time. But doctors can can do this as long as they don't claim it will achieve anything. Okay? But I know doctors who are using the amniotic exosomes like we have to counter the effects of Cipro. Crazy. Crazy, this might be. You've got me thinking that it can't be hard to isolate exosomes. I mean, if you get a filter that's the selective enough to not allow the, like, if you just I'm granted it's amniotic fluid, but we have exosomes. Technically, you could take someone's young, younger blood, like your son's blood and isolate exosomes, with the filter that's specific for a certain, you know, size of an exosome. Right? And I don't know. I'm just thinking if there are ways to do this at home, but, you know, anyway, the Yeah. So the the problem is that if if it comes from different sources, it it will never get approved. Right. Unless you could say that you're you've got exactly the same exosomes. It's not a size issue. It's smaller than that. Right. But how would someone know if I'm isolating, you know, my blood or my family's blood in my in my own house? How would they know if I've got centrifuge in the folks there? I I personally think it's a very safe, treatment. There being tens of thousands of people who have it apparently. Yeah. Alright. So yep. You just have to find yourself a medical doctor who will agree to do it. And if you need to contact me, and I can put you in touch with the right people to provide it. Cool. Alright. So those are the big ones, I think, but are there other therapies? I know you do IV vitamin and mineral drips. I think you take NMN, you know, to increase NAD or maybe not? I I've taken NMN. I haven't particularly found that it makes a difference or maybe it doesn't anymore and it did it first. You know, it's one of those things. I think one of the more interesting ones that I take is DMQ, dasatinib phosphoricin. Mhmm. K? And so, tomorrow, in fact, I will take a dose with my wife, and we do this once every two months. We take fifty milligrams of dasatinib and a thousand milligrams of, vercetin. And, desatinib, for those who don't know, is a, drug that's used in the treatment of a certain cancer, and I don't know which one it is. So, you know, it's passed, the safety test at least for a kind of cancer in humans. It's also being tested by, James Kirkland at the Mayo Clinic. He's running a whole series of tests on dasatinib plus quercetin. And, I asked him a couple years ago, you know, when we would see the results of his work, and he said, oh, five, seven years. And we discussed this a few minutes ago. I don't wait for five to seven year studies. So we just do it. And, yeah, the the target is senescent cells. And, you know, you're keen on measurements, and, I have measurements of my senescent cell burden, and it's very, very low, and it stays down there. And does this make a difference? I don't know, but it doesn't cost me anything to do this. And I really believe that it does work. Certainly, the indications are. But the more interesting therapy that I use for desatinib is based on a comment by James Kirkland a couple of years ago at the conference in Copenhagen. And he reported that they were doing a study, with sheep where they were giving them a shampoo of tesatinib and quercetin. And the hope was that this would extend the wool bearing life of the sheep. Apparently, sheep bear good wool for maybe three years, and then they're put down as the euphemism goes because the wool quality is is not so good. And they're hoping that this treatment will get maybe an extra year or two out of the quality of sheep. So, I looked around my body for wool, and I couldn't find any. But I've got a thinning toupee here and, you know, it's there's a little bit that's got color at the back here still. And so for the last, about three months now, I've been using a shampoo of bitosatinib plus quercetin, mixed into a, you know, a shampoo that I bought. And, I do that a couple of times a week, and who knows what will happen. But I have a friend in London who's been doing this for a year and a half, and there seems to be evidence of new hair growths at the back of her head. Do do you have have you and her have you guys left it on your head? Do you or you just use it as a shampoo, wash it off? I'd imagine you leave it on so that it can permeate the the skin. I leave it on for five minutes before I rinse it off. Yeah. And I put it on my eyebrows and, you know, all over my head. And these bald areas at the front that used to have hair, I put it there too. How about skin? I mean, I don't know if you've seen the recent paper where senescence cells in skin if you transplant senescence cells into young skin, it there was, an increase in, in the aged phenotype in the young animals. So senescence cells in the skin are potentially bad. So I wonder if d plus q could, you know, maybe maybe you're rubbing it on your on your skin too. Well, on that spot, let me just pull something else up. I've got a couple of tubes here. So this black one, I was part of the beta test for a product called OneSkin, which is a peptide based skin cream. And the thing that was interesting about it, this is their currently version of it. They've got the logo on it. So on as I say, this this was unmarked. That's a souvenir from the beta test. So I use OneSkin on my skin. It's a peptide based skin cream, and it has the, characteristic that the peptide will penetrate the outer dermis and go underneath and kill senescent cells. Mhmm. Now I did it for about three months on the beta test, and I used to have, you know, those age marks, the brown marks that people get, and I have them around here, and they disappeared in those three months. And, so I continue to use it, but I actually didn't use it for a period of about six months, and those dark spots did not reappear. So, you know, I continue to use it. They have two or three versions. They have one for the eyes to try and reduce the amount of bagginess. It's a, more concentrated version of the of the face cream. And, you know, most people say I don't look like an 82 year old. Don't look, don't move, don't sound, is stamina. I don't know many 82 year olds that could you know, two hours, like, no problem. You know? So, you're you're doing something that some more than something, probably a combination of things at work. What other what other rejuvenation tech, are you did did we miss that you're currently doing or have plans to do? Well, the the two that I have plans on are the, treatment from repair. They have what they call their cholesterol degrade degrading platform. Yep. And that will be injections. And as currently formulated, we're looking at a, an initial trial. This is not necessarily what would occur as a, ongoing therapy. But I think just from the point of view of caution rather than doing a big injection, we're doing six injections a week apart. Okay? And we'll probably do this offshore to be able to get it done next year. Certainly hoping that that will happen. And if there's anybody out there in your audience who is interested in helping to fund the removal of atherosclerotic plaque, please contact me. We do need some more investors in this space. We've got six hundred thousand people a year dying in this country for want of something like this. I would hope that there's somebody out there with bigger pockets than I have who could, you know, help us do that. Anyway, that's one of the things. And, I don't have nearly the problem that I had twelve years ago. But on the other hand, I do have it there. Like, for example, you're big on testing stuff and measuring. And so about five years ago, my cardiologist, who is, I mentioned Joel Kahn, who wrote the plant based solution, and you see him on TV a lot. Joel took my c I m t measurement, which is a carotid artery measurement of the thickness of the plaque in the artery or something like that, And, you know, he sent the results off to the Cleveland Clinic for analysis. And couple weeks later, he gives me a call and he says, great news. You've got the arteries, carotid arteries of a 58 year old. And so upside 78 or something. He said, you're really doing well. And I said, okay. Thanks. Well, we let it sit for a few years, and I guess after about five four years, five years, whatever it was, we tested it again, two week delay to get the results. He calls me up. He said, Ken, you're doing unbelievably. In four years, it's gone from only, you know, from 58 to only 59. And I just said to him, Joel, it's the wrong direction. We gotta, you know, we gotta restore this. And so, yeah, I I want this stuff to get taken out. I've got a need for it to be removed. And from what I saw with my brain on the language of speaking German, I'm hoping that, if I have a treatment like that, maybe I'll start speaking Spanish again. I used to speak Spanish. I have more trouble with it now. But that's one area that I'm hoping they'll do something on in this coming year. Now the other thing that's really exciting that's going on is in the area of mitochondria. And mitochondria are the organelles that are in the cells, which actually generate the energy, which let the cells do their thing. And these is organelle the right word? I think it is. Yeah. Yeah. I was actually gonna say symbiotic bacterium bacterium because, technically, they were a bacterium that we, you know, anyway. I was just gonna express express that. You do it much better than you do. But, yeah, these are things that coexist in our cells, and a typical cell might have 10,000 of these, organelles in there, the mitochondria, and they generate all the action. What happens over time is these, mitochondria, can wear out. They become less effective. You can get a very clear picture of that by watching a five year old playing on the street and try and keep up with him. Okay. So we need to try and restore that. And most people, by the time they're my age, are really having a lot of trouble with the energy side of things. I'm not doing too badly. But Mitrix, a company that's been headed up by a fellow by the name of Tom Benson, is working on mitochondrial trans transfusion, so to speak. Now the mitochondria in your body come from the maternal line of your evolution, your development. Your mitochondria are the mitochondria of your mother and hers or her mother and so on. And what Tom Benson has done, and I have some interesting pictures of this, is he's taken the mitochondria in a person and analyzed it from the point of view of looking for damage. And he's taking mitochondria in the female line in his family three generations. His mother who I think is 90 and, I think himself, and then I think, a nephew or a niece or something. And you take a look at the damage levels at these different ages, and it's very, very noticeable difference in the level of damage. Okay. And that's obviously affecting how the body works. So the concept is to take mitochondria from a young person in your female line and replicate that in a chamber, a bat, and then take that and transplant it into your body. And probably through just injection, IV type injection, let it pump in. It was a surprise to us a few years ago to learn that there are mitochondria in the blood serum. And, you know, if you pump a bunch more bite mitochondria in there and it's good stuff, hopefully, it goes in the right place, or maybe we'll learn to target it in some way. Anyway, the thing that's been exciting is that Tom has recently received FDA approval to do the first human trial on this, and that will occur in the next few months just as soon as we can, in fact, create, you know, manufacture that and get stuff generated. And, again, if somebody's interested in investing in this field, the company's looking for help. But this this particular approval, there's a a boy who has, a genetic defect in his mitochondria, and he will die within a number of years if he doesn't get a solution. And so the solution that is proposed, as I say, is to create take some good mitochondria in his female line and make a batch of this and put it into his body and see what happens. And so the hope is that we can do that sometime in the next six months or so. And that's exciting. And the thing that's really nice about it is it's being done with a human. Like, they they've done this kind of stuff with mice, but that doesn't really do anything for us. You know, stop killing mice. Let's help people. I gotta I gotta get a t shirt that says that. You know, stop killing mice. Help people. Anyway, I think that's exciting, and I'm part of that program. And tomorrow morning, I'm sending my samples off to have my mitochondrial DNA analyzed to see what condition it's in. And, we'll see where we go from there. Are you familiar with the concept of mitochondrial heteroplasmic? You'd have to explain it to me. I might have heard of it, but I don't So each cell has, like, as you mentioned, a lot of well, depending on where the cell type is, heart versus, you know, labor versus alright. So heart will obviously have a lot of mitochondria, but all of those mitochondria aren't in the same functional capacity. You're gonna have heteroplasmic, which means that you're gonna have, you know, basically a normal distribution where you're gonna have, you know, some at the far right side of that distribution that are working fantastically like they did in youth, and some that are absolutely terrible and on average, you know, average mitochondria. So, it's funny because, I haven't thought about this in probably twenty years. But when I was a grad student, I before I had a a thesis project, I was pitching to my advisers at the time, you know, what if we could, because this was and it may have been James Kirkland who was who got me thinking about this because, you know, I've been reading his works forever too. But anyway, it's this idea of blocking replication of the poorly functioning mitochondria in a cell while allowing the the healthier mitochondria, more youthful mitochondria to basically predominate as a form of of restoring, health. So and I haven't seen anything, you know, published along those lines in the last twenty years. So anyway Well, there there's quite a group of people working with, Tom Benson on this project. Some very top level people out of Stanford and so on. I haven't really gotten very much into the science of it or just how they're planning to do the delivery. It just strikes me as the kind of rejuvenative kind of stuff that we need to be doing. And, yeah, I I you know, we just they they one of the things that upsets me a lot or a bit, anyway, about what we're doing in medical research, as it applies to longevity, is that we're spending a lot of, money treating or trying to treat these diseases of aging, the cardiovascular disease, the, diabetes, the cancer. And to me, these are very largely diseases of what you eat. And it would make more sense to be teaching people to eat properly and to controlling the food supply so that it is more healthy. But we don't spend enough money on rejuvenative technology. And a little bit this goes back to how the field has developed over the last, couple of decades. In 2002, Oviede Gray produced his paper with a couple of colleagues. I don't know who they were. I can't remember offhand. Where he talked about, aging as being something that was a little bit like a car wearing down, and if we got in there and replaced and fixed and so on, we could, slow aging at least. And that was a really important step forward, and it's really, to a large extent, as a result of the efforts that OBRA puts into this, it's become a very dominating part of the longevity space. It was picked up particularly in 2013, I think it was, with the hallmarks of aging paper, which really took the same ideas and repackaged them. As near as I can tell, we never got quite enough credit for his role and all that. But, anyway, that just really caused this field to boom, and people are out there spending money investing in trying to stop these diseases of aging so that we can whatever, achieve longevity. At the same time the work in Yamanaka although it's been respected and there are people working on it, that whole concept of rejuvenation has not really been picked up by the field. And I think that's the big mistake. I think we should be working on rejuvenation. I think we've got the proof of concept. We just need to do it. And I would really like to see people focus more, and this is where I tend to invest. I invest in companies that, are at least going partway on the rejuvenation. If we can get rid of the atherosclerotic plaque and have that person healthy for another five or ten years and then treat them again, that's fine. But don't give me a stat in which, you know, it's it's not even clear they do anything for anybody. The the the need is to really focus on that rejuvenated side of things. And so these companies that are doing the work like Mitrix or repair or LentoBio that's going to reverse the damage on the lens and get rid of the presbyopia. This is a an eye drop that will be very inexpensive and you just think of what the impact of that could be on the world. In most of the world, everybody suffers from presbyopia at some point, but in most of the world people can't afford eyeglasses. And this is a little eye drop that they could be taking for maybe three months, and that would give them restorative capability for a few years. And, you know, this is what we should be doing. Just Definitely. Yeah. Alright. So that was great, Ken, Kenneth. So, I mean, I think we can go on for hours and hours and hours. We'll have to have a part two and part three. I still have lit questions that I didn't get to. But, so if if people wanna find you, I'll link to your Instagram and x and, vivasparkle.com. I think is that where people can reach you if they wanna invest or donate or or, where else can people find you in in case? Yeah. If they can email me, can@vivasparkle.com. Cool. I think there's there's a place on the Viva Sparkle website, I think, but, just send me an email. But, yeah, there's some really interesting opportunities here. And for those of your audience who've got some of these problems, we do have solutions. We're just up against roadblocks, partly financial and partly governmental, but if you've got the funds, we can probably deliver to you someplace. I take the VSEL treatments in Panama. Nice. Alright. Well, thanks, Kenneth, and, we'll catch up again soon. Great. Nice chatting with you again, Michael, and, yeah. Exciting. Lots lots happening, and the important thing is, and this is really the important thing for everybody to take to take away from this conversation. I think it's really important that you understand that you were born to live, not to die. And that's what the Yamanaka work did. It showed us that that brain, those cells want to be alive. If you let your heart stop beating, you're gonna let a 140,000,000,000,000 cells die. Don't do that. Keep them alive and get your mind believing that it wants to live. Nice. Great words. Thanks, Kenneth. Great. Nice chatting with you. Bye from now.