We now have a public health problem with light that impacts on aging, and we need to be very, very careful about a light exposure. We're being starved of red light, particularly in the built environment, and one of my colleagues calls this modern scurvy because scurvy used to be a problem that sailors had because they had something missing. They had vitamin c missing, so they had scurvy and scurvy could kill them. We have something missing now, we have red light missing. So the built environment is now dominated by short wavelengths and the longer wavelengths aren't there anymore. So this has an impact on an aging population because we know mitochondria are regulating, blood sugars, but they're also regulating degenerative diseases. There are lots of evidence now to show that mitochondrial failure is associated with dementia, memory problems, etcetera, and so it's a public health issue affecting aging. It drives aging. There's a thing called the mitochondrial theory of aging. It really it came out in the nineteen fifties, and it just said mitochondria will determine how long you live. And of all the theories of aging that come and go, this one has stuck to the wall. It's stuck to the wall really well. I'd love to meet the person who who had the generated the theory, but it's guided our research very strongly. So we need to increase the deep red light that we very often can't see, and we can do that in buildings. But we can also do that by just going outside into daylight. And there are some very interesting kind of observational things that come out from from this imbalance in lighting. The one that I really love is NASA published a study, a very high profile journal called Cell, and they said there's something wrong with the astronauts on the International Space Station. They're becoming prediabetic, and they're aging more rapidly. I think those are big phrases. These people are super fit, super healthy characters. They're being monitored all the time. But look at a photograph in the International Space Station. What you see is you see an environment lit with hard white LEDs, and those people are up there for months under those lighting conditions. The other one that I like, which I think is also desperately interesting, is where is diabetes really peaking? Well, diabetes has many reasons, you know, for, you know, people sit in front of televisions. But one place that it really peaks is in this is in the Arabian Peninsula. What happens in the Arabian Peninsula? You don't go outside. You don't go outside because it's too hot. It's too uncomfortable. So you sit inside so you don't get any natural light. But then what about windows? Well, architects now are building buildings in glass with red light blocking glass. They block the infrared so you can control the temperature within a room, within a building. So big glass structures, most people seem to have large amounts of glass in buildings. But But if you've got infrared blocking glass, you've now got two things working against you. You've got the LEDs and you've got the fact that natural glass natural light is not coming through and infrared is being blocked. Quite interestingly, the Mayo Clinic is putting up a very, very, very expensive new building, in Rochester. And one of the remits they've given the architects is the building must be must be healthy in terms of its light and also healthy in terms of the air that's in the building. Now the architects that were given that brief, were a bit surprised about the issue of light because it was only just beginning to come out. But I'm very pleased to say they walked through the door here, and we had a long conversation with them. So how do you balance that issue of blocking infrared light and at the same time controlling the temperature and the health inside the building. Well, we need to find filters for glass that block only partially the infrared allowing you to control the light in the building, but also at the same time allowing stuff in so that you're in a healthy light environment. So I started off as a scientist, a visual scientist. Someone asked me what do I do. I'm a professor of neuroscience at University College London. You know, I do stuff on vision. If someone asked me what I do now, I say, I work in public health with an interest in aging.