Can riboflavin increase NAD? To address why that may be true, let's take a look at the de novo NAD synthesis pathway, which is shown here. In this pathway, the amino acid tryptophan is converted by a series of enzymatic steps into NAD. And notice that b two is there. Vitamin b two is riboflavin. So riboflavin is a required cofactor for conversion of kynurenine into three hydroxykynurenine. So vitamin b two levels are suboptimal, then movement from tryptophan being converted into NAD will be inefficient or less effective. So with that in mind, is riboflavin intake correlated with blood intracellular levels of NAD? And that's what we'll see here. This is riboflavin intake versus NAD from 2023 through 2025 as I have 26 tests over that period. On the y axis, we've got blood intracellular levels of NAD, And note that to measure that, I've been sending blood to Ginfinity. If you wanna measure your own NAD levels, there's a discount link in the video's description. And on the x axis, we've got the seven day average riboflavin intake in milligrams per day. And to generate that information, I've been using Cronometer to track diet. Now note that I'm using the seven day average dietary intake because I've realized that NAD levels change very quickly within just a few days. So a seven day average should cap capture those effects better than looking at longer averages, say thirty or forty days in between tests. So in terms of the correlation, we can see that there is a significant correlation between the seven day average riboflavin intake with NAD levels with a correlation coefficient of 0.51 and a p value that's less than 0.05 at 0.01. But note that nicotinic acid and NMN obviously also increase NAD, and that's what we'll see here. First, starting out with my data for NAD versus niacin intake, which includes nicotinic acid. On the y axis, we've got NAD. And now on the x, we've got the seven day average niacin intake. And here, we can see that there is a strong correlation between NAD with niacin. With a correlation coefficient that's 0.75, anything greater than 0.7 is considered a strong correlation and that p value is far below 0.05. Now, in terms of nicotinic acid as its contribution to NAD levels, anytime my average niacin intake is greater than about fifty milligrams per day, the higher in intakes of niacin are coming exclusively from nicotinic acid supplementation. So with that in mind, there are two, data points where I've got NAD levels that are higher than 40 micromolar that are on the left side of that green line. In other words, low niacin intake. How was I able to get higher levels of NAD? Well, that's because I also supplemented with NMN which also increases NAD which is what we'll see here. And once again, NAD on the y axis. Now, we're looking at the seven day average for NMN intake. And here, the correlation is significant with the p value less than 0.05 but the correlation coefficient is less strong at zero point zero, 0.44. So what this indicates at least in my data, it may be different for others, is that nicotinic acid, can raise NAD at far lower doses relative to NMN. So we're considering that nicotinic acid and NMN both increase NAD in my case. Is that correlation for riboflavin with NAD independent of nicotinic acid and NMN intake? So to address that, I removed days or removed tests where I supplemented with nicotinic acids. So that's any any of the tests where I had niacin intakes greater than fifty milligrams per day. And I also removed any test that had NMN where I was supplementing with that. That then left 12 tests without nicotinic acid or NMN supplementation. So now, we're gonna take a look and look and see is riboflavin significantly correlated with NAD after removing nicotinic acid and NMN supplementation, which is what we can see here. With NAD levels on the y axis and once again, the seven day average for riboflavin intake on the x. And here, we can see that there is still a significant correlation for riboflavin versus NAD as that p value is right at the border of statistical significance zero zero point zero five and the correlation coefficient is 0.59. In other words, when riboflavin intakes have been towards the higher end of my range, three point seven milligrams per day, that significantly correlated with my higher or my hot Yeah. Higher, NAD levels and I shouldn't say my highest because my highest has been 67 micromolar coming from nicotinic acid or NMN supplementation. Now as a quick note, note that three point seven milligrams per day of riboflavin is about three x the RDA. And even with just three x the RDA, that doesn't get me to go from 30 to 67 which I can only achieve with high dose nicotinic acid. On the other hand, when riboflavin intake is at the lower end of my intake range, two point seven milligrams per day, we can see that that's significantly correlated with NAD levels that are on the lower side of my range around twenty micromolar. So when considering that n nicotinic acid and NMN increase NAD, if I supplement with them, does riboflavin even matter? This is a relatively small bump, you know, five micro molar or so whether I'm on the higher end of my riboflavin intake range, three point seven milligrams per day or on the lower end. So as you can see, my average is somewhere around 25. So that's Does it go to 30 or does it go to 20 depending on if riboflavin is at the higher or the lower end of my range. So if I supplement with the other precursors, does riboflavin even matter? Why do I care about riboflavin? Well, a big part of my approach is trying to kill two birds with one stone or more birds if I can. Well actually trying to keep birds alive. But you guys, you you know what I mean. So increasing riboflavin may decrease homocysteine and that's another reason why I'm interested in potentially going higher or actually going higher for riboflavin. And that's what we'll see here. So starting with homocysteine, there are at least three ways to decrease its levels. The first way which is the most popular way is with Betaine or trimethylglycine. Now, I've tried that in the past with high dose, trimethylglycine. Four grams per day and unfortunately, that didn't make a dent in lowering my homocysteine. I've also tried high high dose serine, the amino acid serine plus vitamin b six with three different tests going sequentially higher for serine intake over those three tests, and that too didn't make an impact on my homocysteine levels. The third way is with the combination of Methylfolate and Methyl B twelve, which I've put the check mark there because that's significantly correlated with about a 10% lower level of homocysteine in my data. And if you're interested in seeing those correlations, they're on the correlations tier on Patreon. But note that riboflavin is a part of the story and for a long time or until now, I've neglected it unfortunately. So how does riboflavin play into the potentially lowering homocysteine story? Well, starting with dietary intake of folate, that's converted into tetrahydrofolate, t h four folate which is then converted into five ten methylene tetrahydrofolate, t h four folate. And then, in the presence of MTHFR so methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase and riboflavin, that's converted into five methyl tetrahydrofolate which then in combination with b twelve or methyl b twelve in terms of what I'm supplementing with, that can then decrease homocysteine as it's converted into methionine. Now note that I'm not, I don't have the genetic condition where, MTHFR is less active thereby leading to higher homocysteine as my homocysteine levels had been about half of where they currently are now about twenty years ago. So whether this is aging or dietary insufficiency or both, that's more likely relative to the genetic issue. So if I go higher for riboflavin, can I then increase five methyl tetrahydrofolate and then improve the conversion of homocysteine into methionine as now the efficiency of the reaction for folate plus b 12 should and converting that into, methionine with homocysteine should be more effective? Is that true? Did it work? So I just sent blood, to Genfinity for NAD analysis in conjunction with all of the other blood tests for blood test number three in 2025, and I did that on April 22. So, stay tuned for that story and update to this story coming sometime soon. If you've ever wondered what's optimal for biomarkers, well, I have a new Patreon tier dedicated just to that. So these aren't the reference ranges. This is what's optimal based on how each of these biomarkers changes during aging and their association with all cause mortality risk. It currently has more than two hours of video content, 45 published references. So if you're interested in that, check it out. And if you're interested in more of my about my attempts to biohack aging, I post at least twice a day in each of these five Patreon tiers. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that can use you can use to test yourself that can help support the channel including ultalabtest.com which is where I get the majority of my blood tests. The clearly filtered water filter which I use every day. At home metabolomics which I do at every test. Or microbiome composition which I still haven't solved. NED testing as I mentioned in this video. Epigenetic testing. At home blood test blood Sorry. At home blood testing with Siphox Health which includes the DNA methylation test grim age which isn't included in true diagnostics panel, just as a note. Green tea which I drink every day. Dye tracking with Cronamer also mentioned in the video. Or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer agent or dye trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. Hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.