So for those who don't don't know, I post, you know, the diet composition, after each blood test. Right? So at least eight times per year, people are seeing what my average diet composition is, and then I go into full detail all the foods that I consumed, and then were there any cheat days. Right? So what works for me, and, you know, in cheat days where I'm eating, you know, some amount of junk because I if I don't, then that can set up a binge historically, and for me at least. As someone who's prior to the past four years, someone who struggled with, being able to be as lean as possible and, you know, trying to be calorie restricted. So I'd struggled with that until about four years ago when I finally put it all together and how much, you know, what volume of food, how much fiber, how much exercise. And then that almost completely eliminate well, I should say completely eliminated these basically weekly binges where I'd have, like, a Friday or and or Saturday where I would just eat, like, you know, a few thousand calories over my maintenance and then fast Saturday, Sunday, you know, or eat very little food over the next few days, but that's basically a binge purge cycle. It wasn't healthy for me mentally or physically. I hated that I was stuck in that lifestyle. So, anyway, four years ago, I was able to break out of that, and I don't ever wanna go back to that. So knowing that if I completely avoided junk food on that journey, that would eventually lead to a, quote, unquote, binge where I'm just eating everything. Can't stop, don't wanna stop, feels good, but then obviously feels bad afterwards. So if I completely eliminate junk food, that's a bad thing. So after every blood test, immediately after, the first thing first thing I'm eating is whatever I've been thinking about for the fifty days in between tests. You know? And it's usually, you know, peanut butter mixed with chocolate or it can be pizza, whatever it is. And then I generally don't pay any attention to macros and micros, which I try to hit those targets every day based on their correlations with, biomarkers. So the that last two to four days, including a little bit of cheat, not paying much attention to the overall rigid structure, which I enjoy. I'm, you know, I'm not saying I don't enjoy it. I wouldn't do it if I didn't. So that's worked for four years where, exactly sticking to calorie intake, the calorie intake goals that I've met that I've, you know, targeted, within a very small range. Nothing like, you know, thousand calories over, 2,000, 3,000. None of that. So, for the first time, I cracked. I cracked in four years. That was immediately following this last blood test, which on which was on February 4. And this story will be in the after the March, you know, March 18 blood test, you know, when I do the diet composition video. So this is for anyone watching, for anyone who's made it to this portion of the video, you're getting early access to my struggles where, you know, I'm not always, quote, unquote, perfect on my on my approach. So, yeah, so on the day I don't know. Maybe I can share can share screen so we can see. Alright. So so this is February 4. So that's the day of blood testing. And this day was normal. When I when I say normal, you know, it's, immediately after blood testing, I, you know, I premade the day before chocolate, with some, grape jelly, peanut butter, homemade Reese's peanut butter cup with some grape jelly just to see how that tastes. Wasn't bad. And then if we scroll down actually, let me, yeah. So if we scroll down, you can see calories on that day, 2,300. That's essentially around what I do what I normally do on a workout day. So on a workout day, I I'm I'm usually 22, 2,300. On a non workout day, it's, twenty fifty is the target, 2,100 or somewhere in that ballpark. A little bit more calories on the workout day. So after blood testing, I work did the workout, had a little bit of junk. And then if you look at my macros and micros, I mean, even just focusing on fiber, this is pretty much half of what my usual fiber intake would be, but I'm not paying any attention to it because it's a quote, unquote cheat day. So then where the problem happened is usually, I'll make my junk and then, get get rid of it, throw it away immediately. It I don't keep it in the house, and that's just what works for me. I can't keep any of it in the house. It it it's just bad news. I'll start thinking about it and then it right. So the next day came and, February 5, and this is where the the proverbial hit the fan. Right? So it's going down to calories, 5,700. And, just to put that into perspective, my my maintenance my body weight maintenance is 21 to 2,200 calories. So that's 3,500 calories in excess. I basically ate, you know, almost three days of food in one day, and it was, no. I had, you know, cookie dough. I mean, I was I was gonna make some, I made some, you know, some cookies. But then after I ate ate the cookies that were on my list, for whatever reason, I was just like, I feel like eating more. And, I went off. Like, you know, eating more chocolate chips, eating the cookie dough raw, and I know people are gonna be like, ah, it's salmonella and all the other things. I I ate it raw. Still here. I you know, the grape jelly and peanut butter, I was just scooping everything, eating everything basically in sight. So then okay. It's done. You know? I can't fix. I can't undo what was done. All I can do is learn from it. I don't intend on doing this going forward, where I'm just gonna make my stuff, get rid of it, and then, you know, I can basically only eat the junk that I preplanned. And and a trigger may be the cookie cookie dough where, I can't keep that any of that around where that that may have also pushed me over the edge knowing that I had extra cookie dough to include for, like, a third cheat day on a third cheat day, and I my brain was like, no. Just eat it. And that stuff is full. Yeah. So so so with that in mind, what did I do afterwards? Right? Now this is where it can get tricky. Right? Because knowing that I have a history of binge purge, and I don't mean binge purge when I'm puking. The purge is basically extreme fasting. Yeah. Extreme binge fast. So on the next day, on the sixth, I mean, you can see this is my diet the next day. It's almost no calories. 600 calories. Okay? So that's, pretty much good news because now I was 3,500 calories in excess. I consume 600. That's about 1,500 under what I would usually eat. So we can subtract 1,500 from 3,500. Now I'm 2,000 calories over what I did. Not too bad. That's half a pound of fat. Okay. But then I didn't just, you know, you know, do that for one day. I did that also for a second day. You know, you can see the list is very short. I mean, just to fast forward that, you know, to a week, a week later, if you look at my list, it's much longer for all the foods that I generally include. So to see, you know, very little food on that day, and this was a thousand calories. So now I'm 1,100 under what I would usually eat. So subtract the 1,100 from 2,000. Now I'm about 900, a thousand over what I would normally eat over that four day period. So could I have pushed that another day and then had another thousand calorie day and, basically, my binge has been negated by, you know, course correcting with calories, I could. And I've done that in the past, and I've really pushed it out. But, historically, that's binge purged me, and I can't get out of that cycle, and I didn't wanna do that. So the following day, it was essentially pretty close to my usual diet. You can see calories are about 2,000. I generally I'm not I'm not below 2,000. So that's maybe a 100 calories under, but, you know, it was pretty close to a normal diet of all the things that I eat. Am I worried about now being plus 800 or plus thousand? Not really. I was planning on having my calorie intake for the, you know, around fifty day period in between blood tests being a little higher anyway. So my average calorie intake for the forty nine day period before the February 4 test was twenty one twenty per day. Right now, it's currently twenty one seventy six. I'm planning on aiming for twenty one fifty, so I'm not too far away from that even with the fifth you know, 5,700 calorie binge. So so that yeah. So that was the experience. I'm not happy about it, but I did it. I take full responsibility. I am planning on it never happening again. You know, it's just not good for long term health. I don't think it'll impact the biomarkers being forty five days away from a blood test. But, yeah, so that was my experience. So, first of all, I have to really, I'm I'm odd that you're not on I mean, even in the midst of the binge that you still recorded every gram is stunning. Like, I'm, I'm impressed. Like, I I've had the same kind of habits. Many years ago, I was doing something the time was called the zone diet or so. And so I'd be eating, like, a restricted amount of calories and stuff. And the way I would do it one of the things I would do is I have these zone bars, which are pretty tasty, and they're 3030%, protein, 30% fat, 40% carbohydrates. And I have all my favorite flavors and I have them in boxes behind my desk. I was not as smart as you. I didn't get them out of the house. And so I don't know, like once every other week or so, I would just like get ravenous at the end of the day and, like, eat five or 10 or 15 of these zone bars and put an extra, you know, a 2,000 calories on top of my very tight diet. So I I really can relate.