For blood test number three in 2025, when using the biological age calculator PhenoAge, we saw that my biological age was seventeen years younger than the chronological. So what might be contributing to these data? Let's start off with prescription meds. So for those who are familiar with the channel, you know that I've been taking Levothyroxine for more than half of my life as I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in my early twenties. More specifically, a hundred and thirty seven and a half micrograms per day. Now, my free t three to free t four ratio has been on the lower side. In fact, around 0.2, and this is a value that's the age expected value for someone who's 90 years old or older. So, I've been trying to work with my doctor, my GP and the endocrinologist to change my thyroid hormone dose. With that in mind, I had success. Finally, on April 11, I started with a lower Levothyroxine dose, that's t four, Eighty eight micrograms per day. And I added fifteen milligram micrograms per day. Sorry. Both both of those are in micrograms. And I added fifteen micrograms of t three or cytomel per day. So that was eleven days before testing on April 22. And I have a further modification to the dosing schedule in part because I'm trying to get my free t three to free t four ratio to be about point four. And it was about point three for the for this test which is good news and finally, movement in the right direction. Alright. Next up are supplements. So the first has been a staple as I live in Boston and I don't get full body sun exposure for most of the year. For this test, it was two thousand IU's of vitamin d per day for all 35 of the thirty five day period that corresponded to blood test number three. So what is that thirty five day period? Well, it started immediately after test number two on March 18 and lasted until the day before test number three. So that's a thirty five day period in between tests. I also supplemented with nicotinic acid with the goal of keeping my NAD levels or blood intracellular levels of NAD from being relatively low as they've been lower than 20 micromolar. So I supplemented with a hundred and two milligrams of nicotinic acid as very low doses of nicotinic acid raised my NAD levels relative to NMN. And I did that for seven days before testing NAD as NAD is a metabolite, and from my experience over 26 tests, it changes very quickly within three days of not supplementing. So, I think a seven day average is fair, or a fair representation of how long it would take to impact NAD levels. Now, rather than just assuming that I'm getting an increase, for NAD, I'm testing it. So on the same day as blood test number three with all of the other clinical chemistry biomarkers, I also sent blood to GINFINITY for blood intracellular NAD analysis. And if you wanna measure your own NAD levels using GINFINITY, there's a discount link in the video's description. So on this day, NED levels were about 30 micromolar. Now, that's a bit higher than my baseline without NED precursors of 25 micromolar, my average baseline. But note that for test number two, and I'll link to it in the right corner, NED levels for exactly the same amount of nicotinic acid, a 102 was higher around 43 micromolar. So either the test itself is very variable and I should say over 26 tests, I have not noticed extreme variability in Ginfiniti's test. Or there are other factors that are impacting what, what can raise or lower NAD besides supplemental nicotinic acid. And I'm currently looking at correlations between my diet, with NAD levels over now 27 tests. So stay tuned for that data in a future video. Now, I also supplemented with riboflavin because, I wanted to reduce homocysteine. But also note that riboflavin is involved in the de novo NAD synthesis pathway. Now, that I supplemented with a mega dose and this is six hundred milligrams of riboflavin per day. The high end of my range is four milligrams per day. So that's a 150 x higher than my highest just from diet. So, a mega dose of riboflavin did not positively impact blood intracellular levels of NAD. But again, I mostly did it for the potential to reduce homocysteine as it's a required cofactor in the reaction where homocysteine is converted into methionine in the presence of vitamin b twelve and Methylfolate. So in my case, homocysteine moved in the right direction in with this stack. So a thousand micrograms of Methylfolate twelve, four hundred micrograms of Methylfolate, and one point five milligrams of of B six. That's in one supplement. And I did that for twenty six days before or for twenty six of the thirty five days that corresponded to this test. And note that it was all twenty six days before the test, not the beginning of the period. And I That's an important point because if I supplement early in the period and not before a test, it's possible that I may not see an impact on a given biomarker. But the fact is it was like a washout period. So it's important to note that for the remaining twenty six days of the thirty five day period, I took this supplement. And that may be the main reason why homocysteine moved from 11 to nine micromolar which is the lower end of my recent range. But, based on dementia risk and all cause mortality risk and how homocysteine levels or what they are in terms of more likely to be found in youth, I prefer to have values around five which I did about twenty years ago. So, I'm hot on the trail of trying to figure out how to consistently keep it lower than nine. Now, for those who always say TMG, I've tried that four grams of TMG did not make a dent on homocysteine in my case, but there may be more to that story as zinc is a required cofactor in the reaction for the conversion of betaine plus homocysteine into methionine. So that may be the next experiment if homocysteine levels aren't lower than nine for blood test number four. And that's it for supplements. No other geroprotectors or senolytics in conjunction with this 17 year younger biological age, which then brings us to diet. What diet composition corresponds to blood test number three in 2025? And that's what we'll see here, the full list of foods, 46 different foods consumed for during this test or during this thirty five day period. So this is the average daily dietary intake for that thirty five day period that went from test number two to test number three. And note that for those who don't already know, I weigh all of my food, enter that data into Cronometer. So, the amounts that you see here aren't estimates. This is as close as one can get to as accurate as possible for dietary intake. So, these this list is ranked in terms of grams from highest to lowest. Again, 46 foods consumed, during this thirty five day period with two exceptions. Ice cream sandwiches and I'll have more on that in the cheat meal portion of the video, and green tea which is in ounces. And I should mention the ice cream sandwiches are in calories not in grams. Green tea in ounces. And if you wanna use what I use which is organic loose leaf green tea sourced from Japan, there's a discount link in the video's description. So, at this point in the video, I always ask, were there any experiments for this test? As I'm always trying to tweak stuff in the diet and supplements with the goal of improving weak spots and not messing up the other biomarkers. Now, for this test, and it may seem a bit boring, but for this test, I actually didn't do any experiments. The goal for this test was to repeat test number two's diet as my biological age for that test using PhenoAge was 22 younger. So, if the diet had something to do with it, if I repeat it, I should expect to see biological age again in the 20 two year younger range. So, it was seventeen years younger and for those who's who will scream out that that five year variability is very wide, it surely is. But I prefer to look at it as a two test average. So the diet as we'll see was close to the same. And twenty two years younger and seventeen years seventeen years younger for essentially the same diet. From that, I think we can conclude that taking the average value around twenty years would be the diet. The the corresponding diet to a twenty year younger biological age. So it could be as high as 22, it could be as low as 17. Alright. Now, note that in terms of how close I came to keeping this diet at the same as test number two, and if you missed test number two's diet video, I'll link to it in the right corner for reference. But all 13, the top 13 foods in terms of grams consumed were the same in a slightly different order but still the same 13 foods and at the top in terms of grams grams consumed for this test as test number two. So that's good news in terms of replicating the diet composition test over test. And for those who may say, just eat the same diet and tweak one or two things. That's very difficult to do. I'm highly motivated. Even for someone like me, it's very difficult to eat the exactly the same amount of foods everyday without dietary boredom. So, that I was able to do that for at least one test with these 13 foods at the top of the list is is success. Alright. So let's go back to the ice cream sandwiches and the cheat meal portion of the video. So in terms of what I ate, it was that brand right there. I ate the whole box which was delicious. And note that for the cheat meals, what works for me is immediately after blood testing and after I send metabolomics, you know. So I'll go to the quest, draw the blood, come home, do the finger pricks for, NAD and then I'll do the, taso for metabolomics. After that sent out, it's cheat meal time. So, I ate the whole box of ice cream sandwiches on day one. And then on day two, I had the standard which is peanut butter mixed with chocolate and then sweetened with a bit of sweetened condensed milk. Now, note that I've called these cheat meals and not cheat days. Because on these days, the goal is still to stay around my usual calorie intake. So recently, it's around 24, 2,500 calories on a workout day. So that's on the day of blood testing is also a workout day. And then the day after that is not a workout workout day so I aim for around 2,100, 2,200. Now, it's imperative in my for me at least, that I stick to the calorie goals while having cheat meals because if I just let the reins loose and say, oh, it's a cheat day, I'm insatiable when it comes to junk food. Historically insatiable if I let myself do that and I can go as high as 10,000 calories or more and that's a disaster in terms of what happens after their test, how I try to cut calories. It's just a disaster all around. So I've called these cheat meals because I include some junk while sticking to the overall calorie goals on that day. And then after these two days, I go completely clean. In this case, it was thirty three days after the two cheat meals or two cheat days or cheat meals on days with junk. And then thirty three days completely clean until the next blood test. In terms of junk calories, thirteen thirty from the ice cream sandwiches, 293 from the chocolate chips, 211 from the sweet and condensed sweet and condensed milk. For a total of 1,833 junk calories that corresponded to this test. Now in terms of total calories consumed, and then dividing that as a percentage of how clean is the diet, The diet was 97.6% clean, around 98% clean. So almost completely clean, 98% clean that corresponds to the 17 year younger biological age. And that's a thirty three day washout. Right? So no junk for thirty three days. I'm not trying to, you know, play Russian roulette and see how close can I come to the test while eating some junk? I'm not trying to do that at all. My plan is to have some junk immediately after testing and then shut it down, turn it off, focus on, you know, whole food and eating a real food based diet for as long as I can before the next test. Alright. So this list is ranked in grams. What about ranking the list in terms of top foods in terms of calories? And that's what we'll see here. Top 10 foods for that thirty five day period that corresponded to test number three. And this list is generated by Cronometer which is what I use everyday. If you wanna track your own diet using Cronometer, there's a discount link in the video's description. So atop the list in terms of calories are walnuts for the second test in a row. Again, because I was trying to exactly replicate test number two's diet with test number three, and I've changed that for test number four with a hypothesis that walnuts may actually be a part a part of the story that pushed my homocysteine a bit higher and that's based on their omega six correlation. Now, for those who are anti omega six, omega six has a net positive correlative score with many other biomarkers. So maybe one biomarker going in the wrong direction homocysteine but others going in the right direction. And again, that's from whole foods not from seed oils or other other oils. And then in terms of the top 10 foods in terms of calories, they're exactly the same. Same foods in a slightly different order when compared with test number two. So again, the goal was to replicate the diet for the top 13 foods in terms of grams consumed, I did that. In terms of the top 10 foods, in terms of calories, I also did that. So some success. Alright. So what about macronutrients? Let's start off with calorie intake. Average daily calorie intake for the thirty five day period for this test was twenty one ninety nine. And for those who are familiar with the channel, you'll know that my lowest calorie intake that corresponds to a blood test was in March 2024 at twenty seventy six per day. So I've been slowly increasing calorie intake since then over those nine tests. As I as I presented these data for the blood test number two diet video, my body weight had been tracking lower less lower than one forty. And if if you did If you missed the video, body weight peaks at midlife and then declines towards the end of life. So I'm trying to avoid any increase or decrease for body weight for the duration of my remaining seventy seventy plus years of potentially maximum lifespan. So with that in mind, I'm trying to stay stable at one forty. Now, yes, that's body composition. I'm not trying to lose lose muscle or gain fat. So I am paying attention to that with DEXA scheduled for later in the year. But in terms of twenty one ninety nine, that's keeping me or that's coming closer to keeping me, to maintain one forty. Now, I should mention that after test number three, my calorie intake is actually even higher with the goal of keeping my body weight around one forty. But I don't expect to go higher than where my current calorie intake is. And if you wanna see my daily diet, that info is posted daily on Patreon. So, let's jump into the macronutrients. Average daily protein intake, 101 grams per day. Exactly the same as test number two. And that's about 18% of total calories. What about fat intake? That's what we can see here. 111 grams of fat per day which is 45.5% of total calories. Now note that this is my highest fat intake over the past 30 tests going back to July 2021. I have had fat intakes that have gone a bit higher. Now in my data for whatever reason, a relatively higher fat intake is significantly correlated with higher glucose. And my HBA one C for this test was 5.4 which isn't terribly high but it's higher than my, my lowest values which have been around five. But I only have eight tests over the past few years. I haven't consistently measured H b a one c. With that in mind, I am gonna include H b a one c for every test going forward. So we'll see what fat amount whether a 111 grams or closer to 90, which is correlated with lower glucose in my data, is is better for HBA one C. I don't yet know. Now, as another factor for the, relatively higher fat in my case may not be optimal. At least a 111 grams per day and 45% or 46% of total calories. Cystatin C which is not just an important biomarker of kidney function. It's also one of the strongest predictors of the overall grim age score. The epigenetic test grim age which is amongst the best epigenetic clocks for its association with all cause mortality risk and that's in a head to head match up with other epigenetic clocks including the first iteration of Dunedin pace. So cystatin c is a big biomarker in terms of aging. Now, for me, it was my worst data for this test. So although it didn't show up on the pheno age, I'd like for my cystatin c to be closer to 0.7 then closer to 0.8. Now, whether high fat is a part of that story, I don't yet know. But I've since cut my fat intake down again to around ninety grams per day to see if there are potential effects on h b a one c and cystatin c. So stay tuned for that data, coming probably sometime in in June. In terms of the remainder of fat, monounsaturated omega three and saturated, that's shown there. And just once again to highlight, the omega three is relatively high at thirty three grams per day and that's even higher than test number two's amount for twenty nine grams per day. But this is almost exclusively coming from walnuts and again, no seed oils or other oils. So this, internet meme, you know, where omega six from any source is bad for health. In my case, maybe not. Now, could too much omega six be a part of the Cystatin c and h b a one c story? We'll also find out as I've cut omega six down to around sixteen grams per day for test number four. So we'll have to stay tuned for that story coming up. Alright. Next up, carbon intake. And this is the average daily carbon take that corresponds to test number three. Total carbs, 240 grams per day but note that total carbs equals or sorry, net carbs equals total carbs minus fiber. Average fiber intake was 66 grams per day and when subtracting that from total carbs, we get a net carb intake of a 173.5 grams per day. Note that that's my lowest fiber intake since I started dietary tracking in 2015. And whether that's a part of the cystatin c and h b a one c story, I'm also interested in c because since then, I've increased my fiber intake back into the eighties. So in terms of net carbs as a percentage of total calories, 31.6%. Now, other foods or other nutrients that contribute calories are fiber as a fraction of that is soluble fiber which is fermented by gut bacteria into short chain fatty acids. The short chain fatty acids are acetate, propionate, and butyrate. Two, three, and four carbon saturated fatty acids. Now, those short chain fatty acids provide energy. In this case, 4.5% of total calories coming from fiber or a 199 calories per day on average coming from fiber, soluble fiber. So now, we can generate net macros that correspond to a 17 year younger biological age. Including the 45.5% that are not coming from fiber, and then the 4.5% coming from fiber that's fifth, in terms of short chain fatty acids, that's 50% fat, around 32% net carbs, and 18% protein. Now, also note that I track total sugar intake but I don't look at correlations for sugars as a group with, 25 to 30 clinical chemistry biomarkers as there are many different types of sugars, glucose, fructose, sucrose, maltose, etcetera, galactose, lactose. But I do track total fructose and fructose intake because the diet is rich in fruits and vegetables which contain a lot of fructose. And in my data, fructose, total fructose is significantly correlated with a lot more biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. And I post that in the correlations tier on Patreon. So if you're interested in that, I'd encourage to check it out. In terms of total fructose for this test, we we add fructose plus half of sucrose because sucrose contains fructose as one of the sugar molecules in that disaccharide. So when adding those two, we get a total fructose of fifty five grams per day, which seems like a lot, but my highest fructose intake that corresponds to any blood test since 2015 is a hundred and twenty two grams per day. So fifty five grams is progress albeit not perfection. Alright. What about micronutrients? So I'm gonna put the full list of vitamins which may be hard to see so I'd encourage going full screen and minerals as shown there. And for anyone starting on this journey of tracking diet with the goal of optimizing biomarkers, try to get them moving towards youth and lowest risk of death for all causes, IE health. I'd encourage trying to get full RDA coverage for all vitamins minerals. So if you look at my list, all of them are covered with the exception of choline. But the sardines that I use don't have choline data, in Cronometer. So if we add sardines, choline data, I'm close to the RDA there. But more importantly, potentially more importantly, I'm also measuring plasma choline which is not low. So in my case, the the choline being around the RDA is not leading to low levels of plasma choline. If it did, I would increase plasma level, or dietary intake of choline. But then also note that many micronutrients are far higher than the RDA, and that's because I'm following their correlations with that panel of 25 to 30 blood biomarkers, and then using that data to guide my diet. Now, test number four is scheduled for May 27. And if you're watching this video, I blood tested yesterday. And if you wanna see that data, I posted on Patreon as soon as the data arrives. So it might actually be there now if you're watching this video. Now, it takes me a while to make the videos but they're posted first on Patreon. Sometimes as as much as two or three weeks before they make it to YouTube. So if you wanna see the videos as soon as they're made, as soon as I produce them, check us out on Patreon. If you've ever wondered what's optimal for biomarkers, now I also have a new Patreon tier. This tier currently includes 32 biomarkers. It started off at 27 but I've been expanding it over time. 32 biomarkers in terms of what's optimal, not based on the reference range. Any LLM can give you reference range data but what's optimal based on how each of these biomarkers changes during aging and or all cause mortality risk. It currently includes more than two hours of video content including 47 references. So if you're interested in that, check it out. And if you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging and you wanna see more than just thirty five day averages for diet data including daily data for diet, I post that on Patreon. In addition to posting, at least once a day in four other Patreon tiers. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself that helps support the channel. Including ultalabtest..com which is where I get the majority of my blood test, Clearly Filtered Water Filter which I use every day, At Home Metabolomics, we're up to 17 tests and counting, or Microbiome Composition. And I have some progress or potential progress. I'm gonna send out a couple more kits in a bit. NED testing as I mentioned earlier in the video. Epigenetic testing with true diagnostic. At home blood testing with Syphox Health which has GrimAge, a DNA methylation test GrimAge. Green tea. Diet tracking with CortiMeter or if or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch and new merch including figuring stuff out as my drug and the channel theme conquer aging or die trying which I've got on here. So if you're interested in our in our new merch, this or link in the video's description. It's not discount links. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.