Hey, everyone. Today's guest is doctor Jaime Yurybari, who is a nephrologist and professor in the department of medicine at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. Today, doctor Yurybari will present data from his lab on dietary intake of advanced glycation end products, which shorten lifespan in calorie restricted mice and that impact insulin resistance and inflammation in people. So with that, welcome doctor Yuri Bari, and let's get into the presentation. Hi. Thank you very much. We are talking about dietary advanced glycation end products or AGEs, insulin resistant, and the current epidemics of chronic nontransmissible diseases. As Michael said, I'm a professor of medicine at Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai in New York City, and you see there my email in case that you want to direct, any communication to me. Are they practicing nephrologist? Why would they practice in nephrology be interested in nutrition? Very briefly, the incidence of diabetes type two continuous increase in in The United States. Number two, the incidence and prevalence of end stage renal disease, which mean people who need dialysis and or transplant keeps increasing in The United States. More importantly, sixty percent of these patients who require dialysis, they do so because they have diabetes. And even more interesting, diabetes type two is a socioeconomic disease related to problems with lifestyle. The people eat badly. People don't exercise. Therefore, you can understand why your practice in nephrology should be connected to diabetes and should be connected to nutrition. All of that aside, let's go to the subject of our presentation. Briefly, I wanted to introduce you to what are AGEs and their pathogenic mechanism. What is the role of these dietary AGEs in humans, both in health and disease state? The effects of low AG diets that we have done many in diabetes and cardiac and kidney and metabolic diseases, will raise a point where AGs are a major play in the bowel outcome associated with the increased ultra processed food intake, a term that is more commonly in use nowadays, and then briefly about future direction. AGs, as you can see, is the abbreviation advanced glycation end products, and they are heterogeneous group of compounds resulting from the spontaneous non enzymatic reaction of a carbonyl group of sugar with three amino groups in protein. You can see there. Three amino group react with reducing sugar and through a series of reaction that we don't have time to explain. They end up on AGs. This is an spontaneous reaction. That's why it's called glycation. In terms of terminology, when this is mediated by an enzyme, which commonly happens in the body, we're talking about glycosylation. But we are referring right now to advanced glycation in product. And during the rest of the conversation, that will be our subject. So as you can see here, the same reaction is there, which is also called because of the French chemist that first describe it, and also called browning reaction because ends up with introducing some degree of browning in the food and reducing sugar, amino acid, and a serious transformation to finally end up in AGEs. There are many. Some term that I will be using will be CML, carboxymethyl lysine, pentoxidine. What is important, I want you to get from here, is that that is the old view. In fact, we know nowadays that AGEs may form from a variety of other reaction and that AGEs can form even in the absence of glucose. Why do we care about AGEs? Because AGEs are intrinsically related to the process of inflammation and oxidative stress. And chronic inflammation and chronic obstructive stress is at the root of tissue damages in all the chronic nontransmissible diseases, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney disease. How do AGs act? If you have here in this schematic cartoon, you find that number one, they may link directly to protein, inducing this protein cross linking. By doing that, they change the structure of the protein. By doing so, they change the functioning of the protein. So if you have a collagen in the skin, for example, and that suddenly, this is cross linked, it will not work very well. It may wrinkle and may produce a lot of other abnormalities. So AGEs may alter, may produce by the effect, number one, by direct cross linking of protein or more commonly by acting with some receptors at the level of the surface of the cell. The most common one being called RAGE receptor for AGEs. And that through a series of reaction in the cell increases the production of so called reactive oxygen species, and they stimulate this very important pathway of NF kappa b that leads again to inflammatory cytokines. The point that I want to introduce is that AGs by acting on receptor lead to the creation of inflammatory cytokine and ROS. I can complicate that picture as much as I want and as much detail as you need, and you can see the reaction with RAGE, but they sold to another receptor called R1, which is a protective in the center when AGEs react with r one. Actually, the r one catabolizes through a process of endocytosis and degrades AGE. Not only that, r one activated stimulates SIR one, SIR two in one that in 10 opposes the action of RACE on f kappa b. So they are very good. High AGR one is good. High RACE is not good as the name imply implies RAGE. So, again, the protein cross linking remain here, and I can complicate this picture more and more, but we'll leave it like this right now. Now I'm talking today about dietary AGEs. AGEs are very well known products generated indulgencely in diabetic patient as a result of hyperglycemia. You have high glucose, you form higher AGEs. And many people believe that most of what happens wrong in diabetes is because high glucose leads to the formation of AGEs. Still, however, very few people are aware that AGEs are naturally present in all foods because they are tissues. I mean, when we eat in meat, we are eating tissue. And that this amount of food AGEs is greatly increased by processing and or cooking food under high heat. That is important thing under high heat. If you prepare a high AG diet in mice, you can induce every disease known. Diabetes type one, diabetes type two, vascular disease, kidney disease, insulin resistance. You name it. And what is important, if you randomly assign these mice, the same one, to a low Hg diet, you prevent the development of the of the disease. There is no doubt that a high SGD diet then is bad for mice. But, again, I'm a clinician, so do I care? I care more what is the problem in human. But even more, in vitro studies have shown that AGEs can do a lot of bad things. Glycation of the insulin molecule itself, for example, decreases the affinity of glue insulin for the insulin receptor. First mechanism to make it more resistant to insulin release. Incubation of AGs with a skeletal muscle cell reduces insulin dependent phosphorylation as well as expression of a transport of glucose into the muscle cell, GLAD4. Therefore, the muscle cell in the presence of AGEs, they see the glucose outside, but they cannot take it in. And so on and so forth, there are many action that have been shown in vitro by which AGEs added to any system, any cellular system, they can produce insulin resistant and many other problems. So, again, the question is, are dietary AGs relevant in humans in general and more specifically in clinical condition? Well, there are many things that suggest that correlation between dietary AG and serum AGs, as well as circulating biomarkers of disease, effect of an acute or AEs loads. But what is more important, and I think that I may convince you more, get more back for the for this is the interventional study, meaning taking human beings and expose them to a variety of aging content as we did with the mice, if you forgive me, and see what happens actually in people. But before that, let's remind you again, the browning of food generates AGs. Food rich in protein and fat contain the highest level of AGs. AG containing food increases as a function of temperature, duration of that temperature, the pH. The higher the pH, the higher the formation. Presence of moisture, the more the water, the less the formation, and presence of heavy metals. And in general terms, broiling and frying results in the highest level followed by roasting and broiling. So common Western diets are very rich in AGEs. Food that leads to the formation of AGEs. This is the basic concept that I'm introducing. And, unfortunately, these are tasty foods are the one that we are talking about. They are tasty in great measure because of the generation of AEGs that can produce increase of the taste. Now we develop a database, where we cook foods under different condition. The most important thing when I'm talking about a low HG diet is culinary technique, is cooking. It's not don't eat this, don't eat that. It's how you cook. That is the essence of what I'm transmitting. So just to give you a simple idea, you have here a chicken, for example. A piece of chicken boiled, which may not be that tasty, has this generation of these many AGEs unit. The same piece of chicken broiled now for the same length of time, you can see increases tremendously the production of a ghee. Beef is skewed beef, fry, and so on and so forth. So to determine how much of ghee you eat, I do a food record, but not only what you eat, but how you prepare the food. And by knowing that, I can advise you how to cut down the AGEs by simple cooking differently, not necessarily avoiding different foods. That is very important. So AGEs are ubiquitous in food and formed during a series of heat related industrial procedure, including processing, sterilization, packaging, and long term storage of food product. But home cooking too, such as broiling, grilling, frying, and reheating of ready to eat foods also produces AGEs. Western style diet rich in fats, processed meat, sweet snacks, and refined grains have high levels of AGE. What we call the low AGE diet is essentially decreasing take of high AGE contained food based on existing database through culinary technique modification, temperature, duration, moisture, pH, and surface of cooking. And we advise the CEOs of other changes that may help. For example, you can add as many herbs, spices, and condiments. Particularly, these herbs, spices, and condiments have on their own high anti glycation activity that helps in the low SG diet. Okay. So with these principles in mind, the first thing that we did is we took a group of patient with diabetes. And we need a so called crossover design, meaning the patient were placed first on a high energy diet, then we waited for one week and placed on a low energy diet. And the other group randomly went first in the low energy diet, waited for one week, and then went to the high SG diet. And this patient received all meals prepare at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine Clinical Research Center twice a week. And as you can see, this is a paper already published in 2002. So we're talking of more than twenty years of this concept. So what did we find? Very interesting. Most every every compound here has a different unit, so I'm giving you percent of change from baseline. So upper panel, pay attention to percent of change from baseline on the high AG diet in red and the low AG diet in green. So markers of AG like CML, ML, AG, LDL went up. So we demonstrated that if you are eating a high GI diet, these diabetic patient raised their serum AEs. While if they were in a low SG diet, they decreased their AG. This is interesting because up until that moment, the idea was that every AG in the body circulating in the body of somebody with diabetes was because of hyperglycemia. But here, it's maintaining the same level of glucose. If now you pay attention to the lower panel, you see something perhaps even more interesting. The high AG diet not only raises the levels of AG, but also raises levels of markers of disease, markers that are not good to be raised. C reactive protein is one of them. TNF alpha is another. Become and so on and so forth. While the low energy diet not only brings down the levels of serum AGE, but also brings down the level of those markers. So the company that you carry tells you something about you. You cannot prove that that is the case, but, clearly, we have shown again that when you have high AG diet, you increase markers of disease, and in the low AG diet, you do the opposite. Then we took another group of diabetes with insulin resistant, and this was done as an outpatient. So here, all of them were on their native state eating high levels of AGEs because the CRC said, hey. You believe that high AGE is bad. You cannot give high AGE diet to people. So the best that we were allowed was to recruit into a study people that they were on their own on a high AG diet. So that was the first step. So these were diabetes already on a high AG diet, and we randomized them, like, with a toss of a coin into either continue doing the same for the next four months or go down in the low g by cooking differently. This patient prepare meals at home in contrast to the previous study. This was published in diabetes care in 2011, and dietitian research dietitian were calling the patient frequently and interviewing them to make sure that they did not deviate. What observation we have here? Again, percent of change. And I'm here illustrating only what happened with a low AGE diet. So again, as you can see in this, intervention, a marker of AG like CML came down. A marker of inflammation, TNF alpha came down. A marker of oxidative stress, eight isoprosten came down. A marker of inflammation rage, Remember, the receptor came down. And look at this, HOMA, that many people think I'm sorry. HOMA is the relationship between insulin and glucose, and many people use it as a marker of insulin resistance. Resistance. The higher the HOMA, the more insulin resistant you have. The lower the HOMA, the less insulin resistant you have. The low HDL decrease the level of HOMA. So we decrease actually based on that parameter the insulin resistant in this patient, working with them very closely on an ambulatory basis for four months. And, again, we demonstrated that the r one, the receptor that was suppressed, the good one increased and the one increased, but we leave that like that because that may be too much detail. The next study that we did, we said four months is not enough. Let's go for a year. And this is very expensive. I mean, we got NIH funds, and it consumed a tremendous amount of funding. We did the same thing as we had done before, but we extended the study for the next twelve months with research dietitian constantly calling the patient, prepare meals at home. As you know, when we are free willing, people in the outside world, I mean, in in birthdays happen, weddings happen, people, go and party and differently, and all of these complicated when you are going for twelve months. So we understand that, but we try very hard to do it. And, this was published in 2016 in Diabetologia, which is another well known journal in diabetes. And, again, to summarize, the result were impressively very similar to the one on diabetes. In patients with metabolic syndrome, the low AG diet reduced a marker of AGEs, CML, inflammation, TNF alpha, oxidative stress, a isoprostane, inflammation rate, oma, and increased r one and increased sird one. Clinical trials with a low IG diet to reduce IR have been done in other places by other authors in other countries, and I don't have time to go into details of each one of them. So, therefore, we believe, based on the information in vitro studies, animal study, and actual human studies, that dietary yeast induce insulin resistance. And in fact, our concept is this one. The diet leads to type two diabetes. No argument about that. The diet brings AGEs depending on what you are eating. Diabetes through hyperglycemia raises AGEs, but this is what we're saying which is different to other people. We're saying that the AGEs themselves produce diabetes. And this is a vicious cycle, and we can stop it by affecting the dietary intake of AGEs rather than necessarily affecting the intake of calories or other things. That is our hypothesis. Now aminiproles, so have we done studies with kidney disease patient? Yes. Kidney disease patient, even without diabetes, and they behave very similarly to diabetic. So in other words, we have taken even healthy subject and done the same thing. So we have, and I can give you a series of references, of intervention, real intervention, patients who are randomized to either high or a low ag diet. And, clearly, the low ag diet improves the insulin resistance and improve markers of inflammation and oxidative stress. Of course, to demonstrate thing 100%, you will need to use thousands of people over prolonged periods of time to know, for example, if this prevents development of chronic illnesses and all that. And that is extremely expensive to do and very difficult to do. There are some interesting studies looking at epidemiological association between dietary intake, and it has been shown, for example, that it's correlated with asthma in children, cancer of pancreas, risk of breast cancer, risk of mortality after breast cancer, and these are studied done by independent groups. Cognition in older subjects and, again, metabolic syndrome now specifically in in adolescent based on information. So we have developed the idea that the sources of AGE could be endogenous or exogenous. And exogenous is mostly food, but also keep in mind that tobacco, the way it is prepared, also generates AGE. So when you smoke, you are actually ingesting AGEs, and I haven't had time to go into that. But no smoking is part of a low, exogenous AGE inter intervention. And, again, I haven't even referred to the intraluminally in the gut generated AGEs through high fructose diet in a variety of condition, the AGEs may form intraluminal and be absorbed. We can do that at another time. So this is the scheme that we use. People eat a lot of AGEs, and part of these AGEs are absorbed. And in the body, they majority, actually, are excreted by the kidneys. But those that remain, they produce pro protein cross linking, and they produce all the cellular effects with inflammation and oxidative stress, as I mentioned to you. Now what we realize more and more in the past decade is that the AGEs that are not absorbed end up in the column. And there, there's a lot of information that reacts with the microbiota, and in part, they may be categorized by the microbiota, or they induce formation of new products that by themselves may have an effect and may, for example, stimulate in that rage in the wall of the colonic, world And that's so ages that we ingest a small percentage directly absorbed into a circulation. The majority end up in the colon. Some of them come out in the stool, but a significant number affect the microbiota in such a way that that induces disease. So it's not just the absorption. It is the effect of the high AG food going into the colon. And there are many, many studies done by a large number of people demonstrating this. We have demonstrated that, of course, the high AGE diet affect the microbiota in subjects. So this is the what I call the AG hypothesis. We have the endogenous hyperglycemia. We have the exogenous food, tobacco that are the same structurally. So they have the same endogenous and exogenous, the same structure, and the same functionality you tested in vitro or in animal. They contribute to the body AG pool. And this body AG pool then induces cross linking, oxidative stress, and inflammation. And this, over the long term, is what leads to all these chronic noninfectious diseases, diabetes, metabolic syndrome, cardiovascular disease, and chronic disease. So we like to believe that if you interrupt the cycle by affecting the dietary intake, you prevent all of these. And, again, we have demonstrated that, but in a small number of such. In the past few years, a newcomer has come. I mean, the so called NOVA, a classification of food introduced by somebody from Sao Paulo, Brazil. And, essentially, this is a way to classify the food in degree of processing. So the group one minimally processed. Essentially, you eat an apple that is obviously not processed. The group two, there's a little bit of more processed. Group three, more. And the last one is ultra processed food. In fact, there is a lot of information that the proportion of ultra processed food that we consume in different countries is very high. In The United States, for example, about 60% of the caloric intake in people in this country comes out from ultra processed food. And look at this. There is a lot of information again with statistical epidemiologic association demonstrating that, high ultra processed food intake leads to incidence of diabetes and many other conditions that I don't have time to, explain here. And, again, my point has been that most likely, AGEs, the compound that we have been talking even longer than ultra processed food, are one of the major culprit of the bad outcome associated with ultra processed food. This machinery that you see below are all used to process food, and, essentially, what they do is thermic application. So it's not that different than your fourth of July, cooking technique of just barbecuing, I mean, the beef. It is application of heat only in a more sophisticated industrial controlled way. So thermal ultra processing of food generates AGs. No argument about that. And I believe that they are an important so arguments to justify why I believe that dietary yeast are major contributor. I'm not saying that they are the only. I mean, foods are very complicated matrices, and that that will be ridiculous to say, but are a very important one. AGs and other major reaction products are questionable generating food during the thermal processing. AGs generated in food are structurally and physiologically indistinguishable from their endogenous counterpart. AGs such as CML have been documented, again, to produce tissue injuries in almost all cell system and tissues prone. And, again, if they are not different from the endogenous, how is the body know if it came from outside or if it came from inside? Oral administration of label Hg loads in human that we have done have been shown to be absorbed into a circulation and mostly eliminated in the urine, as I said before, but some remaining in circulation and tissues. Diodes loaded with HEE in different mouse models lead to development of I amin insulin resistant prevented by diet loss and AGEs. I show you that. Healthy human subject exposed to an AGE rich diet show increasing market of inflammation and insulin resistant. I did not show you that. Patient with insulin resistant or type two diabetes exposed to a low energy diet show reversal of marker of inflammation and insulin resistant. I did show you that. So these are a lot of, arguments that I used to do. And this is my main message, which is a little bit kind of very domestic. I mean, it's not very sophisticated. In fact, I feel a little bit embarrassed. I mean, in fact, maybe that's why people don't listen too much because there's nothing sophisticated. We're saying take any kind of diet, the Mediterranean, which is good, the DASH diet, the plant based diet, any other diet, and just cook the AG, let's cook. And that is the road to increase health span. Not necessarily more years, but I mean that, living a healthy lifespan. So this is the scheme that, I am, I'm proposing. Now there have been general problems in the field of dietary IgE that have prevented progress. There are too many IgEs, so it's difficult to pinpoint. And some researchers look at one. The others on other. There are too many methods to measure them. Fluorescence, ELISA, mass spectrometry, and no agreement. So there is no universal agreement what is the most significant AEGs and the best method to measure it. There are some confounder during the intervention trial that I said, caloric intake, but we took pain in showing that the caloric intake did not change. We did not change the weight of the patient. We told them this is not a weight reducing thing. This is just a healthier diet. When you apply heat, you destroy vitamin. That may have an effect. When you apply heat, you destroy polyphenols. That may have an effect and so on and so forth. And then lack of collaborative multidisciplinary teams approaching the problem. There is an internal discussion among the food scientist, the biochemists, and the clinician. Yes, no, whatever. I'm never an agreement. I have spent hours trying to argue, and sometime I win a little bit. Sometime most of the time, I lose. So what our future direction, try to refine our understanding of the mechanism linking high dietary disease by utilizing newer and more sophisticated technique, refine the interaction of AG and microbiome. That is really a very important area that we would like other people to do with more better tools than us. Get an agreement on most representative HEE and best method to measure it so we can start developing recommendations and guidelines, perhaps. And, of course, in my field, effect of a prolonged low SGD diet in the progression and complication of CKD. For example, can a low SGD diet slow down kidney disease progression? So we prevent the end stage renal disease requiring dialysis and or transplantation that I mentioned at the beginning. And then perhaps to push medical society and government and institution to pay attention to the data that we have on the dietary AGs. The acknowledgment to many people that over the years have helped to build up on this, and, I any questions will be welcome. Thanks, Jaime. That was fantastic. You covered it from every angle. Strengths and weaknesses. I had a whole bunch of questions. You knocked off a few of them, but I have I have more. So I should say that so, this the age, advanced glycation, and, and product story in part inspired by your work and Helen Glassara first came on my radar somewhere around 2010. In fact, my, jumping into the pool of science communication actually started with the age product story. A low age diet in mice on calorie restriction, and it removed the lifespan extending effect of calorie restriction. A high age diet relative to a low age diet removed the life extending. So right away, I wrote a blog. I put it out there on my personal website. This was 2010. Little did I know here we would be fifteen years later in a YouTube presentation, but I should say that this is probably the most the lowest hanging fruit in terms of potentially improving health or biomarkers of health, and potentially longevity. Right? When you think of the importance of insulin resistance and, inflammation in health and longevity, it seems like an easy low hanging fruit that people could use, you know, just changing the cooking methods or eating less ultra processed foods. So what where I wanna start is the, I guess, the practical. Right? So have how have you changed your overall, eating approach, cooking approach after the, you know, your work in age products? How often are you cooking above boiling temperature? You know, a 100 degrees Celsius, which produces some age products. Yeah. So what can you give us insight into in terms of your own dietary approach to minimize age products? You know, I mean, I I may not be the best example the way I cook because I'm not a very good chef and all that. But let me tell you, for example, that there is an institute in, in, in Northern Spain in the in Bilbao, which is called the BASC Culinary Center. And they are perfecting any kind of technique, I mean, that can improve that. And they have developed fantastic, fantastic, I mean, the menus that are very tasted using the concept of you of just relatively low temperature and even for prolonged periods of time. In general, I do try to avoid as much as possible. As you know, and, that has always been the case, we live in a society with a lot of influences and simple sometimes you have to be a nice person. You cannot reject food of hands. So, occasionally, I do go with the wrong kind of food. But, generally, I do pay a lot of attention to the, to the, way of cooking. Same here. So I that was the first step in me completely changing my diet. I removed almost all cooked foods or at least cooked above, you know, a 100 degrees Celsius. I don't eat roasted nuts, so that's another underrated thing. People don't know that roasted nuts and almost all nuts that you're getting, nuts and seeds are roasted. So the age product content there is higher relative to raw. So all of all of my nuts raw. What other changes? I mean, tech so then this could get into the realm of supplements. You know? So age breakers, you mentioned a few, but what about things like carnosine or taurine, alpha lipoic acid? Absolutely. So we advise all those things. So when we give, to a patient or to somebody who's asking us, we give them a package of all those elements. And, we because, again, I deal also with the clinical part. I pay a lot of attention to salt, sodium, which is not necessarily, I mean, the an HEE, but it's not a patient with chronic kidney disease have problems to deal with that. So my concept that I try to transmit is that people should use as much spices and condiments as necessary and go through the list of the things that we have developed and given to them, that have anti glycation activity or antioxidated activity in general. So we do have, I mean, package to to provide in terms of that. But it's that that is very, very important. And, of course, leaning to I mean, in general, I mean, the plant based diet is is a is a very good idea to eat a lot of salad with a lot of juice, with a lot of, condiments. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I wouldn't say necessarily juice because you're removing the fiber and there's fiber is probably good for the the kidney, gut kidney axis. But yeah. I'm completely in favor of that. Yeah. The the So I think talking about the orange you're saying orange juice. Why don't you eat the the orange? Yeah. Or the apple and so on. We agree on that. Yeah. Yeah. So I think I think the some pushback that comes at least in the lay community for aged products is they think it's an anti meat story and only eating like, going vegan. And it that I don't think that's the case at all. As you mentioned, it's the cooking methods. You know? Even slow cooking as opposed to frying Sure. Or, right, the browning effect. You wanna avoid the browning effect. This isn't an anti meat story. It's just cook it so that you haven't produced aged products. Absolutely. And for example, they, they are some people who have measured with the application of a Mediterranean diet that eat meats too. I mean, even and that it is the way they cook, and they have, they have measured low levels of of AGs. Yeah. So definitely it's not an anti an anti meat diet. No. No. No. That's what I insisted at the beginning. It's not a diet that tells you, this many carbohydrates or fats or meat, but rather the way the way you cook. And mentioning, for example, the work on mice with, Vlasara, with Helen, whom I still see of course, is still around or retired from, the laboratory, she is, she also demonstrated not only that the low EEG was the, the association with prolonged life, but also, if you remember, one of her experiments was a high fat diet that can produce a lot of problems. And when you differentiate between the high fat, high AGE versus high fat, low AGE, is the high fat, high AGE the one that produces most of the problems too? That is another experiment. Uh-huh. So now that's another can of worms. That's a separate story, but that gets me thinking about fiber again because the high fat the high fat diets that are fed to mice, these are purified diets that have cellulose as their fiber source, which is non fermentable or poorly fermentable. So that the problems were on the high age, high fat diet without fermentable fiber, without soluble fiber suggests to me that that's that's the big nutrient there that may be a part of that story. Yeah. So the Mediterranean diet so the idea, there so in looking at the list of age products and foods, so olive oil gets and I know I get that there's an abundance That's a complicated issue. Yeah. Right? So in terms of age products, in terms of, kilo units per gram for extra virgin olive oil versus olives, based on the tables, it's like 20 x higher olive oil per gram age products versus the same amount of age products per gram of olives, which as I'm always saying, eat olives, not olive oil. So what are your thoughts on on the olive oil and age products? You know, the the that has been a very limiting question in the sense that, it is a fact that, yeah, that the in the original database, we measure large amount of AGs in the olive oil. But overall, if you look at the at least the epidemiologic association, the main ingredient of the Mediterranean diet is the olive oil, and it seem to be of benefit. So I'm kind of I haven't opted over time because I don't have a specific answer and more humble attitude than say, I'm not sure. I'm not sure. But that's just my question. I I wish that the the Mediterranean diet studies had included an equivalent amount of, or at least a group with an equivalent amount of calories coming from olives, and then we'd really get to see it. Right? Of course. I would would on. Yes. So in terms of the, age products, most people I think are thinking about glucose. But then you mentioned high fructose, you know, whether it's high fructose corn syrup, but then also there are people that, like, fruititarian that eat nothing but fruit. So, you know, are there more are there more is there more to the story than how much sugar you're eating and then having high dietary so for example, if you're eating a high fruit diet and you've got high fructose, but your overall age product level will be relatively low because nothing's cooked, could diet could that lead to an increase in endogenous age even age even though, dietary age is low? Or is this just the bolus of sugar issue? Any sugar going too high above a certain threshold, now you're gonna increase, in endogenous age product formation? Well, there's no doubt that, glucose alone I mean, if you reach a certain level postprandially, that will raise the formation of endogenous AGs. But fructose will also. Fructose will also do that. And, as you know, the fructose, when it ingested, I mean, that goes predominant to the liver, and liver, I mean, essentially eliminate. We really have very little fructose in circulation normally because of the liver, but that is a source of also endogenous IgE. So a high fructose diet has done inconvenience in my mind. Now the corn syrup introduces even a further complication because the absorption of fructose by the small intestine is connected to the absorption of glucose. And the proportion between fructose and glucose is important to determine how much fructose is absorbed. And the content of fructose over glucose in the corn syrup is really much higher than what the manufacturers have said. There is somebody who were, we worked together for a while who actually they measure that. And then when you are ingesting a lot of on zero, then you may have a relative, relatively malabsorption of fructose without having a primary enzyme problem. I don't know if I'm explaining myself clearly. And then some fructose remain in the lumen of the intestine, and that's what I meant before, that with a lot of free amino acid there, it may react and form a fructose derived AGEs, which are then absorbed. In fact, if you put in vitro, glucose, fructose, ribose ribose, and other sugar, fructose, in glycates, fructose, if you will, faster than glucose. So having a lot of fructose in the lumen of the intestine at particular moment with a lot of floating amino acid in the pH of the intestine that may be, like, seven or so depending on the circumstances can increase the formation of the genes locally. If you think about it. Another area of, the of the important. Yeah. So that makes me wonder about it. Is it just the HFCS story or could too much fruit and just the bolus of fructose that some people can only handle a certain amount where now more of it is in the colon because it's not being absorbed. But then the other side of that story too is that, protein digestion can decline during aging. So less of it being absorbed into the small intestine and, you know, amino acids being in the blood where now you've got more free amino acids or more peptides reaching the large intestine. So now you've got this combination of fructose and maybe free amino acids. So, anyway, it gets to the idea of, you know, maybe not overeating on protein, maybe not overeating on fructose wherever it source so that you're you're able to absorb more of it. Whereas if you're eating tremendous amounts of both, maybe more of that reaches large intestine. You've got, you know, fructose fructoceleation. Right? Is that what it is? That's the of the amino acids that reach I'm kidding. So so what are your thoughts on, like, a precise amount of protein and even fructose containing foods to minimize? Yeah. That is important. I don't need this I don't I don't think that you need to make it a precise. That's the word that I don't like, but, to avoid excess of both, I mean, the fructose and the containment and the protein, I believe, is an important is an important concept. Because if you make it extremely precise, we don't have the tools right now to know exactly how much you have to actually reduce. But introducing the idea that moderate, don't overdo it, don't eat huge amount, That which again is good for calorie intake anyway. And, yeah, no. That's that is very important. That is I'm I'm a precise guy. Just to poke at that a little bit more. So knowing that h b a one c is, you know, above five point seven now or prediabetic. Right? So, couldn't you titrate so if one's eating a given diet with a certain amount of cooked food, couldn't they do the experiment where, okay, if their h b a one c is, say, I don't know, 5.6, they reduce the amount of cooked food now goes down to 5.3, then they know that how much cooked food they were eating was impacting at least glycation using h b a one c as an index of potentially dietary age impacting, you know, what's in the blood glycated. Right? So couldn't we use biomarkers whether it's h b a one c, or are there other markers that you would I mean, I know CML and methylglyoxal, but these are these aren't commercially available. Yeah. Sure. It could. The only limitation there is that, again, one has to realize that, remember, when you you have the hemoglobin a one c, it depends on the amount of hemoglobin and that the amount of sugar. So and the hemoglobin in the normal person, I mean, the red cell survival is hundred and twenty days. So, really, once it happens, whatever label happen now, it will stay there for the next three months. And that's why we don't measure, I mean, that a one c more often than every three months to see changes. So that is the only problem that I see on that. Fructosamine could be another, perhaps, faster in the sense that fructosamine is a deglocation of albumin, but albumin has a shorter of life. So it has the same meaning as the hemoglobin a one c, but it has a shorter half life. So you could see changes faster than with that. But, definitely, one could do one could do that. Yeah. Those are they're very good idea, but those things need to be done. Yeah. What about, glycated immunoglobulin? So glycan like, things like glycogen age, which are a measure of glycated immunoglobulins. I'm sorry. Say that again? So glycated immunoglobulins. So there's there's a thing known as glycogen age, which is based on glycation of immunoglobulin. I mean, I guess that could be included. So that gets around included, but I'm really not sure about the measurement of those, I mean, and the implication. That I'm not I'm not sure. I know what you're talking by by name and what you are referring to, but I don't know details there. Sure. So in terms of endogenous versus endogenous age or exogenous so dietary age versus endogenously produced. So is there a magnitude of comparison where if you eat a certain amount of dietary age products that will lead to a certain increase in circulating age products? And then in comparison with endogenously produced age on a low age diet, Is there a way to compare the two? Well, what we did was that. I mean, that when we changed the dietary intake of AGEs, we show that the levels of AGEs that we were measuring the same subject here, they were here, three x, whatever, and then in the low AG diet came down to one x. So we did see the change clearly. And by the same token, when we give, an AG load, we start measuring the plasma, for example, some some level. Over the next few hours, we see the increase. So, yes, definitely, that can be measured. The problem is the, easy availability of those parameters in the in the clinical practice. It is still a little bit surprising. As you know, I'm, again, predominantly a clinician. So, I'm not very good in terms of developing, new techniques to measure, but there are so many advances in terms of how you can do fast things. So I'm surprised why people again, it has to do with the fact that the the field of glycation is not very attractive, why they haven't developed devices where you can very easily measure, for example, what you are what you are suggesting. Just come out just decide once and for all for one specific AG, name it CML, for example, and measure what happened and see if that has any connection at all with, with outcome. There are, by now, a lot of databases for different reasons. I mean, people who are collecting a lot of information. So if we get markers from groups on those databases and we see them going in a certain direction, we can then correlate with actually what is happening to those people, what has been happening spontaneously. I don't know if I'm making myself clear, not just, I mean, the the intervention trials that we're talking, but they are for example, Sinai has a biobank. So, essentially, everyone who comes into the institution is asked for a permission to get blood and a story. And at the same time, they, develop a lot of information. I mean, almost like an Excel file, age, demographics, I mean, that and what happens over time. So if you take samples from those databases and measure these parameters and see change, you could correlate those changes with what is happening to those individual spontaneously. They are not part of that. So that will be very, very, very important to those kind of studies. Doesn't some of that that data exist? I mean, aren't there large epidemiological studies for, like, say, plasma, CML with all cost mortality risk? They are, but they go in different directions. That is the problem. Yeah. Yeah. So that was actually one of my questions. So there is that that data that plasma c CML is associated higher levels with a lower risk of death for all causes. And then also there are studies where I think plasma CML is reduced in obese people relative to leaner body weights and higher in omnivores oh, sorry, in vegans, vegetarians relative to, omnivores. So yeah. Well, the the I mean, let's go one by one. The the last one, for example, was just one paper that I'm aware that was made here in the past, the one that in the people who are eating predominantly vegetarian diet had higher levels. And the authors, I mean, didn't know exactly what it was. They eventually talk about efficiency in taurine or whatever, but that has not been repeated to see if it is really, because it doesn't make too much sense. But, again, if it is repeated and there is at least two studies showing the same thing, we'll have to come out with an explanation of what's going on. The data on the CML and, with epidemiologic association, has is different, has has very mixed results that is one of the of the problems. So I can show you series of studies where there is a very good association, but I can show you studies where they found no association at all. And, the, again, what you are mentioning about obesity was, specifically with CML measured by mass spectrometry that they found that the obese patients, a group in The Netherlands, found that the levels of AGs in the circulation the CML in the circulation were lower, and the explanation was that they were being sequestered within the fact where clearly they will have a lot of, potential action. But, all of that is there's a lot of background noise, so you really need to come out with a more solid evidence. Yeah. Those are the kind of things that prevents the field from progressing because I cannot tell you, oh, no. Those people are wrong and whatever. There are some people that have found different things. Could it be that Could it be that association? Could it be that there are other age products like methylglyoxal that are Absolutely. That are marker? That that we are not measuring the the right thing. For example, the group in the, in The Netherlands, the only one that has found different things that the information that I presented, When we, do dietary history, we find that in this country I mean, most of the work that we have done with Helen has been Lazarra has been in the area of New York, New York City specifically. And most of the AGE really has to do with, meat intake, most of the AGE in reality. But, for example, the, there is a group in The Netherland where they decided to go into a low and high AG diet of a group of healthy subject by asking them to follow the, their own dietary, HCE database that they generated with, mass spectrometry, which for CML specifically. And, they found that, for example, the main, ingredient there was more cereals and pastries and things of that sort. And when the people go on a high CML on that basis compared to a low low CML diet, they did not see what we saw. So one of the things that you have to realize is that is that the method that we use to measure CML was ELISA, was an antibody. And though it appeared to be mostly sensitive to CML, one cannot swear that it is CML. So it is possible that something else could be MG or could be something not measured that goes along with. So, maybe our I mean, when we have a high AG, it's not necessarily high CML that we believe it is, but it's something else. But, clearly, the cooking of the food with high heat led to these effects. But what is it, the specific AGE is not very clear. Yeah. So I was just gonna say that that regardless of if if it's CML or something else, you saw improvements in insulin sensitivity, reduced inflammation. So call it, I mean, the high g I mean, high thermic, products production, which is, again and we haven't even mentioned something that is another story, as you know, which is the one of compounds like acrylamide and fufiril hydroxymethyl fufiril that generate even a higher temperature in a specific food, which are really being shown to be very bad. So the, the high application of heat to food is not really a very good thing. Yes. But evolutionarily, you know, fire probably wasn't an everyday thing. I mean, I I find it hard to believe that primitive people were lighting fires literally every day at every meal. Right? This is a rare event probably. So occasional foods cooked at high heat. But as you mentioned, you know, we're in a modern society where everything is probably processed thermal processing. That is the problem. So, yes, 70%, 60 plus percent of our calories from that. So that is the problem. And then we're growing older, more perhaps than I mean, I have no idea how long the came and lived, but I'm assuming that it wasn't that long. So, they didn't have time necessarily, perhaps, to develop all these, all these complications, isn't it? It was more important than dying, because of trauma or whatever else. Yeah. But, yeah, it is the fact that we eat everything is processed. That is the fact. You open the refrigerator and at least in The United States, everything that is contained within plastic, it is has been processed and exposed to that. Yeah. Alright. So what about a sugar alcohol? So, I mean, could sugar alcohols, which seem to be rising in prevalence, you know, so things like xylitol or erythritol. I mean, it it's chemically it's just, h two difference from being glucose or fructose. Could sugar alcohols induce glycation? They could sure. They can do it. They can do it in vitro, but it's only that it has to be in a study. So, I mean, I'm not familiar with that, but that is definitely an area that requires, I mean, the inter I mean, the studies. So I think that this is a very open area that, can give a lot of, a a lot of information for people if they want to get involved, and there's plenty of, opportunities to develop new ideas. Yeah. Like the ones that you you're mentioning. Fantastic. Alright. Well, thanks, Jaime. I appreciate it. It was great. If people wanna support Thank you very much for inviting me, and, thank you. Hang on. If people wanna support your lab, is there a way that they could go to your lab site, you know, at Icon and maybe support your lab with is is that possible? You know? Sure. That's possible. And they can if they have any degree of difficulty, they can send me a message, and I'll I'll facilitate that. Fantastic. Thanks again, Jaime. That was great. Have a great day. You too. Bye bye. Bye.