For blood test number seven in 2025, we saw that my biological age was 37 years, which is fifteen point three years younger than the chronological. Not too bad when considering that the maximal theoretical reduction using this clock is about twenty years. But does this clock, PhenoAge, does it have blind spots? And if we look at the nine component biomarkers, we can see that they represent many organ systems including albumin and ALP or alkaline phosphatase as biomarkers of liver, health and function, creatinine, so kidney function, glucose, metabolic health, CRP, inflammation, lymphocyte percentage, and WBC, white blood cells, so immune cells, and then red blood cell related measures, MCB and the RDW. But notably absent from this list are cardiovascular disease related biomarkers. Now that doesn't mean that this clock isn't good for its association with risk of death from heart disease related mortality. In fact, the opposite. In older pheno age is significantly associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular disease disease related mortality. And if you missed that video, I'll link to it in the right corner. But rather than that association, I think it makes the most sense to potentially avoid any weak spots by directly measuring cardiovascular disease related biomarkers. So in today's video, we'll do a deep dive into those biomarkers which include VLDL, LDL, Lipoprotein a, HDL, Apo b, and also h s c r p. So let's jump into the data. Starting off with page one of the report with the lipid panel at the top and note that for this list and the 36 other biomarkers that I included for this test, blood test number seven in 2025, I don't go to my doctor, I go to ultalabtest.com where I pick exactly the test that I wanted. I then bring that form to Quest Diagnostics, the lab, and then I got the results relatively quickly. So we can see that I measured on October 27 around seven in the morning and then had almost all the results, not just what you see on the screen, again the 36 other biomarkers, within about three days. So if you're into blood testing like me and you want to help support the channel, you can do that by using the affiliate link in the video's description. Alright. So let's go through the data. Starting off with HDL, which for this test was 69 milligrams per deciliter, which then raises the question, what's optimal? If we go based on the reference range, at least what the lab suggests, anything greater than forty, forty milligrams per deciliter is desirable. But, my interpretation of the published literature is that 50 to 69 is optimal. And, based on that metric, 69 is right at the limit of that range so we give it a green check mark as that's good news. But this is only part of the what's optimal for HDL story as HDL declines during aging. So to that means, HDL has now been greater than or equal to 50 for 20 tests in a row with an average HDL over those 20 tests of fifty nine milligrams per deciliter. That's potentially important because for the previous 44 tests, each average HDL was 45 milligrams per deciliter so lower relative to where it's been for the past 20 tests. Tests. And I've mentioned this in other videos, for those who struggle with low HDL as I did for a long time, it is possible to increase it. But in my case, it's taken a lot of blood tests and tracking diet and supplements to try to figure out what is a part of that recipe. And clearly, after 20 tests in a row, I think I've gotten the recipe down pretty good. So based on that, I've also avoided the age related increase so we give that also a green check mark. Alright. Next up are triglycerides. So first, note that we can approximate VLDL from triglycerides by dividing triglycerides by five. Alright. So what's optimal for triglycerides? If we go based on the lab's reference range, anything less than one hundred and fifty milligrams per deciliter is desirable. But, if we go by all cause mortality risk which is not reflected in the lab's reference range, less than 90 may be optimal. But my optimal range for triglycerides is actually more strict less than 45 milligrams per deciliter and this isn't just an arbitrary number that I picked out of the air. This is based on a study of about four point five million people where triglycerides less than 45 milligrams per deciliter were associated with maximally reduced risk of death from coronary heart disease related outcomes. So that's my target, less than 45 milligrams per deciliter. Additionally, triglycerides increase during aging. So it's not just about getting triglycerides less than 45 for one or a couple of tests. It's for all tests and then avoiding its age related increase. And if you wanna actually see those data rather than me saying the numbers, I have a new Patreon tier dedicated specifically to what's optimal for biomarkers. It currently includes data for HDL, tranqstrides, and 33 other biomarkers, more than two hours of video content, 52 published references, and again, these aren't the reference ranges. This is my reading of the literature for what may be optimal based on the largest studies that exist for each of these biomarkers. So if you're interested in that, check it out. Alright. So back to the triglyceride story. So we can see that 52 for this test is higher than 45. So I've given it a close to red. It's not totally red. Red would be bad news. I've given it a dark orange, x, which slightly worse than than, good news. In terms of avoiding the age related increase, let's take a look at data for the last four years since 2022 as I have 30 tests for triglycerides over that period. So in 2022, average triglycerides were 68, then 67, then 65. And thus far, in 2025, with one test left to go, 63. So this is good news and that I've got the trend for triglycerides going lower so we give it a green check mark. But on the other hand, it's not low enough to be below my forty five milligram per deciliter target. So we give that eight and x, an orange x. And And I'm still interested and I'm gonna still continue to try to get my triglycerides lower and I get some of you may be screaming or into the comments just increase fat and cut carbs and your t g's will be super low less than 45. Yes, this is true. But in my case, going super high for fat and very low for carbs starts to mess with other biomarkers. So the goal isn't to make one biomarker optimal while messing up others. It's what can I do to improve the broad net of all biomarkers and minimize negative impacts on a few biomarkers? Alright. Next up is LDL, which for this test was seventy three milligrams per deciliter. So what's optimal for LDL? If we go based on the reference range, anything less than a 100 may be optimal for primary prevention. And then the reference range suggest or the labs reference range suggests going a bit lower, less than 70, if you have pre existing CBD or other health related conditions. Instead, my reading of the literature is that 65 to one twenty may be optimal and that's based on a study of about four point five million people that looked at the association for LDL with CHD mortality risk. So with that in mind, my 73 is within that range so we give it a green check mark. But this is only part of the story. The other part of the story is resisting age related change. So how does LDL change during aging? Well, it doesn't have a linear increase or linear decrease. It increases and then decreases during aging. So what's my data? So that's what we're gonna see here. LDL versus chronological age over the past ten years and I have 64 tests over that ten year period, which is what we'll see here. With LDL on the y axis plotted against age, chronological age on the x. Now remember, the goal is to avoid an age related increase and then a decrease. And that's actually what we see though, an age related increase and then a decrease. Now, this isn't just my data to show this in the broader population. We can see that here in this study of fifteen million people who are not taking statins with LDL levels, average LDL levels on the y axis, plotted against age on the x. And first, we can see even in the very large this very large population, low LDL is found in youth with average values for men in green and women in red around eighty five to ninety five milligrams per deciliter. Then we can see that LDL peaks around midlife for both men and women and then it starts to decline. But note that this aid the age range here only goes up to 88 years. What about older than 88 years? It's again, I've said this before. The goal isn't to get to 88 and then die. The goal is to live as long as possible. So in the data that's on the what's optimal tier on Patreon, there is data in centenarians in large studies, relatively large studies, where LDL continues to decline. So we can see that LDL go has an inverse u shape during aging where it starts off relatively low, peaks at midlife, and then starts to decline such that at very old ages, it can be as low as in youth. But then the big question is, how can we know if low LDL is a sign of youth or older age? And that actually ties into my data. How would I know if my data is youthful or aged? So there are two main conditions where LDL is lower. The first is liver disease. So how would we know or how would I know if I have liver disease and that's what's contributing to the lower LDL over the past few years in my data? Well, one way to gauge that is by looking at liver enzymes, AST, ALT, GGT. And if you check out the data on Patreon, the full blood test report, you'll see that my AST and ALT are close to optimal or optimal with data in the high teens, low twenties, and GGT has been less than 12 for all tests, which is my reading of the literature as optimal. So this is unlikely liver disease related story for LDL being lower over the past few years in my data. On the other hand, what about cancer cachexia? Cancer cachexia is the situation where muscle and fat loss it within the context of cancer. Now, when considering that cancer incidence increases during aging and it may go undiagnosed for decades until it's actually diagnosed at late stage or at some late stage at an older age, it's possible that LDL is declining throughout that whole period. And I have a video I'm working on a video that will show that story where can't LDL is low in cancer cachexia. So how would I know if if I'm on that path just subclinical levels of something growing in my body cancer related and I just wouldn't know? Well, there are two biomarkers that may be a part of that story. Albumin and h s c r p. Within the context of cancer cachexia, albumin levels decline and h s c r p increases. Fortunately, there's no pattern of that in my data right now. So I think it's unlikely that the LDL decrease over the past few years of my data is related to either liver disease or an undiagnosed cancer that could lead to cancer cachexia. And I should note that my body weight is also stable. If I had cancer cachexia, I'd expect to see weight loss unexplained weight loss within the past few months and there's no pattern of that in my data either. So that my data for LDL has increased and then decreased. It's more likely related to all of the diet changes that I've been making because I've been playing around with going high fat, high monounsaturated fat, lower fiber, higher fiber. So, that's likely the story that's driving LDL for now in my data. But, there's more to the LDL story and that involves Lipoprotein A. So, what does Lipoprotein A have to do with LDL? Lipoprotein A is a sub fraction of LDL which is what we'll see here or start to see here. So, in this example, total cholesterol is a 150 milligrams per deciliter, 50 from HDL. 30 from VLDL. And note that this is not an ideal health cardiovascular profile as VLDL is way too high. VLDL optimal VLDL, my target is nine milligrams per deciliter. As multiplying that by five, we get the triglycerides of 45 milligrams per deciliter. And then in this situation, LDL would be 70 milligrams per deciliter. Additionally, as I mentioned, lipoprotein a is a subfraction of LDL. So within this context, lipoprotein a would be zero. Now the reason why that's important is because lipoprotein a is six to seven times more atherogenic relative to LDL and that's on a per particle basis. And if you missed that video, the data for that, it'll be in the right corner. So when considering that the LDL of 70 and lipoprotein a of zero, that would be the least atherogenic of the profiles, the cardiovascular profiles that we're gonna see as shown here. So when Lipoprotein a increases, it becomes a greater fraction of the LDL, of total LDL, whereas then LDL declines. Such that at the far right, where all of that 70 milligrams per deciliter is lipoprotein a and zero is LDL, that would be the most atherogenic profile even for the same total cholesterol of a 150 milligrams per deciliter. So it's not just about tracking LDL, it's knowing how much of your LDL is lipoprotein a. So with that in mind, what's my data? So for this test, lipoprotein a was 80 nanomolar and now we can see that the lab has flagged it. And for those of you who are regular viewers of the channel, first, thank you. Second, you should know that this isn't an an an anomalous finding. My lipoprotein a is almost always at the higher end of the reference range or around that where the reference range being 75 nanomolar. Which then raises the question, what's optimal for lipoprotein a? And, as you've seen already through this video, generally the reference range is not what's optimal. To determine what may be optimal for Lipoprotein a, let's take a look at lifetime risk for major cardiovascular events with increasing Lipoprotein a, which is what we'll see here with that lifetime risk for ASCVD atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, and that's in percentage, on the y axis plotted against age from 40 to 80 years. And here we can see that lowest lifetime risk for having an ASCVD event was associated with lipoprotein a values that were seven milligrams per deciliter or 16 nanomolar. And to put that into a risk number, that's about thirteen percent, a thirteen percent lifetime risk at that lowest lipoprotein a level. Now, to put my data onto this plot, it will be somewhere around there, just above the light purple with with a lifetime risk a bit higher around eighteen or nineteen percent. Still not optimal but far from terrible. And when I say far from terrible and apologies to anyone who has lipoprotein a this high but we can see that having values of a 100 and fifty milligrams per deciliter or 350 nanomolar, now we can see that lifetime A S C B D risk is about two times higher relative to the lowest values. So, in terms of what's optimal for lipoprotein a associated A S C B D risk, my target would be less than 16 nanomolar, not less than 75 nanomolar, which is what the lab's reference range recommends. So, with that in mind, what's my data? Because does is that one test representative of all lipoprotein a tests? What's my data going back ten years? And, I get that some of you are gonna say Lipoprotein A is genetically determined. You only measure it once. You don't have to measure it ever again. But is that really true? Is there variability in Lipoprotein A data? So that's what we'll see here. This is Lipoprotein A versus age over the past ten years. And I have 36 tests over that period, not 64, as here in The States, lipoprotein a is an add on test. You have to order it extra. It's not automatically provided on a standard lipid panel. On the y axis, we've got lipoprotein a and that's plotted against age on the x. And then, we can see that my average over this ten year period is about 89 nanomolar. Now, if you remember, in terms of what's optimal for lipoprotein a associated ASCVD risk, my 89 nanomolar is actually far from that 16 nanomolar target. So we give that an x. So that's potentially bad news. Now, if there is good news in the in these data, it's that more recent tests have been closer to 80 nanomolar, about nine nanomolar less than my historical average over this ten year period. But then, taking even a step further, I've had values as low as 69 nanomolar. Now, 69 nanomolar is still far away from 16 nanomolar but it shows that there is variability in lipoprotein a data. Just measuring it once may not be sufficient. And to highlight that point, Lipoprotein a is somewhat malleable. As you can see, I've had values as high as a 110 and a 145 nanomolar. So imagine if I only measured once and didn't discover part of the recipe for helping to keep it as as low as possible. For now, at 80 nanomolar and potentially, I intend to get it even lower and I'm not on any of these, you know, these drugs, these pharma, you know, statins or otherwise. I know statins don't lower lipoprotein a but other lipoprotein a lowering drugs. I'm not on any of that. This is all diet and exercise and a few supplements. But imagine if I only measured once or twice and lipoprotein a was a 145 nanomolar for my whole life whereas I could potentially keep it at 80 or 70 nanomolar after discovering the recipe. So for those who've measured it, I'd say to keep measuring it and track diet and track supplements and try to discover your own personalized recipe for helping to keep lipoprotein a relatively low. Now there may be some good news within this story as in my case, with lipoprotein a being at the higher end of the reference range or around the higher end of the reference range as there are at least two variables that can help or in other studies that have may be able to mediate Lipoprotein a associated CBD risk which include high sensitivity c reactive protein and the waist to hip ratio, W H R. So what's my data for that? So for this test, h s c r p was point three milligrams per liter which then raises the question, what's optimal for h s CRP? But additionally, what's optimal for h s CRP mediated lipoprotein a associated CBD risk? So first, when looking at the reference range in terms of what's optimal for h s CRP, their optimal is anything less than one milligram per liter. In contrast, there's a meta analysis that exists that shows that as low as possible may be optimal with values as close to zero but using zero point three as an zero point three milligrams per liter as an upper cutoff for h s CRP in association with risk of death for all causes. So that's my optimal range. Additionally, in terms of the h s what's optimal for h s CRP mediated lipoprotein a associated ASCVD risk in that study. And, again, that video will be in the right corner. Having h s c r p values less than two milligrams per liter was associated with lowest risk within the context of relatively high lipoprotein a. So based on that metric, also good news for this test. But, HSCRP increases during aging and I want to highlight this as much as I can. There's so much in the longevity space where people are focused on one test per year or two tests per year. Is that representative of a full year average and then are you testing every year? We really want to be looking at longitudinal change as a true rate or pace of aging. With that in mind, HSCRP increases during aging so we want to avoid that age related increase. And to that means, it's now 28 tests in a row where, in my case, HSCRP is less than or equal to the labs detection limit point three milligrams per liter and this is all tests going back to January 2022. So, for the past four years. So, here too, this is good news not just for HSCRP but potentially within the context of hs CRP being a potential mediator of Lipoprotein A associated ASCVD risk. Alright. So, what about the waist to hip ratio? And that too, that video also be in the right corner. When the waist to hip ratio was greater than one and lipoprotein a was greater than a 125 nanomolar or 50 milligrams per deciliter, that was associated with an increased ASCVD risk relative to lower waist to hip ratios. So, in my case, my waist to hip ratio and I measured it yesterday is 0.88. My waist size, thirty inches and my hip size, thirty four inches. So, this too may help mediate some of the risk inherent in Lipoprotein A being relatively high, in my case, in terms of its association with ASCVD or lifetime risk of having an ASCVD event. Alright. So what about ApoB? So ApoB containing lipoproteins include VLDL, Lipoprotein A, and LDL. So it's more of an integrated measure of all three of these lipoproteins. And I should mention that ApoB is also an IDL but that's a very minor fraction of of all lipoproteins and it's generally not included in a lab test report so I won't cover that. But for these three lipoproteins, we can see that they contain the apoB100 protein or apoB for short. So, what's my data? That's what we'll see here. ApoB for this test was sixty nine milligrams per deciliter. What's optimal for apoB? So, the lab reference range is less than 90 or their optimal is less than 90 and then they recommend going less than 80 depending on if you have various health related or adverse health related conditions. In contrast, my data is more strict. My reading of the literature is more strict and that's based on more recent publications in large published studies that less than 70 for ApoB may be optimal, not just if you have a pre existing condition but in the general population and that's where its association with heart disease mortality and all cause mortality. So, based on that metric, 69 for this test, good news. But also, again, longitudinal change. So, I've only started to measure APL B over the past two years. I have eight tests over that span An average APOB over that period is 66 and a half milligrams per deciliter. So here too, good news based on that relatively strict APOB cutoff. Now as I mentioned earlier, this is a small snapshot of what I'm measuring. I'm not just measuring PhenoAge. I'm not just measuring the cardiovascular disease risk biomarkers but 36 other biomarkers. So, if you're interested in that, that's on Patreon. I should also say that the blood test was on October 27. All of these data for the 36 and other biomarkers that I've shown here and in the last video were on patreon very quickly, within a few days after that. It takes about a month for me to get these videos onto YouTube but there too, they're on patreon. So, if you made it to this part of the video, thank you. If you want to see these data as soon as possible, check us out on Patreon. In the next video, we'll dive even deeper. What diet, supplements, and prescription meds correspond to this 15 year younger biological age for this October test, blood test number seven in 2025. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where I offer blood test consults but also post at least twice per day in four other Patreon tiers. We've also got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself that helps support the channel including ultalabtest.com which is where I get the majority of my blood test done, the clearly filtered water filter which I use every day, at home metabolomics, I'm up to 21 tests, oral microbiome composition, NAD testing with Genfinity, epigenetic testing with TruDiagnostic, at home blood testing with Scifox Health, which includes GrimAge, the best epigenetic clock of epigenetic clocks, green tea, diatracking with chronometer, or if you like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch including Data Istmo Norstar, which is what I've got on here, Figuring Stuff Out is My Drug, and the Conquer Agent or Diatrying logo. Link in the video's description. Thanks for watching. Hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.