The reason why neck tangerine b may be important, because as we can see in this paper's title, it significantly increased the lifespan of fruit flies or Drosophila, which is what we'll see here. So on the left, we've got lifespan data for male flies and female. On the left and female flies on the right. On the y axis, we've got percent survival plotted against time or lifespan in days. And then we've got three groups, control in black, rapamycin treated flies in red, and then nectandrin b treated flies in blue. So first, let's take a look at median survival. This is a time when half of the flies have died and half are still alive. And then we can see by the blue and red shift to the right, it's very minor, insignificant relative to what happened for maximum lifespan as indicated by twenty percent survival. This is the time when eighty percent of the flies have died and only twenty percent are still alive. And now note that both rapamycin and nactandrin b lead to a significant extension of maximal lifespan. So that's one way to look at the data. The other is that nactandrin b extended lifespan in Drosophila to the same same extent that rapamycin did, which is potentially good news for nactandrin b and for nutmeg consumption. Now, this effect wasn't only evident in male flies. The same situation happened in the female flies. So a minor impact on median lifespan is shown by fifty percent survival. But in terms of maximal survival, once again, look at that rightward shift for both rapamycin and nectandrin b treated flies which again suggests that nectandrin b may be as good as rapamycin at least in flies for extending lifespan. But one study just generally doesn't move the needle for me. I I wanna know if there are other studies. Is there a broader consensus of research that may suggest including nutmeg and correspondingly nectandrin b may be important for health? In another study, nectandrin b prevented cellular senescence in fibroblast. Fibroblast are found in skin but also connective tissues. So ligaments, tendons, cartilage. So this may be important for those cell types, for those organ systems. So with that in mind, it raises the question, how much neck tangerine b and or nutmeg may be optimal? And I don't think anybody knows the answer to that. I don't know the answer to that. So for now, I think including some nutmeg to get neck tangerine b rather than none may be important. So with that in mind, expect to see it for the test number six diet composition video.