Taurine impacts many health related areas, and that's what we'll see here, including promoting mitochondrial health, improving glucose homeostasis, increasing muscle endurance, and many others on the list. Now, the assumption is that an increase in dietary taurine will increase plasma levels of taurine. But is that true? So the good news is that plasma taurine levels can be tracked which means they can be potentially optimized. And in this video, we'll cover what's my data as I now have 13 tests for plasma levels of taurine. And to track taurine, I've been using at home metabolomics using iolo's kit which besides taurine includes data for more than 600 other metabolites. And if you wanna use this kit to track taurine and the others, discount link in the video's description. Alright. So what's my data? That's what we'll see here. And in 2023, over five tests, average taurine levels, plasma taurine levels were point one one three millimolar which is equivalent to a 113 micromolar. And we'll see why the micromolar data, is important in a minute or the conversion from millimolar to micromolar is important in a minute as I'll show age related data that's plotted in micromolar. Alright. So 2023 data, 113 micromolar. What about in 2024? Well, through the first eight tests, average taurine levels were a 127 micromolar, just a bit higher, Which then raises the question, what's optimal for plasma levels of taurine? In other words, how does this range, a 113 micromolar in 2023 and a 127 average in 2024, how does that compare with age expected data? And that's what we'll see here. With serum levels of taurine plotted against age. And note that this isn't a study of thousands of people. So if anyone's come across a study that investigated plasma levels of taurine and how they change during aging, please post it in the comments and I'd be happy to give you a shout out in a future video. So from this relatively small study, we can see that plasma taurine levels decline during aging at least up until 60 years old. Now, if we plot my data based on chronological age and extrapolate based on the trend line, we'd expect to see an average plasma taurine of around 80 micromolar. But the 113 to a 127 micromolar would put me somewhere around 20 years younger based on plasma levels of taurine. So in terms of what's optimal, at the very least, I'd say avoiding taurine's age related decline. So at least for one year, 2024 verse 2023, so far so good. And this isn't just a two year experiment. I plan on tracking plasma levels of taurine indefinitely. So we'll see how or if I'm able to resist the age related decline for taurine going forward in many videos to come. So but note that there is a higher level of plasma levels of taurine. Even younger or So for those that are younger than 20 years, we can see that plasma taurine levels can go as high as an average of around 200 micromolar. So should I go higher? And then the obvious question would be, should I supplement to increase plasma taurine? As I think that's the most common way that people expect to increase plasma levels of taurine. Now for me, supplementation is a secondary approach. I prefer to optimize diet first. So with that in mind, which dietary factors are significantly correlated with plasma levels of taurine? So to address that, what's the approach? And apologies for those who are familiar with the channel. You've seen this approach many times. For those who are new, welcome. So in terms of in terms of the approach, since 2015, I've been tracking all of my food with a food scale. I almost never eat out. Almost everything is tracked with the food scale. And then, I take that data and I enter it into a diet tracking app. In this case, it's Cronometer, but any diet tracking app these days should be good enough. And then I take the Cronometer data and I manually enter it into a spreadsheet including foods, macro, and micronutrients for a given day. So then, each blood test has a corresponding average dietary intake. So in other words, if there's a fifty day period in between blood tests, the average dietary intake for those fifty days then lines up with the latter blood test. And even if I just have two blood tests, I can compare one dietary period versus another to see what may have caused changes for the second test. But note that two tests isn't enough data to make meaningful conclusions. So then with three tests, I can look at correlations and granted there's a lot of noise in three tests and looking at correlations. So as I accumulate more tests and more track dietary data, there should be less noise and more signal to identify what may impact what in terms of diet or supplements, etcetera. So once I've got the track diet with biomarkers, I calculate correlations between the two. So following test number 13, I then looked at 86 comparisons for plasma levels of taurine. Again, tracked with iolo's metabolomic kit with foods, macro and micronutrients. And on that list, protein intake wasn't significantly correlated with plasma levels of taurine. In fact, only one had a p value less than 0.05 as the significance threshold, and that was fructose intake. Where a higher fructose, a relatively higher fructose intake over those 13 tests is significantly correlated with a lower level of plasma taurine, which is what we'll see here. So So on the y axis, we've got plasma levels of taurine plotted against the average daily fructose intake that corresponds to each blood test. So each thought is a blood test. And then we can see that significant inverse correlation for fructose intake And note that this is almost exclusively exclusively from whole foods. I do include cheat days but only for a couple of days after each blood test. The majority of most of the year is no cheat days. So probably around three hundred and fifty days, no cheat days out of three sixty five. So, almost all of the fructose that I get is coming from whole foods. Fruits, vegetables, etcetera. So nonetheless, we can see that there's a significant inverse correlation between fructose with plasmataurine. In other words, when my average daily fructose intake is relatively high, plasmaturing is lower or at least the correlation is for lower lower taurine. I can imply causation. And conversely, there's one data point that may be driving this correlation where fructose intake was 48 grams that corresponded to that test. Now, that could be interpreted as an outlier but it also could be preliminary data for a real correlation. And the only way to find out is to have average daily fructose intakes that are in the fifty to fifty five gram range which you can see are currently empty. No data points with fructose intakes at that level. So in future tests, I'm planning on aiming for fifty to fifty five grams to basically fill in the plot and see if this correlation stays where it is or weakens. Now, to follow the correlation, I should aim for that fifty to fifty five gram range with the goal of keeping plasmatorine relatively high and resisting an age related change. But, following a test number 13 and for the fifty two day period that preceded test number 14, it wasn't exactly fifty days, it was fifty two days. Average daily fructose intake for the December 17 test was sixty one and a half grams of fructose per day. Now based on extrapolation of what we see here on the curve, that I would expect to see an at, a taurine level, a plasma taurine level of a 100 micro molar. So, is that true? Test number 14 results just came in and they're currently on Patreon, and diet correlations are also on Patreons. If you wanna see if this correlation is still negative point five seven or did it get worse? Did it get stronger? Or are other things now strong more strongly correlated or significantly correlated with plasma levels of taurine? All of that data is on the correlations tier on on Patreon. So if you're interested in that, check it out. We've also got a new Patreon tier That's what's optimal for biomarkers. This is a ninety five minute video ad free that will be exclusive to Patreon covering all of the 27 biomarkers that are shown here. This video includes 40 published papers, references for 40 published papers in terms of how each of these biomarkers changes during aging and what's associated with lowest risk for all cause mortality. So if you've ever gotten a blood test, from their from your doctor and you see the reference range and you wanna know what may be optimal for health and potentially longevity, I'd encourage you to check out this video on Patreon. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself while also helping to support the channel including ultalabtest.com which is where I get the majority of my blood test. The clearly water clearly filtered water filter. And note that all of these affiliate links I'm currently using or have used recently in the past. At home metabolomics which I mentioned in the video, oral microbiome composition, NAD testing with Genfinity, epigenetic testing, at home blood testing with Syphox Health which includes ApoB, but also the DNA methylation test GrimAge, green tea, diet tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Die Trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. Hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.