Polistatine gene therapy. Okay. So this is not something that you can do in The United States. You can get this treatment offshore. I was part of the clinical trial as was my wife. I did it three months before she did. Polistatin is a protein. It has a weight of something like, I think, 235 k d KDA. And polystatin is a naturally occurring protein in the human body, probably in most mammalian bodies. It's being has been applied or used in the agricultural industry for years to bulk up the weight of, you know, beef cattle and so on. People who are into, muscle building, weight building, and so on have been injecting themselves with follistatin into their muscles for years. It's it's safe. Follistatin, as I say, occurs naturally in the human body. But what happens is that for various reasons, our bodies start to deteriorate, and we lose muscle mass and skeletal structure and so on. And so the body sensing this very wisely increases the amount of follistatin you have. However, it can't keep up. And so that's how people can end up being very frail and so on. Now the follistatin gene therapy is done by giving an injection of plasmids. And, I'm not sure how much your audience would know what plasmids are, but, essentially, they're just circular strings of DNA, which are encoded to produce the protein, follistatin. And as it's developed by mini circle, in addition to, having that piece of DNA to to create the follistatin, it it has another piece of DNA, which is sort of a killer switch as it's called. So that when you get this injection of the polystatin plasmid from, mini circle, if you were to have a serious adverse reaction and wanted to turn it off, you just take an injection of, I think, doxycycline or something like that, and that will wipe out what the injection was. So there was a, you know, a really nice safety factor. When I do these things, I'm really concerned about living and continuing to live. So I need to know enough about the science and the safety to actually do it. And so, as I say, everybody has follistatin. You if you if you're losing muscle mass and bone mass, sarcopenia, whatever, you osteoporosis, you want to counter that somehow, and you can do that, it seems, with, an injection of this plasmid from mini circle. Now I had the injection two years ago, and we're just doing now the two year measurements to see how it looks after two years. What we have seen are the following. We did a follow-up at three months. And in three months, the effect of I I guess I should also mention that these plasmids, they're ejected into your abdomen, and they replicate. So you continue to produce this. You're creating essentially a little follistatin factory in your abdomen. And this follistatin factory in my body in three months doubled the amount of follistatin in my blood serum. Three months later, it was three it was double. Nice. Nice. And another three months, it had gone up another 50%. Wow. It it went from eight and a half, and I can't remember the units, whatever they are. It went from eight and a half to 17 in three months and then up to 22 or four 24, I think. But the big but the big deal would be an improvement in muscle mass. Right? So I think what follistatin inhibits myostatin, which allows muscle to, right, to grow at hypertrophy. Right? So Yeah. Did you notice two way two ways you can measure that. You can actually do a DEXA scan, and we did DEXA scans. And my lean muscle mass increased by, I think, about four or five pounds. Now I only weigh a hundred and twenty pounds, and you know more than I what percentage my body would be lean muscle if I weigh a hundred and twenty pounds. So a 5% or a five pound increase or a four pound increase, whatever it was, is pretty significant. But, you know, I don't measure things the way you lab people do. I measure it, and what does it do to me? And when I went to, this treatment was done in Roatan in Honduras. When I went to Honduras and went through the Miami Airport, and I had my roll aboard suitcase with me. And if you've ever been to Miami Airport, it seems that you always arrive at a gate at one end and leave from a gate at the other end, and it's a mile away. And so I had to tug you know, pull this thing a mile down there. But on the way to Roatan, I had to stop a couple of times just to rest and cover my breath as I was going from one end to the other. I got to Roatan. I had the treatment. I came back. And two months later, before we even did the three month follow-up, I was out running, and I can run now. Now I'm not, you know, a four minute miler, but I couldn't run before the false stat treatment. I can run now. I run a couple of blocks, rest, run a couple more blocks. I can do that. And that's just incredible. And even more important, because running is boring, I can dance. And you need to find that little video of me dancing at, Dublin, at the longevity summit, Dublin back in June. It was sort of funny because, you know, the music starts. And if music starts, I dance, and, I get up and I'm dancing. And then I sort of look around, and there's all these longevity, geeks, young people like you. And they're standing at the side looking at me. Some of them can actually sway in time to the music. Very few of them were moving. And, you know, that's what pvolastatin does for me. You know? So it's just really exciting. But the thing that is also really significant and important to me, with respect to the polestatin treatment is that it's truly rejuvenative in the following sense. It was one injection that took thirty seconds, and two years later, I'm still seeing the benefits. And we need treatments in this longevity space where we focus on rejuvenation, and we come up with therapies that are like that. Like, if I have to repeat this every two years, fine. What I don't want is something I have to do every day. Okay? That's that's not solving a problem in any sense. Creating this little follistatin factory in my abdomen is dealing with a real problem. And the other thing that comes about as a result of that, I think, is that and and, essentially, putting that colostatin injection into my abdomen was a systemic treatment. What it did really is it gave a resource to my body. Okay? And my body chose what to do with it. It was under control of my body. It wasn't a doctor putting an injection into a particular muscle to get me a bigger muscle. It was giving a resource to my body so that my body can decide how to allocate that resource. And one thing it did very quickly is it zapped my heart. It gave me that extra cardiovascular capacity, and that was not necessarily predicted or expected or anything else. My body said, look. You need this. And that's what it did. Now the other side to that statement is that when you come up with a therapy which will do this kind of thing for a body, you're freeing up the other resources in the body to be better utilized. You're augmenting the total pool that's available, and your body will typically figure out how to use that most effectively. That's what our DNA, which has been coded through our evolutionary development, That's what it's designed to do. It's designed to use those resources if we can give them in a systemic way. And so what I look for in therapies for longevity is I look for rejuvenative therapies that can be injected or or otherwise administered systemically and let my body decide what to do with it. And then I really do get true rejuvenation, I believe. And so, you know, the follistatin, therapy, has just been incredible for me, and the results are there. Now I should mention that quite a number of people who get the follistatin therapy report no particular improvement in anything. And you might say, well, why is that the case? Well, quite a number of those people, as I understand it, were fairly young. Well, if you're young, your body is generating enough follistat. So, you know, one of the things that I think is really true, and and I think more people are starting to understand that, is that if you're dealing with therapies for longevity, you really wanna be trying them on people like me who have, in some sense, degenerated to the extent that what you're doing can show improvement.