Hey, everyone. Today's guest is doctor Niharika Duggal, who is an assistant professor at the Institute of Inflamaging and Aging at the University of Birmingham. Today, Niharika will present her lab's findings for the impact of the gut on thymic involution and immune aging in addition to strategies that we can use to potentially slow these process processes. So with that, welcome, Naharika, and let's get into the presentation. Thank you, Michael. Thank you for the introduction. My name is Niharika Diggle. I am a scientist based in Birmingham, very interested in how we can maintain a healthier gut to boost our immune responses. But before going into that, I wanted to highlight why I got interested in this area. So one of the biggest achievements that we've had in the past few years in medical history is that we're all living longer now. We've seen this massive increase in lifespan which seems like really good news but unfortunately this is some data here from The UK but we see this trend across the globe where although we are living longer so our life expectancy has increased but we still see a big lag between how long we are living and the healthy life expectancy. So what's happening is as a result of this increase in life expectancy even currently we see at least the last seven to ten years of your life are spent in poor health. And this has led to the emergence of this concept now that as aging researchers, we are not necessarily interested in increasing your life span or getting you to live longer but possibly adding value to this life and getting you to live healthier. So we've shifted gears now towards rather than extending your lifespan, we want to increase your health span. And as an immunologist one of the key ways forward to doing this would possibly be maintaining a healthier immune system. So what happens as we get older is that your immune system undergoes a massive remodeling. So this, affects both your arms of your immune system. Your immune systems are really complex organisms, components, so I want you to think of it like a superhero of your body. And we have a number of soldiers that come together. They have different functions, and we need an overall homeostasis to ensure that we have a healthy immune system. And with age, we start seeing a massive remodeling, and this results, it has a number of clinical implications, it can result in an increased risk of infections in older adults. So this was particularly highlighted during the recent COVID nineteen pandemic where we saw in the first wave older adults were disproportionately affected. So not only do we see an increased risk of infections we also start seeing more hospital admissions due to these infections and a higher mortality due to these infections as well. In addition to this, one of our key strategies to to combat this increased risk of infections is vaccine responses, but we have bad news here as well because there's a number of evidence showing that whether we look at your influenza vaccines, pneumococcal, tetanus, the responses to this declines as we get older. Not only that we also start seeing an increased incidence of certain inflammatory autoimmune conditions. So there's a lot of epidemiological data showing that rheumatoid arthritis, we start seeing a higher incidence in your older age and this immune remodeling could be contributing there as well. But more recently in the past two years, we have had evidence from animal models which has shown that if we accelerate this aging of your immune system in young mice, we can accelerate the process of whole organism aging, whether it's your cardiovascular aging, muscle aging. So overall, this concept of immune senescence or remodeling of your immune system is really driving this organism health as we get older and what we believe is that by targeting this we could improve health span. Another concept that I would like to throw in here is Inflamma Ageing. So what happens is your inflammation or acute inflammation is one of the most important host defense mechanisms that we have to help fight off infections or is very important if you're facing an injury but on the other hand if this inflammation persists for a long term time it can actually have detrimental effects on the host health. What we see with old age is irrespective of the presence of any infection chronic diseases the levels of inflammation are higher in older adults so this is in a chronic condition and this has persists for a very long time and this persistent inflammation is called Inflamma Ageing, It's been recognized as one of the key hallmarks of aging so it's a key driver of a number of aging phenotypes that we see and it also has detrimental effects on host health ranging for from for example we see a migration of these inflammatory cytokines into your brain. It could be driving emergence of neurocognitive disorders, cognitive declines. It's also been railing to a poor, responses to infections. So overall again having a very detrimental effect on your host health. So as a researcher, my lab is particularly focused on how we can maintain a healthy immune system because we believe that this could be the key of healthy aging and this could be help us bridging the gap between the health span and lifespan that I spoke a little bit earlier on about and we are really interested in a number of different strategies on how we can boost immune health as we get older. So we work on two key arms. These are lifestyle based modifications. We have done a lot of work showing that physical activity could be one way to do this. Today, I'm going to primarily focus on how we could target our microbiome to boost immune health. So why the microbiome? Your microbiome has recently gained a lot of attention because of the diverse range of functions that it has in maintaining host health. One of the key ones I want to highlight here is that it plays a very important role in maintaining your immune system, so immune system development, stimulation and functioning. What happens as we get older is that our microbiome which is primarily formed in the early years of our development, remains relatively stable across our adult life. So what I mean here is the diversity is maintained, overall it remains relatively stable, But as we get older, what we start seeing here is a loss of diversity and also an imbalance. We start seeing an accumulation of pathobionts. So this could be, for example, you'll see difficult infection. You see difficult pathogens start expanding and that's why we see more of these infections in older adults and on the other hand we have these beneficials or commensals we start seeing a decline in these so overall this results in a state of dysbiosis where our microbiome composition has shifted and this also has recently been recognized as one of the key hallmarks of aging. So in addition to the changes in your microbiome composition, we also start chasing changes in your intestinal barrier integrity. What we mean here is your intestine barrier, which is shown in the figure over here, plays a very important role in ensuring that all your microbiome and its products remain, intact to a specific location, they're not found in circulation. But as we get older, due to changes in this composition, so one of the key functions of your commensals is also to maintain this intestinal banner integrity, but because we're seeing a loss of these commensals, what we start seeing is a decline in your mucus layer production and these endothelial gaps between the different cells here also starts increasing. As a result of this, a lot of your microbial products can now be found in circulation. So this is in common terms called a leaky gut which has also been reported in a number of chronic inflammatory conditions and there's evidence now from animal models showing that if we can stop this intestinal barrier dysfunction, we can also combat a number of features, such as inflammaging that I spoke earlier on about. But one of the key areas that my lab was interested in was saying that can this loss of intestinal barrier dysfunction also be contributing towards immune aging features. So to do so, what we have done and, what I would like to highlight here is our immune system is very, very complex composed of a number of different cells but today I'm going to primarily focus on one cell which is called our t cell. This is very important in providing for protection against viral infections. So to address our hypothesis and understand the links between your understanding of barrier dysfunction and immune aging, we in our study design recruited a number of healthy young and healthy older individuals. Just to clarify here by healthy old rattles we mean they had no underlying chronic conditions, they were not on any medications that could have an impact on the immune system and what we've gone on to do is we've collected blood samples in humans it's very difficult to look at gut barrier integrity, so what we have to do is we rely on surrogate markers. So for example, with age we see a loss of these tight junction proteins that hold your epithelial layer together. If we find increased levels of these in circulation, it's a surrogate marker that you have a leakier gut. What we found here was that it's no surprise, this has been shown by other studies as well, with age we have higher intestinal thyroid disintegrity, more of your tight junction proteins in circulation. But what we observed here which peaked our interest was that unlike young individuals where we see a lot of homogeneity, our older cohort although they all were healthy showed a lot of heterogeneity where we saw some individuals which had gut barrier function levels very similar to young whereas others showed poor integrity. So what we've gone on to do then is we split our older adult cohort into two subgroups. One group which had low microbial translocation, these are levels very similar to young individuals and the other group showing high microbial translocation And then what we've gone on to do is we have compared their levels of immune aging. We've also looked at stool to understand the fecal fecal microbiome composition of this cohort. So before I dive into our findings, I just wanted to provide a little bit of backdrop. As I said a bit earlier on that I'm going to primarily focus on your t cells. So these are a very unique, immune cell subset. Most of your immune system develops in your bone marrow, but your t cells go into a small lymphoid organ called the thymus, which is located on top of your heart. That's where it gets its name from. They go into these thymus to complete their process of t cell development. And once a t cell has completed a development and it leaves the thymus and comes into circulation into your blood, it's called a naive t cell or a new t cell because this t cell has never seen a pathogen before, it's never been exposed to any pathogen. One of the key properties of your adaptive immune system or your t cells is that they have this concept of immunological memory. If your new t cells or naive t cells in circulation, they encounter a pathogen, They undergo rapid activation, proliferation to have fight of that infection. But what happens once this infection is resolved is we still have a small subset of these t cells left behind called memory t cells, and they are there so in case of re encountering infections we should have a faster and a more robust response and this is basically the principles behind vaccinations as well. So firstly what happens with age is I told you your t cells go into this organ called your thymus to develop. With age, we start seeing a shrinkage in this organ. We start seeing architectural changes inside that, and as a result, these number of t cells that are leaving your aged thymus start declining. And what this means clinically is that older adults, they have fewer naive or new t cells. These are very important in fighting off infections they've never seen before, and the ability to do so declines. This might be one of the reasons why we saw a disproportionate response in older adults during the pandemic because they were exposed to a new pathogen which they've never seen before, fear of these naive t cells but what you might think is that that's fine they don't have enough of the naive t cells but on the contrary we see a buildup of these memory t cells which have seen pathogens before so if we re encounter pathogens that should be okay Unfortunately we start seeing functional changes here as well, so although you have more of these memory t cells they are not necessarily as functional and one of the key defects we start seeing there is their ability to expand and proliferate when they are re exposed to a pathogen. So firstly what we were interested in looking at in our study was I told you earlier on we split our older cohorts into those with low microbial translocation and those with high microbial translocation. What we have previously reported, so we are not able to actually look into the thymus of human people, so what we can do is again relying on surrogate markers. We can look out for those T cells that have just finished their development and come into circulation and the levels of these are known to decline with age but what we saw in our study was that we only see a significant decline in these recent thymic immigrants that have just finished their development and come into circulation only in those older adults that have higher microbial translocation. The other concept I introduced you to was that with age, we have these memory t cells that are not necessarily functional. And what I mean primarily by that is, I'll introduce another concept of senescence. What we mean by senescence is that our cells have reached a state of proliferation arrest. They can no longer proliferate, but just because they can't proliferate doesn't mean they're no longer functional. Their atoms acquire additional functional properties. So for example, majority of these senescent cells are actually very pro inflammatory in nature and that is one of the contributors towards the inflammation concept I mentioned earlier on about. What's been widely reported with aging that we see a buildup of these senescent t cells pro inflammatory t cells but what we found in our study was that we did not see any accumulation of these senescent t cells in our older cohort, the one in red here with low microbial translocation. They're very similar to the youngs, but this buildup was only seen in older adults who had these leakier guts and more microbial products in circulation. So this is a lot of and I have a lot more data, but I wouldn't like to go into that at this point. This is a lot of data in humans. The challenge here is that it's very difficult to pro to confirm causality. So what we've gone on to do is now we've used a MICE model here we've used we've got young mice, old wild type mice so these are 24 which is equivalent to about 60 years in humans and we've got this cohort of aged germ free mice. So these are those mice that don't show features of microbial dislocation, dysbiosis, and they're also protected from this age related intestinal barrier disintegrating. What we're going to do now is here in mice models, we can collect thymic biopsies. So if you look at the first two ones over here, these are thymus sections comparing a young and an aged mice. The red staining over here is looking at lamin. Loss of this lamin is, seen in senescent cells. What you can clearly see between these two is, if we look at the organization of the tissue, it's a bit more disorganized. We start seeing buildup of senescent cells in the thymus of aged mice. Even these black voids start emerging. One hypothesis is this is due to infiltration of adipocytes. But if we look at this age germ free mice over here at the bottom, its structure is very similar to a young one where you see maintained lamin expression, maintained tissue organization. We've also looked at these epithelial cells, which are really important for your t cell development. Similar story here, if we compare our wild type young and aged mice, you see lots of these blue, thymic epithelial cells. So they help and support these cell development, which is maintained in these old germ free mice. So this possibly helps us and provides us with some explanation. What we're proposing here is that with healthy aging, what we see is that your gut barrier integrity is maintained. These tight junction proteins ensure that your microbial products are not found in circulation. But what's happening with unhealthy aging is due to this loss of barrier integrity, we start seeing a lot of microbial products in circulation. One hypothesis is that your immune system is chronically activated as a result of exposure to these pathogens, and this results in a buildup of or resulting in a state of senescence where it can no longer proliferate anymore, and they're more proinflammatory in nature. The other hypothesis here is that a lot of these microbial products can now even migrate to other organs we have confirmed in mice that they can migrate towards your thymus so there's a lot of migration over there and this is causing a number of thymic aging features so whether it is accumulation of senescence, it could be driving the adiposity we see here and due to this altered thymic microenvironment due to the buildup of these microbial products this could be resulting in the loss of the naive t cells that we see and accelerating this process of t cell aging. So one of the key areas why this is really interesting is and why the microbiome has gathered a lot of interest is its malleable nature. There's a lot of positive news here that what we can actually do is change your microbiome composition, possibly reduce some of those features that are driving this loss of intestinal barrier integrity And what I'm going to try and go through a few of these approaches from a least diverse to a more diverse approach that we have, possibly starting off with your dietary patterns. There's a lot of, interest in how we could, you know, use optimal nutrition to maintain immune health as we get older. One of the dietary patterns that has gained a lot of attention is this Mediterranean diet. So this is the diet that is consumed very very actively across the regions around your Mediterranean Sea. It's very rich in your dietary fibers. It has a higher consumption of protein based meat, reduced consumption of red meat, reduced consumption of saturated fatty acids and also it promotes a balanced meal where there is reduced consumption of fats, sugars, and processed foods and there's evidence now, so this was a massive study in healthy young older adults over 1,200 and what they've shown that a one year adherence to this mediterranean diet can reduce your inflammation levels so it has anti inflammatory effects One of the mechanisms on how this might be impacting and that's really important to understand because it helps us develop other strategies is that this dietary fiber, which is a big component of your Mediterranean diet, is almost like a food to your healthy microbiome. What your gut microbiome can do is that it can digest these dietary fibers and it can in turn produce metabolites. One of the most common ones here being short chain fatty acids, so butyrate for example a very common one and these metabolites can then via circulation go and impact other organs and they're also now gaining attention because they have immunomodulatory properties, they're anti inflammatory in nature. So we have done a study last year in which we were very interested in dissecting these links between nutrition and immune aging. I've earlier on introduced you to a number of hallmarks of t cell aging whether it was a loss of your naive t cells, we see a buildup of memory cells, these memory cells are more senescent in nature. So what we can do is we can assess a number of different features of your t cell aging and then we can combine them and generate one score which is called your immunological age. What this metric has been shown that this metric is a really good predictor of mortality. What we've gone on to do in our study was we recruited healthy young and older adults and in parallel we collected a lot of information on their diet and we've also done deep immune phenotyping to assess this immunological age. So this is, as I said earlier on, it's a score between zero and one and higher the immunologicals the score, the more aged your immune system is. Firstly, there's no surprise our older adults did show a higher immunological age, although they were healthy. But interestingly what we have observed here was that there was a strong association between your immunological age and the Mediterranean diet score particularly in older adults. So what you can see over here is that these older adults that had a very high immunological age also showed a lower Mediterranean diet score. We've then via machine learning approaches tried to disintegrate which components of this Mediterranean diet was one of the biggest drivers and it wasn't a surprise that your dietary fiber was the top one that associated with your immunological age and one of the hypotheses here is that it also associated with your intestinal barrier integrity. Those older adults that were, adhering towards this Mediterranean diet having more dietary fiber intake showed reduced levels of a tight junction proteins in circulation, so maintained barrier integrity, and this could be one of the reasons why they also showed a reduced immunological age. So one of the other, areas that has garnered a lot of attention recently is this fecal microbiota transfer. And what this involves is this has been used for many centuries actually, to treat gastrointestinal disorders. There have been a number of human clinical trials now, so for example, in c difficult infection patients, so these are those that keep getting recurrent infections, that if we transfer the liquid feces from a healthy donor into those with gastrointestinal conditions, what we see is a restoration of your microbiome composition. This also results in a restoration of your barrier gut barrier integrity. And we did a study a few years ago trying to see so this was done again in c difficult infection patients and not in healthy older adults. But what we were interested in looking at was that in addition to restoring your microbiome homeostasis, malaria integrity, can this also have any anti T cell aging properties? So what we found over here was that firstly, this transfer was anti inflammatory in nature, but what was very surprising is when we compare those individuals that were responding to this fecal microbiota transfer versus non responder, what we can see is in the responding cohorts post FMT you see a decline in the circulating frequency of these senescent t cells that are pro inflammatory in nature. So since then we have been trying to apply this model towards healthy aging as well but there are a number of restrictions. So whether it is donor variability, we have done these studies in, with collaborators in Canada versus here in The UK where Birmingham is one of the sites licensed to do a fecal microbiota transfer, but we see a lot of donor variability, there was a slight risk of transfer of pathobionts as well. So what our group is really interested in now is trying to identify specific novel path, your novel probiotic species that could be driving the state of immune health, so we go towards more of a precise approach. So to give you one example, we have recently done a small study in which I told you earlier on due to immune aging, one of the features is that we start seeing a decline in vaccine responses as we get older. So we did a small study in which we wanted to see the links between microbiome changes and vaccine responses. So we got a cohort where we looked at their microbiome health before getting the vaccination, so this was an influenza vaccine. What we see post vaccination is you should see at least a four fold increase in your antibody titer to consider it as a positive response or a good response. So what we saw here was in within our cohort, there were two groups. There were individuals that were actually responding to the, influenza vaccine versus those who didn't, and then we've gone on to compare the microbiome profile of low versus high responders and identified certain species of interest. Two of the ones that I highlight here are bifidobacterium bloussius species which we saw associated with lower immunological age and improved vaccine responses as well. But now what we're trying to do is validate a lot of these findings via more tests in the lab to actually see what might be the mechanisms. So the reason for mentioning this was that there's a lot of interest in as I said we are moving from a less specific to a more specific approach of targeting health, there have been a number of studies now looking at intervention strategies most of them being looking at probiotics where you can give the live microorganism. There's been a lot of evidence showing that if consumed in adequate amount, this could confer health benefits on the host, including immune health benefits. They are anti inflammatory in nature. They have been shown to improve vaccine responses, for example. The other approaches have been where you can provide, the host prebiotics. So what these are, these are nondigestible products that actually act like your dietary fiber. They're the source that help in the expansion of these pre probiotics. They have now been, some, products known as symbiotics, which can actually combine the prebiotic and probiotic and yielded even better effects on host health. And one of the mechanisms on how they work is by increasing those beneficial metabolites that I told you earlier on about, the short chain fatty acids. And one now emerging space is, these postbiotics and what we can do is rather than, trying to provide the probiotics and prebiotics, directly provide the host with the beneficial metabolite. So in the labs, what we are currently doing is a lot of screening in which we are testing a number of new, probiotic species that we identified in previous studies to see the effects that they have on t cells, other immune cells in culture. But what we've also confirmed is a lot of the postbiotics, your short chain fatty acids, can actually have anti inflammatory potential, improve t cell functioning in the lab settings. So so far the reason for still trying to go on this hunt to identify new species is that we've had 36 intervention studies mainly focused on probiotics, very few on prebiotics, and so far only one study on symbiotics looking at immune responses in older adults and rather than looking at specific effects, out of these 36 studies there were 10 that were done looking at vaccine responses and what we have seen here is a lot of heterogeneity. Six of these studies did show a beneficial improvement of vaccine responses but other studies have shown no effect at all. There have been over 12 studies that have tried to look at upper respiratory tract infections in older adults mainly relying on the symptom duration. And there as well, there's no clear evidence yet. There's a lot of heterogeneity in these studies because they use, different probiotic species. At the moment, the most common one are your lactobacillus and bifidobacteria. They use it for different durations, different dosages. So that's why what we are trying to work is possibly look at other strains that haven't been looked at or look at higher dosages or maybe combinations. The reason why your fecal microbiota transplant has shown such a lot of success is it's not relying on just transfer of one species via the whole microbiome. So what we're trying to also study is a combination approach, with the hope that we could actually and none of these studies I would like to highlight again has actually looked at any of the t cell aging features that we have discussed about today. So we have just completed another probiotic intervention study, which is blinded at the moment, where we're trying to see whether this probiotic supplementation can actually reduce the immunological age of hosts as well. So hopefully what I've tried to convince you all today is that maintaining immune health is really important for organism aging. What we see with age is a state of microbiome dysbiosis, a loss of intestinal barrier integrity, circulation of microbial products which could be a big driver of immune aging but the positive news is that we have a number of different approaches that can be used to maintain microbiome health ranging from dietary approaches, adherence to your Mediterranean diet for example or whether it could be supplementations with your probiotics, prebiotics. There's now emerging evidence in animal models. So we don't have any evidence in older adults and humans, but we have an evidence in aged FMT receiving mice that it can improve vaccine responses, but we're still trying to make this translation into humans. Or the other approach would be actually giving them the giving, otoridals postbiotics, which is the metabolite of interest. So what we're trying to do here is as I said there are a number of different approaches trying to find a more looking for a more holistic approach, approaches that can be maintained over a longer period of time and what we're trying to say here is there's a lot of interplay between a number of different features and by restoring your microbiome health we can actually ensure that our immune system is aging better as well which could be pivotal in not only, as I said, not increasing the lifespan, but it could ensure optimal well-being with old age. We could possibly reduce the dependence, promote well-being, and that's the ultimate goal here. With that, I'll stop. Thanks, Niharika. That was great. That was that was fantastic. I I have so many questions. So what I'd like to start with is biomarkers. Right? So I understand that restoration of the aged immune system is one side of the equation, but from my perspective, it's maintaining the youthful as youthful as possible immune system for as long as possible, delaying any potential restorative therapy. So at the when you go for a yearly physical, you know, usually, you'll get, like, the standard chem panel has white blood cells. Right? But clearly, that doesn't tell you the differentials. You know, neutrophils and monocytes increase, lymphocytes decrease. So, if if people are trying to track their immune system health, would you say that only tracking white blood cells on its own is insufficient? And then taking it a step further, would looking at the differentials be sufficient, or at what layer of granularity? Like, for example, do we need to actually measure, you know, the the differentials, neutrophils, monocytes, lymphocytes, but also b, t, and natural killer cells. And then taking that lower, we also need CRP, IL six, t, and f alpha. How how in-depth do you think we would need to go in terms of biomarkers to get ninety, ninety you know, a high amount of resolution on on our immune status? It's an excellent question, and and that explains some of the heterogeneity we have in the field because I told you about the 36 studies, maybe the intervention ones, they've all looked at different biomarkers. And there are a number of different ones. Tell the whole lymphocyte count actually doesn't give us a lot of information, neither is the neutrophil or monocyte ratio. So you mentioned a number of different immune cells. They're all there for different purposes. What I focused a lot here on is viral infections and vaccine responses, and there you need your adaptive immune system of t cells and your b cells. But if you're looking at innate immunity, so if you wanna look at your infections to responses to bacterial infection like pneumonia, for example, that's when you need your neutrophils. And it's not enough to just look at your counts. So all that information lymphocyte counts is not enough. If, and to give you an example, I haven't discussed about neutrophil agent today, but that's one of the cells where the numbers actually remain intact with age. You have enough number of neutrophils as you get older. The problem is we see functional defects at every stage. They can't migrate to the site, for example, your lungs where most of these pathogens might be sitting. Once they reach the site of infection, they're no longer able to engulf the pathogens and kill them as well, which makes it harder. It depends on the question you're trying to answer. If you're looking at vaccine responses, as I said, that's one of the really nice outcome. So rather than going to the granularity, the reason why a lot of these studies, they look at vaccine response. It's a nice functional outcome. The immune system has to come together to generate something, and it means a lot more. Okay. So with with that in mind, so if there are large epidemiological studies that show an increase in neutrophils during aging, you know, 400 I've got one in mind, 400,000 people. But, but, yeah, to your point, neutrophil function declines. Now you've got more of them. But would would looking at neutrophils, monocytes, lymphocytes as 95% of total white blood cells, what if you looked at that in combination with the pro inflammatory cytokines and SAS secreted proteins, you know, CRP, IL six, TNF alpha? Now granted, that doesn't tell you about function, but wouldn't you imagine that with a decrease in function of any of those cell types, you should expect to see an increase in inflammation? Not necessarily. And that's why when I introduced the concept of immune aging or immune senescence as well, I mentioned that we see a remodeling. So if I give you an example for t cells, the numbers are actually very well preserved with age, but what you saw within that is that you have fewer of the knives, more of the memory, and within the memory somewhere lie the senescent t cells as well. So if you have more senescent cells, t cells, that would be linked to more inflammation as well. At the moment, our inflammation panel, again, it just focused on CRP, TNF, and l six. There was a big study that looked at thousands of people and as extensive as 50 panels of these inflammatory cytokines and linked it to longevity. That's why they found that neither of these was the biggest driver. Actually, it was a a cytokine called CXCL nine, which links with cardiovascular aging. So that's why I went back to the statement earlier on that there's a number of things we can look at. There are a number of different biomarkers. We still don't know how good they are in a longitudinal context because in humans, it's very difficult to do these mortality based studies to show that this was the best one to predict it. Even when it comes to immunological age, the one that I've shown you is the recent one which has garnered a lot of attention, the immunological age. It's more complex to do it. The reason why it can't be done it's very difficult to do this in thousands of people because it's more complex methodology. It's not as simple as mention measuring your lymphocyte counts. We struggle to do these on thousands of big, big studies, which might explain the smaller sample size in our cohort as well, which makes it a bit difficult, and you need specific methodologies or at least instruments to do this. It can't be done, for example, if you're going to a GP surgery and you just have a blood sample taken. We can measure your cytokine levels, but we can't do such complex analysis. Yeah. I noticed that. I looked into the individual components in the, in age, and it's not even commercially available. So I couldn't track it in my own if I wanted to. No. So as a as a worst case scenario, I mean, lymphocytes, inflammatory markers, but then so lymphocytes decline during aging. And, would would, you know so is there, you know, t t cell immunosenescence and then maybe even is it less production of lipocytes, or are we having more, degradation of BT and natural killer cells that leads to an overall reduction in lymphocytes during aging? Overall overall, we might see a reduction, but that's why it's important to look at the different components. If you look at T cell numbers as a whole that's preserved, NK cells, on the other hand, is one of those cases where we see more NK cells. Mhmm. It's one of those areas, one of the first studies, we've had in NK cells because they've been around we've known about them for so long was in the nineteen nineties, showing that we have more NK cells as you get older. And but then now we know they're more senescent. The maximum buildup of senescent immune cells we see is in our NK cells. Although they are more, they are very important again in your viral infections clearing out cancers. They're not as functional because your senescent cell is more proinflammatory in nature. One of the other functions of newly discovered functions in NK cells is that they clear out senescent cells. And there are no studies that have shown this, but we have some initial evidence hinting that even the ability of aged NK cells to clear out senescent cells is reduced. So what we're trying to even work in that space is boost NK cell clearance potential to reduce this load of senescence as well. So it's the answer actually, unfortunately, still lies in the details, and that's one very common criticism of the number of, techniques that we show that it's how can we large scale implement these? And that's why we try and link it back to simple measures. Like, I've shown you that a lot of your immunological age features link in with, for example, your cut leakage markers, which is something that's really easy to measure. So what we're hoping is bigger studies, more longitudinal studies to find more circulatory biomarkers is the way forward possibly. I I have questions on that too. But, hang on. So increase in the natural killers and it gets, and they're they have a role as you mentioned too, and this is great because I didn't know that, to remove senescent cells senescent immunological cells or just senescent cells in general? Senescent cells in general. Okay. So then in that context, you'd expect to see an increase in inflammatory markers. Yeah. So looking at, I guess, even just looking at lymphocytes, neutrophils, monocytes with inflammatory markers and tracking that over time, if you see your, you know, white blood cell differentials stay the same, but an increase in in inflammation, couldn't that be some sort of a readout that immune age or or immunological function probably is suboptimal and you've got some amount of It definitely could be. It just depends on when you have taken that as long as you don't have an infection, for example. If you take a sample when you have an infection, you see in place inflammation, that could possibly be due to the infection. But to have a definite answer for that what we need is more longitudinal studies to identify what are the levels that could be classified as something's definitely not on the right trajectory. One of the big challenges we face is and another reason why we see heterogeneity in our older adult intervention studies is we always go for the healthy older adults. When, if you look at I showed you some evidence on the links between your diet and immune aging. What we found there, which was very surprising, is I didn't show you the difference between the young and the old diet. In our older adult cohort where I said we had a very strict inclusion criteria, no underlying conditions, no medications, no chronic conditions, what we end up with is such a selective population. These are those individuals. If I show you the physical activity levels, they were exercising more. They were eating healthier than the young. If you look at the dietary fiber intake between the young and old, it was higher in the old. So what happens is reactants in these kind of research studies end up with a biased population which is as it is so healthy and if I look at the inflammation levels in this cohort, I haven't shown you that data, we wanted to look for links between inflammation and immune aging as well. The levels are so low it's difficult to find anything meaningful And I think that's one place where we go wrong, wherein in the attempts to designing a perfect study, we miss out populations that might actually benefit the most from these interventions and might help answer a lot of these questions as well. So I I think what you did was great, though. You split the groups that the older older groups into low and high microbial translocation, which kind of accounts for some of some of that. But I I hear you on the limitations, but my focus isn't necessarily on, you know, large epidemiological longitudinal studies. It's on testing myself. So Yep. I I'm not sure if you you're familiar, but I'm testing, you know, eight times a year. So even if I do have an infection, if I'm taking, you know, the yearly average and tracking that over time, then I could potentially figure out that recipe for how much fiber or what calorie intake or how much exercise bypassing the need to wait for large epidemiological studies with all of that variability in in results. Absolutely. Alright. So done that, but that that does sound an interesting one. So we've had, someone who's doing this, different dietary interventions, trying to affect look at all of them over a period of two years. So we measured all the complicated markers in the logical age before and then, went on a calorie restricted diet to see the effects that that would have because we know high calorie consumption also has a negative impact on your barrier integrity. And then after that, went on a six, six week, very high fiber diet as well to see the effects. And we definitely we definitely see something there, but that was just a one case just to see what was going on. But that would be an ideal study design to see what what actually happens. Yeah. So that raises the next question. So, and, actually, there's, like, three questions in that. It's at the individual level, what is the ideal calorie amount even when accounting for someone's physical activity levels, and all the environmental factors? What's because as you mentioned, you know, too low calorie intake. I think anorexics may have an increased gut barrier leak too, and, obviously, overweight, obese increase LPS at least. So it it even gets to that question. What's the optimal calorie intake? Not necessarily calorie restriction, which could be, you know, I haven't even gone into that space because we have a lot of evidence there as well. It's one of those dietary patterns which we've known for thirty years as a big geroscience protective one. And we've seen it there as well that there's a link between your calories consumption, but the challenge there is when we're actually recommending it to people. We don't want the decline to be in your protein intake. It can geriatricians are very hesitant to recommend it because we don't want to increase your frailty because you already see malnutrition and a loss of appetite as you get older. I wish I had the answer to your question on exactly how much. A lot of the data that we get is there are a number of downsides, so what I've shown you self reported data. There is a bias there where people could be over reporting. The best way to answer that would actually be an intervention trial. The challenge with nutrition based intervention trials is, again, we can recommend, but and and that's why I said there we are moving towards that of the supplementation because they're easier. I showed you one study of the Mediterranean one. That's the only study we have at the moment in humans. There are a lot of these mice studies because there we can actually control the amount you eat, which is much harder to do in humans. Or or the others area that I said earlier on, we're working on physical activity. There, it's easier because now with, you know, with the tracking devices, we can actually track the amount you're doing, which is not as straightforward for your dietary based approaches. If we give you supplements, it's more straightforward that we definitely know you're consuming them, and we can tell you. And and maybe branching I hear you on that. That's a huge limitation of academic studies. Even in a controlled feeding study, if it's for, like, a three month period, you have to give them all the food and then hope they eat it all. They eat it all. Stay stay in the study. It's just so many, variables. But even it's so that same idea with the precise amount in terms of calories for also exercise. Right? So too low, potentially worse to cut barrier function too much in extreme endurance athletes. Right? So then it gets to what's the optimal dose there. Right? So, there's so many variables. And so even too with the fiber amounts, you know, it's it's like, is it a specific so, you know, based on someone's microbiome, they may have a specific, you know, preference for degrading certain soluble fibers relative to others. So if you supplement them with the quote, unquote wrong fiber, maybe you'll see no effect or even in a negative effect. Right? So what are your thoughts on, like, how much soluble fiber, how much insoluble? Like, what's that what's that balance for optimizing gut barrier function? At the moment, when it comes to human studies, we don't know the answer to that because all the evidence that we have and how much dietary fiber you're consuming, people don't understand the soluble and insoluble. They can answer very basic questions on exactly so even if you look at the food frequency questionnaire, it goes down to, like, how many carrots are you consuming per week. And then we have to work on the type of fiber intake or the act on, like, simple questions. Are you doing your five a day or now seven a day? And yes or a no. What the answer to the other one, which ones we know it is all based on in lab settings. So what I didn't show here was that, like, for example, in labs, we have these in vitro models where we can take your t cells, for example. We do this very often out from older adults, and then we culture them with whether it's your metabolites. We can culture them with the bacteria itself. We can culture them with the bacteria supernatants, which has the metabolites, or we have done a lot of assays where we have cultured them with different, of these, bisaccharides, nondigestible ones. There as well, the answer is atoms of combination is the best approach, but this is all in vitro. To translate that in vivo is where where the gap is at the moment. We do a lot of work in that space where the other thing I told you was there's a for example, the vaccine responses, which whether probiotics can have improved vaccine response or not. There's a lot of negative literature, a lot of positive literature. What we don't know is all of them are focused on one species, different dosages. In vitro, what we have seen is that maybe you need six or eight of those species, high dosages combination. And not just and not just those pal polysaccharides, but, polyphenols. And the polyphenols. Maybe even lactate because lactate can be converted into short chain fat acids. So it's like the whole the whole gamut. Right? Maybe a holistic approach where rather than the supplements because this is a question we get asked so often, which supplement should we have? And I'm not if you could avoid that and exercise and eat healthy, you might not need the supplements. So it's more of a holistic approach or the other aspects we keep forgetting is, stress. We've seen how that can have such a negative impact, and it's normally the people who are stressed that they're not eat eat eating well or not exercising as well. So I think what we need to maybe move away from all of the supplementation towards a more holistic approach. With specific, I I just would wanna take that to an even higher level of what's the greater specificity. So how how much stress can you tolerate before the system starts to break if you actually had that quantified? Yeah. People could, you know I mean, granted, emotional and phys psychological, psychological stress is tough too. Right? Sometimes it just hits, like, right up. But but the rest for calories and physical activity can be titrated. Right? So What, this was my, PhD actually where I was looking at the effects of physical and psychological stress on immune, system of older adults, where we were looking at them. So one of the most common surgeries you see in older adults is hip fractures. They have osteoporosis. They fracture the hips. And what we will look what was very surprising, I never thought of the psychological aspect of aging before that. What you see is that thirty percent of the people of the older adults who are having hip fracture surgeries go on to develop depression, though they have no history of any, depressive disorders. And, this could be possibly due to loss of independent living. If a young person has a fracture, fracture, they recover in a month. We followed on our cohorts even six months after a hip fracture surgery, and what you see is their physical functioning hasn't returned. They're no longer able to live independently. They're living now in more care homes, and they start developing depression. And what we saw there was that, the physical stress of a surgery was not actually impacting your immune system, but with the psychological stress. And there's a lot of other literature also supporting this. There have been studies that have looked at bereavement studies or the effect of caregiving stress. And where what we have seen there is if it's not the amount, it's more the duration of the stress. Acute stress is actually possibly good for you. So if you have the stress of getting you to work on time with the stress before an examination, it's almost like it gives your immune system a boost. But the chronic stress, we know that's the one that's actually detrimental to your immune health as well. So one of the common when I go back to the holistic approach, we keep telling people to socialize, go out, especially those who live alone or live independently. We've also done a study looking at dietary intake of individuals comparing those who live alone versus with a partner. So that's the other challenge as well. When you're living alone, you're not possibly cooking as much and rely more on the prepared meals. So it could possibly all be coming as a package. All great points. Especially, it got me thinking that someone who just an older adult who went in for hip surgery and then may have some depression around that. Now the emphasis must be, you know, we've gotta get you rehabilitated. We've gotta get your physical function back on track so that can alleviate some of that psychological stress to get them back on the road going upwards as opposed to downward. So so going back to the biomarkers, so, in terms of vaccine titers, right, so, technically, wouldn't we need to look at in the immunological signature of many different microbial triggers. Right? So I guess influenza, maybe even COVID, CMV, viruses, even even fungi. Right? So I don't know that it's practical to do that individually. Right? I'd have to I'd have to have 10 different right? So would looking at IgG, plasma levels of IgG, as a broad readout of antigenic, stimulation be what would you think about that as a marker of microbial burden? The reason we do it is relatively straightforward to do. It's one of the ones that we can do. We can do big studies. But if you want to go to the specific ones, to just give you an idea there, we will be looking at your b cells. For example, we have assays in the lab where you can stimulate the b cells with different antigens and then actually look at the amount of antibody they're pro producing. The other thing that's really important more than the amount is the quality. So looking at the actual pathogenicity, and those assays to give you an idea are so time consuming. It can take us up to a week to get the answer for one participant. And that's why we don't end up doing it for a lot of the studies that people keep relying on those titers. It's it's it's it's as easy as measuring your cytokine levels. It gives you the answer. Would that be total IgG, or what what biomarker would that So that what we have looked at, you can look at total IgG as well, but we have looked at eight here in on our study. We split it down to the components. So, the reason we do influenza the most it's the easiest one to do. People here in The UK will provide us are offered every September the annual flu vaccine, so it's a relatively straightforward one to do. And there, it's usually composed of three different antigens that come together, so we can even look at those specific ones. At times, looking at those specific ones is much better. So what we saw, for example, is you only see an increase in the titular h one n one component of your vaccine, not the other ones, and that's the most important and the biggest one. Alright. Interesting. So, I'm sure you know, but, like, pneumonia is top five cause of death in centenarians. Right? So, I I think what I hear you saying is if you could identify where in your immune system it's weak against antigen antigen production, you could potentially pinpoint that and then look at strategies to optimize it. Because if your total IGG is quote, unquote normal. Right? I mean, but you've got a deficit in a specific, you know, influenza, antigen expression. Right? And that's what hits you at a 105 years old. Well, probably that's the end. Right? So, but then it's it's a matter of trying to figure out which part of your b cells would be defective, and you'd have to go down that list of continuously searching. The the other thing is it's not only that we have a a lot of these vaccines that are currently available were actually designed on young people. They're not even designed to work on older adults. And a big drag we have at the moment was when the pandemic hit the COVID nineteen and you know older adults were getting vaccine first, we always had this hesitation that but they don't respond that well to vaccines and what was really surprising is that actually, these new mRNA technology, older adults are responding very well to those mRNA vaccines. So now there's a big drive where a lot of these companies are actually redesigning their vaccines. Influenza vaccines have been redesigned based on the similar technology. And what the hope is actually what I'm talking about that you have a defective response, we could possibly correct that. So that's something already under the way. A lot of these companies are now designing supplements where you can add them on with your vaccines to improve the response, which again seems like a simple thing to do. We did a study in which we were trying to look at the time of the day differences between your vaccine responses. That is it better if you have a vaccine in the morning as compared to the afternoon? There have been studies that have looked at, again, physical activity. There was one study that showed that if you go for a walk a thirty minute walk just before your vaccination, you have a better response because it mobilizes your immune cells into circulation. But the the the complication here is when you mentioned pneumonia, there's one thing is that we have to defect to your pneumonia vaccines. In neutrophils, which are the most important cells that help fight with that, that's a totally different space where we see defects there with age as well, and there are number of interventions targeting that. So if you want to get rid of the deaths caused due to pneumonia, do you want to improve the vaccine responses, or do you want to improve the neutral functioning? That actually in the first place, I'll fight it off. And that's why we don't have a simple answer because there are different interventions to do different things. So whether we need, again, a combination approach, finding out maybe those individuals who are at higher susceptibility of time due to pneumonia. Nice. That was great. So alright. So bringing it back to fiber. Mhmm. So, you know, most studies, the quote unquote high fiber diet is even I think 40 grams or so is the upper limit in your study. But, you know, there are a few but not many studies going above fifty grams per day. And even epidemiologically, I think there was an NHANES study that showed, you know, up to 50. It was, like, a pretty close to linear association with increased lean mass, increased grip strength. So what do you what are your thoughts about the optimal fiber dose? Like, if if you have the most highly motivated person, especially the optimal fiber dose with the goal of optimizing not just immune health, but systemic function. Right? You've got gut brain, gut kidney, gut immune. So what would you I don't know if you track fiber intake, but what would you like to see as as an optimal fiber intake for health? There's there's a difference between optimal and achievable. The op the evidence at the moment suggests that possibly your forty grams a day will be the optimal one. The challenge we face is how achievable is it. When you said the highly motivated people, they might already been doing this. So at times what we, the challenge we face is, if you tell or do I tell that that's what you should be doing, forty grams, we do a lot of these, talks to them as well. What does that mean? We still don't know what that in a plate looks like. What does a 40 grams a day look like? How much of it should be cooked? How much of it needs to be raw? What happens when you cook it? If you are not having the forty grams a day, can we supplement it with some prebiotics? So I should say it is achievable. I've been on at least 80 per day. I weigh all my food. I've done that for ten years, and I did it in part because of the data on optimizing gut barrier function. But for me, there is an upper limit where when I've gone to a 130 grams, and this is on 2,100 calories per day. This isn't on 4,000 calories per day. Right? So the the the fiber to calorie ratio, very high. Also, I will know no, no supplemental fiber. This is high vegetable diet. Right? So, and we published, you know, a similar version of that diet in in aged mice versus, standard chow. But, anyway, so so it is it is achievable, but I hear you on the deficits. Most people don't wanna eat very high fiber. They barely get 20 grams if even that. Yep. Yep. But the other benefit you have with all of these raw fibers is and that's why I said it goes back. It's not only all these vegetables. It's not only providing you with the dietary fibers. It provides you the polyphenols, the phytochemicals, and they all also have new modulating properties. So maybe the benefit that you're seeing is not only due to the dietary fibers. A lot of the foods that you're talking about are also then rich in so for example, if you're having spinach, it's not only rich in dietary fiber, zinc as well, or your iron as well. So it provides you with more than that because we've we've also done a recent study in which we provided auto idlers with eight different supplements, which didn't have the right to file both, but it had your phytochemicals, it had your polyphenols, and we actually saw no effect on the inflammatory status. We did not look at immune health. And that got us to think as well that, again, should we possibly try a more well approach like you you're saying with actually the dietary changes rather than the supplementations? Because the other thing people forget is one of the drawbacks where whenever I show this data about, you know, like, the postbiotics, it's really promising. Then why do we need to restore gut health? Let's just have them metabolite. The downside there is the minute you stop those supplements, the benefit's gonna go away. No one actually does those studies to show you that, Whereas if we are and there's a reason why we still want to do the fecal transfer. There's evidence showing that after one round of transfer, even a year after that, your microbiome health is still maintained. That that's interesting because wouldn't you imagine that transplanting someone else's, poop, you would need the stimulus as the prebiotics to keep whatever those microbiome changes would be. But if they don't have that, it should just go away. So There have been few studies that have they're not been done in healthy older adults. There's still have no studies, but but there have been studies in c difficult and now IBD patients as well showing that that even after one year, you maintain the barrier integrity, you maintain the composition, all of those beneficial metabolites that we're talking about are still maintained. And that's why we we want to keep revisiting that concept. A lot of pharma companies now are working towards, generating polybiotic supplements, which have a lot of these rather than, you know, the one in your yogurt drinks. Or they have also been now a lot of interest in possibly generating pills, these fecal microbiota pills that they can just orally take rather than endoscopically as, again, as a more holistic approach of restoring that microbiome health. But I absolutely hear you that had they compared those people who supplemented with the dietary fibers versus those who don't, maybe we would have seen even more of a benefit there. Yeah. And even even optimizing gut health, it just very tricky. Right? So for example, you mentioned the metabolites. Right? So what what are your thoughts about metabolomics? So for example, like, indoxyl sulfate, pericrystall sulfate, these are basically, bad bad back bad bad bacteria metabolites that cause all kinds of damage everywhere, you know, kidney, muscle, heart, etcetera. And they're associated with fecal pre fecal pH. So when fecal pH becomes more alkaline, which increases during aging, there's an increased production of these metabolites. Right? So then the question is, is fiber and polyphenols, or what is the best strategy to truly acidify the colon and resist that age related change? So how how you know, what were you what would your thoughts be on optimizing acidification of the colon and even in gut barrier function? Because if you have acidification, probably you have gut better gut barrier function. To answer that question, what we need is actually actually to understand even at the moment, what we don't understand firstly is what a healthy microbiome looks like. If you ask me that question, we don't even have a clear cut answer. We know there is it's it's, again, not about just the different compositions for the diversity, the resilience. What we don't understand is how completely especially in humans, we started to understand this in mice where how the composition differs across your colon, different areas of your colon. A lot of times, I think your intervention studies don't work is if they don't have the habit, the capsules in the right pH, that it only need it needs to survive your stomach pH and then go into the gut. It's not gonna colonize, so you're not gonna see any benefit. So we still need to understand there's some evidence in mice not actually showing, and this was this lovely study. We've been talking so much about your bacteria. We still don't understand your fungal microbiome, how it changes, and they showed that higher fungal composition is different across your colon because the pH changes. So that's that's still and a lot of these questions, we can still answer in vitro settings. We now have these in vitro gut models, really good models that are used as screening, methods in which you can put in these fibers and you can change the pH and try and answer all of these questions. Yeah. That sounds like the way. Would you place major what would you place more emphasis on? Fecal short chain fatty acids as a potential positive stimulus for remodeling the gut and getting away from dysbiosis. Right? Because I'm sure you know where if you've got high short chain fatty acid producing bacteria, you've got the high short chains, you got acidification, and that can limit the growth of, like, enterobacteria, and then all of the negative products say so would you focus more on fecal short chains in their production or downstream of fecal pH? Which would be more important within the context of optimizing the gut? When it comes to optimizing the gut, I think it's a balance of both. The reason why in my data, I've been showing stalking more about the SCFAs is because from an immune health perspective, they're more important because they can direct place. So we very often get asked this question about, like, your gut immune access. How can something sit in your microbiome impact your systemic immunity? Because your immune system directly responds to these SCFAs. Our immune cells have receptors that actually recognize that. And once you bind them, we've there's evidence now. We've done our own study showing that their transproptomic changes. A lot of these features of aging, like senescence, it can be downregulated once they interact with them. The production of inflammatory cytokines, the biggest evidence that we have of our SCFA lies in that if your t cells come in contact with them, they start producing l ten, anti inflammatory in nature. That's why they've gained so much attention in your IVD models, for example. Rheumatoid arthritis. There was a study in mice two years ago showing that those, and then they translated that to humans as well, that you see, with your rheumatoid arthritis, for example, you see different stages of the disease. During the remission stage where the disease is resolving, you'll see more of these anti inflammatory regulatory t cells emerging, regulatory b cells emerging, and that's directly linked to your SCN phase because the levels of those increase. So from an immune health perspective, they are definitely more interesting. But from a gut health perspective, I think in the balance of both of them. Yeah. So the other side, just to play that so I agree with I can hear you. Everything you said, that's great. The other side of that is fecal pH. So bacterial enzymatic activity. For example, ergothione, which is neuroprotective, and it can be degraded into trimethylamine and then TMAO. Yep. Irbethionase, its activity increases as fecal pH increases. Right? So the fecal p the fecal short chain fatty acids is great, but there are some studies where you get an increase in the short chains, but no change in fecal pH, which still to me is mind boggling. Right? I don't know how that's possible. But, that that's the side of it that I see where if there isn't enough col colonic acidification that, you get an increase in bacterial enzymatic activity of these things that can produce these deleterious metabolites, that can potentially, you know, in in the case of erythionine, impact the balance between neurodegeneration and neuroproduction. So what are your what are your what are your thoughts there? The the, other thing there is that there also now there's evidence that it has immune, modulatory properties as well. So it can go either way. Tamau, for example, has also been shown to have detrimental effects on your cardiovascular health. It can, increase the process of atherosclerosis if it migrates to your coronary arteries as well. But, when it comes to the balance, actually, I don't think we'd really have the answer on why that's happening. It would be and that's why I said we need to go back to our in vitro models. I'm aware of one study that actually used that colon models where, I read about how they were using different compositions of the back of the different dietary fibers and how they were trying to see how it modifies your pH and pattern integrity. And I think they haven't published that those findings yet. I've heard it at the conference. They had some ideas into that space, so I'd I'd possibly look out for that paper. But they tried to answer both the questions because now what we have done is we have tried to test their composition of this prebiotics as an intervention study to see whether in addition to restoring gut health, can it also restore immune health? There is one study that's published that I know of that looked at in vitro, a head to head comparison. And I think inulin, in terms of the fee the fecal pH reduction, inulin came out on top. But the the the tricky part there is, I'm sure you know the Sonnenberg lab. They recently did a, an intervention where they gave high dose inulin. And, the the doses were ten, twenty, and thirty grams per day. And the twenty gram per day didn't have a problem with an elevation in liver enzymes, but three of the eighteen people in their intervention group had elevated ALT in response to that thirty grams of inulin per day. So then it gets the, but I hear you. That that's a great point about, in vitro fecal fermentation models as as a yeah. As an answer to understand what's going on there, it's very difficult to do it in human models because then I think you need to go into the nitty pities of the people who weren't responding. Were there any underlying conditions? I'm assuming that, their BMIs were similar. Medication use medication use. Use. Or the other question that remains, unknown is the gender is there any sexual dimorphism in this? We always see females live longer. So the one aspect that we are very interested is is there possibly because they maintain healthier guts? That could be one of the answers. Or so that's why that's the other thing I'm always interested in whether there's a sexual dimorphism in that space as well. So much to study. Right? Alright. So how study. And that's the problem when we do these small intervention studies with 18 people. It's very difficult to dissect out the reason for the heterogeneity. And then the time, like, because, you know, get the grant, write the paper, don't have really the time to really take it apart and dissect it. Right? So Well, no. Unfortunately, but that's one of the downside of academic research where we have a lot of questions we would like to look into. It just, finding the funding and time to do it. Yeah. Alright. But this one would have been in parallel to do all of it. So, you know, you have a dietary intervention study. You have a supplementation study, prebiotics, combination of both of them and see actually which one works the best. Definitely. Yeah. So now curveball. Right? So, there's a big emphasis on, like or a segment of people who don't eat fiber at all, and they claim or they feel subjectively that their gut health is better. You know, so carnivore or animal based diets. So I know in animal models, you know, taking fiber out, it's terrible for the animals. I mean, they gain weight. Metabolic diseases is horrendous, but these are on, you know, either standard chow or purified diets. And I'm not here to promote anything. You know? I'm just trying to play the other side of the equation. So it's always it's always somewhat confused me how someone can take fiber completely out, eat no vegetables, no fruit, just meat, animal products. So how are they potentially optimizing gut health for relatively long periods of time? What would you hypothesize? Because I don't think there are any published studies either. No. And and and at times, we've tried to interview centenarians about what they did to possibly live the longest, and the take home message was there was never take healthy aging advice from the centenarians. There have been people who have been, if you know the the longest living individual, this French lady, Jean Mapache, she said that, her success to living so long where she had a chocolate every day, she was having a glass of wine every day. I would try and sell that around the polyphenols still, but it doesn't make sense. And there, I would say possibly it's a combination of your genetic factor and your lifestyle choices. Genetic component is only 30%. We can't modify that, but there's still evidence saying that 70% is lifestyle driven. We'd have to wait and see how long these individuals live and possibly not even how long I would be concerned about what kind of conditions they start developing past middle age. Because, as I said, there are no studies we would never ethically be able to actually do this to totally deplete, you know, dietary fibers for someone's diet to see what happens. You can possibly do it in animal model, but it's got to have detrimental effects because, I've only been talking about one aspect about the immune health, but it plays an important role in everything ranging from your cardiovascular health to your cognitive health to we have lots of evidence now actually linking it to your longevity as well. Yeah. So yep. Yeah. So I would be maybe they're not there's a difference between not feeling it that they got showing any symptoms, but you have to follow them on longer to see actually what what happens. I would be very hesitant to take such advice. Or Yeah. For sure. For sure. But, I mean, there's a large segment of people that feel subjectively that they feel better, you know, cutting it out. You know? So so wait. So I looked into it in, strict carnivores in, like, cheetahs and tigers. Right? Because they're so there are animals in the wild who eat no fiber, which goes back to this idea of how and, you know, I'm just more interested in it from the academic point of view. Like, how could any animal exist without fiber? So, there's one study that I know of where they fed cheetahs whole rabbit or just meat, and eat feeding the whole rabbit actually led to an increase in fecal short chain fatty acids similar to fructooligosaccharides compared with only eating the meat. So they hypothesized that things like cartilage could be could act as a prebiotic, not less so, you know, the hair, bones, and skin. So I don't know. What what would you think? Or or the other thing, if you're having the whole one, I'm thinking that your microbiome is being transferred as well. It's it's almost like a fecal transfer. Alright. Yeah. So the other thing we actually see is, if you put mice together in cages, they eat each other's poops. Yeah. So you don't even actually have to do a fecal transfer. You can just take an aged mice. There have been studies that have done that, and they just put them in the cages of young mice. And because they eat the young, poop, you already start seeing a benefit in everything that we're talking about. The fecal health is better. They're living longer. So that that answers the question that if you're having the whole rabbit, you're possibly transferring the whole microbiome as well in there. Interesting. Yeah. I'm assuming some of it is getting colonized rather than the meat on its own, whereas the meat can possibly give you some fatty acids. But Or worse if it's infected meat, e coli, or whatever, salmonella, whatever it may be. Right? Yep. Yep. Could could it also be that there are you know, so the pancreas secretes bicarbonate, which can affect the colonic pH. I mean, granted, maybe more upstream in the small intestine, but I'd imagine a large bolus would end up getting right? So could it be that for people who are eating no fiber and, again, just purely from an academic point of view question. Right? So could it be that maybe the pancreas would secrete less bicarbonate, may thereby shifting the balance to a more acidic I don't know. It it could be because the other thing, one of the other metabolites that we haven't touched upon is that your microbiome can convert all of these bile acids, the primary bile acids into secondary bile acids. The reason we haven't touched upon it that much is because we still don't completely understand the function of the secondary bile acids. But there's now some evidence that a few of them are actually anti inflammatory in nature. So if we go back to your inflammatory conditions, IBD being the one where we have the maximum amount of evidence, there is link between your liver bile acid production and how healthy your gut health is because that's another metabolite that's not gained that much attention that our microbiome is actually even converting all of those bile acids that the liver is producing into beneficial secondary bile acids as well. Do you know which of the secondary bile acids, would be potentially pro inflammatory? Do you remember the Not the pro inflammatory ones, but there's a little recent evidence from, the cholic acids that if you convert them into secondary ones, it's anti inflammatory. That's the one I Has anybody has anybody looked at a head to head match up? Because their acids bile acids are acids. Right? So I don't know what their p k a is, but relative to the acetate, propionate, and butyrate, has there ever been a head head to head matchup? No. Not that I can not that I'm aware of. As I said, the reason why we keep talking about the SCFA is because it's the most well studied and characterized ones. I'm not claiming that they're the best ones. It's just the other metabolites, we haven't really looked into them as much. Like, I I what piqued my interest is when you're talking about the egothela, for example. We know that it produce a metabolite called urolithin a, which is very beneficial. Beneficial. There has been a study in humans, older adults, that if you give them a supplementation of urolithin a, three different dosages, I think it was at the highest one that you can improve the muscle functioning because it targets one of the other hallmarks, which is it improves mitochondrial health. And we are very interested in now seeing whether it has the similar effects. Can it improve mitochondrial health in your T cells or immune system as well? So as I said, there are other ones as well. They might be just as good, but we just no one's ever done a parallel comparison on they're not even as well characterized. You can find maybe one or two studies on other metabolites, whereas I can tell you hundreds of studies of these SCFAs. Yeah. It makes the atoms a bit difficult where we we try to do this in vitro where we want to do a, you know, side by side comparison. It's that time hard because there's so many of them, and then there are different dosages as well. And even some, as you mentioned, some of the secondary bile acids may be pro inflammatory and others may be anti inflammatory. So if you're giving the whole mix Yeah. You may be losing. Yeah. Even short chain fatty acids, they can be pro inflammatory as well. It depends on the dosages. Or would it be even the specific, because propionate, for example, is, produced by, or can be produced not just by fiber fermentation, but branch chain amino acid degradation. And if you've got, you know, a deficit in absorbing amino acids in into the blood, right, now you've got more of them reaching the large intestine, and then you know amino acid fermentation in the colon is, you know, potentially branch chain fatty acids bad for health. Right? So if you have an increase in propionate, would that be one of them where it's too much being bad? So what we're seeing with propionate is if we look at butyrate and acetate, they are definitely more anti inflammatory than propionate. Propenate can go either ways, and that depends on the concentrations that we have used, at least in a lab setting, which makes it a bit complicated. And and then what we try to do is also use them all three in combination. And what we see in at least in our context is butyrate alone is just as good as all three in combination. Butyrate alone is Butyrate alone. But it's in the lowest concentration relative to the other two. So that's the trick. Depends on what's the lowest concentration as well. Even our lowest concentration is not similar to your serum concentrations. Our serum concentrations are even lower. If we try and match them up, we hardly see anything, which makes it a bit more complicated. Our lower concentration is definitely lower than your colon concentrations, but it's, there are very few studies that have that have actually even looked at serum concentrations of these metabolites. We have done them. We have the answers for those. That declines with age as well. But if we try and absolutely match it, a lot of the effects are gone. And that's why I said it's it's just so difficult to answer these questions, the dosages, the concentration, the duration exposure. There's so many unknowns. So I have a few more questions. Hopefully, I can bombard you with a few more if that's okay. Yeah. Go for it. So cholesterol, is potentially bad for, in one of your papers, you showed that it's potentially bad for, immune immune health, immune functioning. Right? So it total cholesterol levels are low in youth, and then they peak at midlife, and then they come down, so they follow an inverse u. So could it be that cholesterol's age related increase to midlife is related to a declining immune system, and it acts to detoxify things like LPS, which it's known to detoxify? What what are your thoughts there? There are a number of different things, but the other thing we know is that your cholesterol can directly impact your immune cells. So very similar to your short chain fatty acids. We have receptors that actually respond or to if we go down, like, omega three fatty acids, the beneficial one, but we have polyunsaturated fatty acids as well. They're more pro inflammatory in nature. There have been evidence not showing that if I even culture, your immune cells with these cholesterols, it can actually induce transcriptomic changes. If I go back to the thing where I was telling you when we are selecting people for our studies, they're very strict on, the type of medications they're on. Statins, which is one of the most common drugs older adults on, anti inflammatory. What we've seen is they're actually their immune system is better. So this is more like unpublished findings, but there was a study that happened in our institute. I I it it was not one of our studies that actually compared survival of pneumonia patients in the hospital. So we're based in the Queen Elizabeth Hospital. It's one of the biggest ones in The UK. And what they found very surprisingly was that older adults who are admitted in the hospitals on statins had a better chance of survival as compared to those who weren't. And that was some evidence there hinting, and what we have seen again is statins is definitely, the other thing is cholesterol it can what we wanna what we wanna think about it is, a, I will talk about the direct effect that it has on immune cell. There's a microenvironment effect as well. We often ask this question that is it intrinsic or microenvironment? If I take an h t cell and put it into a young mice, we can't do this in humans, we can do it in mice, does it change? It does. So the other big aspect we have to consider is your microenvironment. At times, a proinflammatory microenvironment, which is often the case if you're having more cholesterol, could also be driving changes as well. So it's a double value that you have there. Yeah. So the, statin use in older adults makes sense because, right, so cholesterol level so immune system declines towards the end of life. So I can see I can see the scenario where, the net effect of cholesterol within that content so if cholesterol has immune enhancing properties, yeah. Hang hang on. I have It mostly has proinflammatory properties. So one of the ways, one of the off target effects of statins is not only lowers cholesterol, but it's also anti inflammatory in nature. That's one of the complexities of these drugs then have always have multiple targets, and we reap on the benefits that it has more than one of these effects. One of the other things is lowering our cholesterol rose inflammation. There's evidence that statins can even lower your l six levels, for example. We have evidence that a pro inflammatory environment actually can be driving a lot of these features. I was talking to you, for example, about thymic aging. One of the other reasons I showed there was disorganization. A more proinflammatory environment also drives that. We always have more inflammation in your thymus that's aged. And that could also be, like, you know, providing the environment. It's not giving the right kind of signals where your t cells develop as well. So that's one of the biggest things where we know why obese people, they have more inflammation. They age faster, the immune system particularly is aging faster, and then there have been these FMT studies in obese mice as well. They try and see whether it's down to their gut health or the microbiome. If you can transfer microbiome, which is healthier, and, there's certain species that have been recognized as well with obesity that if you have higher abundance of those, you're likely to be more obese. And there's evidence beneficial evidence there as well that if you transfer this, you can reduce the obesity levels. So it it has multiple targets there with targeting your inflammation and having direct effects as well that could explain that. So the smaller effect then would be cholesterol's detoxification impact on LPS. Right? Because LPS But then the larger effect of the statin use is that cholesterol, even if it's it is detoxifying LPS, statin use in in that context is potentially good. But then, that that that's kind of a similar, segue into the adiposity. Right? So adiposity also follows this inverse you during aging, peak, and then decline. And fat cells can produce antimicrobial peptides. So is some of that increase, related to the declining immune system up to midlife, to help the immune system, and then it just can't even you know, the adiposity continues as the immune system declines towards the low you know, the end half of that u. So do you have any thoughts on that? Find them. It's actually more evidence we have is that the adiposity has a negative effect on the immune system. So, if I was I was talking about the hormones of aging, and I was introduced the concept of senescence that are pro inflammatory cells. When we talk about the inflammation concept, your aging immune system built up of senescent t cells is one factor. The biggest contributor there is adiposity. If you have a higher BMI, you have more inflammation levels. The reason being your senescent cells are producing that. The biggest home for your senescent cells is the adipose tissue. That's where they go. That's where they proliferate. They really like that macroenvironment. So there's a lot of evidence on the contrary that increased adiposity, and it comes in as a package. It's mostly due to reduce physical activity, poor health, a more calorie rich diet. And, there, what you start seeing is that this adiposity is actually contributing towards the accelerated immune aging. It has absolutely no there's no evidence that it could have a protective vector. Yeah. I'm just I'm suggesting that, potentially, it's the weakened immune system first. And then well, granted, that a poor lifestyle and all the things. And then part of the compensatory reaction is to increase adiposity to try to compensate with increase in antimicrobial peptides, caphlicidin, for example. But, clearly, you've already got a suboptimal immune system. The an increase in adiposity to try to combat that, but then that's even worse. Right? So That's even worse because there have been studies in animal models, and what they've shown is that if you take a mouse and you put them on this high fat diet, you actually, if not necessarily aging the future, but what we start seeing is built up of more differentiated immune cells. And what the the sad story there is that if you make these mice lose weight and then you put them on a chore diet, what we see is that imprinting of the immune cells, They actually don't go back even after you've lost that weight. It's a very depressing message where we haven't, it's almost like there's no point losing the weight. But that's what we know in mice models that even, these obese mice, it causes imprinting due to these signals. There have been experiments that have shown that you can culture your immune cell with all of these different peptides as well. And the programming that it does is these are called epigenetic changes, and they are imprinted then. So even if you if the mice lose the weight, the immune system doesn't go back to what it was before they got gained the weight. So wouldn't the answer be, you know, stay lean? Yes. Stay lean and not not, you know, succumb to the agent? The hypothesis would make sense. We don't know why that is. One hypothesis with the, you know, the epigenetic changes. But what you're proposing also makes sense that yeah. So what what's next for your lab? Do you have studies that, you know, you're in progress, yet to publish, that you wanna share with that you're working on? So one of the key spaces that we're working on, as I said, we're doing a lot of screening for different metabolites. One of the ones that I should told you about is the butyrate. So I think that's gonna be the paper that comes out soon where we're showing that it has a lot of these xenomorphic properties. So a big area of the aging space is currently focused on the senolytics, senotherapeutics, where the senolytics are those drugs that can actually kill senescent cells. But there's a lot of evidence now that we have the xenomorphics that can reduce these SaaS features that we see. And what we're showing is that butyrate is one potential xenomorphic, and, we've got a lot of in vitro evidence and some animal evidence there as well. So what we want to do is in and plan for this year was possibly start with an intervention trial where we want to compare, you know, a postbiotic with the, probiotic and see if we could actually reverse a lot of these features. We are also keen on finding new ones. The other area that we're working on earlier and said was physical activity. That's an area where we've actually done a longitudinal study. This is in collaboration with King's College London where we look at a very interesting cohort of cyclists that were very, very so we started study back in 2010. And these are very healthy people. To give you an idea, they were doing, like, 700 kilometers per month, very, very physically active. They showed none of these features of high mic agent that I've been talking to you about. If you looked at their piece of output, it was actually better sometimes than the young people. We'll compare them with sedentary. So that makes you again think about intrinsic versus lifestyle driven aging. But now when we follow them on nearly nine years later on, what we've seen is a lot of heterogeneity. So which started off as a very healthy group. Some of them have now developed underlying conditions. Some of them are still excellent exercising at most, some aren't. And now we are also assessing microbiome features in this cohort as well to see how much of the microbiome is also contributing alongside the diet. So that should help us answer the question of the holistic approach of the diet versus exercise and some of the longitudinal aspects as well because there, as I said, we've seen heterogeneity, so we're trying and dissecting out those changes that, you know, if you lose that amount of physical activity, which you've done most of your life, can you still reap those benefits? So that raises a couple of questions for me is, first, so exercise is well known to increase short chain fatty acid, levels in the colon. So I'd imagine that the the hypothesis would be that, the the cyclists who are better able to maintain their immune function, maybe they have higher or maintain fecal short chains? They should have fecal and lower levels of leakage as well? That's the hypothesis at the moment. Would we necessarily need leakage? Would which which precedes which comes first? Is it the leak of things like LPS, or is it the dysbiosis, and then metabolites like endoxyl sulfate, pericryl sulfate, TMAO? Like, which would you expect to happen first? The metabolites found in the blood or LPS found in the blood? Excellent question. To answer that, what we need to do, and that's a big limitation at the moment, is we always assess young versus old. When I showed you by young, I mean, people below the age of 35. That's our cutoff, and old is 60, 65. What we are always forgetting is this big word in the middle called the middle aged, and what we need is properly possibly proper decades split studies to understand the dynamics. A lot of them, I I don't think changes are magically happening at 60 or at 65. Maybe it's at the 50, and that might be so that goes back to the question of when to intervene as well. When we do a lot of these intervention study, we have a lot of discussion. Is 60, 65 too late? Maybe if we target the middle age, 50 year old population, they might reap the most benefits as well. So it's an excellent question. It's been something we have been thinking about, but I think what we need is a proper decade split study to actually understand it that which comes first and in what context as well. Because the other area that we do a lot of work on is immune aging in biologically young people. We have published some work in trauma cohorts, for example, which could be 20 year olds who had a severe trauma in the ICU, and we've seen that even up to six months post discharge, they show accelerated features of immune aging. Or we've worked with, we've got a paper that's gonna come out soon in rheumatoid arthritis patients, and these are all biologically young people, but their immune system so a 30 year old RA patient could have the immune system of a six healthy six year old or a healthy 70 year old. And a lot of the intervention that we're talking about could have benefits there in those cohorts as well alongside the biological drugs or, therapies that they are put on. Is the sample size large enough to assess diet changes between the, you know, the for this one, it's a it's a big sample size. It's a study that was done on 200 people. But what we wanted to do is look at them across different stages of the disease to answer that question that can so they're starting off from right when you just start having joint pain and have not developed the disease to see when does your immune aging features kick in. There's a lot of evidence that this t cell senescence, for example, is a contributor towards the inflammation. And we wanted to answer that question that, again, is it a contributor, or is it a reason because of the proinflammatory environment that's causing the accumulation? And there, we think the answer is it is a contributor. But we've only been able to do that because we have people at different stages, 200 to answer that question. And maybe that's why we need bigger studies across different decades to answer the question where you were saying on which one comes, whether it's a environment that's causing it, or is it a contributor towards this? Definitely. Would you predict that people who had lower quality diets, less physical activity, then they probably were are gonna be at a higher risk for the faster immunological aging despite a young chronological age? Definitely. That's what's really important that, you know, there's the biological age, which is more meaningful than the chronological age, and we have shown evidence that your immunological age at times does not always necessarily correlate with your chronological age. We have shown that, for example, with these RA patients that there there's a mismatch between your chronological age and your immunological age, and that's here we know it's because of the disease. And this is even before they put on any medications. So then yeah. Yes. I was just gonna say I had a couple questions there too. Was butter versus fiber for butyrate production, how would you compare? It would be hard to back it up with scientific evidence without a goal for the fiber. But I know there are companies now that are trying to supplement their oils and butters with Butyrate. Butyrate. Yeah. I I think that's maybe one of the ways just to increase consumption. One of the challenges that we've had previously is when there have been very limited studies even looking at butyrate supplementation, it tastes really bad. Yeah. Yeah. So I think that is one way you could get around it to increase the consumption so you can get these oils that are not supplemented with butyrate. But the, the limitation there is they be should be completely absorbed into the blood bypassing any effects of the colon. So you're missing any potential, right, gut barrier function improving effects of fiber in that case relative to butter. Un unless and until it it just combat some of the cells in circulation and then we focus this back. That's the only way. But, again, it's not backed with any scientific evidence. Yeah. To show that it's gonna be beneficial. And then are there things that you do specifically in your own personal approach to optimizing gut health and immune function that, I I would still stick to more of the dietary changes. So, so for example, it's diversity. I try and stick to more towards, you know, the rainbow, consumption of different I we don't still understand completely about which vegetable or which fruit it is. So I try and stick to the approach of a rainbow approach where we try and have different ones, different, so for example, spinach, kale is something that I particularly enjoy as well. So I I've been able to do it over a long term. We also try and have a lot of fermented foods. And that's that's beneficial as well. Again, it's difficult to back this up with scientific evidence. It's very difficult to do clinical trials, but it's something I think long it's important to whatever lifestyle changes you're having that you can adhere to them long term, and that wouldn't be possible if it's something you don't enjoy. So we always I think about it like salads are the component of our meals, whether it's lunch or dinner, there is always a portion of salads there, and it's different things. It's not just adhering to one or two. We try and mix it up to make it a bit more interesting and different colors. So whether it's your beetroots, avocados, beans, adhering to all of them. Nuts nuts are also another big big source. Try and mix it up would be my advice or keep it, interesting. Try different recipes. So the fermented foods is a tricky one for me. So all that makes sense. That that's a big focus of the channel is is is as much dietary variety as possible, but then also biomarker tracking to make sure that that may be best for your immunological age, keeping levels of inflammation low. You know? So the fermented foods is a tricky one for me because evolutionarily, sure, you know, we found an apple tree and there's an apple on the floor and we ate it. Maybe it was fermented, but we didn't have food. So we're gonna have some fermentation products in our diet. Right? So I think when people think of gut health, they automatically jump to, well, I have yogurt, and I have kimchi or whatever it may be. But then for me, it's like evolutionarily, it makes sense that we were chewing on leaves and plants whenever we couldn't get meat or maybe it was both. Right? So, the diet was very high fiber. There is some published data on that. I think, Eaton's lab published, you know, the paleolithic. But then there the data is variable all over the place. Some societies only meet and then very high fiber diets on the other hand. So how do you square that circle between their two head to head matchup? You know, very high fiber diet, soluble fiber, insoluble versus fermented foods. Is it a little bit of fermented foods? Is it a lot? Like, how do you how do you balance those two two in the equation? The challenge with this is a lot of people don't actually like the taste of the fermented foods. Mhmm. So it's very difficult to implement, but the only evidence I could possibly hint of is if you look at the cultures of the scientists that actually consume these, not the maximum number of centenarians there. There's these Japanese populations where you see the maximum number of centenarians. There, they consume a lot of these diets, lot of the kimchi or the kefirs. But then the other thing is there's there's also a society that's very calorically restricted as well. So So it's difficult to tease out what might be, but that's the evidence that we have at the moment is that those population that do consume them are generally living longer, healthier, dying less of cardiovascular related conditions. So if you had to put a gram amount on fermented foods I mean, because they're not eating, you know, the majority of their diet from fermented foods, that can't be good. It's so much acid. It's so much and and that goes back to, again, personalized nutrition then. If you already have an irritable bowel syndrome, for for example, that could be really detrimental. It it it's more about what works best for you, and that's why sometimes the supplementation, as you said, doesn't always work for everyone. And that's why you might have the best clinical trial that's not yielded the result that you or you're not confirming your hypothesis. And it all comes down to that personalized approach where what is something that works for you and you can maintain on a long term basis and not just, you know, the three weeks or the three months and then stop it because I think that's where you're gonna lose the benefit. Anything that you can actually implement long term. Definitely. Alright. Well, thanks, Niharika. That was great. I'm looking forward to your lab's work. And, hopefully, we can have you back on the channel, you know, with study updates at some point in the, you know Oh, that would be lovely. Cool. Cool. Alright. Thanks, Niharika. And Thank you. Yeah. Ciao. Bye.