Hey, everyone. Today's guest is doctor Jack Gilbert, who is the director of the Microbiome and Metagenomic Center at the University of California at San Diego. Today, doctor Gilbert will will present work from his lab on optimizing the microbiome of the built environment as an underrated aspect of health. So with that, welcome, Jack, and let's get into the presentation. Yeah. Hi, Michael. Okay. So let me share my screen. Yeah. So, I thought I'd, give a brief presentation on how the work that we've been doing is is enabling us to understand, the microbial community in the environment that we most often live in. This is a social microbiome as it were because, we are social creatures or creatures of sociality. And, and that social interaction has probably been driven by our need to share microorganisms. So I hope to convince you of that fact. So we live in a microbial world. We are constantly being bombarded by microorganisms. Our skin, our lungs, our gut, our, any surface that's exposed or can be exposed to the outside world is being constantly engaged by microorganisms. They've been around for four point something billion years. We've only been around for five hundred million years. So our or everything you can see with your eyes, plants, animals, etcetera, grew up or evolved in the context of a rich and diverse microbial world. And so the microbes have always been trying to colonize our bodies to either eat us or to, form symbiotic relationships with us where, they, our bodies pump out things which they need and, they pump out things which we need. And the vast majority of microorganisms that are emitted from our body are quite beneficial. You will release around 30,000,000 bacterial cells into your immediate vicinity every hour. And this is, this is a basic understanding of what leads to a microbiome of a built environment. This, this system which we've grown to, adopt, if you will, this microbial, milieu that's constantly around us, a microbial dust cloud is controlled by our immune system. Our immune system is like a national park service or or maybe a gardener. It's there to basically manage the microbial community, which, lands on our skin, lands in our respiratory tract, lands, we swallow into our intestines or our urogenital system. It's there to manage that community, to manage it, to make sure that the bugs that we want and we need and are beneficial to our health survive and thrive, and the bugs that aren't, do not. So it's it's very much a selective system. We used to think of it more like an army. It's really not an army. It's much more like a, a, a gardener or a curator, making sure that the right bugs are there at all times. We now understand the microbial community to be one that's that's, oh, pardon me, one that's quite, socially driven. Right? So where do we get our microorganisms from? Well, we get them from the environment, from the environment around us when we are born, and we are exposed consistently to the bugs from the environment, as we grow. However, it's also from physical and social interactions between people. So a baby will get a lot of microbes from the mother, as well as some microbes from the father, and also from anybody the baby interacts with. And that microbial exchange, we believe, is vital to the ecological drive, the evolution of the microbiome inside and on that child. And then that constant interaction we have with people consistently shapes the microbial communities that live on and in our body. And we believe that many of the social behaviors which we and other animal species have evolved to, to have and and demonstrate now are actually to promote microbial transmission. So think of things like grooming or co feeding or mouth to mouth interactions, everything from kissing, to cross feeding, or maybe even nursing, the idea of suckling breast milk, and coprophagy in some mammalian species such as mice and rats that eat our own feces. And even nowadays, we are actively exchanging microbes for clinical purposes through things like fecal microbiome transplant or FMT that allows us to shift the beneficial microorganisms from one healthy person into a sick person. We ran a study, a few years ago now where we took 16,000 microbial samples, poop samples from nearly 600 baboons over a fourteen year period. We had students watching to wait for the baboons poop. They're running out and collecting that baboon poop and tagging who pooped it. And using this information, we're able to demonstrate that 97% of the bacteria that were present in any one of those animals were driven or associated with, their social interaction. If you will, they were they were in part, a hereditary experience because the vast majority of sociality is driven by familial connections, I. E. Your mother, your father, your sister, and brothers, etcetera. And so this interaction shapes that microbial transfer down the generations. But what we identified in these baboons was that shared bacteria were predominantly associated with things like fermenting fermenting dietary fiber or producing beneficial products that aid the health of the baboon. So the majority of the bacteria that were transferred due to the social interactions between these baboon populations were beneficial to the health. And their presence and abundance was predicted by that social group behavior, such as grooming between, a dominant female and a and a recessive female. We've seen the same thing in people. So in a study that we ran nearly fifteen years ago now, we were able to identify microbial transfer between people living in a home. So here we have, three people, a, a grown adult, living with his parents, in a home, and their feet, their noses, and their hands here in red and pink. We also have, two dogs that live in this house, three dogs, in fact. Their feet and noses are, found in this network diagram. Then we have, surfaces like the bedroom floor and the kitchen floor, which essentially allow for microbial transfer between feet, and then things like light switches and counters, which have a more hand based microbial transfer. We can watch, as we look to this environment over time. We can see the direct transmission of microbes in this space. And we can see that even we're sharing and interacting constantly with the microbes of dogs. In one study from, several of my colleagues, they demonstrated that a couple that have a dog in their home share more microbial similarity between each other, I. E. They are more microbially similar than couples that do not have a dog or couples even that have a baby. This suggests that the dog may be acting as a microbial transfer between people, allowing for more microbes to be shared with your partner. And we know that, dogs make excellent transmission vectors then, and People in the same household typically share around 12% of their gut microbial community. What does this mean? A lot of the time, being inside a building is allowing for physical interaction. So in this particular population, we had, a young couple who had a lodger, to save money on their apartment costs and living with them. And here we can see, when we look at all the microbial samples in this diagram, which is a principal coordinate plot, every single dot is a microbial community taken from one sample from an individual. And when we compare them, the, the young couple, who are in blue and red, are much more microbely similar to each other than they are to person three who is that lodger. And that is true for the hands and the feet. Often, the the samples over interact or are much more similar to each other in the hands and feet of the couple than they are of the, of the, the lodger. Interestingly, the nasal cavity is quite unique irrespective of who you are, probably because it's much harder to get physically interacting up your nostrils. So, this this dynamic means that when you live in a space, you are sharing microorganisms, of course, because you're breathing them in, they're interacting on your skin. But realistically, the biggest driver for microbial similarity is that physical interaction with another human being. And pathogens have learned to, if you will, take over these transmission pathways. Right? Pathogens come in and they they've taken over the beneficial transmission pathways of beneficial microorganisms, and they are they are the rare occurrences where an organism has learned how to, take advantage of those transmission pathways to infect you. And this is everything from viruses and bacteria and fungi, which we breathe in and breathe out into that built environment, or things like, bacteria, viruses, and fungi that we pick up on our skin and then we transmit back to the environment from our skin. And so these these are really important concepts to understand, and everyone who went through the COVID pandemic will understand that that breathing interaction was vitally important to the transmission of the pathogen, whereas picking up from surfaces, didn't appear to have much interaction. So figuring out even path pathology and, and epidemiology of bacterial, fungal, and viral pathogens, is a is important when we understand the communities of those environment. We can also see when we go into an environment that that colonization, that tracking of microbes over time is actually quite dependent upon who lives there. So we we ran a big study where we looked at this brand new building, which was built on the University of Chicago campus in around 2012. And we were lucky enough to be able to get into this building as it was being built and before it became an operational hospital. You can see the lobby, the sky lobby here is on the on the 5th Floor, and then we have patient rooms up here on the top and laboratories on the bottom. We focused on these top four Floors, looking at patient rooms in that lobby environment to understand how that microbial community changed when a hospital became an operational hospital environment. And what we're able to show was that, yes, it became much more similar to humans, but the the interaction between people and within a person was entirely dependent upon how people worked in that environment. So here I have a staff member over here on the left. This is their hand, their cell phone, their shoe, their nasal cavity, even their shirt hem and pager. We can see the transmission of things like Acinetobacter, Karenibacteria, staphylococcus, streptococcus, between all these surfaces as the person touches themselves. We can also see that the staff is transmitting through their hands to mostly to the armpit and the other patient's hands, bacteria such as, staphylococcus, coronibacteria, and acinetobacter, as they physically interact with that patient. But what we don't see is any real transmission of bacteria from the patient back to the person, the staff member. And this, we hypothesize it because that staff member is washing their hands after physically interacting with the patient. So they may be a transmitter to the patient, but they're not necessarily going to be picking those bacteria up and transmitting them elsewhere because they're washing their hands. This points to the value of hand washing. Right? It doesn't matter if you go into the garden, you get your hands dirty. You're gonna get a lot of immune stimulation from interacting with the bacteria and the fungi in the soil on your hands. You're not necessarily gonna see much transmission the other way. As long as you wash your hands after you've done that, you're gonna get the benefit, and hand washing is also absolutely fine. We even went into a college dormitory. And just for fun, we're able to really identify that microbial transmission network and actually look at the social dynamics of a college dormitory for all of these students living in there. And we could tell who was physically interacting with whom and, and which rooms were they were sharing and the for the most part. And this was mostly dominated by hand to hand transmission as people interacted in that space. We found this to be, compelling, although we could not necessarily tell everybody everything that was going on in that dormitory. A good reason. The problem is, we've we've lived now in this kind of sterile polluted world, right, where we live in these buildings. We have, polluted air. We have social inequity. We chemically clean these environments. We have, pollution and a low diversity of environment around us. I mean, it's mostly built environment. And that actually limits the microbial diversity that we're exposed to. That kind of microbial diversity would be exposed to if you lived in a rural community, interacted with a lot of animals, interacted with a lot of plants, had clean air access. That dynamic is shaping our health. And this as an illustrative example of this, we went into two relatively rural communities, but had who had made a significant choice about how they interacted with that space. So, the Amish community, that we predominantly worked with in, Pennsylvania, these sorry. Pennsylvania and this was Indiana, predominantly live on their family farm. So children grow up physically interacting with the farming environment. Their front door is, like, 20 feet, 30 feet in the barn door. They work on the farm with the animals and with the farming environment before and after school. And the Amish have very, very low rates of asthma in their population. Whereas the Parlerites who live in South North Dakota, this population, they tend to, have a housing community that's separated from the farm. So the children, especially all children under the age of 14, do not actually go on the farm. They don't interact with the farming environment at all. And the haderites, even though they have the same genetic predisposition to the development of asthma, they have a much lower much higher rate of asthma in their population. So the Amish who live on the farm, have around four percent asthma in their population. The average for The US is around eight percent. But the Hutterites have almost a quarter, so twenty five percent of their population can develop asthma in in, in their lifetime. We think this is due to the interaction. So to the interaction with the environment, figure this out, we went into their immune system. And I'm not gonna give you an immune immunology lesson here, but we have two real cell types here. We have neutrophils, which I like to think of as sentinel cells, the scouts running throughout your body looking for foreign objects. When they see a foreign object, they latch onto it. They send out a signal, and then white blood cells come along and they munch up everything. The neutrophil and the and the foreign object. If you're exposed to lots of foreign objects, like you live on a farm where you're breathing in lots of dust from this between the animals and the and the soil, you need a lot more neutrophils. We see that in those army children. They tend to have a lot more neutrophils than the other children who are separated from that farming environment. The other ones have a lot more eosinophils. These eosinophils are pro inflammatory response cells, and they can be, associated with asthmatic interaction. So hyalurides tend to have a lot more eosinophils than the Amish. But the interesting thing for us was that these cell surface markers we found on the neutrophils, like CXCR four and CD 11 b and c, much higher in the hydrolytes. What does this mean? Well, these cell surface markers are like proteins that stick out from the cells of the cell surface in neutrophils, and they can actually make the neutrophils kind of sticky. And the neutrophils, if they have a lot of these cell surface markers, which generally happens when neutrophils are older and haven't been used, they kinda stick together and they can form these rafts, and that raft might potentially lead to a significant inflammatory response when it finally sees a foreign object. So if your neutrophils aren't used very much, like the haderine neutrophils aren't, they get old, they get sticky, and they can cause inflammatory reactions. To prove this, we took mice and we made them sensitive to, a common dietary protein of albumin. So when this animal got gets a albumin, it can see it gets a significant increase in inflammation of those eosinophils in the in well, this is a bronchioalalabouille lavage. This is the what's happening inside their lung. So their lung has a lot more of these pro inflammatory eosinophils. But if we take that same animal that's sensitive to a albumin and we expose it to dust from an Amish bedroom or from the children's, the Amish children's bedrooms, that the Amish children are breathing in deeply while they're sleeping. And then we expose it to albumin. We see that inflammatory reaction goes away. So no longer get eosinophil burst inside their lungs. However, hydride dust doesn't have the same effect. So it's something about the dust that the children are breathing in in that farm environment that is helping to significantly reduce this, asthma like in inflammatory response. This is important. Right? So children that grew up on a farm in The US have a, on average, about fifty percent reduction in the likelihood of developing asthma. So we know that that farming environment can help to reduce asthmatic interactions, and it appears to be bacterial and fungal antigens that are present in the soil and in the animals that are getting into the lungs and into the skin of these children helping to reduce their allergic reaction. So can we bring the benefits of environments, such as forests and farms to people? Well, I like I like to think of this in terms of trees. Trees are really valuable, not just because they can improve your mental health, reduce energy bills, improve air quality, support biodiversity, etcetera, but also because they themselves have a deep rich microbial environment around them in the soil, in the tree, and that microbial environment can help to stimulate the immune systems of people that interact with trees. So putting trees into urban environments, for example, cannot only help to beautify the ecosystem and provide shade and reduce stress, but they can also help to stimulate, in anti antigenic microbial interactions that can benefit people's health. And one great example of this was a, group of scientists in Finland who, went into children's, pre preschool children, playgroups in the cities and brought soil from the forest outside the cities and allowed the children to physically interact with the soil in a randomized way. The kids that physically interacted with the soil from the forests had a significant reduction in their inflammation. They're they're much more or less inflamed. Their immune system was much healthier than children who did not physically interact with that soil, suggesting that that soil environment can be beneficial. Working with, professor Amber Fife Johnson from University of Washington, we're examining this phenomenon in something called the COMETs, cohort, the children at childhood obesity and the role of the gut microbiome outdoor time and stress in, in, their the development of their, their their inflammatory menu as these children grow up. By taking children from urban environments and allowing them to experience farm schools or forest schools so that they can get that immune benefit early in life and hopefully reduce their cardiometabolic disease rate. So these are ongoing programs that are predicated in the fact that kids actually really like being in forests, being outdoors, being at farms, and they can learn a lot, not only in their brains, but also in their immune systems from being exposed to these diverse networks of ecosystems. So I like to propose that we need to better figure out better ways of rewilding our lives. And we're doing this by developing microbial building materials where we actually take bacteria, and we build them into the structures that we use to build our, built environments, creating also living walls that contain microbes and plants to allow for improved immune activation of people breathing and working in that space. Increased ventilation is also valuable if you have a beneficial microbiome outside your house. And even multigenerational living could be improving. Right? Moving from this this, very, suburban, wealthy environment where we live in our little bubbles, to more interacting with each other on a much more, day to day basis. For example, we see that lactobacillus, a bacteria which is generally associated with health in our lung and on our skin and in our gut, can be at greater proportions in people who are, who infants who have older siblings in their home, potentially because those older siblings are interacting with the wide world and bringing that wide world back into the home for the children. We're also adding bacteria, working with our colleague Richard Beckett at the University College London into public art. So these are ceramic surfaces which are impregnated with living bacteria, and then we put them into, artistic to open spaces and actually encourage people to physically interact with it with the idea that when they physically interact, their their immune system gets stimulated on their hands and in their bodies and helps to improve their health. Thank you very much to, these are all people that sponsor our work, and this is my team in, what's usually sunny San Diego. And if you're interested in gastrointestinal health, please, watch our documentary hack your health, the secrets of your gut on Netflix. Thank you. Thanks, Jack. That was great. Questions? So I have a whole bunch, so we can hopefully get into some of the specifics. Right? So and just starting with the the social microbiome, the shared social microbiome, I guess you can make an argument for choose your friends wisely. Right? Because if you live a healthy life and the majority of your friends are eating unprocessed foods and, you know, overweight, all the things that are associated with a bad microbiome, that that would be transferred to the healthy. Right? And and you could make the argument vice versa. The unhealthy wanna be around the healthy, but the healthy wanting to keep their health associated microbiome. Right? So there's a balance there, I guess. What are your thoughts on the choosing your friends wisely? Yeah. I think, well, the the complexity here is, like, it's it's much easier to change your microbiome when you're when you're an infant or when you're a baby. Right? And so a baby doesn't get to choose their friends wisely as it were, but their parents' microbiome and the microbiome of the children and the microbiome of the people that baby interacts with should be healthy. Right? Then you'll get that beneficial transfer. There's a there's a, a small, anecdote here. So children that babies tend to exist in developed societies like China, Europe, North America, they tend not to have a certain bacterial species called Bifidobacterium longum infantis in their guts. This bug is has essentially evolved to just consume all the sugars in breast milk. Right? But, you know, it's babies that gets breast milk, should be able to consume those sugars based on the having this bacteria in their gut. But if you're missing bifida bacteria, can't digest the breast milk properly, and you don't get all the benefits of that breast milk. Where did this bug go? Why is it not present in our societies? We definitely know it was there in the nineteen twenties and nineteen thirties because we have records of people culturing it out of store, but it's now its prevalence has dropped to virtually zero or very, very small numbers, maybe ten percent of our population. We think that's due to multigenerational antibiotic use and poor diet leading to their mothers and their daughters and their daughters' daughters not having those bacteria present inside their guts and therefore not able to pass it on to the children. So it's a possibility that we need to intervene with that, bring that bug back into our environment, back into our children's lives in in order so they can get the benefit of breast milk use. Later in life, yeah, you know, you wanna be exposed to beneficial organisms. And so being exposed to people who are healthier may help, but also just getting outside and gardening and going on a forest walk and living, you know, with a dog maybe or living with that interactive diverse microbial environment could be just as beneficial as an adult. Nice. Alright. Wait. So the bifida bifidobacteria story, is that in part related to less breastfeeding too? Are mothers breastfeeding less on on average? Breastfeeding less, but that's really we don't think that's the primary driver. We think it's the the fact it's missing. So a lot of, women that do breastfeed that have this bacteria in their gut, it ends up in the breast duct. So it's actually, breast milk can be, what we call a symbiotic. It's part probiotic. It's got the living bacteria in there, and it's part prebiotic. It's got things which will feed those bacteria and and help those bacteria to produce things which are beneficial for us. So breast milk is like this ideal, you know, living bacterial, almost like a, a kombucha, right, or a, you know, you know, a fermented milk products. Right? It's it's perfect for baby's intestine. But if that bug is missing from the mom's gut, it never ends up in the breast milk. So, we think, you know, you need it in the mother's intestine in order to be able to give it to the child. So it's less necessarily about the lack of breastfeeding and more about it's missing from her gut. And so then that goes to the antibiotic story. So more people than ever probably using antibiotics, less women having it in their gut, then it's less in the milk. The babies get less, and then you have the multigenerational. So I should say I've had my gut microbiome done, I think, three or four times and almost no bifidobacteria. So I'm in that, you know, same boat, unfortunately. Oh, so when you breastfeed your children, you you wanna be careful. But yeah. I mean, like, the fact it was prevalent in our society back in the twenties and thirties before the in in, you know, start of, antibiotics would suggest that hypothesis. Right? Antibiotics really only came in in the late forties, early fifties. So it's it's it's indicative of that association, but more research would need to be done to make that definitive statement. It's also quite possible that poor diet leads to refined diet leads to a reduction in the abundance of some of these key organisms, and and that that also might be leading to intergenerational loss. So on the other side of that then, people who are eating real food should see a bloom at some point in the fit of bacteria, and that wasn't that not my not not the case in my situation. Maybe. But also, it might might not you know, we we think a lot of the bacteria that are missing might be present as very, very low abundant seeds in our gut. Yep. And that's we demonstrate that in animal studies and in human studies that when we put a, especially fermented food or and a high fiber food diet into, people who are not used to it, they can see blooms of certain organisms. And over time, it takes a little while for the gut to adjust, but over time, it can improve their gastrointestinal microbial diversity and lead to the abundance of some of these bugs. But if it's not there at all, then no amount of feeding is gonna introduce it. So a lot of clinical studies right now are introducing bifidobacteria, especially this longum and infantis species into infants early in life. So especially in in, neonatal intensive care units and in, early preterm clinics where we have babies that need that bug. We're adding it into their exposure, feeding them breast milk from their mother, and then that helps to reintroduce it. So it's quite possible if we're able to do that at a scale that's effective, that in a couple of generations, we might see it being reintroduced, and then beneficial feeding will help to propagate it through life. Definitely. What's the prebiotic for bifidobacteria? What do they like to feed on? Bifidobacteria longum infantis basically loves breast milk sugars. The complex oligosaccharides that mother produces in her breast milk that changes over the life of a baby. Right? So breast milk is not one composition. It changes constantly, and it varies month to month, and it varies throughout life. So it's it's, it's complicated. But there are lots of different species of bacteria. And so, a lot of the time, they like, indoles, so, you know, colorful plants and colorful vegetables and and fruits. They can be very full of these these kinds of compounds, and they like fiber. So, you know, complex fibers. But, you know, to get that Bifidobacterium longum infantis, we need breast milk. Yeah. I wouldn't suggest you start trying to consume breast milk as an adult, though, because it won't help unless you've got that bug in your gut. Yeah. It's sold as supplements, but or at least the be long in the sold in supplements. Right? But it's getting a prebiotic. Right? And if the and if it's based on polysaccharides that are exclusive to milk, then we're all out of luck. Right? So Precisely. You need it as an infant. But then it can stay throughout your intestine in in in life and become benefit become part of the beneficial microbiota fed by other organisms. It's not it's not like a panda and it's, and it's bamboo. Right? It it can it can be it has a a broad feeding strategy. But to get it to take hold, get it to be present there, you're gonna need early life exposure to that breast milk. Gotcha. Alright. So let's nail down on the built environment. So things like lighting. Right? So can, artificial lights for you know? So if you had no lights, right, so sun up to sundown, no lights in the house. But then the artificial lights, whether it's fluorescent, now you're playing with the, you know, the different spectrum of maybe you've got too much UV, not enough red in near infrared. So is there is there, is it incandescent lights? What are your thoughts on lighting as a part of the optimized built microbiome? Yeah. We've there's been only a few studies that have explored this phenomenon. We know that exposure to direct sunlight through a window, right, or light through a window pane, differs. So, you know, if you're exposed to direct UV without any window there, it can change the microbial community on that surface versus light sunlight that has to go through a window pane versus, adjacent areas that are shaded. It can have a different microbial community, and we think that's due to the ability of organisms to survive the UV exposure. But, realistically, there appears to be very little difference between spaces that have direct sunlight versus incandescent light on the microbiome. It's far more predicated on what animals, plants, which humans are present in that environment and what surface materials are there. So temperature, humidity, surface material, and occupant are the primary drivers of what microbiome is there on the surface. Light is less important. However, you tell that to anybody that's worked in a basement versus worked upstairs with, windows, there's a there's a, you know, a neurological impulse to having, the presence of, of of natural light. So you wouldn't be too worried about, you know, LEDs versus incandescent after sunset or before sunrise? Not on the microbiome. It's not gonna have a big impact. I mean, it literally it's just, the vast majority of bacteria you'll find in the built environment are essentially dead. Right? They don't survive very well. You have a nice, warm, moist, you know, nutrient rich dense body. And when they leave your body, they suddenly find themselves in a cold, dry, nutrient poor environment. It's like a horrible desert. Vast majority of them die. The ones that do survive, are adapted to that environment, and, the amount of light isn't gonna make a big difference. Nice. Alright. So I think then the factor you left out is wetness. Right? So, then that's that's obviously gonna gonna be a factor for microbial growth, probably mold or It's the key it's the key factor. Moisture is absolutely essential. Yeah. So keeping everything as dry as possible, that's step number one in optimizing Well, this is where it becomes complicated. So, yeah, if you have a wall and you make it wet, then the biggest light the biggest likelihood if there's nothing antifungal in there, you're gonna get molds. Molds are gonna release spores. Spores are gonna make people sick. We've known about that for three thousand years. Right? We didn't know they were fungi, but we knew that that mold was bad, and it made people sick. Right? It's even present in the Bible. The Jewish, in the Torah and the, the first part of the Bible, whatever that's called, the old testament, they actually talk about washing walls with, blood and water to get rid of the the, molds which can make people sick. They talk about mold, but they talk about the colors. So, you know, we know about that for a long time. And, yes, somehow, we still have not enabled ourselves to create plumbing systems or whatever that are totally foolproof and stop that from happening. And that's especially true in very, very, humid environments. However, we are working on developing more structures which have antifungals in there. We we don't wanna get rid of all the fungi. Some of the fungi can be beneficial. We just don't know which ones yet. We're so we're working on creating these kind of living surfaces, which would allow beneficial fungi to flourish and beneficial bacteria to flourish, but not dangerous ones. So it's a real fine balance. We don't have the equation sorted out yet, but moisture is important, beneficial things as well as creating a problem for detrimental things. And we wanna balance that equation. Yeah. Definitely. Always. Right? It's a yin and yang between our existence and the microbes. Right? So, like, as you mentioned, we live in their world. So how how in green spaces is just the greenery resisting? Because if it rains in the forest, there's gonna be mold. Right? So the forest has to have evolved mechanisms to limit the mold exposure. Otherwise, it would take over everything. But I think this is the this is the complexity. Right? If I if I if I take a a mold and I put it into environment where it has no competition, right, certain species are gonna grow really, really well. Just so happens that the species which can survive and thrive in an absence of competition in our buildings are ones that are detrimental to our health. Right? Now whether that's an evolutionary driver or not, I don't know. But that's what happens. If you take that same bug and you put it into a rich diverse ecosystem, it'd be like taking a house plant and sticking it in the Amazon Rainforest. The likelihood that it's gonna suddenly proliferate and take over the Amazon Rainforest is very small. There's much more checks and balances, right, in that system that stop dangerous things from dominating or anything particular from dominating. So diversity is ex is extremely important. I mean, I'm not allowed to say that in our current climate. But diversity is incredibly important in our ecological world. Right? It it's it's with with diversity, we get a resilience. We get strength of an ecosystem. It stops one thing from becoming dominant and killing everything else. So it's incredibly important that you embrace that. We've removed it for various reasons from our built environment, and adding it back in is very difficult. Right? But a child, for example, that grows up physically interacting with a dog in their home will have a thirteen percent reduction in the likelihood of developing asthma, which is very significant. Right? So just introducing one source of diverse rich microorganisms can be beneficial. So figuring out ways to manage that exposure could be vital. Alright. So along those lines, are there green things that you could that you that you include in the built environment in your own that that, you know, others may benefit from to Houseplants houseplants are great. Right? There's nothing wrong with them. You know, there's very few examples that we found where there's an houseplants are an epidemiological source of pathogens. And a lot of examples where we've shown that having houseplants in the home can actually be beneficial for health. So the the, the benefit outweighs the risk. Right? Same with dogs. Right? And and any kind of animal. So, yeah, bringing that that natural environment to the home. You know, if you're anything like us, I'm we're my wife and I are terrible at keeping houseplants alive. But, so maybe we're just bringing in new ones each time. But, also, if you can, getting outside and having the opportunity to do some gardening, even if it's in a window box, right, with some plants that you grow on your windowsill, is a great thing to do. Having that physical interaction with that plant as well as being able to breathe in the things it's releasing are beneficial. So in a 100% agree. And, actually, that's one reason I'm moving out of Boston and moving more to the suburbia so that I've got that backyard with grass that I can start gardening and do all these things that I miss out. Not that it's impacting my health here, but, it's underrated. I mean, we we evolved in nature. That should be some part of our life. So, so not are there specific plants or it's any greenery is gonna be beneficial? We don't have a particular you know, the that kind of, tell me exactly what I should buy is just impossible. Right? Because, the people that live in Boston are gonna have different exposure needs than the people that grew up living in in San Diego. And that's gonna be very different for immigrants like me who grew up living in a different continent and then came over here and are now exposed to a very different ecosystem. So we actually think your your historical, if you will, your ancestral immune exposures can actually be important. There's a the Chinese when they were, going from, say, the capital city of Hangzhou out to the, the peripheries of the empire would take, little, tubs of soil with them from their hometown, the place where they grew up. And Whenever they felt sick, whether it was just homesickness or gastrointestinal illness, they would take some of that, make it into a tea, and drink it. And they they believe they were consuming the, essence of their hometown. It's quite likely they were consuming things which stimulated the immune system in the way that they had when they were growing up in their hometown. Right? So it's a beneficial, learned environmental immune exposure that they were bringing in. I'm not saying everybody needs to go and grab soil from their hometown and carry it with them. Although, you know, that may may be beneficial. But, but these are indications that for years, we've understood the the, the importance of where we come from in terms of how it trains our immune system and how it keeps ourselves healthy. So there there could be something in that. Right? What you put in your home could be important. We don't have the answer to that at the moment. Whether it's hostas or or, you know, or, dandelions, I don't know. So the the knee jerk reaction that is just to say, just increase the diversity. As many plants as you can, different species of plants. Make sure you keep them alive just like your pets and and and look after that environment. Make it more diverse. Diversity is strength. Nice. So are there, specific plants that can reduce environmental pollutants? I'm gonna look into it, but wouldn't that be a good place to start? In soil and in the air, yes. But it depends upon what environmental pollutants. Right? And it depends upon the environment in which they find themselves. In the home, there are people that will tell you that some plants are more beneficial, but, it's like it they'd only be beneficial if your house was exposed to extremely, extremely high levels of that pollutant. And then only if you had, like, an entire room taken over by these plants would you actually see any movement. It's not like there are plants out there which are sucking up huge amounts of air and recirculating it and making it healthy. And, there but there are people out there who will tell you that that's true, but, they're probably trying to sell you the plants. Yeah. So the then the other side of that too is when considering that, you know, we're breathing oxygen and expiring carbon dioxide and plants are doing the opposite, That no matter how many plants you have in the home, you're not gonna reduce carbon dioxide levels by them consuming it and then producing oxygen. And your house is not exactly impermeable. Right? You know, if you had a completely sealed system like the International Space Station, without those carbon dioxide scrubbers, you know, you quickly run out of oxygen. But you could theoretically, with enough plants, create a system that was entirely self circulating, but you need a lot of plants. Yeah. Yeah. Isn't that with the have you heard of a terra preta? I think it's the Amazonian, soil that, it I guess it regenerates on its own, and, you know, you don't have to add fertilizer. And it's Soil soil is another entire question. Right? Yeah. Soil is a rich microbial ecosystem. But without a plant inputting carbon into it, it can quickly become self cannibalizing. So you do need you do need an entire ecosystem. Then put for soil, you need the plant, you need the fungi, you need the bacteria and the viruses, all interacting to create a self sustaining ecosystem. A soil by itself that was self sustaining would have, cyanobacteria, bacteria that can take light energy like a plant and make it into sugars. But they'd only be on the surface, and then you basically created a very, very specific ecosystem that's surviving in a stratified form. I can get into that, but that becomes complicated. So so then even soil, you can make the argument that there's gonna be a a spectrum of what's optimal soil for greenery to grow versus, you know, nutrient dilapidated and just right? So Yeah. 50% of our soils, our agricultural soils are already nutrient and microbially dilapidated. And by 2050, we expect that to get up to 90% of our soils. So we are in a critical inflection point in soil care. We've actually opened a new soil health center at UCSD, which I'm co running, that's predicated on trying to do exactly what we're doing in humans, get the beneficial microorganisms back into their experience, but we're doing it in soil, getting the beneficial microorganisms back into the soil to help to restructure the carbon cycle and nitrogen cycle of soil to make it more self sustaining and make it more resilient to climate change and industrial agriculture. Because without that, we're gonna run out of soil, and soil is feeding a 100% of our population. Yeah. So if you have if you have damaged soil, you're gonna get damaged food security. You have damaged food security, then you get mass migrations, riots, and, and the destruction of humanity. So it's kind of important. Yeah. So is a part of that story composting then? I mean, should we all be composting and for I mean, composting is great. Right? But, you know, we we find that it's very difficult for a lot of the especially poor people in our community to be able to, in the world to be able to compost. So for example, when we go into Sub Saharan Africa where 90 900,000,000 people are actually fed by essentially smallholder farms, mostly female red run smallholder farms, the the fiber, if you will, the the, organic matter which they produce during the production, they need to act as a fuel for keeping their houses warm to feed the animals. Very little of that, organic matter can go back into the soil or can be composted. Right? Because they use it in everything. So in those situations where food insecurity would lead to absolute global chaos, you know, this is essentially why we need USAID, but I won't get it political at the moment. In those environments, we, a lack of different strategies to improve food security is gonna lead to massive problem. So we're going in and we're creating synthetic probiotic communities. So communities of bacteria from that environment that we construct, we grow, and then we redeploy into those soils that can actually be effective in helping to restructure the soil ecosystem and make it healthier and more resilient so that we don't necessarily always need composting. The obvious ideal situation is we take composting and we add it back into the soil. We use regenerative farming practices. We put it back into the soil. It's not always possible. So we need lots of different strategies to make that effective. So with the probiotic that you're talking about, what would be the prebiotic then in that case if it's not composting and but The prebiotic is what the plant pumps out. So just like mother's breast milk, a lot of the soil bacteria become dependent upon the carbon exudates. We call them exudates. It's just what the plant excretes from its roots, where the plant pumps into the soil. So that's why you need the plant and you need the microbiome in the soil. And the the plant's roots pump this out. All the bacteria congregate around the roots, they munch it up. And then when they're munching that up, they consume other things around the soil and make that bioavailable back to the plant. Right? So the plant is essentially seeding the soil with beneficial nutrients to make the microbiome thrive, and then the bacteria pump the the beneficial products back into the, plant. Exactly the same as what happens in our intestine with our microbiome. Right? So we, we're trying to understand that cycle and make it more beneficial. The just the unfortunate side effects is if you pump the soil full of nitrogenous fertilizer, the synthetic nitrogenous fertilizer, it feeds the plant, but it kills the microbiome. And it makes the microbiome very, very dependent upon that source of nitrogen. And they've not the microbiome now no is no longer interacting with the plant. And so it starts to become, very nondiverse, entirely, self reliant upon that nitrogen, and it starts to die. Right? So you you you have to have a constant replenishment if you're gonna use that. Yeah. I I do what we're trying to aim for is where we only have these microbial probiotics, and we don't rely on nitrogenous fertilizers. We don't rely on phosphates. We try and avoid the use of, herbicides and pesticides. But it's not you know, we can't change an entire global economy overnight. Right? So we're working on a on trying to develop systems which will integrate or can be used alongside those damaging practices, in order to mitigate the their impact. Is the soil microbiome similar to to the human microbiome? Like, for example, high fiber diet, you're gonna get, short chain fatty acid producing bacteria. You're gonna minimize the growth of the, proto you know, enterobacteria, protein digestion. So on a high nitrogen fertilizer containing diet, I'm thinking a lot of enterobacteria, a lot of proteobacteria, and low fiber degraders. Right? So Ostensibly, yes. I mean, you know, you do see short chain production in the soil, but that's not quite what's important. Right? We see other kinds of compounds which are relevant for promoting plant growth and for, being able to degrade certain complex phosphates, which are only present in soil. I remember the soil microbiome is the most diverse microbial ecosystem on the planet. There's nothing more diverse than the human gut. It pales in comparison. Right? So we're talking about an incredibly complex ecosystem. And so it's, it's like the human gut on on massive steroids. Right? But, yes, exactly the same principle. If you just eat saturated fatty foods, that are processed, you're gonna get lots of bacteria, a total loss of all the bacteroides, some of the, you know, beneficial bacteria that active the cells are gonna go away. You're gonna get a very underbursed ecosystem. Exactly the same is true in the in the soil. Interesting. Alright. So going back to the built environment. So carbon dioxide, if carbon dioxide levels in the house are so you I know you were saying if you're on the space station, but so I'm I'm moving to Austin and, you know, I've gotta make sure that my house is pretty well sealed so that I can cool it. Right? So then monitoring air quality and carbon dioxide levels is gonna be important because it's a part of the overall sealed structure. Right? So, you know, is carbon dioxide, you know, a part of the built environment keeping that at a certain level? If so, what level to minimize microbial growth? In in in your apartment in Austin, even if you've tried to seal the building, the air is still coming in from outside. It's just being processed. So you're you're never in a situation where you're recycling the air inside the building in a way that would ever lead to a significant increase in carbon dioxide concentrations. So we, you know, we even when we look at positive pressure rooms inside hospitals or negative pressure rooms inside hospitals, you know, you even when we pack it with people, we see only a small increase in carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere. But we actually demonstrated you can use the carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere to predict how many people are present in the room because it does go up a little bit, but never to dangerous levels. You know, this is this it just can't I mean, there's just too much air exchange with the outside. So it's, it's it's it's something you can look into, but it it's never gonna be a major threat. What you really do need to focus on is the fact that you're dealing with an environment which is dynamic and has, has a lot of opportunity for change. Right? So putting in beneficial things will not necessarily worry about oxygen and carbon dioxide, but will improve what your body is exposed to in terms of the antigens, in terms of the, you know, reduction in some harmful gases, that kind of thing. That's what we're most interested in. So air purification then should be a big part of of the story. Yeah. But, you know, you want air purification alongside if you if see if I just put, an air filter in a room, I'll get rid of the bacteria and the viruses and the fungi. If I take an infant and I put them in that room, they're never gonna get any kind of microbial exposure, which would actually be beneficial to their health. Mhmm. But if I take them and I put them in a in a room with an air filter, it gets rid of the pathogens they might be exposed to. But then if I just stick a dog and let the dog lick the baby's face and I put loads of plants around the room, I'm providing further stimulation that that child can then get in order to improve and develop its immune system. Same is true for you. Right? You cannot just purify the air and hope for the best. You need you need, a rich diverse exposure to help you. Definitely. Right. So just wait. Pushing back on that a little bit then, couldn't I just go outside? And then Yes. Outside, I've got Going outside is great. Yeah. And I've got the antigenic stimulation, whereas then I can go inside and then basically let my immune system relax a little bit because it's not constantly bombarded. Absolutely. It's just unfortunate that most Americans spend 90% of their time indoors. Yeah. Definitely. Going outside and if you look outside the vast majority of American, even suburban environments, there aren't a lot of places to walk. Right? It's a car driven society. Most places don't even have, you know, sidewalks. We and in the urban environment, it's even worse. So it's you know, this is a real problem. We need to provide people with access to those spaces. And the only way to do that is to either build them or bring them into the home, like we did with, you know, bringing soil into kids' experience or taking the kids to the forest or making the building itself more biologically viable. That's the that's the way that we've overcome the limitations of our current societal norms. Definitely. Alright. And then so in terms of the wetness, so then that gets the humidity. Right? So is there a a humidity level that once it the built environment gets above a certain percentage that, like, how wet? Like, how how humid Below 45%? Yeah. Yeah. There's an entire, the the there's an entire, society, indoor air society that's focused on this this question. The majority of it is actually keeping the humidity at a level which makes us feel comfortable. Mhmm. Right? And as long as it we feel comfortable, it's very unlikely the humidity is gonna be high enough to allow moisture to form on walls, which will cause, fungi to grow. But, again, it's there are ways to mitigate that fungal growth either with the introduction of antifungals into the, building material or potentially creating a living structure in that building, which the building material, which prevents the growth of fungi or prints the dominance of particular fungi even when it is wet. But those are ongoing research topics and not necessarily developed products. Gotcha. Alright. So the Amish story is is so they're eating whole food. They're they're not They're the Harish. Both of them are eating very healthily. You know, farm based products, lots of fruits and vegetables, traditional, you know, lots of potatoes and and and animal products, so traditional, you know, southern northern German diet. But, yeah, one's one has the children growing up and being exposed to that farming environment. The other one doesn't. Gotcha there. Alright. So another one is since, I think you're the director of planetary health, you know, on your long list of accolades I wish. That would be sounds amazing. I'm sorry. Something along those lines. I have it here in my notes. But, great. I can be I can be the planetary health director. I I'll I'll take on any You're not planetary health. I'm overstating it. You know you know, which affiliation I'm talking about. I'm just an Earth microbiome project. There you go. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Sorry. I gave you I gave you the glorious right? So I don't know. Planetary health sounds way better. I'm taking it. That's cool. So when you consider that our microbiome evolved, co evolved over, you know, five hundred million years of human existence. Right? So or hominid existence. So are we stuck on this planet never to travel in step without, you know, breathing apparatus? Because if we do, our microbiome isn't adapted, and then any antigen may kill us unless we've evolved the technology to adapt No. No. I don't I don't believe that. I mean, yeah, our bodies are highly adaptable. Hominids are only about 5,000,000 years old, but, yeah, you know, 500,000,000 years is everything you can see with your eyes. So from fish and reptiles to, you know, amphibians and plants, that's all about 500,000,000 years old. But yeah. So, if you take a human and we put them on Mars in a controlled environment, there's it there's a possibility there might be an antigen there which might make us sick just the same as when I moved to America. I had allergic reactions to different types of oak pollen. It's now gone away through dietary interventions, etcetera, but it's a problem. Right? You know, when you move to a new environment, you're gonna get new exposures. But there's no reason to believe that living on a different planet would lead to any significant shift in our, in our immune response that would cause detrimental health impacts. So just to play devil's advocate. So when the, Europeans came over and the, native native Americans weren't familiar with those microbes, wasn't there a wiping, you know, wiped out big That's a pathogen. That's epidemiology. Right? And so it's possible if we landed on another planet that had rich life that there'd be a pathogen there that would kill us off pretty quickly. I mean, that's HG Wells and War of the Worlds. Those aliens couldn't survive it. The native Americans, was similarly impacted. When the when when the Dutch came back from China and brought back infections, we cause plague in the thirteenth century. Same thing happened in the second century Roman Empire. You know, these are those are epidemiological disease problems. That absolutely could be true. So so then, if there are aliens that exist, one reason that they're not stepping foot or we don't see them is because they're not worried about getting microbial diseases because they haven't evolutionarily adapted. So there is a interesting, sideline. We think that xenophobia may have evolved as a mechanism to prevent us being exposed to pathogens from other people. So if you think if you are in your isolated tribe in the jungle, right, you actually become quite immune over one or two generations to anything that's circulating in that population. When a foreigner comes in from a tribe over the other side of the mountain, and wants to trade, well, they have other pathogens. They bring them to you. Your tribe gets sick. So being but that would rapidly select, due to, you know, lack of progeny, that rapidly select for people who are wary of other other people who weren't part of their tribe. Right? So xenophobia may have may have evolved because of microbial exposure, and it's possibly true for alien societies. Maybe the reason we don't see alien societies is not because of the almost impossible to imagine technology that would require us to move at light speed or, you know, or close to light speed, and the extraordinary differences even within our own galaxy that would preclude us from seeing anybody else. But because they don't wanna get infected, h g will start. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's a whole another conversation because, you're making the argument that they're coming from somewhere else. When, you know, the Earth is what? Four point five billion years. Who's to say they're not here? And that our small visible spectrum that we can actually perceive, maybe they exist in portions of it that we can't, you know, directly detect. That's absolutely possible. Yeah. And, you know, if you it only takes around fifty million years for the surface of a of a continent to be so significantly shifted that it's hard to detect anything else. And our fossil record is so sparse that if a population of a highly technologically evolved people suddenly appeared and then was wiped out in, say, fifty thousand years, which is likely what's gonna happen to us, it's quite probable you would not see any signature of that in in the, fossil record. Or the only way you might see it is if you were looking for certain, certain, chemical changes that could exist in isotope ratios. You actually have to look at it in very particular locations, and and and that might be the only thing that you'd see, and it'd be very hard to interpret it as the rise of a civilization. So, yeah, absolutely. You know, stuff could have happened fifty to a hundred million years ago that we would have no understanding of. The aliens might have arrived, you know, just before the dawn of the dinosaurs or even during the dinosaurs, set up an entire culture and civilization, and we'd never know about it. Yeah. Definitely. Alright. So how much is fiber soluble fiber because there is a gut lung axis? How much of that is a part of the and I get the asthma story in the in the, you know, the dust transfer. Right? Yeah. But did did you adjust for fiber? Because, you know, so there are there's at least one published study that I know of where soluble fiber supplementation improved survival in mice, infected with influenza. So with with so, that's an immune that's immune interaction. So if you have high levels of fiber in your diet, you'll have an increased level of short chain fatty acid production, an increased level of bile acid, deconjugation, which will lead to, alterations in your immune response and make you more likely to be less susceptible to extreme inflammatory reactions in the presence of a pathogen. So is that part of the story in the Amish? Quite possibly. The gut the gut line the gut microbiome axis and the gut immune access is absolutely essential. But as I say, in that population, both of them are consuming very similar diets. So it's it's less likely to be a particular driver there. It's more likely early life environmental exposure shaping that, paradigm. But we do know that, for example, we've demonstrated that lactobacillus certain lactobacillus species that we can isolate from the lung can be highly effective in helping to treat things like chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder, or lung fibrotic diseases. And that appears to come from the gut into the lung potentially via, you know, esophageal transfer into the lung environment. And and we believe that might be driven by, particular diets. But, again, a lot of conjecture. Interesting. Alright. Wait. So there's also a few published studies on, soluble fiber helping to and I'm gonna say detoxify, but helping to protect against microparticle pollution, which which implies that it can improve long microparticle. I I don't know if you're familiar with that, but there's just a few I'm not familiar with that. We've we've looked into the microplastic exposure, and we don't see any significant association with dietary health at all. In fact, you know, when we look at microplastic exposure in the ocean or in the environment, we can't seem to see any particular impacts upon animal or or ecosystem health. But, depends what microparticles. If no microparticles were like cadmium oxide, then that might be a more bigger problem. But yeah. I mean, again, if you have a if you have a healthy immune system and you have a healthy body generally with a lower antioxidant level, which is generally associated with improved immune responses, which can be modified and managed by a beneficial diet and a beneficial microbiome, then your body's gonna be more resilient to a lot of things. Definitely. Aren't the isn't there some, evidence that the amount of particulate or or, you know, it's less than 2.5 mic bugs. Yeah. Isn't isn't gonna increase over time because of, you know, global warming and all the other stuff, fires and ostensibly, if there are more fires, yeah, but PM two point fives and PM tens are heavily associated with pollution in any context. So when you burn fossil fuels, when we burn wood, when, you know, when it when it any kind of air pollution, we can get particulates that build up in the air, and they are definitely damaging to health. We've demonstrated that. And there have been one, legal, case in The United Kingdom where they're able to sue, for a child's death by demonstrating that child would not have died had they not been exposed to that pollution. Right? So, that's gonna happen more and more and more where it's gonna become a legal necessity to control that pollution in order to prevent lawsuits. So in that context, no amount of a healthy diet, if PM, you know, put a particular pollution is is increasing over time, there may be a threshold where it was But but bear in mind, it's not gonna increase, like, it's not gonna become a global phenomenon. Right? It has to have a point source. All particles have to have a point source. A a forest fire is a point source. Right? It can be a very generalized point source, and if you're near it, it's gonna make you very unwell. Yeah. At some point, I cannot make you impervious to, damaging environmental stimuli. Right? If I if I put you in in a an environment with a a car is pumping out pollution into your into your face, no amount of microbial support is gonna is gonna stop you from getting very, very sick and probably dying. Yeah. Alright. So future or current projects that are unpublished that you wanna talk about and future projects that are on the Oh, man. I have 47 ongoing research themes in our lab, and I can't choose my personal favorite baby. But, I think one thing we're really, really, focused on now is trying to improve, women's health, through, modifying the gut microbiome and the vaginal cervical microbiome to, essentially reduce, when there's, disease women female associated disease courses and also improve menopausal symptoms and improve, aging, through that framework. So that to me has been something incredibly interesting, one thing we're focused on. But Cool. We're also very interested in the gut brain axis. I work a lot in depression and anxiety. We're starting clinical trials focused on trying to reduce depression and anxiety by altering altering the gut microbiome with particular probiotics, that we've isolated from healthy people's guts. Healthy non depressed people. So taking probiotics from them and then but then you need the the prebiotic in that case to feed those probiotics. Otherwise, they would just go away. Right? Yeah. So, actually, we've we actually don't think they need to be alive. So, we've run our preclinical studies in rats. These bacteria, even when they're dead, are as effective at treating depression as Prozac and, and, ketamine. How's that how's that possible? They're they're gonna be in the gut dead, not making any They don't need to be alive to interact with the immune system. So I can I can tell you a dead bug, and the proteins and sugars on the outside of its cell or even on the inside of its cell will be seen by the immune system? The immune system doesn't recognize an entire bacterium. It recognizes chemical signatures on the surface of its cell or things that it pumps out, like, hydrogen sulfide or or, lipopolysaccharides. These are things which bacteria pump out. Like so flagellin, lipopolysaccharide, and hydron sulfide are predominantly produced by things like protobacteria, and the immune system sees them as pathogen associated markers, and they cause inflammation. I don't know why I've got confetti. Apologies. I don't mean either. But that's the the that's an important piece. Right? It's things don't need to be alive. Chemicals can stimulate the immune system. So if you have the right kind of bacteria with the right kind of compound on its surface, alive or dead, it will produce an immune response, which can shape how your brain functions. So the depressed people are missing the dead or alive bacteria? That bacteria. Whether it's alive or dead doesn't appear to matter. They're missing that bacteria in their gut. And are they fiber degrading bacteria? Because that would be my bet. Some of them will degrade certain well, this one the one that we're focusing on does degrade certain fibers, but it's more, related to polyphenols. So if, you know, polyphenols in your diet, it'll stimulate the growth of that one. But, again, it's like the bacteria story. If it's missing, no amount of polyphenols are gonna bring it from a nonexistent to an existing state. Right? It needs to be introduced. So, I was gonna ask about fecal pH. Right? So but the probiotics that you're mentioning probably had nothing to do. It doesn't matter. They're just dead. The the immune system is triggered. But I think, what are your thoughts on fecal pH as an underrated aspect of optimizing the gut microbiome? I mean, you can eat a high fiber diet, but not every every study shows that even with a bloom in short chain fatty acids in in fecal samples that fecal pH goes down by a significant amount to potentially optimize gut gut microbiome compositions. Yeah. It goes it it only fluctuates by less than one pH point. Right? We're talking about change from, you know, 5.8 to 6.2 or 6.2 to 6.4. You know? It's that kind of range of fluctuation. But, yeah, fecal pH is, very indicative of the antioxidant environment or the oxidative environment in which that microbiome lives. And the oxidative environment in which a microbe lives isn't tired or is entirely responsible or very responsible, shall I say, may not entirely responsible for its metabolic activity. So what it can eat and what it poops out will be very dependent upon the pH. But, you know, the fecal pH is a proxy measure of what's going on in a part of the intestine. We, you know, realistically, to understand it fully, we need to get pH measurements from the duodenum and the stomach and the esophagus and the small bowel and the, you know, the distal sigmoidal colon and the, you need every bar because the ecosystem changes as it goes through the gut. But, yeah, it's a good proxy measure that people don't always look at. But the same is true for gastrointestinal transit. You know, we we now measure transit sometimes, but not always. And, you know, as we got older, the reason we tend to have more gas and we start to fart more is because our gastrointestinal transit slows down. And so our body is actually processing the food more more consistently, and that produces more microbial activity, which produces more gas. It's an interesting side effect. In the wrong direction, though, you get probably more protein digesting, or, you know You do get more protein digesting, but it depends upon your diet. Right? If you have a high fiber diet and you have a consistent high fiber diet in a 20 year old and a consistently same high fiber diet in a 50 year old, you're still gonna get a slower transit time and a significant increase in gas production. Now it's possible that you could, for high fiber diet in a 50 year old would lead to a significantly faster transit time than a low fiber diet in a 50 year old. But there's some part of aging that we don't fund fundamentally understand in terms of gastrointestinal transit. So fecal pH can actually vary a little bit more. In all in centenarians, I think there's one study where it was close to eight, but granted, this is, you know, the fecal sample. You don't know you know, is that a measure of the the whole, you know, the Yeah. And not And I I always yeah. I'd love to take the centenarian studies are great, but they you know, you're dealing with a group of people who are living a very different life and have lived it for a long period of time. And so, you know, we don't know which part of their life, may have resulted in the features which they have as in a 105 year old. It could have been what they were exposed to when they're just babies, or what happened when they were teenagers. We you know, it's, until we can fundamentally replicate that in another individual and demonstrate over a very long period of time that it's associated with longevity and everything else, it's gonna be very hard to prove it. We can do some of that in mice. Right? But in in humans, we need this is a call for action. Right? If we're ever allowed to do science again in this country, or maybe all the scientists will have to leave and go to China and make China the most dominant superpower on the planet. If if, you know, it's a threat. If, if if we if we can, we need longitudinal studies, studies where we study populations over decades. So we actually understand at which point we can have a real significant impact upon longevity and upon healthy aging. That's incredibly important. Right now, we're just making suppositions and hypotheses. A 100% agree. I wasn't suggesting that centenarians having a pH of eight may be beneficial for the long longevity. In fact, I was are potentially arguing the opposite. That's a consequence of a longer life having a higher fecal pH. Along those lines Yeah. That's a really good point. I didn't think about that. I mean, it's possible that there's some physiological feedback mechanism which would lead to that that feature. Absolutely. So along those lines, there's a few fecal pH studies, at least in Parkinson's patients, where fecal pH is relatively high as as close to around eight. And the reason I raised that issue is because, you know, so you mentioned fecal pH being a part of, of metabolic activity, right, and and andoxia versus, anaerobic or anaerobic versus aerobic conditions. But fecal pH can also impact, bacterial enzymatic activity. So now you're getting Yeah. I mean, that's just that that's all part of the same piece. Right? So pH is a function of microbial metabolism, which is a function of the oxidative environment. You're right. The amount of aerobic and anaerobic activity, but also the the number of anions and protons in in a system, and the the number of ionic exchanges, which is all a function of the metabolic environment, which is a function of that system. I mean, it's a it's a great example. If you eat more fiber, your your antioxidant level inside your body will will be significantly increased. And I love this. This is a great example. When you look at antioxidant activity, our bodies have an innate antioxidant capacity, right, to eradicate free radicals and oxidative stresses, which will damage our neurons and damage our cells and stop our functions. If you eat a crappy diet, right, high saturated fat, high sugar diet, you do very little exercise, you live in an apartment building in a polluted environment, you are constantly putting your antioxidant capacity to the absolute test and quite often going far beyond its ability to control free radicals and control oxidative stress. If we can take those people and just replace one of those pieces like a healthy diet or, you know, improve their air quality, their breathing, we might be able to bring it below their oxidative stress threshold and help them to live a healthier life. I just think, you know, our modern lives have so many threats that it's constantly pushing us above that threshold and preventing or damaging our ability to control the damage that oxidative stress can do to our neurons, our our body cells, our liver cells, our kidneys. And, you know, if we could control that, we'd have a much better chance of living a healthier, longer life. Definitely 100% agree. But where I was going with that is bacterial metabolites that could impact the brain. For example, quinoline eight. I'm sure you're familiar with the the work on quinoline eight, being neurotoxic even in Parkinson's. Right? And it increases during aging. So most people are focused on quinoline eight coming from the de novo and a desynthesis pathway. So degradation of tryptophan all the way down to the quinoline eight. But quinoline eight can be produced by gut bacteria by aspartate oxidase, which is sensitive to a high fecal pH, which argues that low fiber diet, high sugar, western diet, high fecal pH, increased bacterial activity, and conversion of aspartate into quinoline, potentially more neurodegeneration. Nobody's nobody's So you said the same thing about kineurin, though. Right? And, you know, I and and the animal studies have have in some sometimes have supported those statements, and other times have shown them to be highly variable. And I think, you know, we need more studies in humans to demonstrate that those two that there's a cause and effect pathway there. You know, more protein can lead to a significant increase in hydrogen sulfide production through short chain fatty acid production from protein fermentation. Right? So the wrong kind of short chain fatty acid production can cause that inflammatory response. But you're absolutely right. There are many of these processes which might be linked. Gotcha. Well, thanks, Jack. That was great. I appreciate you coming on. Hopefully, you can come on at another point, and we chat some more about the microbiome. Yeah. Sounds good. Alright. Cool. Bye, Jack. Cheers.