Hey, everyone. Today's guest is doctor Sunil Ahuja, who is a professor of medicine, microbiology, immunology, and biochemistry at the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio. Today, doctor Ahuja will present his lab's work on immune resilience, which is a main factor that counteracts inflammation, immune aging, and cell senescence, and correspondingly plays an important role in promoting health and longevity. So, with that, welcome, Sunil. And let's get into the presentation. Thank you. So, this evening, I'm going to speak with you about a subject that, I've been working on for about, fifteen years. And it relates to the concept of, immune resilience. And it basically talks about a very simple problem, why some people get sick less often and live longer. So, for this talk, I'm going to talk about immune resilience rates. So most people focus on disease. I prefer to focus on what promotes health. So the word salutes, as I will show you a little later, comes from the word health, or she's a goddess of health, and sends the term salutogenic. And then I'm gonna talk to you about a unified survival mortality axis, which is a TCF seven, which is a transcription factor that I discussed linked to salutogenesis in cancer. And then finally, I will talk about why Gilgamesh, who was a king in the olden times, failed on his quest to have limitless life. And I'm gonna provide you an immune basis as to the limits of human life. So, and as an aside, I'll if I have time, I'll talk about the quest for immortality from Gilgamesh to the Silicon Valley. So just as a framework, I'm a physician, and all my work relates to the framework of p four medicine. So, Mike, if you were my patient today, I would tell you that I like to predict diseases, prevent them. I want to personalize your health care. I want you to participate in your health care. So those are the four p's. So the same principle holds true for all of us. We all want to be able to predict diseases in us. We'd like to know if we are have a proclivity to die sooner than sooner versus later, and if there's a way I could prevent my aging or my diseases associated with age, and how I could personalize it. And, of course, the world is very interested in participating in it. So here's an example of a paradox of long life. So this is a nun. Her name is Lucille Randon. She's a French nun. She developed COVID, about before her her seventeenth birthday. But interestingly, she did not develop any symptoms. So she's an oldest known survivor of COVID nineteen. In fact, she died a year later from natural causes. So this is a good paradox of someone who one would have expected with COVID to have died and obviously had a very long life. So, my thesis is very simple, that our journey from womb to tomb is punctuated by repetitive antigenic exposures. And by the term antigenic, it could be infectious, it could be trauma, it could be allergens, anything that we have been experiencing from our evolutionary ancestors. And these repetitive stresses eventually erode our immune resilience. But there are some people who are endowed with the capacity to preserve their immune resilience and they live longer healthier lives. So, most people focus on the term pathogenesis or falling sick. I prefer to focus on the Greek term pathos or that's what most people focus on pathos. I prefer to focus on the term salutogenesis I mentioned, and they're not the opposite. And I'll explain this in a bit of a moment. So what I'm gonna contend with you is that during our lifetime, we experience three forces. The first force is the fourth force of the luteogenesis, and that is the promotion of health, which is not the same as the absence of disease. So if we didn't have this force that preserved our health, at least for some period of time, I doubt that we would have been evolutionarily been equipped to live a longer life. This salutogenesis of this force that preserves our life is a part a component of that relates to immune resilience as I will show you. And then, eventually, this force wears away, giving permission, if you will, or permissivity for pathogenesis or the forces that lead to disease to emerge. So that will be the second force. The third force that we none of us can escape is the biology of aging. That's why we all die. So the most people think about aging in terms of age associated diseases and sometimes omit or neglect to understand to reflect in the fact that this by that aging is not the same as age associated diseases, that the biology of aging is quite distinct. So these three forces are operative in all of us at different levels, but we cannot escape this fact. So immune resilience is not an esoteric term. It's something that we can quantify. It is sexually dimorphic. By sexually dimorphic, I mean it's more common in women than men. And regardless of whether either man or woman, it is associated with superior immunity dependent health outcomes and longevity. So this is our first manuscript that relates to it. The title of this in Nature Communications is immune resilience Despite Immune Stress, Promotes Longevity and Favorable Health Outcomes, Including Resistance to Infection. And I outlined the term, the three most important words here, which is despite inflammatory stress. So if you equate emotional resilience and immune resilience in a similar manner, if I were to go out and live in the Himalayas in a cave, I would never know if I had emotional resilience. The only time you'll know you have emotional resilience is if you are, you know, being irritated or frustrated by your boss, your partners, or whatever else is happening in your life. Then if you remain calm, I would say you have emotional resilience. So the same thing holds true with immune resilience. You will never know if you have immune resilience unless you have been challenged with an inflammatory stress. So that's the operative word. It is not something that's constitutive. It is something that is you can only witness it when it is induced, when you are facing some pressure. So the point here then is that this is, is defined as a capacity to preserve and or rapidly restore immune functions that promote disease resistance, I. E. Immune competence, and control inflammation. So there are two operative components to this. So the first component is immune competence, and the second component is inflammation. So most people always focus on the term inflammation, but inflammation is absolutely essential. If you didn't have inflammation the right place, the right time, the right kind, the right duration, you would all die. So inflammation is absolutely essential. The question is when it becomes aberrant, it becomes a problem. But what is generally forgotten in this equation is that concurrent to this, there is a secondary there's an additional process, which is independent. They occur concurrently, but they're not dependent on each other necessarily all the time. So, a person with cancer, for example, could be highly immunosuppressed, but they don't walk around with flagrant inflammation. So these are two components that are concurrently present at one time. So an optimal immune resilience then is a person who has the capacity to maintain high immunocompetence and have an appropriate amount of inflammation or low inflammation while experiencing inflammatory stress. So, that was one paper. We recently had another very large study come out in aging cell. The title is here, the fifteen year survival advantage immune resilience as a salutogenic force in healthy aging. So between these two studies, we have studied about a 100,000 people with the concept of immune resilience and we suggest that optimal immune resilience is operative in many disease contexts and is generally associated with better health outcomes. I said, I think there's gonna be some yanks to it too, probably autoimmunity. But thus far, that's what we have uncovered. And immune resilience impacts are agnostic of the kind of immune injury. So you would see it in the context within the context of SLE. When I talk about when I said autoimmunity, I needed to clarify there's a difference between susceptibility to the disease versus once the person gets the disease. So within the context of an autoimmune disease like lupus, being able to maintain immune resilience would be a protective factor, but it may not be a protective factor for susceptibility to get disease. So in this secondary paper, we demonstrated that this salutogenic trait that I will be discussing in a few minutes, it has got is associated with optimal immune resilience. And if you remember, initially, I told you I'll be talking about the transcription factor, TCF seven, and that this combination of having the traits of immune resilience with TCF seven, which is a critical transcription factor to maintain naivety, will have many protective effects for Telkom two. So what I wanna leave you at this point is with the fact that during our lifespan, we encounter three major forces. The force to stay healthy, which is selutogenesis, the force of pathogenesis, which is getting sick, and the biology of aging, which is growing older. So, this is there's a confluence of events concurrently happening of forces at the same time. And so, my vision of the work that I'm gonna present to you is that there are some of us who maintain a level of immune resilience and that that's optimal and that there are methods to monitor the degree of deviation from this optimal resilience. Okay. So, that's generally my vision of how I approach my patients and how how how I'm approaching this problem. And the operative word here is regardless of age. So I'm in my sixties. One could say that all 60 year old people are the same as much as one could say that all 40 year old people or 20 year old people are the same. That's not true. Just like my five fingers are different sizes, there's a lot of heterogeneity. And to be able to capture that heterogeneity is extremely important. But we'll never be able to capture that heterogeneity unless we anchor it to what we believe is a metric or a measure that is possibly optimal. And that degrees of deviation from that being optimal tells us how far along are you from that spectrum of being optimal and how it might potentially predispose you to diseases or other aging associated processes. This concept of ours actually was somewhat recapitulated in a paper that came out in Nature Medicine. This is their abstract came out last year. They talk about a unified metric of human immune health. I will discuss this partially within the context of our work a little later. But this is their abstract. In logical health has been challenging to characterize but could be defined as as the absence of immune pathology. While shared features of some immune disease and the concept of immunological resilience based on age independent adaptation to antigenic stimulation have been developed, general metrics of immune health and its utility for assessing clinically healthy individuals remain ill defined. So this is exactly what I just mentioned to you that we need to be able to understand what is optimal and the degree of deviation from it. So lots what what is very important to appreciate that our lifespans, our expectancies have increased in large part because of improvements in public health. So as we have developed vaccines, clean water, antibiotics, this is a lifespan going along till here. So not too long ago in the nineteen hundreds, we were about fifty years. And now we're at about eighty, eighty five years over here. Okay. So but it is possible then that I'm in my sixties. So I've experienced sixty years worth of antigenic exposures or load. If someone was 20 years, they've experienced twenty years of antigenic load. So, one could argue then that how we manage antigenic loads that we experience, you know, even in fact diet is a form of antigenic load. I mean, you eat microprocessed food or whatever else you might eat. You know, they're they in itself induce antigenic loads. So it could be that our lifespan may be capped at how much antigenic load we can actually handle. And that potentially is why Gilgamesh and we will fail at immortality. So as I mentioned, there are tradeoffs to a longer lifespan. So as you can see that as your GDP or your family income goes up, your longevity likelihood goes up, your immune competence will go up. But as with it, there's trade offs. There are increased risk of autoimmunity and inflammatory diseases or cancer. And of course, there's a concurrent decline in microbial burden. But this is exactly what's happened over lifespan over the last especially one hundred years. We have increased our immunity levels and tolerances have decreased. So my thesis is rather simple that the process of aging is basically a proxy for antigenic exposures, repetitive experiences, infections, or other traumas, etcetera. They all induce a low immunocompetence high inflammation state. There are some individuals who preserve the state or rapidly restore it. And they preserve what I call is an IC, which is immunocompetence high or IF low inflammation low state, which is optimal immune resilience. As I mentioned, females are likely to preserve this more than males. They have a longer lifespan who preserve this trait. They have less severe or asymptomatic COVID or influence that we've shown this. Sepsis survival, resist HIVAIDS. And this term that people like to bank to you around called Inflamma Ageing and they resist it and they resist some cancers. So in a very simple terms, we all are designed to either be resilient or we adapt or we become maladaptive. So any inflammatory stress that one might experience, the outcomes can be divided into these three traits. With respect to the process of aging, one could argue that those who are resilient to this inflammatory stress, they preserve lower amounts of senescent cell loads. Here, adaptation is two plus, maladaptive is worse. So I'm more interested in understanding factors that preserve or restore immune health versus studying disease. So what makes people look like this rather than what looks like this? They're not necessarily the opposite of each other. So, one let let's so one can think about this problem as such. There's a inflammatory stress. It turns on an immune injury. And then when the stress goes away, the repair processes begin. And concurrently, there is a decline in immune competence that gets restored over time. So if you look at either a solitary form of antigenic insult or your lifespan, it can be encapsulated in this fashion. So this is an antigenic insult. It could be a single COVID exposure. It could be your lifespan. You start out with a high immunocompetence, low inflammation state. You get a hit and you return back. You get a hit and you get turned back. And you maintain this. That becomes your optimal state and you have resisted the erosion of immune resilience. Some people will erode back and will arrive at some suboptimal state. But all along this journey, we are switching from a high immunocompetence from and a low inflammation state to a low immunocompetence in a high inflammation state. And this, of course, would be nonoptimal if you switch from here all the way up to here. So people generally talk in terms of homeostasis. I prefer to talk in terms of allostasis. Allostasis is how we respond or adapt to antigenic stimulation. So, to study our problem, what we did was we quantified or used proxies of antigenic stimulation. So, aging would be one. Moderate antigenic stimulation would be risk factors for HIV. Moderate transient would be SARS CoV-two, allo immunization after transplant and HIV. So, when one experiences these levels of antigenic stimulation, your response, which is the immune allostasis, one could have an optimal response or one could switch to becoming suboptimal or nonoptimal. So this journey, females are more aligned with here. Males are more likely to get aligned with this or nonoptimal state, and this process leads to the switch. And when you stop that inflammation, you have the potential of going back. So what I'm gonna show you is that that at any age, there are people who preserve optimal resilience for about $67 You can measure it, as I will tell you in a test. We developed metrics, if you will. Metricsizing is a very important concept for us to be able to, as I mentioned, define the degrees of deviation from a sense of normality, if you will. So I'll talk to you about immune health grades. I will talk to you about transcriptional or RNA based to gene expression based metrics, which we call a SAS one, which is survival associated signature one. So this is good. So here's survival, so high is good. And mortality associated signature mortality is not good. So having low of this would be good. So this double hit, so remember I mentioned to you where we're looking at the combination of immune competence, good, inflammation, if you wanna call it, generically speaking, bad or too much of it is bad. So high immunocompetence, low inflammation. And these are the outcomes that we'll be studying. With this initial study of ours, it was about forty nine thousand people. We also studied monkeys and we also studied mice. But today, I'll just talk to you about our studies related to humans. So we wanted model systems to test this concept. Remember, we need to study this in the cons on in the context of inflammatory stress. People who, within the context of inflammatory stress, either preserve or don't preserve immune resilience. So the first one one model we will study is, the model of aging. And those who preserve this will have longer lifespans. Those who have we used COVID as a model system. Those who, again, within the context of COVID, preserve immune resilience, resist severe COVID. I will talk to you about HIV AIDS as another model system. And with respect to cancer, I'm gonna show you a model system with skin cancer. So first, how do we gauge this? So first is we develop these immune health grades, which, are measuring the balance, not the CD4, CD8 ratio, a balance between, as I'll explain in a minute, between CD8 and CD4 cells. And the other is RNA or transcriptomic metrics that I described to you earlier. That is SAS1, which is survival associate signature one, mortality associate signature one. So, these are immunocompetence genes. These are inflammation genes. So, what we did here was in 2010, I believe, or '14, I'm forgetting. Sorry. Forgive me, my brain is not very sharp right now. But we measured in a paper in Newman General Medicine, I believe it's 2010, we screened about eleven thousand, fourteen thousand HIV negative people and established that the median CD4 count of human populations were HIV negative is about the lower boundary was about eight hundred. So, we use this as a metric. So, if you were to send your lab results to LabCorp, and it'll tell you that their normal range is from three forty yard or three fifty all the way up to 1,500. Well, if I had three fifty one CD4 cells, I wouldn't be a happy person. Okay. So, we needed to metricize what is a normal remember, Tom, I've gone and looked at the degree of deviation from normality or some sort of a normality. So, we established that CD4 count of 800 is what I would call as a good benchmark to have. And we use the CD4, CD8 ratio simply as a proxy, an indirect proxy for the levels of CD eight cells. We are not studying the ratio. I am studying a balance between CD four CD eight and CD four cells. So people who have a ratio above one, they have preserved lower amounts of CD eights compared to their CD four. So we then took people who have a ratio above one and a CD four count of 800. We then that was grade one. We then took people who have a ratio of one, which means they've restrained the CD8, but in the context of lower CD4 cells. Then these two groups have got an inverted ratio, less than one. So they have got expanded amount of CD8 cells relative to their CD fours. And this is in the context of having high CD eight with lower CD fours, and this is having high CD eight with low CD fours. So four grades over here. Sunil, quick question. Yep. And I have many, but I'll save most of those for later. And for those who don't know who are gonna yell at me for interrupting, Sunil and I discussed this ahead of time. So it's good with us. Hopefully, it's good with the audience. So c d fours, 800. I get that that's in the in the, best immune health grade, the best IHG grade. But what it I think your, population was forty to seventy nine year olds or somewhere in that range. What's the do you know the average value for CD four in, say, 20 year olds, 25 year olds, a bit younger? And then correspondingly, the average levels for, CD eight in youth? Yeah. So, the general ratio across all ages will always generally be a two to one ratio. Younger adults or younger children will have higher CD4 cells. We do not study younger children, but our cohort goes all the way down to 15 years of age. Right. It doesn't matter how you stratify your ratio and your CD four your ratio and your CD four cells as I will show you because we have cohorts as young as five year olds with a particular disease or infectious disease that I will mention in a minute, and it exemplifies the problem that we are dealing with. So more important than an absolute value is the relative proportions of these cells. So, again, the ratio is not an actual I'm not interested in an actual value of CD eight. I'm interested in what is the relative amount of CD eight relative to the amount of CD four counts. And that will become very clear here. Okay. Wait. Wait. One more quick question. Hang on. Sure. Sure. Yeah. So, and then it seems that CD fours decline during aging, and then CDAs increase during aging resulting in a more likely to have a lower ratio with age. Or true? Yeah. So then you are really talking about averages. So you're talking as a group how people behave. Yep. But what you will see in a minute that there are 80 year old people who do preserve the best grade as much as a younger person does. And there will be younger people who look like 80 year old people compared to, younger people whose profiles look like 80 year old people profiles. So, as a group, yes, you will see and as an average, that is what would happen. But as I said, that's an average. It doesn't help me at all as a physician or you if you were to come to me and says, I wanna know how good my immune health is, most doctors will roll up their eyes and not know what to do about it. So the idea is to metricize it. I can't metricize an average going down or up. I mean, as I said, an average of 350 cells at LabCorp may sound three fifty one might sound normal. It doesn't sound normal to me. I would be very concerned if I had 351 CD four cells regardless if I was 20 years old or if I was 80 years old. I don't believe in averages. Average is just a framework but doesn't really help me at all. So the goal for us really as clinicians is to metricize it in a way that we can control heterogeneity. If we don't control heterogeneity in a population and we just continue to use averages, we will generally perform conflated studies. So, for example, if I were to just take high CD4 count people, are we conflating group one and three? If I were to take people who had low CD4 counts, are we conflating groups two and four? If I was to, you know, and so on. So that that conflation is a big problem. So I'm with you a 100%. Don't get me wrong. And I agree. You know? But what I the question that I'm basically asking is, relative to population based averages that can inform So for example, I'm with you on the metric sizing. You know, I I've tested blood tested 62 times over the past ten years. And a majority of my audience a a lot of people in my audience are doing that too. So but the population based average, if you know that CD fours are declining and you look at your own data, independent of what whatever CD eight is doing at the moment, if you know that that CD four declines during aging in the average population and your data is 800, seven fifty, seven hundred, six fifty, then, you know, I'm on I'm on a bad trend here. I need to do something to reverse that. So I I'd look at the population based averages as informing in terms of where your own directionality should be aiming higher for c d fours and resisting age related decline and aiming lower for CD8s and resisting their age related increase. Sure. But then what do I do with that information? If I would rather be able to if I just looked at my CD4, I would like to bin myself in some category and further subdivide these categories that I could rationalize because if I just, I don't have population based averages in America that I could use in Mississippi would be different. People have poverty greater poverty there. Or South Texas would be a little different than me over here. So that doesn't really help me. What really helps me is that I can bin it, and then I could even ask, okay. I fell sick today, and I could tell my physician. I was in grade one before, but today I got COVID. Now I'm in grade two a or two b or two c. But, hey, guess what? I rebounded back up to grade two a, and and I didn't go ever go back up to my original grade one. Now monitor me. So I think it is really about being able to categorize oneself, if you will. So, like, for myself, I used to be a great you know, my grade right my grade started off as a two a, as I'll show you in a minute. During COVID, I went to a grade four. It took me a long time to get back to grade two, so I could monitor it. So if I just followed myself as a group average, I would never be able to inform myself or others or my caretakers as to how my shifts are occurring. So more important is not just to see where I am relative to my age, but relatively see how I shift when I get my next disease, for example, or my infection or something of that nature. And just to add a little bit more, you know, if you have data in your own youth. Right? So if you have twenty years of of c d fours and c d eights, and even if you have the transcriptional data yet, you know, which isn't commercially available. But if you know what your immune health profile look like at at 40, and now you have an infection, and now you know what it is after infection, And it isn't reverting back to where it was in in the 40. Now it's okay. What can I do? Diet, lifestyle, supplements, prescription meds, whatever it may be to try to help your immune system revert back to that more youthful state. Yep. Yep. Absolutely. Absolutely. With you a 100%, Sunil. Yep. Absolutely. You see, if I had acute kidney failure, I would know my BUN and creatinine went up, I could stage it. The difference between infectious disease doctors, gerontologists, and people with cancer, the cancer docs are way ahead of us. They like to metricize, group people, stage cancer very well. You know, we don't stage diseases very well. So it's important in my books for me, this is a form of staging. You know, immune health is the largest organ system in the body, but physicians don't measure it. It's very sad. So that is that is, I think, if I had to leave a parting message, it really would be that we are ignoring a very large component of our repertoire of immune of of health systems, if you will. Wait. Just to add a little more context. When you say the immune system is the largest, organ in the body, is that by number of cells? So total white blood cells are more than liver cells or kidney cells. Well, every organ system of your body has got the immune health system. Mhmm. From microglia in your brain, which will be there to fight it, you know, fight infections, the glial system as well, the neurons as well. The brain gut axis is very well known. The brain immune axis is very well known. Your entire microbial system of your gut from your mouth to your anus is a huge organ system. Kidney, liver all have got immune cells embedded in them, spleen. So the fact is that we are being able to metricize those organ systems, but we are unable to or inefficiently at a bedside level monitor or make it accessible to have some better crude measures of immune health. This is why your your work, your lab's work is so important. So, yeah. Alright. Sorry. Continue, please. No worries. All good. Yes. So these are the four grades here. This is a large 3,000 person cohort. So you'll see that grade one is the most common. Grade two is the second most. In a generally good population, less amounts of grade three and four. Okay. Now if you looked at the CD four count here, you would argue that this CD four count looks relatively normal. This goes back to your point. So I have relatively I would not say there's biologically any difference over here, but if you look at the CDH, this has got 525 median. IAG three has got twice the amount. If you look at low CD4 counts, it's the opposite. So here, these guys have got six seventy five and six sixteen, no different. But this group four has got twice the amount. So by eye, just looking CD four and CD eight, you can't intuit someone's immune health grades. So this is what it would look like. Grade one being blue, brown being grade two, green being grade three, grade four. And we are taking the data from age 15 to greater than 90 years of age, and our capacity to preserve blue or the best grade goes down and there's an expansion of the other grades. So, but there's, as I mentioned to you, even among people greater than 20 greater than 90, so less number of people here, but those who survive 22 among those 22, there are about 25% of those who do preserve blue over here. There is nothing that we will learn by studying averages. The only time we will learn anything in medicine is when we study the extremes of phenotype. So that none example over there is a great example of a person who lived a long life. So understanding her paradox is extremely important as much as it would be a paradox for a young child to die at an early age who is otherwise generally healthy. So the extremes of phenotype is how I have lived my life in understanding disease biology. Okay. So, so but on the other hand, the reason why studying extremes are so important is you will have younger people who have got black. And so they've got grade four. These younger people, if you were to give them a flu vaccine, would be less responsive just as much as an older person would be less responsive. There'll be some immune traits that are common to blue to blue, brown to brown, regardless of age, as I will show you in a minute in our phenotyping work. Okay. So when people study the concept of age, they're comparing older to younger people. But you're studying younger people who are heterogeneous and older people who are heterogeneous. And that leads to confounding. Okay. Across age is a female and male. Male are have a greater propensity to degrade their immune health grade one across age. So this is not as this is sexually dimorphic across age including postmenopausal. It's not all hormones. K. So the take home message is some people resist older persons resist, immune, resilience and degradation. The resistance is greater than females and males, and immune traits differ by two factors, age and the health grade. Okay? Sunil, quick question. But you can just go back real quick. Yep. So, for the fifteen to twenty nine year olds that are in grade four Yep. Would they be more likely so maybe is that, a lack of vaccine responsiveness where they don't generate antibodies to a given antigen? Or and or would that also be potentially they get an infection while in grade four status? So they're in grade four status, they get an infection. Now they're or a vaccination, and they're more likely to have an adverse event, whether it's whatever it may be. Yep. So these are the studies that we have done, these are constitutive. They're not ill at a given moment. And so if you were to actually in fact, there are others who have done this study as well. If you just take there was a study done in Germany with younger college going students. They took people who had a lower ratio, and they looked at the influenza titers, and they were lower than those that were who didn't have it. So they were by proxy studying this particular grade. Gotcha. Alright. So, being in grade four, being in a worse immune health profile, vaccination, less antibody titers. And then, potentially, when they're exposed to that pathogen, they may not mount as big of an, an immune response to fight it off. Or, yes. There'll be more likely the best model we have that I have studied is COVID, and I will show you those data. We studied very extensively. We obviously didn't have these immune health grades before COVID began but because I study MIIM at the VA, we have proxies of those. You could use, you know, again, we had to use some proxies but what we can be fairly confident is that those who were blue before and preserved blue did much better. You could not have turned on blue during COVID as I will show you in a minute. So the fact is that the reverse I'm pretty certain of, But I can't tell you everyone had a grade four, were more susceptible to it because we would need very large prospective cohorts to be able to do it. So but for blue, if you were a grade one and regardless of your age, if you came in well if you came in with COVID, you are more likely to survive. In fact, I use that to triage patients at the height of the COVID. In nursing homes, people who preserve their blue, I would request them to come send them over later to the hospital compared to those who are older and had black or grade four, for example. Great. Fantastic. Yeah. So you were to argue, like, you were to mention that this is all an effect of age. So it's not an effect of age. It's an effect of antigenic experience. So this is the data I just showed you. These are children who have schistosomiasis, five year old Kenyan children. And we are anchoring the level of antigenic stimulation to the level of eggs in the urine. So schistosomiasis in the urine is an extremely antigenic stimuli. And you can see as the antigenic stimulus goes up, the proportion of kids who have got the best grade goes down and black goes up. So again, remember, I'm trying to develop model systems where I can control for the level of antigenic exposure experience someone has had. So one model system you could use was age because age is a proxy in my books for the level of antigenic exposure someone has had. A second model system is this. A third model system we use was female sex workers. So here we're quantifying the level of the behavioral activity score. Greater than zero means they've got greater exposure. They're using less condoms, more frequent exposures, more STD, sexually transmitted infections. And as you can see there as their behavioral scores go up, the proportion preserving blue goes down and the other scores show up. We use HIV as a model system. Here is HIV anchored at the bottom. You go from low HIV all the way up to higher HIV. So people who have preserved low HIV have some of their pres or have lower HIV's, counts copies. They've got preserved some blue, less black or gray grade four. But as you increase it, you have this. So it's rather remarkable here HIV negative children who look very much like HIV positive people. Here are young sex workers who have got a fair amount of black over here compared to just very much like the same as grade four in HIV positive people. So we were very fortunate. We took care of some two thousand patients who were hospitalized. And we did a deep phenotyping in them. This work is now published in, aging cell. And, basically, grossly speaking, so if we had a human population, let's do a thought experiment. So one would expect as we age, the amount of blue goes down. So this would be an aging population. This is grade one. This is grade two. This is grade three. This is grade four. So now imagine we did an experiment where we showered SARS CoV two. So what happened with COVID is that if people switch had AIG one preserved IIG one, they do the best. They either resist SARS CoV two induced immune resilience. They've got mild infection, good immunophenotypes. If you went from a one to a two or any other grade, you did worse. You went from a two to a worse or two to a worse grade or a two a good two to a bad two or a good four to a bad four, you did worse. Very extensive studies we have done shown its association with mortality, shown its association with post acute COVID, etcetera. So, basically, what we did during COVID was we monitored their grades. So in addition to those bulk rates of one, two, three, four, we further stratified grades with a, b, and c where we took 500 to 800, 200 to 500, and less than 200 to quantify or state as two a, two b, two c, and same for four a, four b, four c. So if people came in with one or two a, they generally did much better than people who came in with two c or four c. So what we did during the corporate time was that when people came in with these grades, we tailored their healthcare to these particular grade systems. Okay? So I wanted to share with you the idea that there are when we study aging, we're generally confounded because of heterogeneity. So what I wanna show you is the immune traits differ both by the health grids and by age. So what we're trying to do is to say, regardless if I'm blue, regardless of age, what will I see? If I am four and four, what will I look like regardless of age? So basically, we could stratify human populations or the traits by those that are uniquely associated with immune resilience. There are traits or immunophenotyping of those 3,000 people that your traits associated with uniquely with age. Some that are shared by immune resilience in age and some are neither. So I won't go through this. This is all published, but it gives you a flavor that if we just studied older folks with younger people, we have the propensity to confound ourselves. Why is this important? It's important because if we're gonna develop zero medicine as a discipline where we wanna give medicines or methods to treat people, if you wanna use treat as a word or boost them. Using a conflated person who is in this group might need a certain kind of therapy. So right now there's a large trial going on with metformin. Well, maybe it will work in everyone. But maybe it would be important, even the trial, to balance your arms. So if you got hundreds of thousands of people, maybe it won't make a difference. But even you're doing a small trial, if your arms are imbalanced, your placebo and your trial arms are imbalanced for these grouping systems, you would have some confounding. That's number one. Number two, the kinds of therapies that you want to give. So first is just the design of the trial. The second is the kind of therapies you're giving. It may be that rambamycin might work in people who have grade one, but may not work in someone who has grade four. So remember I mentioned to you predict, prevent, personalize. Personalization means I must know something about that person deeper than just simply their age. Okay. So the next system we used was sex workers. This was actually an ideal system because sex workers have repetitive chronic exposures. Very much like what would happen. HIV compresses everything down in two days, but and it's not a truly a great model. I mean, people can use the term of accelerated aging, etcetera, with the with the HIV, but sex workers are a unique system because they've got repetitive chronic exposures. So you may be aware that there are these women in Kenya who have been followed for many years, who have had repetitive sex exposures and a small number and they have remained, had unprotected sex and remain HIV infected, uninfected. So, that's an exposed to HIV yet uninfected. So, I just want you to concentrate on this middle plot right here. So here we have quantified their behavioral activity based on their quantum usage as well as their clients per week. And what you notice is that as the behavioral scores goes up, the capacity to preserve the immune health grid goes down and that there are women who will have an expansion of these other grades. To me, this is remarkable. This is not very far off from the non experience, right? Here you have women who have massive amount of exposures. In fact, twenty five percent or thirty percent of these women are becoming infected eventually. And most infections are all we show, we occur in this particular group. But there are some women who despite all that preserve the health grid. Remember, like those 80 year old people I showed you earlier, who despite age maintained the best immune health grid. And so those who preserved it were less likely to get infected compared to their counterparts who degraded this grid. Sunil, so, two two two questions. So would the prediction be that, those women who have preserved immune health grades, you know, the ones, even though they have all the, at at right. So longer lifespan? Or is this a evolutionary, you know, a genetic evolutionary thing where they're just evolutionarily adapted to resist infection and microbial burden, and maybe it has nothing to do with other the health of other organ systems. Yeah. So we requested these women to stop having sex or reduce their sex activity. So what you'll notice is that black these are the same women followed for ten years, and they restore back their blue. So if you're always under antigenic pressure, eventually, you'll begin to erode your immune health. If you remove that pressure, then you have the opportunity to go back up. So this is an adapt this is this this being able to preserve blue then is a true trait that is under the pressure of repeated antigenic stimuli, they managed to preserve it. Same if I used sexually transmitted infections as a proxy. The same thing happens over here. As you increase the sexually transmitted infections, blue goes down and the other grades go back up. Gotcha. Would the prediction be though that those women would have the slice bands relative to the women in the, you know, three and four worse immune health grade? Yes. So my prediction is that in the women who managed to preserve blue would have a survival advantage. Nice. Yes. I don't have the data though. But yes. Prediction. Sure. We can speculate, you know. So the same thing holds true in HIV. Some people manage to preserve this best immune health grid. They live longer. Those who, by the way, have grades two or three have intermediate aids progression rates. So that is why using CD four count even in the context of HIV is a problem. Okay. So I showed you now aging as a as a model system. I showed you sex workers as a model system. And now I'm going to show you a an aging or lifespan as another model system. Okay? So this shows you that, of course, when you're younger, you live longer than older people regardless to be expected. But what I'm showing you here is this is in the Framingham Heart Study. Younger females that is less than from 40 to 66 years of age, they are have a survival advantage compared to their younger male counterparts. Similarly, among older females from 67 to 92, they have a survival advantage compared to their male counterparts. So, what happened during COVID was we took samples for patients with COVID. I asked my group to identify genes and then gene pathways that are differentiated with that are differentially expressed between people who survived versus didn't survive. And so that is mortality is listed at the bottom here. So all we converted the genes to gene signatures. So higher expression of these pathways is associated with greater mortality. Higher expression of these pathways is associated with survival. So all these pathways that are associated with mortality are generally inflammation related. All these pathways that higher expression is associated with survival all relate to immune competence. So then I asked them to take these same very signatures and ask whether they associate with survival in the Framingham Heart Study. So the reason is this, if I got COVID today, my survival is dependent not on just what happened in COVID, but what happened to me the day before I had COVID. Okay? So if I had a gene profile that was skewed towards survival, my my lifespan could have been another ten more years. But if the day before I got COVID, my gene expression profile was skewed towards lower immune resilience, then it's possible that COVID would give me a kick in my pant and I would possibly die within a month. So my survival during COVID is not dependent on just what happened during COVID. It depended on all the years behind me that have brought me to the day till the time. So the day my body saw SARS CoV-two, it's reacting to what it saw. Okay? So Framingham Heart Study, they don't have COVID. This is the constitutive group. So by comparing these two, we could ask which gene signatures associate mortality uniquely to COVID or are common regardless of COVID. Okay. So, that's what we did. So, what you'll see are red colors and green colors. So, not unexpectedly, you have a signature like type one interferon signaling associated with higher mortality and no association with mortality in the Framingham to be expected. Framingham people are just constitute a group of people. But then what you'll notice is there are gene signatures that are in green here that are common to both. So this is a gene signature that is common to sort of associate with mortality in COVID as well as a signature associated with survival or mortality in the Framingham study. Similarly, there's there's this cassette of signatures that are uniquely associated with survival in both the COVID nineteen setting as well as survival in the Framingham study. Okay? So what this means is that there are mortality traits that relate to inflammation, that beneficial traits relate to immune competence, and survival is the combination of both. So in this in some of you may have heard a signature called ImmunEdge that was developed by Mark Davis and his group up at Stanford. So if we take his signature, higher levels of their signature, which is associated with survive with the way we've coded it, it tracks survival. You can see it's protective in the COVID setting. It's protective in the Framingham Heart Study. Our SAS one, which is a good signature, survival here, survival here. MAS one, bad here, bad here. Okay? So if we apply these signatures now to the Framingham cohort so the for those who aren't familiar with Kaplan Meier curves, this is a Kaplan Meier curve. Y axis or x axis over here is time since the time the score was calculated or is calculated baseline. So and then follow from that time. This is proportion survived. Blue color means they're double good. High immunocompetence, so high SAS one, low inflammation or low MAS one. Double bad is in brown. This is a double good. This is a double bad. So here you'll see they have low SAS and high MAS. So these are the two extremes. You can see these people live longer. These people pass away earlier. Those who are either bad have intermetric survival rates. So then if you asked what is the distribution of these double good or double bad etcetera in by immune health grade. So this is during COVID. Those who managed to preserve one so, basically, all I showed you here is a way other than immune health grades using transcriptomic metrics to monitor immune health. And I'm showing you that those who have got this kind of immune health with double good with the double bad, they are, they differ. So now I'm showing you that if you take people who have got the best immune health grid and you went in immune profile, transcriptomely, you profile immuno profiled them, this blue represents double good, high SARS, low mass. So most people who have preserved the best immune health grade have preserved this double good status. You asked me earlier, did those sex workers, will they have a survival advantage? I just told you that in our all our studies, people who had COVID and came in with the blue grade, they did very well. So they came in with this, but I'm showing you that within when you tell those people and you sequence them, they have preserved a high signature for immune competence and low profile for mortality. If I take people with autoimmunity like lupus, so these are younger and older people with immune health grade one, you will notice in their when we look at their gene expression profile, those people who are immune health grade one, they all have got or most of them have got blue. Not very different than controls who are younger or older that have got the same profile. What you don't want to be at is here. Two c or four c basically has got the mortality profile. They've got double bed, low immunocompetence and high inflammation. So, the next way to examine this remember, we want challenges. And when people get flu, only thirty to fifty percent of people with seasonal flu actually, they remain they remain asymptomatic. So and a lot one in three people, even despite you inoculate them up the nose with influenza, they do not develop any clinical illness. You even find this with SARS CoV-two, there is a challenge in England, you find the same pattern. So let's examine what happened to people during a natural flu season. So this is a natural flu season. What they did was they took samples from people before flu season, the fall, gave them a cup and said, when you get your first fever, show up, spit in it with your cup and show up and give give us some blood. So they got their first acute respiratory infection. And day zero, they showed up, got the blood, two four six twenty one blood and the spring. So blue here is immune health grade one is no. Sorry. SAS SAS high, mass low, double good. This is double bad. So very soon after infection or basically on the same day they had fever, this was the overall profile of Sasmaz that it looked like before. Now you can see that most of these people turned on a mortality profile about eighty percent. So this is how it looked. Over time, these people began to restore back their SARS mass, and there's a decline in the prevalence of brown, and it looks very similar. I said, great. No problems. But so now let's examine this group of people who were blue beforehand. That means they started out very well beforehand. This goes back directly to your question about how if what happens to people during preservation. Okay? So these people all started out blue. They were great. So this is the problem about averages. If I just compare this to this, I said no difference. Blue to blue, I don't see any difference in the prevalences. Let's just focus on blue for a moment. The majority of these people converted into a non blue state. Over time, they began to restore their blue immune health grade one, but there were about thirty or thirty five percent of people who did not restore it. They were left clinically fine but immunologically they have a deficit six months later. You asked me earlier whether someone now who had, was in that immune health grade four and 20 years old, what would have happened to them? So my argument to you would have been this is in a constitutive state in spring, six months or four months after they had the flu season, they are doing just fine clinically but they have a residual deficit that they don't know about. Now, if they got their secondary infection, this group is potentially at a greater risk potentially, okay, we haven't studied it but potentially at a greater risk for having more severe disease or, and that this never goes back to normal and this is the group eventually over time that began with the blue when they were younger and they switched over and never went back. Remember, I went to that oscillation cycle. So this is the group who never went back to that baseline. And then they switched now and they've gone from a high immunocompetence, low inflammation state, and they switched it. So now let's take this one step further. Now let's examine the same context, but actually documented influenza infection. So this is a study that was done. They inoculated younger people intranasally with influenza. You would have thought that everyone get will get infected. That's not true. As I mentioned, fifty percent of people remain asymptomatic. Okay. So what they did was they took baseline gene expression profiles, that's t one. Then they took gene expression profiles at the second time point. So they then when the people who had what we did was we examined the profile when the symptomatic people had peak symptoms, okay, and compared the gene profile to the people who when the symptomatic people were having peak symptoms to the time when the and then we took the samples from the people who were asymptomatic at the same time point. So t two means peak symptoms for the symptomatic people and we're comparing it to the asymptomatic people at the same time point. And s and r basically represents people who are either sympt susceptible or resistant. So what you notice here is that this among the symptomatic people, this is what their profile looked like beforehand. There were forty one people who were asymptomatic, and this is their profile at time point two. At this time point two, which is I think about a hundred hours or here, sixty hours later, And you can see sixty hours, sixty and sixty nine point nine five we pulled together. At this time point, most of these people were now turned on this mortality profile that you see here, okay? However, the people who an equal proportion remained asymptomatic. What is interesting is this is what their profile looked like before they got their flu at time T1. And now they didn't turn yellow. They actually had more blue. So this is an adaptation of resilience. Not only did they not degrade it, they actually improved their profile at that given time. Okay? If these kinds of adaptations do not occur, we want to survive as a species. If all of us turned like this, every time we had our flu, we would have all been not very healthy. Okay? The fact that through evolution, we have had our greatest evolutionary pressure has always been infectious diseases from TB to malaria. Okay? So I know this to be true because we also study, you know, simple things like allergens in an allergen challenged chamber. And we put people in there and they inhale house dust mite or ragweed, we again find three kinds of people. People who are resilient, people who adapt, and people who are maladaptive. So here is a great example of people who are not only resilient, but they actually have a great adaptive response of immune resilience. So the final model is this. There is an age old question. Does immunosuppression lead to cancer or does cancer lead to immunosuppression? Which came first? Very hard to test. So as a model system, we studied post transplant skin cancer. Because people who get squamous cells because people who get transplants, they have a 100 fold excess risk of developing this very unique form of squamous cell cancers. Repetitive multiple times. Very unfortunate with kidney transplants, with liver transplant. So this is work that we did by the way, the the work we did with the, I I will acknowledge my authors, my collaborators a bit later. So this is a group we did with a group in Oxford. And so, what we did was we took people when they got their first cancer. And we asked what was the rate to their second cancer? So, here is the proportion of people who developed a second cancer. And this is a time from their first cancer. Those who had the best immune health grade resisted getting their second cancer compared to those who had the worst, worser grades. And this is after correcting for the length of follow-up, their degree of immunosuppression, etcetera. So I've given you four model systems to examine to see that there are people who experience inflammatory stress. There'll be some people who preserve it, and they do better compared to those who don't. So, the next question we wanted to ask was, is there a unified survival mortality access? And as I said, my focus is on health rather than what makes us sick. So, what I'd like to leave you with the idea is some of the work we've published in our second paper in aging cell. Both of these papers are very large studies. And the idea is that that there is what we believe is a co preservation of traits associated with optimal immune resilience and TCF seven or transcription factor, T cell factor one, whose gene is TCF seven. That when people experience inflammatory stress, those who have the capacity to co preserve this, they have maintained this very strong trait of immune competence and low inflammation. We showed that it attenuates what people like to call as premature aging or infection severity. In this study, we showed incident cardiovascular disease. In this paper, we showed with cancer as well, as well as Alzheimer's. And the concept of a pathogenic triad. So the pathogenic triad is what I call is a triad of inflammation, immune aging, and senescent acetyloid. This is a very hard problem to study in vivo. So, what we did was we developed readouts for the pathogenic triad of inflammaging, immune aging, and senescent cells. So, we developed gene expression signatures that what we call as an age IL-six, these are from other people's work. And we developed this signature from their work. We took the signature called the SEN Mayo signature developed by the Mayo Clinic in a paper in Nature Communications that they said tracked senescent cell load. Then we took a signature that tracks Inflamma Ageing also from another group. This is a signature that tracks the extreme longevity. These are genes that went up. These are gene signatures that what we call has went down, and then we are comparing this signature. We developed this unique signature that tracks three positive t cell health outcomes. This is a previous signature that tracks immune age and so on. And these are our two signatures and these are two transcription factors. And, again, this is lifespan, shorter or longer than the Framingham Heart Study. So here you can see that these three signatures are CENMAOS tracking senescent celluloid, the inflamma aging up signature and age IL six. These are tracking inflamma aging, if you will. They are going up with age. These signatures, you could say, tracking immunocompetence and higher levels of these signatures associated with greater survival. Very much like our mass one here and our SAS one here. So, basically, we developed these readouts, if you will. So for immune aging, we had a readout of immune age that will go down with immune aging. L down, age this extreme longevity one will go this signature goes down. This other unique signature goes down. Inflammation, we developed two signatures. And with senescent cellular, we developed San Mayo. So by using these methods, we could go further. And so what I wanna leave you with the idea that there is actually a core group of gene expression signatures that co cluster, if you will, are highly correlated with t c f seven. So you see there is one branch that comes out from here. And what you notice is the one big blob of kind of reddish. Some are closer or more closely related. So these are slightly more correlated. These are slightly more correlated, but they all come off one branch. This one branch is a branch that is associated with longer lifespan or immune competence genes. On the other hand, what you notice is a whole bunch of inflammatory signatures that for do not are not very closely related to each other. They're just free bits floating around over here. But I wanna share with you the idea is that there are many ways to inflammation, but there are few ways to immune competence. Okay? So this is one. There'll be another pathway that may be associated with chromatin regulation, etcetera. So, or DNA repair. But there are fewer ways to maintaining immunocompetence. That is why losing immunocompetence in my books is much more lethal than inflammation because there are many inflammatory pathways but there are very few conserved immunocompetence pathways. In my books, it's a loss of immunocompetence which is a greater problem in aging than a gain of inflammation, okay? So, what we did was when we looked at these various signatures of immunocompetence, what we found was that this transcription factor TCF7LEF1, which are actually homologues are highly conserved. Whereas a very few signatures actually when you look at the inflammatory signatures that are conserved between these. You see lots of zeros here with a lot of fours, three fours over here. So a lot more commonality between these immunocompetent signatures. And one that stood out to us is TCF seven, highly well studied. The reason is this is this is signature that's very evolutionary conserved, and it is very highly related to preservation of naivety of immune cells. So I mentioned to you that this group developed some signatures called immune health metrics. We took their signatures that they developed. And what we find is that their signatures that they defined as an immune health metric, they actually cluster to this particular signatures as well. They're very highly related to immune competent signatures that we defined here earlier. So, as I mentioned, this is a master regulator of T cell responses. It is, plays a very important role in T cell stemness. That generally this is what I would suggest to you is that generally people think of this in terms of aging. That with age TCF seven goes down. I would argue with you actually that TCF seven is preserved in people of optimal IR regardless of age and regardless of inflammatory conditions. Going back to your question about averages. So by the average what happens versus that is, is very different than what happens when you when you stratify people properly. So here is that same group of people that I showed you from the Sardinia cohort earlier. Now here at the bottom, what we're looking is TCF seven levels in people who have preserved IAG one compared to those who have TCF seven that is not IAG one, sorry, SAS high, MAS low. And this is, TCF seven in those who have got double bad which is SAS low and MAS high. And if we look at the gene expression level of TCF seven here, you notice it's universally higher here compared to this. So across age, you will find that if you anchor it to their SAS mass levels, you find this uniformity. If you look at people who are controls or down syndrome, down syndrome is used as a model system for accelerated aging, for example. You see children who have got down syndrome. If they have preserved their blue, they have also maintained higher levels of TCF seven compared to those who are in the SAS low mass high category. Common variable immunodeficiency, same story. People who are SLE, same story. People who've got HIV or other diseases, same story. People who've got metabolic syndrome, same story. So it is not age. It is your TCF seven level is highly anchored to how well you have preserved your immunocompetence and inflammation status. So we then go on to show that as your TCF seven levels increase, your proportion of these good great good SAS mass goes up. And so you can see here, this is t c f seven octile groups. And so what you'll notice is that SAS one keeps going up. All groups with SAS mass. So high SAS, low mass is here. So this is with and this is among people who are 66 to nine 92 years of age. This is 40 to 65. These are basically indistinguishable. So again, showing you that as TCF seven low goes up, your chances of having a high SAS, low mass profile keeps going up. But it is no different whether you're a younger person or you're a older person. Okay. So this is an age independent TCF seven dependent model of immune resilience. So I'm gonna show this to you again in a different way. So here is age. So yep. You were saying to me, Sunil, this is great. Age l six goes up. Well, I've studied this for years. You're telling me nothing new. Yep. St. Mayo goes up. You're telling me nothing new. Immunocompetence goes down. And by the way, most immunocompetence gene signatures that associate survival are sexually dimorphic, not the inflammatory ones. This is a great example over here. There's not much sex dimorphism. Blue is for males and red is for females. You'll see there's no sex dimorphism. Those that go down, high sexual dimorphism. So, yes, exactly what you said. I'll monitor my CD four count. I'll say, okay. You monitor TCF seven. Goes down with age. Right? That's exactly what you told me. CD eight goes up with age. Exactly as you told me. Okay? Now let's anchor this according to someone's SaaS mass. Those who've got high sat low SaaS so double bad, low SaaS, high mass, these are double good. You'll notice that across age, those who have got double bad, they've got higher CEN Mayo signature. Those who are double good, have got lower CEN Mayo. Same with age IL six. Same with l down. So those who have got good SARS mass, they've got higher levels of an immune competent signature, same with TCF seven. So people with capacity to preserve immune resilience, they have less senescence, less inflammation, then more immunocompetence markers regardless of their age. It's not an age dependent phenomenon. K. Once you control for these factors, you can see the true effect of immune resilience from the effect of aging. Okay. So why Gilgamesh failed in his quest for living a long life? So my view on this is that just like a car, eventually it wear and tear happens. In this case, the wear and tear is the antigenic load, our capacity to handle repetitive antigenic stimuli. Just like those sex workers I told you. Stop it. They'll go back to normal. But we know we can't go back. We don't know. We can't revert back. There's no defined immune, you know, stimulation that we could say. If I reverted this, I'll go back to normal. K. There we knew it was sex work or exposures. K. So people call aging as a disease, which I think is a misnomer. And they go to extreme lengths of anti aging. And as you know, Brian Johnson spent a lot of money doing this. And this is a paper actually which goes along with my line of thinking. This is a paper that, Oshansky, had published recently about the implausibility of radical life extension in humans in the twenty first century. So I'm going to show you why I think that happens. So here are the various SARS mass categories. Here we've anchored survival or the hazard ratio of mortality to those who are double good to double bad. So you can see that those who are double bad, their mortality is much higher compared to those who are single bad. Then if you look at the effect of age, obviously, the older you are, the greater the likelihood you're gonna die. Now the hazard of death is much more. What we find is that people who have double bad start out with a survival disadvantage. But eventually, the people who had a survival advantage, they actually catch up. So you the benefits of of having better immune resilience or better immunocompetence profiles, they eventually collapse. It they're not parallel lines. They don't go on forever and ever and ever. Okay? So just because I have immune better immune profile today, eventually, I will converge. But the point is, during this interval, I'm better off than the guy who is brown. So I can escape age associated diseases. I can have a better immune health, and I will generally do better even after I suspect my lines have collapsed because I have delayed the detrimental effects of higher inflammation, higher immune aging during this period of time. So I got fifteen years to have a better immune health if you will. And so there are therefore, I have delayed other bad things that would happen even after I converge. Okay? So that's that's so it's not all gloomy. That is not to say that you should forget about it. It is that actually there is an advantage, but that advantage dissipates. But there was an advantage to have that advantage. That's what I'm trying to get at. Okay? So that this is the same plot showing that as we age, our these two blue and brown begin to collapse. But during this window, what I call is a warranty window, which is actually Oshalski's term from his older work, that all of us have evolutionarily a warranty period. Humans are very unusual that we have a post reproductive lifespan that's longer. There are only very few species who do that. Okay? And so during this warranty period, which we talk a lot about in the salutogenesis paper, we think there are some advantages afforded to people. So, what I wanna leave you with is then we have three forces that we deal with, staying healthy, getting sick, growing older, that there is a trait of optimal immune resilience, which is characterized by having high SARS and low mass or IAG one. And that it is co sure what you wanna call it, highly associated with DCF seven high levels. If you preserve this, you will antagonize this pathogenic triad of inflammation, immune aging as soon as senescence load. Premature aging, this is your concept of premature aging. You would have died earlier if someone had this low mass, low sass, high mass state. So you prevent that premature aging. We show it protects against insulin cardiovascular disease. We show these traits are better off in people who have Alzheimer's, who who don't have Alzheimer's. We show in this paper about vaccine responsiveness. You prevent unresponsiveness. We do all biomarker work showing that you preserve better biomarker if you maintain this trait. You resist COVID and I've shown you with flu and you actually maintain more trophic fact. I think that's a very important fact that you're maintaining tropism, which is promotion of growth. You know, so aging is a very catabolic event. Okay. It's catabolic. And what we really need to think about is how do you maintain anabolism? Longevity is about anabolism. Aging is about catabolism. So to maintain longevity, you must have trophic factors. You must have the capacity to have growth hormones or other trophic factors. Okay. So when I speak about longevity and aging, like I said, they're different concepts. Okay? So these are not conflated concepts. The as I mentioned, the three forces going on here, longevity is the concept of solutogenesis. The biology of aging is the aging phenomena. So we need to be able to maintain anabolism. Okay? So that's the same three concepts I showed you. I showed you we must think about these dual axis that occur at concurrently, immunocompetence and inflammation occurring concurrently, that we have a way people are on a spectrum, and we need to be at any age group. Studying age is a misnomer. It will create study. I didn't say age is a misnomer. I said studying it by the concept of younger versus older because there's heterogeneity. We need to deconvolute that heterogeneity to be able to predict, prevent, personalized, and have patients participate in the health care. I've shown you how ways to do it. I think that there are two forms of immunosenscence. One is an age dependent immunosenscence, and the other is this loss of immune senescence immune resilience, which is associated with an age independent process. And I feel, unfortunately, just my view, I could be wrong, that the these two forms have been conflated and has resulted in some form of confounding in the field of aging, infection, cancer, and vaccine responses. So that's the first challenge that we have two forms. We need to deconvolute it. We need to be able to study them separately. The second is there's heterogeneity. How do we handle that? And then how do you reconstitute immune resilience, which is your question earlier to me. So I think there is infinite ways to be unhealthy, but there are only few ways to be healthy. Okay? That's just my view. Okay? And that the processes that cause health are very often in the processes that cause disease. And I leave you with that thought. I've had the privilege of studying of fantastic collaborators. And so Lyle McKinney McKinnon was helped me with the, sex worker cohort, and and Matthew Bottomley was with the cancer cohort, and then Eduardo and Maricilla with the Sardinia cohorts, and Muthu, Grace, and Justin, and others from my group have been fantastic collaborators, so there's Wei Jing and Jason over here. So with that, I of course, I've been very fortunate to have had years of funding, which I've been very fortunate. So blessed for that. So we have had a merit award, my VA center award, and my diversity of awards, and, great groups of people over the years. So thank you very much. Alright. Thanks, Sunil. That was great. I have so many questions. I didn't wanna inter I wanted to minimize my interruptions because I I didn't wanna mess with, the story and the research. And your your your data is so comprehensives from so many different angles. Alright. So let's start with the can you take it off of, full screen just so we can or from sharing? Yeah. Or stop sharing? Yeah. We can stop. You can stop sharing. Yep. I'll stop sharing. Great. Alright. So let's, the philosophical stands out to me as the first one. So when you consider that there is a pretty constant rate of aging, even with heterogeneity. Right? You've got people with bad diet, bad lifestyle, bad immune health profile with a slightly faster rate. You've got people who maybe can slow that down with calorie restriction, exercise, whatever it may be. But it's pretty much a constant. Right? So then in terms of, longevity and, you know, the Gilgamesh story, where are we in terms of knowledge of all of the mechanisms underlying aging? Right? This constant. Are we down here just primitive monkeys thinking we know a little bit? Right? Or are we close now, I get the old Olshansky is a an eternal pessimist or maybe he's a realist. It depends on how you look at it. But, eventually, whether it's fifty, five hundred, five thousand, or some number of years, those slopes will match. And then we presume that the rate of aging will be flat. It's a matter of time in terms of the knowledge of aging to match that rate of aging. So what are your thoughts on that philosophical idea? Okay. So I don't think the rates of aging have changed over time. Yep. I think that in the ancestral times, people came through a very high infectious burden when in childhood most died or of large proportion died, I should say. And that those who escaped their childhood mortality and adult mortality, Socrates, etcetera, were older people. So they didn't die necessarily at a young age. So the lifespan that we have, I think, is as if we escaped the vagaries of nature that we had to live under we remember, we had harsh environments at that time. We don't live under harsh environments right now. Okay? But if you take that context of a harsh environment then to the environment we live right now, I don't think the rate of aging has changed very much. What has changed is what I call as artificial longevity. We have ways to keep people alive. We've got better drugs to keep people alive. So we have expanded our warranty period not because our rate of aging has changed or slowed, it is because we have manufactured larger lifespans, with with medications, etcetera. You know, I had my first heart attack when I was in my forties, and I had statins. Thankfully, I had interventions that one could do. Right? So in the olden days, we didn't have that luxury. So I think we have to be very mindful that what we are talking about is can we reverse the rate of aging, which is what you're asking me. And is the knowledge of how we can slow that process down different enough? And do we have enough knowledge? I actually don't think we have enough knowledge. And I think the reason why we don't have enough knowledge is because we study people cross sectionally. For us to be able to do this, our rate of aging or lifespan is dictated from the day I'm born or probably before I was born, probably because of all the epigenetic changes that were modified in me because of my mother and her grandparents or whatever else might have happened. So I think we are diluting ourselves in part because we study cross sectional humans as opposed to people from a lifespan going forward. So we're gonna change the the rate of anything. We have to be able to know where the rate was to start with and where it ends as opposed to taking two people cross sexually at any given time point. And, generally, you know, younger if you if this conversation was happening with someone who's 20 years old, he'd be bored. He says, you know, I'm gonna go play my video games right now. But because mortality is not on their mind right now. So all farms like myself, at least, we will be thinking about mortality, right? So, so that is, I think, an issue here where we will, our knowledge is limited by the tools and model systems we have. So, you know, that's why we, of course, resort to non human primates or other, you know, lower species to study this problem. Be a pessimist. I just think we don't have the tools and we don't have the model systems in humans to be able to do it. I think a time might come. I think probably with the advent of AI whose knowledge systems are much wider and broader and can think much more quickly than we can, I am hopeful? I think, you know, tools like, you know, AlphaFold that could, you know, won the Nobel Prize last year, you know, to be able to decode proteins and find antagonists within months rather than years, I think these are rather parallel technologies that are coming forward. So I have hope, but I don't know if we have the model systems concurrently to be able to do it. So and I think what is the biggest missing box in all this, Mike, is the environment. You see, it's a gene environment interaction that is absolutely essential. So for us to be able to talk about a rate of aging without being able to control for environment. If I was living under, in the space station so, you know, actually, I got a call from somebody who works a lot with NASA after this after our work was published. And he said, that's very interesting what you just wrote because, what happens to people up in the sky in the in the space station? They got the environment is clean. Nothing there are no bugs there. So no they had them gut microbiome. And that is the only internal environment they have by which their body is interacting with. We forget even our gut microbiome is an environment. It just happens to be inside us. And every food we eat is a change in our environment. Okay. I mean, ensure if I had versus some crazy cocktail I had would change my environment. And so I think this is a hugely difficult problem. So those people who are living up in the space station, when they come down, they have to now face an external environment and the whole thing changes. So I think it's an extremely complicated problem when we think about the rate of aging, the tools, the environment. Environment is the key point. I agree a 100%. But when you think about, like, the exposome. Right? So if you had all of that data and then was able to crunch the numbers, whether it's machine learning or AI or these AI agents now, which I guess can go off on their own and I'm not saying it's within the next five or fifty years, but not unless humanity gets obliterated, I can't imagine the knowledge of aging itself and disease, you know, pathogenesis isn't gonna go a lot less. So for me, it's only a matter of time. I'm not I try to be realistic and, you know, the the standard, you know, I'm sure, you know, like, so so my graduate work, Arlan Richardson and and Holly Van Ramin, they would always, you know, tell the, stakeholders or people who wanted, you know, private investors that will come to the bar shop. They would always say, you know, five to ten years. We're we're about five to ten years away. You were at bar shop? I yeah. I did my graduate work at the bar shop. Yeah. Oh, with Arlen? Arlen and Holly. Yeah. Holly was my adviser. Arlen was on I remember reading that. I didn't I didn't I didn't immediately connect that fact. Okay. So you know San Antonio well then? Yeah. Yeah. It's one of the reasons I moved to Austin. So so wait. So quick so alright. Hang on. So, where was I going with that? Where was I going with that? You're talking about about the the knowledge about the aging field with Holly. Oh, yeah. So the investors that would come to the bar shop, and then Arlen and Holly and everybody else would get together and have these big, nice, fancy parties five to ten years away. I hear people like Aubrey de Grey, five to ten years away. David Sinclair, five to ten years away. I'm not in that boat where I say, this is right around the corner, and we're gonna conquer aging in five I'm not that guy. But it's for me, it's still it's a matter of time that the knowledge for all of the processes, whether it's 50 or 500, 5,000, 5,000,000, it's only a matter of time if humanity will survive that long. So what do you think? So you're gonna wait? I'm gonna I'm gonna do everything I can to live as long as healthily as I can for as physically possible by monitoring all of the metrics, not just, you know, immune health grade, but albumin, kidney markers, liver markers, inflammation, CRP. I'm looking at kynurenine divided by tryptophan as an integrated measure of IDO. I mean, I'm doing all kinds of stuff. But, yeah, I'm trying to live as long as physically possible. It's kind of the Ray Kurzweil, live long enough to live forever. But I'm not so naive to think that my generation is the last generation to to die. I it's it's everyone that's ever lived has died until that stops, then, I'll be more, you know, optimistic. I'm not going to shatter your optimism or your hope. I think it's always good to have hope and and that, and I totally agree with you, with that aspect of it. But, you know, the thing is that change to you know, we would have to find a universal, molecule that universally helps us. So that would be that is the problem because the heterogeneity is so vast. And that is where I mentioned to you that the current trials and the current way of thinking is not is thinking as an age as an entity, whereas age is a conglomeration of a very heterogeneous group. Older people are a very heterogeneous group. If you ask me, can we make people escape as age associated diseases, I have greater hope for that. But if you ask me, can I escape the force of aging, I have less hope for that? So I think people can enter their adulthood, their later life, more cognitively intact, more physically intact, less cardiovascular burdens, and things of that nature. That I'm very hopeful for, but I am less hopeful for, if you wanna use the word, cure or reversal of the rate of aging. That piece I find a little bit more challenging to consider. Yeah. I agree a 100%. Even the organs are gonna age even at different rates. So and then as you mentioned, the heterogeneity. So what works for one person, if you're just gonna arbitrarily give it to the other person without that preexisting information that where it may be beneficial, it's maybe detrimental. Right? So, alright. So one reason that your work is so amazing is because anytime I'm thinking about adding more biomarkers into my approach, that's a big deal. So it starting off with the whole so most people aren't doing c d fours and c d eights. You know, it's an extra add on. So one one thing I think about your research is probably that's gonna change when the field catches up to your work. You know, the standard chemistry panel and complete blood count isn't just gonna be total white blood cells, and then maybe you get the differentials. It's gonna be the differentials now even further subdivided, c d four, c d eight, even b cells. Right? So so now I've gotta add c d four and c d, it looks like, into my approach because I I was you know, so most people only focus on total white blood cells, which, as you know, neutrophils and monocytes increase during aging and lymphocytes decrease. So for the longest time, until your work came around or until, my brain was ready for the c d four, c d eight story, total lymphocytes may not change, right, during aging. And and I may be thinking, oh, well, my lymphocytes are 2,000. I'm I've got the youthful levels. This is associated with lowest all cause mortality risk. But the fact is, as you mentioned, it's that balance between CD four and CD eight. So now I I don't know what my CD four and CD eight are. 62 blood tests in, and now I've gotta add them in now and track them over time and then see what they're what's correlated with them so I can keep them relatively, you know, at grade one. So, for that, thank you. Right? But, like, I didn't have a question. That was a comment. But, I guess what, what I'm getting at with is if someone was only gonna study total lymphocytes, and then maybe they were gonna add on IL six, CRP, TNF alpha, how would that compare against looking at CD four, CD eight by itself? Yeah. So I have a very simple response to this. If you look at our I can put it out if you want. If you look at our, aging cell paper, we show that people who preserve IHG one, they've got lower CRP levels. So CRP levels go up with age. IL six levels go up with age. But regardless, those who maintain IAG one at any time, those who occur those who have IAG one with the younger or older people, they preserve low they have lower levels of CRP and IL six than compared to those who don't. So it does not matter. IAG one, these grades are are are very strong prognostic markers. Those who preserve IAG1 will have lower inflammatory status. They will have better higher B cell markers. They'll have lower NK cell markers. So, in my books, this is a $67 test that can give you a lot of prognostic information. The bigger prob the I am more confident about if preserved if people preserve IAG1, then I can tell you about if they do not preserve it. I am very confident that those who have got IAG1 preserve that. We show that people who have IAG1, even into older age, we model it, have lower burdens of comorbidity. We show that the level of inflammation among people who have equal amount of comorbidities and have IAG1, they too preserve lower levels of inflammation. I don't think you need 67 tests to do. I think what is really in my books as a physician, I think what you need to ask yourself is which test is prognostic, has a greater prognostic capacity, and is uncorrelated. So, you want to find uncorrelated biomarkers so that you are testing different domains. So, that way you don't need to measure B cells. You don't need to measure NK cells. I don't think you need to measure CRP and IL six. I think you're just better off measuring an IAG as one domain. And then you can ask your other domains at one time and then take the conglomeration of that to do it. But there'll be some heterogeneity in that too. So, you couldn't There will always be some overlap. Right. So even if I'm I'm in IHG one, so high CD four, low CD eight, it's possible that my CRP is a little bit higher than it should granted not path so remember, I'm thinking about this from the perspective of not the reference ranges, but, you know, what what's been shown what's more likely to be found in you than what's associated with lowest risk of death for all costs? So, for example, even though h s c r p less than one milligram per liter is technically, you know, within that optimal range or reference range. Sure. There are studies that show going as low as point three milligrams per liter is also a so I'm aiming for that. But if my IHG, CD four to CD eight, was in the one, and my HSCRP was point eight, Then the next year point nine, and then 1.1. It's moving in the wrong direction. So I'd I'd find value in measuring all of the other stuff too in conjunction to try to make sure I'm for me, it's about multiple organ systems. Right? Sure. Yeah. The question is, how can you mod the biggest problem in all the work we're doing is how do we modify it? And that so we want actionable, modifiable biomarkers. Right? So, yes, I I agree with you completely. But, you know, on a practical end, how does one modify something? So if you have an inflammatory status that is so you preserved a good immune health grid, but yet, say, your CRP is 1.5, and you got a cardiac scan done, and you've got a calcium score of zero, and your hemoglobin a one c is 5.1, so you don't have nobody has diabetes here. You're exercising. You are eating, you know, great food. So and so then the question is, how do you modify or change it? You know, so at some point, someone's genetics takes over. And then how does one change the genetics like HDL? My HDL has chronically been in the teens. I could barely get it up. How do I modify it? I can eat anything I feel like, but I can't change my HDL. I have a genetic profile that's never gonna change. So that's the problem. So so wait. I hear you on that, and I've had HDL as low as 28. My latest test, on the twenty twenty second, a couple weeks ago, 76. How did you do that? Right. So what I now we're getting into my No. No. We don't wanna get first one. Okay. That's No. No. No. No. No. No. It's I'm an open book. Everybody knows. So, because I'm blood so the question of rate of aging, ideally, we'd wanna measure every day. Right? I'll have albumin, GGT. I mean, you name the markers, h b a one c as blood pressure, FEV. I'd have biomarkers of every organ system every day for three hundred sixty five days. I have a full year age age average data, and I can track that over time. That's a real rate of aging, but nobody's doing that. You can't do that. It's impractical. My veins would look like I'm a heroin addict. Right? So I'm measuring eight times per year. So every two months, I track everything. I weigh all my food. I barely take any supplements. My workouts are standardized. So if there are any external variables, I pretty much standardize them. So because I'm tracking my diet and I log it, you know, using an app, I have the macros and micros of foods. Every blood test has an average dietary intake and supplemental. And because I have so much blood test data, I look at correlations in my diet. Now correlations are not causation. And many times, there's a lot of noise. I've and I don't know what the signal is. But if a given correlation, say, with HDL in this case, is the highest correlation, I'll I'll increase that food. And then if we'll see how does the correlation look after the next test. So I've done that over and over and over. And for the first 47 blood tests of since 2015, over the past ten years, HDL, my average was about 45. And then I figured out the recipe for me, which is, for whatever reason, collard greens, which if you look at the, RDA for vitamin k, the RDA or an adequate intake is only a hundred micrograms per day. That's very little green. I'm I'm at, like, three hundred grams of collard greens per day, and that's strongly correlated with my HDL going up. Now that HDL going up is not in the context of higher inflammation because alcoholics can have high HDL, poor liver function, high inflammation. That's not at all. My HSCRP, as one example, is, like, 23 or 27 tests in a row below the detection limit. So HDL can be improved. I actually now have to reduce my I wanna reduce my HDL now by a bit because the all cause mortality data, 50 to 60 is optimal. My eight zero eight one is a bit on the higher side, like, one sixty five. Still in that quote, unquote optimal for lowest all cause mortality risk, but where I would agree with you and is harder and less malleable, not HDL in my case, but lipoprotein a. That for me is a more genetic marker. I've measured that 30 times. So, but there too, I've had my my data now is about half as high as it's been at its highest. So it's malleable. It's just a matter of figuring out within your own, you know, it could be it could be fitness. It could be body weight, it could be stuff in the diet. It's just figuring out what's the signal and where, you know, versus the noise. Well, that's great. You can you can do that. Not everybody can afford it or know the knowledge behind it. So, I mean, for the average person, if you were to ask me what single test would be good, I mean, I think a few would be very useful. But, you know, that goes back to the NF1. And so I commend you for that. The NF1 is very important. That is the reason why as I mentioned the rate of aging at a population level to change it is gonna be extremely challenging. You could figure out your n of equal to one and what could modify it. But to be able to do that would be exhausting for any physician or any caregiver or anybody else to do it. Yeah. Well, eventually, we'll just get the blood test data. The, diet data will be uploaded to the cloud. The AI will crunch all the numbers and say, today, you should eat this, and this will be your best profile. But we're we're far away from that day. What about your metabolites? Which metabolites? Are you measuring all your metabolites in your blood? So I'm doing metabolomics, the Michael Snyder's, company. They Iola? Yeah. Iola. I've done that 18 times. So, yeah, I'm tracking I mean, I don't know how familiar you are with metabolomics, but I'm tracking a whole bunch of stuff. Like, there's so many metabolites you can get there are 230 something triglycerides. Like, so I can't focus on all of them, but there are certain, triglycerides that are, in some studies a couple studies have been shown to be associated with a greater odds of reaching 85. Some tracking, like, subsets of the 600. But, yeah, big picture biomarkers, the CBC standard chem panel, the iolo stuff, blood pressure, lung function, physical fitness, body composition, visceral fat. But alright. So wait. So getting back to your stuff because I have still so many questions. So the t c f seven story. Right? So in terms of their their two, like, ways to improve it or keep it relatively high or high as a part of the IHG grade. So I looked into studies there, and all I came across was, very low vitamin d. I think it was, like, ten nanograms per mil, was associated with lower t c f seven. But then anything above that, even very high levels of circulating vitamin d wasn't associated with higher t c f seven. So how can like, what are ways to keep t c f seven relatively fine? Or have you studied that yet? No. No. I have to tell you though that it's not TCF seven alone. What we show is actually there's a constellation of of, of transcription factors that are highly correlated with TCF seven. And there's seven of them or eight of them. I forget. And, all of them or one of them, especially KLF 12, is very highly associated with naivety. So I don't that's my concern when you asked me the question about is there a holy grail? I don't think there's a holy grail of one which one of a biomarker or molecule that would and that is, you know, evolutionary is very hard to be tinkering with too many systems at one time. And that is what my worry is that we don't know what the, you know, the side effects of tinkering with one or the off ramps or the unintended consequences are of tinkering around. And that is, you know, we've been evolutionally designed to have we already lived millennia so far and we're trying to tinker very quickly over, you know, a matter of a 100 with our bodies to do it. So I think in terms of evolutionary scales, you know, so I think that we've been tinkered to the point of where we are who we are, and now we want to rejigger the system. We have to be very careful what we're gonna rejigger. A 100% agree. And with that in mind, then the big picture interventions could be things like, well, starting with animal models. Is t c f seven up higher? Is it higher in dwarf mice or, methionine restriction or calorie restriction interventions that are known to promote longevity? Yeah. So we've we have begun to do some of those studies. It's much harder to the longitudinal aspect of these studies would need people like yourselves who are willing to come themselves and get bled a lot. So, after this conversation, I'll share with you some stuff we are doing that might give you some insight into it. I mean, you have to remember that there is a j shaped curve for everything. So you know that even people who are elite athletes, if you bring down with exercise down to a certain point, the inflammation goes down. But if you continue to exercise and become a very high endurance amount, you become an overreaching or overtraining syndrome. And people, as you may be aware, who are elite athletes get more influenced, etcetera. So you have a j shaped curve. You have the same u shaped curve with BMI. So I think the big issue for me is what's the optimum. Like I said, inflammation, right amount, right place, right time, right right kind. I think the same would be for things like t c f seven, like all these biomarkers you're studying. Too little, too bad, too much, too bad. So how do you arrive at that's why I mentioned deviation from. How do you how do you monitor that? So that that to me, Michael, is really the crux of the problem that we don't know what the if we if we rejigger a system, have we overshot or have we undershot? I'm very nervous about that. So that gets into the idea of, entropy. Right? So the exposome and the deviation from Yes. The deviation so you have a youthful state entropy, and the deviate entropy is the deviation from that youthful state. Right? Well, but we're so far I don't know so far, but, you know, independent labs may do metabolomics, like, you you guys did the proteomics and transcriptomics, But we need all of that data integrated. Right? I mean, it's it's, it's impossible study to fund. Yes. It's an impossible study to fund, especially when we wanna study only people when they are older. Yeah. And so that to me, if you would ask me that if we America is not into birth cohorts. Europeans are. But Americans aren't very much into birth cohorts. If you look at the Framingham, our study starts at the age of 40. So we don't have any knowledge. I think by the time people have hit 55, 60, you've been hardwired. It's very hard, I think, to unwind. I think you might arrive at a balance, but I think there's a window of reversal. I don't think windows of reversal extend into older age. I think it's much harder to do so. So that's why I think when you talk about the biology of aging and reversal of aging rates, I think the reversal of aging rates needed to be addressed when you're in your twenties and your thirties, when at least you're a little bit more aware. And you can either do interventions of that period of time. I think that this aging, the aging field trying to to unwind a hardwired potentially hardwired system is a little bit more challenging in our older age than when we were younger. So it's a constantly moving target. Right? So the the the recipe that worked in relative youth, you get to, I think, 75 years old. And, you know, the the the the the slopes inner inner inner right? They intertwine. Right? So then it's a question of, okay. It's a constantly moving target. What worked before may not work now. And now I've gotta constantly tweak the system to try to further push that out. That would be one way how. We should only keep it stable. Try to try to keep it stable is the goal, but, I mean Yeah. So, you know, if if all biomarkers stay the same I mean, literally, if you comprehensively analyze everything and everything stays the same, technically, mortality rates should be flat. Right? But it's that deviation from, you know, that even the small deviation over time where now mortality rates are gonna go up because your systemic biochemistry and physiology is starting to change. Right? It's just does it change at a very rapid rate, or how how much can you flatten it? Right? So keeping everything stable, and resisting age related change would be the goal. But Yeah. Yeah. I I guess my I've been I guess my perspectives come a lot from, you know, as part of my life is taking care of patients. And I see the vagaries of how they are that, you know. So I've seen people who are just fine, healthy, and then ten minutes later, they're gone. Yeah. You know? So I think that I'm a little bit more circumspect with respect to or cautious, if you will, with my optimism because, I guess I see a lot more deaths, you know. So, a little bit more cautious about it. I see aging upfront. You know, my as you probably are aware, when you came if you came to the VA, Alan used to have his lab at the VA, I see the patients walk in. You know, they're in the wheelchairs or whichever way they are. So, you know, so I'm a little bit more cautious in saying we can fine tune it and reverse it because I see when people get a little hardwired how difficult it is to do so. Yeah. Now I think that I think it's the issue of substrate. You know, if you if you enter into adulthood with a better substrate, I think what you're saying is doable. But I think if you enter into adulthood with a poorer substrate, I think it's very hard to do so. I think once the decline has begun, once the tilt has happened, I think there's a there's a there's a there's a a point of no return. It sounds like it's all centered around the immune system. The immune system controls all of aging. Every everything if the immune system is bad, systemic inflammation systemic inflammation degrades muscle, liver, kidney, brain, every tissue. Right? So it it you know, that your your work is basically showing that, you know, you're either resilient or you're not resilient. And it as you have more antigenic microbial burden, over time, it's just you get to that age, 75, where it you can't we our immune system loses. Right? And then it's the inevitable decay. So then, you know, what would be what are there ways that you would speculate to try to improve immune health grades in 75 year olds who have high SAS, low or, sorry, low SAS, high mass, or that are starting to shift into the IHG grades two, three, and four after 75, what would you speculate would be how would we help them? Well, the most important ways for me as a clinician, I use this every day, is to see if there's some underlying disease. I focus not on the biology of aging as much as if they've got an age associated disease. So, if someone has a minor shifted from a 2A to a 2B, obviously, I'm looking at, by the way, things like RDW, neutrophil lymphocyte ratios. These are reasonably good biomarkers you can study as well. There are neutrophil platelet ratios, as you know. But then I'm looking for diseases. I'm I'm actually looking for scanning, looking for cancers, and things of that nature. So for me, it's more about can I prevent something or can I predict something that's reversible? I find it much more harder for me as a clinician to wrap my arms around whether I can reverse someone's aging process as much as something that I can predict whether they have an an age associated disease that I haven't figured out yet. So I have younger colleagues of mine who have grade four. I'm very worried about them. And so I, you know, some of them I caution, you must wear a mask or, you know, I'm constantly worried about looking for biomarkers of cancer in them. And, unfortunately, some of them go on to develop cancers. So my focus, Michael, has been more on what I can predict or reverse. I haven't focused so much on the biology of aging because I have a a greater challenge in being able to wrap my arms around that right now. Yeah. I mean, I understand that. You're dealing directly with disease. The aging rate is like, almost like a first world problem. Right? But so wait. So digging into the microbes a bit more. So we're considering that that's the cause for whether your immune system you know, that burden is gonna be the cause of your immune system decaying over time. Right? Your just immune system can't. Okay. So what are your thoughts on IGG, measuring total IGG, and tracking that over time? And then, also, subsets of IGG. So CMV, burden increases during aging, antigen, you know, so, HSV. Every microbe, basically now granted, this isn't an I IGM story. It's IGG. So if you've got microbe specific IGGs and their units are super high, like, you can actually get a reference value, not just, you know, greater than the reference range, some lab values. If you were to reduce that, could that help restore, you know, the immune resilience? Is is the microbe your immune system can't react to it. It's making a ton of IGG. But if you were able to discover the recipe to to to lower some of the systemic IGG naturally, not with some crazy thing that's gonna make one system better, intense systems worse, Would that relieve some of the, you know, block on the immune system and restore to immune health? That's a great question. In some other context that we are studying, we're seeing exactly this problem where so you can imagine that if I were to live in a in a dormitory, I will, by definition, have greater antigenic exposure. Look at the barracks in the air force or army. People live in close quarters. You know, we know that even the exercise that these people do for their basic training can is a JSAEP curve can transiently reduce their immune health. They have greater antigenic exposures. There was there have been great there have been large incidences of, you know, repetitive infections in them. So, they will have higher IgGs or sex homoglobulins. And the question is, how do you prevent that from happening? Or how do you reverse it from happening? And I don't have a I don't have an answer for that because, you know, CMV, if you look at our paper in nature communication, we wrote a very long essay on CMV. People who have IAG four or three, most of them are CMV positive. Fifty percent of those who are IAG one or two are CMV positive. Got exposed to CMV, they are a biomarker for a greater susceptibility for infection. All the sex workers are CMV positive, but not all of them are IAG three and four. Most of them are IAG one. So as I showed you that picture over there. So CMV per se is not the problem. It is if you have CMV and IAG three or four, then it is a problem. So I think it is very context dependent when you start talking about infections as a complete burden system. And even if we were to be able to measure it, which I agree in a lot of my patients who have, you know, chronic fatigue syndrome, I'll find EBV, CMV, HSV, you know, had COVID, and I think some of this anti dated COVID. So the question is, how do I reverse this? Which is what you're asking me. And I wish I could do what you're doing with them where I could monitor them six to seven times or, you know, two times even in four months, which the VA will not allow me to. So, I'm not sure how I would reverse it because it would, again, go back to the n of equal to one. I'm not prepared to give immunosuppressives or other drugs to people. So the thing is what you're doing, which is to experiment with the n of equal to one with a variety of diets to see what would be the best way to do it. Now if you ask me if a person like you could possibly do something about the rate of aging with an intensive monitoring and tinkering around without doing anything crazy Yep. I think the answer is possibly yes. But it would require a very fine tune knowledge of it without doing something absolutely crazy. Yeah. Well, I try to do it lowest risk, you know. So, you know, you mentioned Brian Johnson, and he's taking, I don't know, fifty now supplements instead of a hundred and fifty. I'm on, like, four, and only because I've measured the biomarker so many times. I can't figure out the recipe after 40 tests. What am I gonna do? Just let the biomarker increase for ten years? I've gotta take you know, so homocysteine increases during aging. It causes cell senescence into endothelial cells and neurons in a dish. I don't know if that's gonna actually happen to me, but I don't wanna take that bet. So nothing I do by diet works, to get it to where I've had it in youth, so I've gotta take a supplement. But I don't know what the recipe is. I wouldn't suggest immunosuppressants, but it's just the general idea of, you know and it probably isn't just CMV. It's like you said, it's for that patient who has chronic fatigue. It's CMV. It's EBV. It's HSV one and two, maybe. It's that chronic burden. And then the burden gets so high that now they're perpetually in that eight IHC three and four grade. Okay. Well, if we're able to help the immune system, and I don't know what that recipe is, like you said, it's gonna be different maybe for everyone. If we're able to reduce that microbial burden using IgG specific to those microbes as as the, the metric, could we then get them back to the IH ones and twos? I I don't know what the answer is, but Well, I do know that during COVID, I screened our all our physicians before COVID began. And those who had threes and fours, I requested them not to be in the frontline, which I'm glad. Some had worse grades and they saw Jesus and started exercising and changed their diet. Right. So a lot of them reverted. And so I think it's a doable process, and there was just a very crude measures we used to do that. I see fluctuations in myself all the times. To grant time, I'm a, you know, switch to a worse two or a four eventually. But I will acknowledge that NF1 has a possibility of, I wouldn't say reverting or hardwire, at least keeping you a hardwire, less hardwired. But I'm not prepared to say that we'll be able to reverse the biology of aging. Yeah. Yeah. Me neither. I'm not trying to say it's my my approach at best is a slowing of the a potential slowing of the rate. That's what I'm after. I I'm not like these these guys, these crazy people saying I'm reversing. This is nonsense. Like, I I've said that a billion times. All we can do at best is potentially slow the rate. Even then, how much is it? 15%? I don't know if you're slowing the rate or as much as you're slowing the onset of age associated diseases. Can you dis can you dis disassemble them. Right? I mean, because if you make the argument that, you know, aging is a it increases the, predisposition to age associated diseases, whether it's CBD, cancer, all of these things increase during aging, not healthy. People have heart attacks at the age of 20. That's true. Heterogeneity. This is, you know, an outlier. Right? But along the lines of the diet and exercise helping to revert back to the IHC ones and twos, I think it's possible as, again, heterogeneity for someone to be lean and fit. And for whatever reason, had, you know, CMV exposure at a young age and HSV. I I had cold sores when I was a kid. I mean, you know, and CMV incidence goes up during aging. So, I think it's possible to be lean and fit and already had that come to Jesus moment, and then it becomes a question of, okay, what is that recipe for reducing microbial burden so that I can get out of that IH three threes and fours? That's the billion dollar question. So I'll share this with you. You know, we studied, a group of middle aged men who underwent exercise trial for twenty four weeks and then a two week washout period. So during that time, they had an improvement in their SAS and a decrease in their MAS. But after the two week period, they went back to baseline. And the degree of responsiveness of these survival and mortality signatures was less in those who had a higher BMI at baseline and who had higher IL six levels at baseline. So the context really matters. So when we say exercise, when we know people who go to the gym all the time, but who don't revert, so they're not necessarily exercise responsive. The intervention does not work. So that is what I meant to you by saying that, when we arrive at a certain age, we have already been hardwired where even an intervention like exercise in a middle aged person may be very hard to go back to unless they entered into that age at a with an advantage. That's why I mentioned to you that fifteen years survival advantage that we talked about, that window, That window is important because if you enter that window with an advantage, you can then capitalize on these other interventions to, you know, like you're trying to do is to extend it or prevent it. May not necessarily revert it, but you have an a greater advantage to be able to do it. And that's where my concern lies that we as physicians and or as, you know, scientists are not educating the public with respect to being mindful or having the grace of heterogeneity, the grace that we aren't all built the same. Five fingers aren't the same. So it's not a one size fits all. So I think recognizing and appreciating that not all of us are garnish or enter middle age with these advantages, And that's just unfortunate the way we are. Because the amount of money being spent and amount of energy being spent over this is not a trivial exercise. So if you had to bet or speculate, like, are there ways you think that could be promising other than diet and exercise that could help revert someone's, let's say an 80 year old who's, you know, already past that point that you saw. Are there things that you think could work to help revert them back aside from diet and exercise? Whether it's, prescription meds or certain senolytics. I I don't know. What you would would you have any insight into what? Magic the magic portion in my my book, I think, very important is mindfulness. To me, the mind, brain, immune access is extremely powerful. I think there are two kinds of behaviors. One is an anticipatory, something that I can look into, a future oriented behavior, and the other is my current behavior. They aren't the same. They're probably run by different programs. You know, BMI, body mass index, you know, the genes for for for body mass index are in the brain. And they co localize in near the same area where there's intelligence, education, schizophrenia. Okay? It's not a metabolic problem. It's a brain problem. So, like, the gene called Negri, n e g r one, it is the strongest one of the strongest genetic polymorphic currently associated with BMI. It's in the brain. Okay? It's not a metabolic one. So energy allocation has always been a very important part of our lifespan. We had to run. We had to forage. We had to escape predators, we had to escape hurricanes, things of that nature. So energy allocation has been a very central part of human evolution. Okay? So the but the energy allocation is here with things like BMI. Okay? So if you ask me what is the best thing that can ever happen, is really our understanding of this black box, which is the brain immune axis and the brain gut axis. We know that inflammatory signals travel up into the brain and play reversal brain immune axis. There was a wonderful paper recently where in neuroscience nature neuroscience where they showed people avatars through a virtual reality of a picture of a person who was fearful, an avatar of someone who had an infection, and a neutral avatar. Just the visual sight of infectious avatar actually induced the innate immune response. So what we are forgetting is the very profound influence of our brain on our immune health. Okay? So if you asked me what was the a very important untapped area into which we are not looking into is actually this. So I think that, like, for example, I would give you the example of, there are I would predict that the future is going to show us that there are molecular programs run-in the brain that can that are that are closely aligned with our current behavior and a distinct program is aligned with our future behavior. Being able to look into our future, like you would have said, if I was younger and I looked into my future life and if I had looked up and said, you know, I'm going to do all these good things for myself, that and being able to actualize that is very different than what I'm doing today. So, there is a dissociation between behaviors. There is a very important intersection of that with metabolic control and an intersection of that with immune health. And so I think the next frontier is really not going to be done. And I think that we're gonna modify that the way you are doing it with diet. But I think it's not the diet that matters, it's the reprogramming of the microbiome. So the collards that you are taking may not necessarily be, have anything to do with the HDL cycle as much as it could have something to do with your microbiome. I will leave you with a great example. Jeffrey Gordon is a very prominent, person in the microbiome field. He did a wonderful study where he examined children who are malnourished in Bangladesh, compared them to children who were not malnourished, identified a microbiome that was deficient, and then replaced it that that it produced a microbiome directed diet. What they did was they give these malnourished children only three months worth of this diet compared to the regular diet. Thereafter, they saw and induct the children's weight, etcetera, became better just with the diet. And when they looked at their peripheral micro their peripheral blood, they found induction of these what I call as trophic factors. CNS, ossification for bone, axon guidance. So when we think about cognition, Alzheimer's, etcetera, my view is that we are neglecting a very important access and that being able to bring this behavior, mindfulness, our attitude into, our day to day living and the impact of that on our immune health. I just gave you an example. Just looking at Avatar in a in a crazy VR could induce your innate immune system. That's mind bending. Okay? That's just the visualization. I mean, just the the thought of something. Okay? Just the thought of something. There are many studies like this, by the way, where people have been asked, provoked, like, they have to stand up and give a five minute speech on if they got arrested, why they have to be released, and how it turned on their immune systems or mitochondrial DNA release. So I would leave you with the thought, Michael, that the reason why I feel it's much more distant is because I don't think we have figured out this to this connection well yet. Mice, maybe we're getting there, not in humans. That was great. Thanks, Sunil. I I have so many more questions. I think you and I could talk forever because I have so much to to ask, and say. But, I guess I'll have to wait until your your next papers, and I'm looking forward to that. So people wanna support your work. Can they support your lab's work? Can they visit? Is there do you have, like Well, I I love them to come and visit, but I'm actually, at the VA, so I can't take any support from anybody. No. No. I meant, like, support your lab's work. Oh, you're you're supported by the VA. You can't so so if people wanted to donate to your lab, I meant. Well, I have other yeah. Well, thank you. I I'm I'm I I more more important than that is that they were willing to sit and talk, and, there will be more support than money. Money is money comes and goes, but, good intellectual discussions like we had today don't come often. So thank you. That's great. Thank you, Sunil. I appreciate you. And, we'll talk to you soon. We'll talk more. Thank you. Bye. Bye. Bye.