Lipoprotein a is six times more atherogenic than LDL and that's what we'll see here. On the y axis, we've got the genetic effect on CHD or coronary heart disease risk and that's plotted against the genetic effect on APO b. And more specifically when ApoB is attached to either LDL or Lipoprotein a. So when compared with risk when ApoB comes from LDL as shown there, risk when ApoB comes from Lipoprotein a is six times higher relative to LDL, which again goes back to the initial premise of Lipoprotein A is six times more atherogenic than LDL. So, there may be ways to reduce this risk and one way may include high sensitivity c reactive protein, specifically, low levels as that mediates lipoprotein a associated CBD risk. And I covered that in an earlier video and if you missed it, it'll be in the right corner. But there may be another way to reduce lipoprotein a associated cardiovascular disease risk And that way involves the waist to hip ratio, which modifies Lipoprotein a associated CBD risk, which is what we'll see here. On the y axis, we've got the cumulative incidence of having an ASCVD event. So And for ASCVD events, they included myocardial infarction, so having a heart attack, having to be resuscitated from cardiac arrest, so when the heart stops beating, coronary heart disease, angina, which is chest pain, or stroke. And then that was plotted against follow-up time in years up to twenty years later after the initial assessment of lipoprotein a and the waist to hip ratio. Alright. So now we can ask that question. Is lipoprotein a associated ASCVD risk higher in people with a relatively low waist to hip ratio? We're gonna have two groups for lipoprotein a lower than 50 milligrams per deciliter, which is quote unquote low in blue, and relatively high lipoprotein a in red, greater than 50 milligrams per deciliter. And in terms of the waist to hip ratio, it included people with an average waist to hip ratio of 0.83. In terms of the cumulative incident curves, the blue and the red lines, we can see that they overlap such there was no significant difference between the cumulative incident rate for people that had high or low Lipoprotein a in conjunction with a low waist to hip ratio. So from this, we can conclude that CBD risk is not relatively higher in people who have a high Lipoprotein a relative to low Lipoprotein a and a low waist to hip ratio. Alright. So this these were the lowest waist to hip ratios in the study. What about at higher waist to hip ratios? So So, now we're gonna take a look at data for people who had an average waist to hip ratio of 0.93. Again, same setup, low lipoprotein a in blue, relatively high in red. And then, here too, we can see that the cumulative incident rates for ASCVD events over that twenty year span overlapped. In other words, there was no significant difference between cumulative incident rates whether someone had low or high LEC protein a and a relatively low waist to hip ratio with an average of 0.93. So from this, here too, we can conclude that CBD risk is not relatively higher in people with relatively high lipoprotein a greater than 50 milligrams per deciliter and an intermediate waist hip ratio. Alright. So, how high can we go for the waist tip ratio and is this effect still significant? So, now we're going to take a look at data for people who had an average waist tip ratio of one point zero and when compared with the low lipoprotein a group, now we can see that there is indeed some separation for cumulative incident rates and you can see by the log rank p value, they are significantly different. In other words, people who had a relatively high lipoprotein a greater than 50 milligrams per deciliter And in for both groups that had a waist to hip ratio of one point zero, their cumulative incident rates of having an ASCVD event was significantly higher than people who had low lipoprotein a less than 50 milligrams per deciliter and also that one point zero average waist to hip ratio. So from these data, we can see that CBD risk is indeed higher in people who have a high relatively high lipoprotein a greater than or equal to 50 milligrams per deciliter and a high waist to hip ratio. So what does this all mean? Well, if your lipoprotein a is greater than 50 milligrams per deciliter, get lean. And what that'll do is it'll reduce waist circumference, which is one part of the waist to hip ratio. The other part is hip. So in order to maximize or optimize hip circumference, regular strength training including squats, dead deadlifts, and other compound movements would help resist any age related decline for hip circumference. And the goal there should then be to get the waist to hip ratio to less than 0.93 if one has a lipoprotein a value that's greater than 50 milligrams per deciliter. As waist to hip ratio is less than 0.93, we're not associated with an increased ASCVD risk regardless of lipoprotein a values. If you've ever wondered what's optimal for biomarkers, well, I have a new Patreon tier dedicated specifically to that and currently includes the 35 biomarkers shown here, more than two hours of video content, 52 published references, and note that these aren't the reference ranges. It's what may be optimal based on the largest studies that exist for how each of these biomarkers changes during aging and or associations with all cause mortality risk. So if you're interested in that, check it out. And if you're interested in more of my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where I offer blood test consults but also post at least twice per day in four other Patreon tiers. We've also got discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself that helps support the channel including ultalabtest.com which is where I get the majority of my blood testing done including lipoprotein a, the clearly filtered water filter, which I use every day, at home metabolomics, I'm up to 21 tests, oral microbiome composition, NAD testing with Genfinity, epigenetic testing with TrueDiagnostic, at home blood testing with Siphox Health, which includes the best epigenetic clock of epigenetic clocks, GrimAge, green tea, which has a bit of an issue now because of the tariffs impacting Japan to get green tea over here to The States, but I'm still committed to them long term because I love their tea. Diet tracking with Cronometer or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch including data is my north star, figuring stuff out is my drug, and the conquer agent or diatryne logo which I've got on here. Link in the video's description. Thanks for watching. Hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.