For blood test number eight in 2024, when using doctor Morgan Levine's biological age calculator PhenoAge, we saw that my biological age was seventeen years younger than the chronological. So what might be contributing to these data? So let's start off with prescription meds. For those who are unfamiliar with the channel, I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in my twenties. So I've been taking Levothyroxine, more specifically a hundred and thirty seven and a half micrograms per day since then. Which then brings us to supplements. Now the first shouldn't be a surprise either as I currently live in Boston and for about nine months out of the year, the non summer months, I supplement with vitamin d. For this test, it was two thousand I use per day, and I did that for fifty two of the fifty three days that corresponded to this test. So what is the fifty day fifty three day period that corresponded to test number eight in 2024? Well, it started immediately following test number seven, which was on October 25, and it lasted until the day before test number eight, which was on December 16. So that's a fifty fifty three day period, And as we'll see in a minute for the diet data, I'm gonna show fifty three day averages for diet. Alright. Next up on the supplement list is nicotinic acid. As when I don't take any N a D precursors, my N. A. D. Can be very low. As low as 20 micro molar or less. So for this test, I supplemented with nicotinic acid as very low doses raise my N. A. D. By a small amount. I'm still trying to figure out what's the optimal N. A. D. In terms of how high whether it's thirty micromolar, forty, fifty, etcetera. So for now, I'm still experimenting with data in the twenty to thirty micromolar range. Now, to get my N A D levels in that range, very low doses of nicotinic acid get me there. As you can see, I supplemented with thirty five to eighty five milligrams of nicotinic acid per day. And you could say, how am I getting a supplement in that low of a dose with varying amounts? So I'm not taking it in pill form. I bought the exact powder, nicotinic acid, and then suspended it in water. So I take aliquots of that every day depending on how much niacin I get in the rest of my diet. So I'm eating If I'm eating like for example mushrooms which are high in niacin, I cut down on the supplemental nicotinic acid while aiming for a specific, total niacin intake level for a given day around a hundred milligrams per day for now. So with that in mind, rather than assuming that nicotinic acid supplementation impacts my N. A. D. Levels, on the same day as this test, so December 17, I also sent blood to G infinity for N. A. D. Analysis. And if you wanna measure your own N. A. D. Levels, there's a discount link in the video's description. So on the same day as all the other tests for test number eight, N. E. D. Levels were 25.5 and that's in conjunction with an average niacin intake over these fifty three days of around a hundred and three milligrams per day. Now, where the story gets interesting though is that for test number seven, my average niacin intake including nicotinic acid supplementation was about 86. So a lower total niacin dose. But yet, NAD on the same day as testing all the other stuff for test number seven was higher at 32 micro molar. So now there are at least two factors going on here. One, the test to test variability is somewhere in the five micro molar range even though nicotinic and niacin levels were in the same ballpark, a hundred versus eighty six milligrams per day. Or two, there are other factors that despite having a lower total niacin intake allow my NAD to be higher than 26 micro molar. In this case, almost 32 micro molar. So I'm currently calculating correlations for N. E. D. With diet as I have 20 plus, data points for N. E. D. So I can look at correlations and with diet and then adjust my models for nicotinic acid intake to see which other factors may be involved in mechanisms that can raise my NAD levels. Alright. That's it for supplements. That then brings us to diet. So more specifically, what's the diet composition that was the fifty three day average that preceded this test? And that's what we'll see here. This is the average daily dietary intake for that fifty three day period that preceded test number eight. Now, this list is ranked in terms of grams with two exceptions. One is coffee which is in ounces and that's that's not point four ounces every day. That's, one twenty ounce coffee over this fifty three day period. And I I make it at home, I just put some coffee in a stainless steel ball, boil some water and pour that into a teacup and it's pretty delicious. But I'm already getting caffeine from green tea which is a staple in the approach. It's been a staple for probably two decades. And if you want to use what I use which is organic loose leaf green tea sourced from Japan, there's a discount link in the video's description. So while we're on the topic of green tea, for those who are familiar with the channel, you might notice that usually it's 20 ounces for every test as it's a constant. I fill that, or I fill most of the stainless steel ball with loose leaf green tea, and then I Again, it's just like the coffee, I boil water and put it in there, add some lemon and I'm good. That's a 20 ounce cup. So it's it was 19.2 ounces for this test because for two of the fifty three days, I completely removed it. No caffeine, and I did that to see if it would have an impact on how many times I awakened in the middle of the night, or if it would impact sleep duration and or slow wave sleep percentage or duration. And it didn't make a dent on any of that. So I'm now back to 20 ounces of green tea per day. So that brings us to experiments. What other experiments that I do for this test? And for every test, I'm making small changes with the goal of optimizing current weak spots without blowing up the rest of the diet. So for this test, there were three main experiments. The first was a reduction in flaxseed intake and I did that based on a significant positive correlation between gamma tocopherol which is a vitamin e isoform with lipoprotein a. In other words, gamma tocopherol in my data is significantly correlated correlated with a higher level of lipoprotein a. And the importance of lipoprotein a besides its atherogenicity is is that it's a part of the epigenetic algorithm for Dunedin pace with probably a higher Lipoprotein a being associated with a faster epigenetic speed of aging. So to test that hypothesis for the past two tests, I followed the correlations within my own diet to try to reduce Lipoprotein A. Now for test number seven, the main experiment was increasing, cacao bean intake which was inversely correlated with Lipoprotein A. And for that test, Lipoprotein A was 90 nanomolar. For this test, in following the gamma tocopherol correlation with Lipoprotein A, when considering that flaxseeds are my most concentrated source of gamma tocopherol, I reduced flaxseed intake with the goal of reducing gamma tocopherol intake to potentially reduce lipoprotein a. And note that I say potentially reduce because these are correlations and I don't know about causation. The only way I can test causation is by following the correlations. And even then, if the biomarkers moved in the right direction, there too it's still just a correlation. Many other factors may be involved. So for this test, I cut flax seeds to twelve grams per day and note that the previous test, so for the period that preceded test number seven, it was sixteen grams per day. And you could say that's not a major cut. Come on. It's only four grams. But for the two weeks before test number eight, average flaxseed intake was only seven grams per day. So I cut it to more than half relative to test number seven and in support of that approach, Lipoprotein a moved from 90 nano molar for test number seven to 80 nano molar for test number eight. And note that I did that despite cutting cacao bean intake from 12 grams per day for test number seven to about five grams per day for test number eight. So after recalculating the correlations clearly now, cacao bean intake will be less strongly correlated with lipoprotein a as keeping it relatively low was associated with a lower lipoprotein a. In contrast, flaxseeds and gamma tocopherol's correlation strengthened as cutting it was involved in the mechanism that helped bring lipoprotein a to a lower value relative to test number seven. 90 versus 80 nanomolar. Alright. So other experiments included an increase in orange intake. For this test, the average was fifty eight grams per day Whereas for the previous test, it was 35. And I did that based on a positive, significant positive correlation for oranges with DHEA sulfate. So DHEA sulfate levels decline during aging and in my data, they've been mostly stable for the past 18 tests. Two and a quarter years. So I've resisted an age related change within within that time span. But going back twenty years, I have two data points with DHEA sulfate levels that were around 300. But I wasn't tracking diet back then so I can't say what was going on. And I also know that I was supplementing with DHEA which would be expected to raise DHEA sulfate. So I don't know if it was just useful data. I don't know if it was because I was supplementing with DHEA. Nonetheless, it's possible that my DHEA sulfate has declined from a youthful 300 to around one twenty five. Nonetheless, resisting age related change and trying to get it as high as I can, if I can, is a part of the overall strategy. And to to do that, I followed that correlation with oranges with the HCA sulfate and the good news is it was a bit on the higher side of my average, my recent average, that 18 test average which is one twenty five. So it was one twenty eight for this test. So I've that helps to resist the age related change. So that's somewhat good news. Again, whether that's causation, I don't know. All I can do is follow the correlations and try to best optimize my biomarkers like that. The third experiment that I that I did was increasing chickpeas relative to intake for test number seven. So I doubled chickpea intake and even though this isn't a large amount and I've got it in dry weight there. So from nine to nineteen grams per day, approximately double, I did see an impact on the biomarker that I was trying to move which was creatinine. Creatinine is used as a biomarker of kidney function and I already know many of you are gonna say that it's not a good biomarker of kidney function. Before the age of 65, there's published data that it is. Above the age of 65, I would tend to agree as it's proportional to muscle mass and kidney function declines, so Cystatin C may be better. So in following the correlation for chickpeas with a lower creatinine which would suggest better kidney function, creatinine moved to my, 20 fifteens, my my 55 plus test average since 2015 which is point nine five milligrams per deciliter to point eight seven milligrams per deciliter. A small but probably significant move in the right direction which suggests better kidney function. Now here here too, I don't know if that's causation. All I did was file the correlation. Higher chickpeas suggest which is suggestive of a lower creatinine. The data moved in that direction. So it is what it is. So for these three experiments, there was good news. Reduced lipoprotein a, reduced flaxseed intake, lipoprotein a came down by about 10%. Increased orange intake, DHEA was a bit on the higher side of my latest two plus year average. And increased chickpea intake and that reduced creatinine to my, average since 2015, 50 plus blood test since 2015. It reduced that to below average. Again, suggestive which is suggestive of better kidney function. So good news for these three experiments for test number eight. Alright. So what about cheat meals? So the diet isn't always purposefully clean. And I do that because in the past, historically, when I've tried to go completely clean and no junk and as strict as possible following the macros and micros, indefinitely if I can, I start to get to the point where I crave some junk and not it it not giving into that, I can do that for a short time with willpower? But eventually in the past, I've cracked and then that can lead to a binge and I'm trying to minimize binges as much as possible. That's the opposite of calorie restriction. That's the opposite of optimal health. So with that in mind, immediately after blood testing, I add some junk. And then I do that for a couple days afterwards. And I've since expanded that approach to one or two days with some cheat meals into not paying attention to macro or micronutrient targets for that three or four day period immediately after blood testing. And what that does is, it enables me to have some satiety or to get satiated by eating some junk. Whatever I want, you know, chocolate or peanut butter mixed with chocolate or or ice cream, whatever it may be. While also not being as rigid with the diet, you know, I have to get this much beta carotene, or this much vitamin k, or calcium etcetera. Now, for that up to three or four day period following each blood test, I get satiated and I also get have gotten to the point where I'm like, I'm sick of junk. I want to get back on to my usual approach because I enjoy eating like this. So with that in mind, following blood test, the the last blood test, test number seven, I I had the standard which is peanut butter mixed with chocolate. So I melt the chocolate, add the peanut butter and I add some sugar and that's a homemade Reese's peanut butter cup which is delicious. I look forward to it. And then I also made some homemade ice cream. So if you saw the last video in this series, the diet composition video that corresponded to test number seven, I had some Oreo ice cream bars which I thought were ice cream bars until after I ate them, And then I realized they're a frozen dairy dessert which didn't include any heavy cream. So with that in mind and filled with a whole bunch of other chemicals. So it's like a chemical, you know, a storm of of of garbage. Right? So anyway, for this test, following test number eight, I decided to, make my own ice cream. And I did that with heavy cream mixed with sweetened condensed milk which I should say it's not actually sweet sweetened condensed milk for this test. I boiled it in can after removing the label for three and a half hours which converts it into a caramel like texture which is known as dulce de leche. So heavy cream, dulce de leche in one jar and then in another jar, I made heavy cream, dulce de leche and, raspberry jam. So I've got two homemade ice cream jars, little jars that I did that for a couple of days and that was pretty delicious. I might do that for for a cheat meal in the future too. So when adding up those junk calories from the chocolate chips, $6.87. For the sugar, $3.93. Sweetened condensed milk which is essentially all sugar, $3.14. And the raspberry jam also basically all sugar although there's a small amount of fruit in there probably. $3.36. Total junk calories were $17.30. And when dividing that by the total amount of calories consumed for the fifty three day period that preceded test number eight, it is 1.5% all of all calories. In other words, that fifty three day average that corresponded to test number eight was 98.5% clean and 11.5% junk. Alright. So this list list is ranked in terms of grams. What about ranking foods in terms of calorie intake? And that's what we'll see here. These are the top 10 foods for average daily calorie intake for the fifty three day period average that corresponded to test number eight. And first, note that this list, this image is generated by using Cronometer. And if you wanna track your own diet using Cronometer, there's a there's a discount link in the video's description. So atop the list as it has been from any test are sardines. And that may change for the next test, test number one in 2025 as as I've started to add in wild caught salmon to get Astaxanthin which is a carotenoid. Now, Astaxanthin was recently shown to increase lifespan in the one of the many ITP studies. And astaxanthin has also been shown to have positive effects on skin and eye health. And these are two areas where I'm always looking to improve. So I'm gonna add more wild caught salmon into the approach going forward. Now, I wish I could add it every day, but that stuff is crazy expensive. The sardines that I eat are already somewhat expensive. I mean, this is like 15 to $20 a pound. Wild caught salmon can be as expensive as $40 a pound. So I'm not gonna add the wild caught salmon in all the time, but it'll definitely make an appearance to get some rather than none Astaxanthin into the diet. Now, in terms of the other foods that made the top 10 list, nine of the 10 foods that are here were also here for test number seven in 2024. As again, I'm not looking to blow up the diet at this point. I'm looking to make small changes while optimizing the weak spots and not messing up everything else. So with that in mind, walnuts entered the top the top 10 whereas flaxseeds left the top 10. And again, for that lipoprotein a experiment. Alright. So next up is macronutrient composition. How does that look that for the corresponding, fifty three day period that preceded test number eight? So first, calorie intake. Average daily calorie intake was twenty one nineteen And this is my close to lowest intake since 2015. My lowest intake since 2015 is twenty seventy six per day. So you could say, why not just go for your lowest intake? So eating less calories in my case being calorie restricted to some degree is better and actually maybe the best intervention for all of my biomarkers. Something like a net of 10 biomarkers move in the right direction relative to wrong and these are significant correlations with a p value less than 0.05 with one exception and that's lymphocytes which decline during aging. So when my calorie intake has been at the lower end of my range for a few tests, I've had my lowest lymphocyte levels and the odds of them being less than 1,500 which is moving towards age as somewhere around 2,000 is what's found in youth or more likely to be found in youth and that's what's associated with a lowest all cause mortality risk is less likely. So with that in mind, that twenty seventy six to twenty one nineteen may not seem like a big jump. You know, it's only 40 calories or so. But for the past three tests, lymphocyte levels have been closer to 1,900, and I haven't been at that 13 or 1,400 range as I had been with the twenty seventy six in that ballpark calorie intake. So going forward, I'm gonna stay around 2,100, try not to go below with the goal of keeping lymphocytes relatively youthful and all of the other biomarkers relatively youthful too. Alright. Average daily protein intake was 96 grams per day which when divided by total calories consumed is 18% of the total diet. Fat intake is shown here, 91 grams per day which is about 39% of the diet. And then if you're interested in the individual breakdown of fat, monounsaturated, omega three six and saturated, that's shown here too. Next up is carbon tape. So starting from total carbs which is 268 grams per day. I know that seems like a lot and I say that on every test but, net carbs equals total carbs minus fiber. Average daily fiber intake that corresponded to this test was about 76 and a half or was 76 and a half grams per day. So when subtracting that from total carbs, we get a net carbs of about a 193 grams per day. When multiplying that by four calories per gram, we get 3036% net carbs that corresponded to test number eight. Now note that within fiber, about 20% of that is soluble fiber which means that it's fermented by gut bacteria into short chain fatty acids including acetate, propionate, and butyrate. In other words, a fraction of fiber is converted into fat. And when accounting for that, a 148 calories from fiber can be added to total fat. So that's 7% of the diet came comes from fat that was from potentially, fermented by gut bacteria into short chain fatty acids. So So now, we can see the net macros that correspond to test number eight. About 46% total fat, 36% net carbs, and 18% total protein. Now, note that within total carbs or net carbs, I also track sugar intake and and more specifically total fructose. And that's because the diet is rich in fruits and vegetables which contain fructose. And in my data, in those correlations, a relatively higher fructose intake is significantly correlated with a lot more biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. So with that in mind, I keep an eye on fructose intake and try to keep it towards the lower end of my range. So for this test, when dividing sucrose by two as sucrose is half fructose, and then adding that to fructose, we get a total fructose intake of about sixty two grams per day. Now that may seem like a lot. My lowest has been forty eight grams per day but the biomarkers weren't at their best. I think PhenoAge was thirteen years younger relative to seventeen years younger with a bit higher fructose intake for this test relative to the forty eight grams for that test. But prior to that forty eight grams, my lowest fructose intakes were around fifty seven fifty eight grams per day. So sixty two is pretty close to my lowest. I've had fructose intakes that are as much as double where they were for this test. So this is progress albeit not perfection. Alright. Micronutrients, how does that correspond to test number eight? So that's what we'll see here and I wanted to get all of the vitamins including the subdivision of the carotenoids, alpha and beta carotene and so on on the list. I'd encourage, you to go full screen if you haven't already if it's tough to see. Now for anyone starting on this journey with the goal of optimizing biomarkers through diet and supplements, the first thing that I'd recommend is getting full RDA coverage for at least the first few blood tests. And once you're doing that, after a few tests, then you can start to look at correlations within your own diet and supplements assuming you're tracking supplement intake too. And then you can start to follow correlations with your own data to try to optimize biomarkers towards youth and what's associated with lowest all cause mortality risk. So with that in mind, if you look at my list, many of these micronutrients are purposely much higher than the RDA as I'm following correlations within my own data. Again, to keep those to try to keep those biomarkers youthful and associated with lowest risk of all cause mortality. So I've highlighted this in other videos but just go to the bottom there and you can see vitamin k is about 24 times the RDA or what's considered an adequate intake. And I didn't pick that number out of thin air. Vitamin k is significantly correlated with more biomarkers going in the right direction than wrong. So I've been pushing it higher and higher over many tests to see if that would get result in a better impact on biomarkers and it has. So that's why I've settled on that high of an intake for vitamin k. Now, would that be true for others? I can't say. You'd have to track your diet, look at your own correlations, and then do that up for many tests in order to figure out what may be optimal for each of the micronutrients rather than just following the RDA. Alright. So next up is full list of minerals and that covers the full diet composition for test number eight. That's all for now. If you're interested in more of my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where you can see daily dietary data including foods, macro, and micronutrients as I post that screenshots daily. So rather than waiting two two months after each blood test or around two months to see the average dietary intake, you can see that daily data on Patreon. There are also a whole bunch of other tiers where I'm posting data. So if you're interested in that, check it out. And now, I'm also happy to announce a new Patreon tier. What's optimal for biomarkers? Including biomarkers representative of major organ and systemic function, including immune cells, inflammation, red blood cells and hemoglobin, metabolic health, liver, kidney, thyroid function, lipoproteins, and vitamin d. It's a ninety five minute video. So if you're interested in that, check it out. Before you go, we've also got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself which help to support the channel, including ultalabtest.com which is where I get the majority of my blood testing done, clearly filtered water filter, at home metabolomics, oral microbiome composition, NED testing with Genfinity, epigenetic testing, at home blood testing with Syphox Health, which includes ApoB, but also GrimAge, the DNA methylation DNA methylation test GrimAge, green tea, diet tracking with Cronometer. Or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or DIY Trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all of the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.