Hey, everyone. Today's guest is doctor Gary Churchill, who is a professor at the Jackson Laboratory and the co director of the Jackson Aging Center, which is a Nathan Schock Center of Excellence in the Basic Biology of Aging. Today, doctor Churchill will present recent findings from his lab showing that fasting and calorie restriction contribute to lifespan extension. So welcome, Gary, and let's get into the presentation. Great. Thank you, Michael. Thanks for giving me this opportunity to, to present my work. I'm always excited to, to try to explain to people what we do and why we do this. As you said, I'm gonna talk today about, some results from a a recent study that, we were, really very fortunate to, to publish in the journal Nature, with the first author is my colleague, Andrea DiFrancesco. And, the paper describes a study that spanned, approximately seven years of, of keeping mice on the shelf, feeding them different diets and different schedules as I will explain, and, keeping track of how their health and lifespan played out over that period. So, this is me. I'm at the Jackson Laboratory. I've been here for twenty seven years. It's really fantastic. I I spent the whole morning cross country skiing, and I am exhausted. So just factor that into, into my presentation here. What I wanna do is I definitely wanna focus mostly on the paper, but I wanna bracket it. And this is new. I just feel like there's some I've done this talk a few times. I wanna throw some new stuff in. I wanna bracket it with some of the preliminaries. What did we do before, and what, you know, what motivated us to look at this study? And maybe just a little glimpse of where I think it might go next. So, this is the before. So I'm a geneticist, and I'm really interested in how, the variation in our underlying DNA and our genome affects all kinds of traits, things that are related to health, lifespan, metabolic disease, etcetera. And, some years ago, I was really concerned that the studies that we were carrying out in mice were focusing on inbred strains. And inbred strains are really powerful tools for doing genetics, but they tend to be well, they are, genetically identical. And many, many large studies often just carry out their their studies and report the results from a single strain. And my concern is that results on a single strain aren't necessarily robust, and there are a lot of concerns about reproducibility in science, which is a whole other topic. But, you know, one of the ways that we can help improve reproducibility and generalize results from a model like a mouse to human health is to introduce some genetic diversity. So these two mice are, they're diversity outbred mice. They're, they're they're genetically diverse. The the two there are probably about second cousins, so they're not unrelated. They're, they're from the same birth cohort and become a parent. And, what else can I say about them? They're really special mice because we took this picture a few days after their fourth birthday. Both born about the same time, and a typical mouse lifespan would be two and a half years. So four years, pretty remarkable. And what to say? These were two mice of 900. They were, on a caloric restriction protocol, so we had reduced their food intake by about 20%. They eat healthy food. We take care of them. Veterinarians examine them. You know, they they live the good life. In fact, we had them in, in pens with a a large format so they could have lots of friends. They were they were group housed with about seven or eight other other mice throughout most of their lifespan. But these two really, you know, made the extra mile. It it's it's not really linear like the the the dog ears joke that that we often hear, but the the human equivalent, these mice are easily centenarians. They're, you know, they're well over a 100 mouse years old. So, let's take a closer look at them. Oh, I I should say that we don't normally name our mice, but when you work with these genetically diverse mice, and they're all very unique, they're all different, they're all one of a kind, and you work with them for four years, you really get to know them. And I do I have allowed the technicians to name their mice on their fur fourth birthday. And, on the left here, this is is Blanche, the the brown mouse, and the black mouse is Grace. So Blanche and Grace. Here we go. Here's Blanche. Well, four years old. What can you say? Her fur looks kinda tatty. She's got a hunched back. It's kyphosis. She probably has osteoporosis. There's a nick in her ear. What I find really striking is the the hind end musculature is wasting away. So she probably is not getting around very well. She probably can't reach the food hopper. Without a doubt, they're feeding this animal by putting food and water on the bottom of the cage so that she can access it. You also notice there's the there's a kink in her tail. You know, we don't really know what old age is, but we know it when we see it. Right? This this is an old mouse. This is what she looks like. Her second cousin, Grace, also four year old mouse, you know, the distinguished gray. It's really nice conformation on her body, smooth tail. The fur looks great. Good musculature. This is the four year old mouse you wanna be. Right? How did she get there? I'm gonna say largely luck because out of 900 mice, Blanche died a few weeks after her fourth birthday, but Grace persisted for nine more months. And she is still the oldest, diversity mouse we've had in the mouse room And now many, many years and many, literally, thousands of mice that we've put on lifespan protocols live to be four years, nine months old. So go, Grace. So how did she manage that? Well, we wanna understand it. So, we've been carrying out some other studies. And this is the the published study that I referred to Michael referred to a moment ago, where we looked at dietary restriction in diversity of bread mice. The mice that we looked at, there were 960 of them altogether. They were all females. We did that intentionally. I'd like to say, and I'd I will say that there's a really strong male bias in model organism research. A lot of studies are done with only male mice. That's a real problem. It's also not ideal to do a study with only female mice. But if anything, we tip the scale back a little bit. And, honestly, we were concerned with a a study of this size and of this duration that male mice could potentially be aggressive, especially if we food deprive them. We've since done these studies, and we're getting better at the husbandry. And I know that our our upcoming studies are going to include both males and females. But right up front, please, this is a female only study. What did we do? Well, we let about 20% of the mice just eat all the food they want. I I want it looks like highly processed food. Right? But this is the it's it's in pellets, but it's actually a grain based diet. It's really healthy. It's fortified with more than all the things that that mice need to stay healthy. So they're they're eating good healthy food. And I know people have this image that, you know, oh, the mice are, you know, eating all they want, so they're overeating, and they really don't necessarily overeat. Some do. Some get obese. But on average, a mouse is gonna eat about 3.4 grams of food per day, and that was our ad libitum baseline. So we have a lot of experience. We know that's about how much they eat. So we put some other mice on caloric restriction. Mild caloric restriction, just like Blanche and Grace, 20% restricted. That's they get about 80% of the food that they would normally eat every day and 40% restricted. This is an extreme CR. They're getting two grams a day. They'd like to eat three and a half grams a day. Just picture your plate. Okay? You'll see in a moment. The 40% CR is is a really extreme intervention. To do CR, you have to weigh the food every day. You have to calculate how many mice are in the cage, etcetera. It's a lot of work. So we thought, well, might be easier just to do intermittent fasting. And we also didn't know at the time whether caloric restriction and intermittent fasting would do the same things. We planned the study way before the, the the six eighteen style of fasting became popular. And now I wonder we gotta go back and look at that. But we decided that one day a week with no food or two days a week with no food. And we did that by on Wednesday, we changed the cage. The mice are put in a fresh cage, fresh bedding. They can't squirrel away any food. We don't fill the hopper. Twenty four hours later or forty eight hours later, we fill their food hopper, and we treat them just like ad lib mice. So they have all the food. Hopper is always full. And these are the five interventions that we looked at. So it's good. When you talk about dietary restriction, the details really matter. And I'm gonna spend two slides just to show you oh, I put these mice on 20% caloric restriction. What does that really mean? Well, this is what they do day to day throughout the week. This is their daily food consumption. This one really puzzled me for a while. The ad libitum mice are eating more food on Wednesdays. It's like, what is happening? Of Of course, you know, slap your head. This is the day they change the food hopper. So they have fresh food on Wednesdays. They always have food, but it's fresh on Wednesdays, and they eat more. So there's that. Here's a one day fasting. You can see there's one day, twenty four hour period. The food is taken away. They have no food. But look what happens the next day. No surprise. They compensate, and they you know, by the weekend, they're eating normal amounts of food. And this, dotted line, this is a this is the ad libitum average. The two day fasting mice, two days with no food, and then they also compensate. They continue to compensate through the weekend. And here are the CR mice. You notice their daily input is below where they would like to be, but something happens on Fridays. And this is another just practical logistical decision. I can't have my staff coming in on the weekend every day, every weekend for seven years. So on Fridays, we said, heck. We'll just triple them up and go home. And, the 20% mice would would have a feast and, you know, spread it out over the weekend. The 40% CR mice did something pretty amazing, not surprising. They ate all their food within a few hours, and then they went two days with none. So already, it's not so simple. It looks like the forty percent mice are also doing intermittent fasting intentionally or otherwise. And, you know, there's just a lot of fluctuations here, the compensatory feeding. And you can really get down to these are four hour intervals, but you can get down to pretty fine resolution. We put the mice in metabolic cages where we could track everything. How much food, how much carbon dioxide they're breathing, how much oxygen, their energy expenditure, how much wheel running they do. And there's so much to say in these graphs. They're just amazing. A mouse will normally start to feed. You can see here right at the beginning of the dark cycle. Of course, the CR mice start to feed as soon as they get food. You can see the food deprivation period. You can see for the one day and the two day. You can see the Friday feast, and then, by Sunday, all the food is gone. This parameter, our q, is is is the respiratory quotient. This tells us what kind of fuel source animals are burning for their energy. If an animal is burning carbohydrates for energy, they're gonna have a high r q value. And if an animal is burning fat for energy, they're gonna have a low r q value. What I find amazing about the 40% CR mice is how they go through this daily rhythm is really striking of completely switching their metabolic base. They're they're burning fat. They're burning carbs. They switch, switch, switch. It's like they're exercising their metabolism. Little hard to see on this busy graph, but all the mice have a bit of circadian, but it really gets flattened out, with the ad lib mice. Another thing to notice is that RQ plummets when mice are deprived of food, and you can see again the feast and famine, strategy. Interesting, the magnitude of the RQ fluctuations at the level of the individual mice don't predict their lifespan. That isn't what I would have guessed. I was really, really hoping. You know? This is the magic bullet right here. Metabolic flexibility, lifespan, not the case. Mice who aren't eating have low energy. Make a note. Ironically, the the 40% CR mice who are always low on energy are always running on the wheel. They even get up in the middle of the day when they should be asleep, and they run on the wheel. And this has been studied in other context, and it's a pretty clear indication of food seeking behavior. They're hungry. They're looking for food. So mice, when they're not getting enough food, they have low energy, they're hungry, and another bit of data that I'm not gonna show you, they're cold. So CR. Okay. What do these dietary interventions do? Well, no surprise. They reduce body weight. And if you look here on the left, for this first six months, all the animals were ad libbed. We wanted them to become full adults. Here they are. They're full adults, and we put them on these regimens. I I wanna add to that we eased the forty percent and the two day onto their regimens. We didn't just flip a switch here. So we we got them onto their restrictive regimens, and here's what an AL mouse would do. It just gonna continue to gain weight until it's about 20 old. Interestingly, the, I forgot to mention. The AL might the one day fasting mice who compensate, they don't have any caloric restriction. They eat just as much food as an AL mouse over the course of a week, and yet they lose weight. So same caloric intake, and they're having weight loss. The 20% and the two day IF, they're definitely both calorically restricted. They're losing weight. But look what's happened to the forty percent mice. Immediately, their weight starts to plummet. It drops down to a certain level, but it just never picks up again. On average, these are population averages. These aren't individual mice. The individual mice are just all over the map. But on average, they're they're they're having rapid weight loss. It goes down to what would be a ridiculously low level below 25 grams for an adult mouse is very low, and they never really pick it up again. So, you know, here they are. They're negative energy balance for their entire lives. I wanna just flip this graph because, we'll always plot our data in chronological time. But you can plot the data in a different time scale, and it's not perfect. But if we go from birth to death so we're gonna take each mouse's data and stretch it according to their time of death, And we replot the data so that you can see as my as mice approach the end, you can see they pretty uniformly lose weight. The 40% CR mice, they don't have much to lose, but they are also losing weight at the end. I just wanna point out this proportion of life lived scale is not a perfect surrogate for biological age, but I think it works pretty well. And it's gonna give us some insights, and I'll come back to it. So I wanted to show you in terms of body weight how that looks. Dietary restrictions increase lifespan. That's in the title you knew it was coming. Right? Here are the ad lib mice. Their their median lifespan is about twenty five months. The 40% CR mice, those mice who are cold and tired and losing weight, they live nine months longer median and, you know, about thirty four months. That is amazing. The IF mice live longer. The 20% CR mice live longer. Now when I say this, there are a couple of caveats I just want people to keep in mind. I I know, Michael, your audience, very health conscious people thinking about diets, thinking about their caloric intake, and probably thinking about what this is gonna do to my lifespan. So if you look at the lifespan data, same data, just plotted a little differently. Lifespan in months on the x axis. I've got the the different dietary intervention groups. And each of these points is telling me at what age a mouse died. And I want you to notice that the forty percent mice, they're not all living. Here's the median. So it's definitely you know, the the odds are better, and here's the tail. So those very extreme mice, you know, Blanche and Grace, you know, right out here. And I want you to notice, by the way, how many four year olds we got out of of this study. We got a bunch of four year olds running low on on names. But I just don't want people to think, oh, I'm gonna restrict my calories, and I'm going to live longer. If you restrict your calories to this extreme, the equivalent of what we've done for the mice, you will not be happy, and you probably won't live remarkably longer than a mouse who just ate what they felt like eating. It's still amazing. Okay? I I I just don't want to give first of all, it's a mouse study. Everything I say has to do with mice, but we're always, always anthropomorphizing and thinking, woah. What about what does that mean for people? Well, I'm pretty sure the meaning for people is pretty much the same message that you're getting here from the mice. Chloric restriction has some benefits. I'll show you in a minute. It has some detriments, and it does enable a lucky few mice to live a really extended lifespan. So there you go. Does intervention extend lifespan for everybody? One thing we came in with a hypothesis that mice who are smaller prior to the intervention and mice that were bigger prior to the intervention. First of all, we know they have different lifespans. We know big dogs die young. Same is true of mice. Bigger mice when they're young mice that are bigger when they're young generally have a shorter lifespan. So would the interventions care if the mice were smaller or bigger? And it turns out that for smaller mice, all of the interventions extended lifespan. The effect doesn't look quite as dramatic here. It's compressed a bit. But for the IF mice for the heavy mice, the intermittent fasting didn't extend the lifespan on average. So this has also got us thinking that these interventions aren't necessarily right for everyone. And that's a big open question that we're beginning to investigate. Unfortunately, we can't really draw solid conclusions from our diversity mice because every mouse is an individual, and we did not have the opportunity to put two mice who are genetically identical onto the same interventions or different interventions. That's ongoing. Give me five years and invite me back. So this body weight thing is puzzling. It turns out that losing body weight has shorter lifespan. And this is what I mean. Here's here's our body weight curve, and I drew some arrows on top of it to show from six months to about eighteen or twenty months, ad lib mice are gonna gain a certain amount of weight. Each mouse gains more or less weight. Some of them gain a lot. Some of them lose weight, actually. Here's the blue and, you know, here's the 40 CR. They almost all lose weight. So if we look at individual mice and we ask, well, did you lose more weight or gain more weight? And we look across all the intervention groups. The mice that lost weight, the solid line, had shorter lifespans. Lost weight, shorter lifespans. Lost weight. Lost weight. Lost weight. It's not good to lose weight. But wait a minute. The dietary restriction extends lifespan, and it causes mice to lose weight. So this is a real dilemma, I think. So this one I've never done. So let's try this. I want to explain a little bit of why body weight. So one of the hypotheses floating around about dietary restriction is, oh, well, you restrict their diets, they lose weight, they don't get obese, secures their metabolic diseases, and they live longer. That's not true. We put the mice on these diets, and they live longer. And you can see that here. This is the same plot I showed you earlier, just turned on its side. Here's a plot of the change in body weight. And just like, the other graphs that I showed you, AL mice tend to gain weight, forty percent CR mice lose weight. So putting animals on these restrictive diets causes them to lose weight, so that's a negative effect. If we look at lifespan on the y axis by change in body weight on the x axis and we draw the regression lines for each diet, they're all positive slope. So what's happening here is diet causes animals to lose weight, and more weight gain is associated with longer lifespan. So diet can't be explained by change in body weight because the sign is wrong, goes the wrong way. So there has to be in addition to this, there has to be some other effect of diet that's changing lifespan. That's what we wanna know. And I'll give away the punch line now. That's what we still don't know. But we do know we have some ideas where this might be happening. So dietary restriction is doing something other than weight gain, weight loss to affect lifespan. In the Dorito study, we you know, one of our objectives was to examine, health of the animals. And we're we're really good at measuring mice here at the Jackson Lab. We measured everything under the sun. I just show you the hairball just to give you a sense that, you know, at three or six time points, across their lifespan, we measured hundreds of things. I I forget the total number, but there may have been over 700 individual measurements, not including body weight, which we collected weekly, which would be now thousands of measurements on each individual mouse. And we asked, you know, of all these things that we measured, if we calculated their diet adjusted lifespan correlation, So which traits are associated with longer lifespan, which traits are associated with shorter lifespan? In this little diagram here, here's a trait that I called pheno delta. That's really hands down. It's most strongly associated with very long lifespan. And here's the trait most strongly associated with shorter lifespan. That's the red cell distribution with at ten months of age. Some of these other traits like myeloid and lymphoid cell populations are immune traits. And, I didn't get into the fat content, but when animals are not losing weight, they are maintaining fat, and maintaining fat is definitely a good thing. Positive association with lifespan if you can maintain fat on one of these restrictive diets. So let's pick apart pheno delta for a minute. What this is is every year for a month, we sent the mice off to a new mouse room. They get separated from the cage mates. They get measured. We put them in open field. We we do blood draws. They go in the NMR machine. They just it's a pretty stressful period for them. It lasts about a month, and they almost all lose weight. So which mice live longer? So this is their weight change, and this is the same story again, except this is during a very focused period in their lives when they're stressed. So animals by the way, these are just z scores because the technical reason, it just it works better on the on the plot. Mice who lose weight during the stressful period have shorter lifespans. Mice who don't lose weight during the stressful period have longer lifespans. This was really the clue as to what's going on with body weight, and you notice it's true across all the diets. It's a little softer here, in the 40 percenters, but it it's true across all the diets that resilience to weight loss is an indicator of long lifespan. And what I think, this is my opinion, is that these animals across all the diets, independent of which diet they're on, they come with a genetically encoded level of resilience. Their resilience is what's determining their lifespan. Resilience is is a word. It's an English language word. It's a very meaningful word, but in terms of molecular mechanism and what's going on, we'd really like to know what are the molecular signatures of resilience, future experiments here. But I think all the body weight stuff can be explained by, oh, I'm stressed. I'm not getting enough food. Can I maintain my weight, or can I not maintain my weight? And the mice who are intrinsically capable of maintaining their weight are living longer. Oh, there's some other stuff going on. We measured a lot of things in their blood, and there's this you know, there are a lot of traits in the blood, both related to your erythrocytes, your red cells, and your immune cells, that are associated with lifespan. And I'm just picking on one. It's called red cell distribution width. If you go get a whole blood analysis at the doctor, I'm sure most of you know this, red cell distribution with RDW expressed as coefficient of variation is a number that's gonna be on there. And it's very similar to the mouse number. And look at this. Mice with high RDW, lifespan on the y axis, RDW, x axis. Mice with high RDW are almost assuredly having shorter lifespans. There are mice who die with low RDW, but mice with high RDW, one exception. Right? This could be a mistake. But high RDW is a is a indicator of mortality. So let's look at RDW predicts mortality. Honestly, I talked to one of the physicians who was associated with the study, and he's like, oh, yeah. We know this. Physicians know this. This is why RDW is on the medical report, the blood the blood analysis. So if you look at all the mice together and you just look at their RDW, this is ten months negative slope. There's that one. But there are a lot of 40% mice out here, and these are the 40% mice who had short lifespans. They have high RDW. If we go to twenty months, twenty two months, actually, the reason the plot looks funny is because mice that died before twenty two months did not get their second RDW measure. So everybody who was measured is now in the top part of the plot. And you can see again this phenomenon and then out here at, 34. So I picture it. If you had a movie, if you could continuously watch this through time, I just picture these points kinda rolling down here, and then the mice are dying, rolling down and dying. So RDW is a really interesting measure. High RDW, short lifespan. But wait. The fun's not over because look what RDW how RDW responds to intermittent fasting for two days or 40% CR. At 10 of age, they've been on their intervention for four months. This RDW number, on average, has really shot up. So that's not good. But the slope is less, and we know they live longer. So it does appear that the intervention is doing something adverse to the red cells, and yet the age effect is is flattened, and, ultimately, they live longer. And remember, this is chronological age. I would swap this over to the proportion of life lived. And here's something that's really amazing. All these lines are parallel, and they all have this inflection point at about 70% of life lived. RDW starts to go up. Remember the movie. Here we go. These mice have turned the corner. And the fact that the lines are parallel tells me something. These mice are all changing through their biological time scale in a very similar way, and there's something independent that's happening that's just bumping the RDW up in these, two extreme groups. That is a weird observation that I'm curious about, but let's go somewhere else for a minute. Okay. I said in the beginning, I'm a geneticist. I am really fascinated by genetics. I always have been. You can ask my mother about fruit flies in the house when I was a kid. So, I really wanna understand what are the genetic underpinnings of lifespan. And one way we can do that is we can genotype all the mice, and we can do genome wide association study. This, you know, we're gonna map loci in the genome that are associated with lifespan. And a mouse has, 19 autosomes and an x x y chromosomes, and a mitochondria. The the height of the peak here is showing me the strength of association of a particular point on a chromosome with lifespan. And the higher the peak, the more the the stronger the association with lifespan. So there's this really high peak here on chromosome 18 I'll come back to. We can also calculate how much of the variability and lifespan is explained by different factors. You remember that lifespan is a really noisy trait. It's it was even for the 40% CR mice, there were short lived mice and long lived mice and a lot of variants. And it turns out that diet explains about 7% of that variance. And then after accounting for diet, body weight, which we talked about a lot, that comes in at around 1%. Chromosome 18 just all by itself explains four and a half percent of the variation in body weight. And the rest of the genetic background, all this stuff out here that really, you know, we can't sift out. There must be dozen, you know, dozens of loci that are affecting lifespan. Together, the genetics is explaining about 20%. So if you're a mouse, if you're a DO mouse living in these happy conditions, this is the breakdown. There's a whole other lecture to explain why it's more complicated in humans. But diet has an effect. It's a huge effect, but it just it's dwarfed by genetics. Interesting. That chromosome 18 locus is not only a lifespan. We call them quantitative trait loci. It's not only associated with lifespan. It's associated with RDW. Weird. We have a working hypothesis right now that this locus on chromosome 18 affects something that's closely related to RDW, which affects lifespan. So we have a causal hypothesis and some ongoing studies that I hope will resolve this eventually. So that's the three dose study. Oh, here's a little synopsis. There were lots of lifespan predictors, diet. Here's your chromosome 18 effect. You can see it's huge. Here's RDW, the lymphocytes, percent fat, which I didn't talk about, but, mice with high higher body fat are living longer. I think it's a resilience thing. Here's change in body weight that I did talk about quite a lot. So you can just get a sense of the magnitude. The the single genetic locus is huge. Diet is huge. But look at the shape. These all these other factors really don't push the tail. But look at how diet pushes the tail of the lifespan distribution. It's different. Diet's doing something different, and this is what has me puzzled right now. So I just wanna look at a bunch of traits. This is the it's called the myeloid skew. How many of your white cells are innate immune versus adaptive immune, myeloid to lymphoid ratio? This is just showing AL and 40% CR, and you can see 40% CR attenuates the rate of increase of the myeloid skew. Sounds good? It is good. But if I change things to PLL, to biological age, these two curves lay right on top of each other. And look, 70%, it's not as sharp as some of the other ones. But on a biological time scale, this ML ratio is tracking biological age really well. Here's our red cell distribution width. Remember, it bumped up in a flattened slope, and we put it on the PLL scale, biological age, parallel lines bumped up. Here's one I didn't talk about, hematocrit. High hematocrit is good. 40% CR is good for hematocrit. It's bumped up. It attenuates less rapidly. But on biological age scale, they're parallel. So what I'm wondering here is whether caloric restriction changes the rate of aging. I'm not even sure what the rate of aging means, but it looks like we're measuring something. And this something that we're measuring has a really sharp inflection point at at 75 of life lived, which is really striking. We have some ongoing studies. We're interested in red cell and immune traits. And just because it's on here, I would like to point out, inflammation. 40% CR does something amazing to inflammation. It goes down, goes up on AL. You can see that just like everything else with these diverse mice, it's really noisy. But if you look on the lifespan scale, sure, it's going down for most of the lifespan. But even the 40% CR mice, when they get to that last leg of life, inflammation shooting up. So things to things to ponder. These are some of the questions I'm really interested in in chasing down after this study. And I think that, the immune system and the erythroid system are two very likely candidates for, revealing mediators, so we can better understand how caloric restriction is acting at a physiological or even biochemical level. This was a huge study. I'll just say it was it was largely funded by Calico Life Sciences. Very grateful and also the Jacks Nathan Schock Center. There are a whole number of really wonderful collaborators at Calico. I'm just gonna point out Andrea, who was with me through thick and thin on the phone every week, sometimes three times a week. And also, David Botstein, who's been a really wonderful inspiration for me. David is now retired. He's the one who made the study happen. He said you gotta do this. I'm gonna invite you out to Calico. We're gonna make it happen, and he did. Some of my folks here at JACS, I'm gonna shout out Laura Robinson who, through the entire study was my per project manager, wonderful phenotyping team, and, Karen Svenson, who was responsible for Blanche and Grace, collaborators at UPenn and Beth Israel. And, oh my god, thank you. Your study is, from my perspective, iconic. It's gonna be looked at for decades. You know, you mentioned you mentioned, translatability. So I have so many questions. You know, I hope I hope we can go through them all. So, you mentioned translatability. So the pattern that you saw for positively correlated with lifespan and and negatively correlated with lifespan regardless of which diet the mice were on. So just using higher lymphocytes at relatively younger ages, you showed in your paper too. You know? So lymphocytes decline during aging. They also decline during aging in people. The REW increases during aging, you know, and higher levels are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So in terms of translatability, sure, it's, you know, it's in, you know, female mice specific to one genotype, but that biomarker pattern is similar in people. And it then raises a question. If you could discover, you know, the recipe, whether it's diet, exercise, supplements, magnitude of CR or not, IF or not, to keep your lymphocytes relatively high and resist that age related change and keep your RDW relatively low and resist that age related change, can you push lifespan and health span even out? So what what are your thoughts on that in terms of translatability in the book with the biomarkers? The measurements that you referred to are really, similar between mice and humans. The same patterns of change happen. The numbers are even the same. I know these mouse numbers inside and out. When I go to get my physical annual physical results, I can read the numbers because they're the same numbers I read on all these mice. So we're measuring the same things. A lot of the same phenomenon happen. Why do we study mice? Well, we study mice because we want to understand human biology, find ways to improve human health, be translationally, medically relevant, but you're obviously not gonna do a study like this with humans. Just ain't gonna happen. So, and mice give us access to a whole suite of tools that would be inconvenient to use in a in a human study. So do I believe these results translate? I believe it. Yes. But that's my belief. It's it's an inference. I'm going out on a limb and saying, oh, if this works in mice, it's likely to work in humans. And I think all of model organism science works that way. And, ultimately, that's why we end up having clinical trials. And I'm not gonna get into the hullabaloo about, my clinical trials fail after we've studied mice, except maybe they should have used my mice. But that's a whole other story. And we've well, the the the rate of aging, as I was showing you at the end, is malleable. We know if there is a such thing as aging, we know that we can change its rate with these caloric restriction interventions. As I said early in my talk, these are really extreme interventions. You don't wanna do that. Trust me. But it does tell us something really important. It says we can move the needle. Well, what do we have to do? And is it even possible to move the aging needle without accumulating, all these adverse outcomes, cold body temperature? I I doubt the forty percent CR mice can reproduce, and I think we raise them in germ free facility. I think they would be susceptible to infection. So you're gonna have trade offs. Can we find the the path, you know, the the mechanism, the the molecular key point, or the dietary recipe? I don't know. We'll have to keep keep doing this stuff for a while. Yeah. In in terms of the, CR mice being more prone to infection, so, is so, obviously, I get in a in a controlled study, whether it's controlled feeding study in humans or even, you know, on a standard chow diet in mice. That's a variable you wanna control. But when considering that, you know, even on CR, you know, or or even, you know, these genetically long lived mice without CR, that the last 20, you know, twenty five percent of life that, you know, mortality rates are basically increasing no matter what. What are your thoughts on maybe adding something to the diet? Like, you know, so for example, soluble fiber is, there's a couple of studies showing that it improves survival after influenza infection. So if you had infect mice with influenza, you allow them to have I think it was in the water even, and then the you know, so mice that had soluble fiber, in the water, they they survived better. Right? So, what are your thoughts on adding things to the diet, that could potentially flatten that, you know, that increased mortality rate at the last quarter of life? Anything I say is gonna be opinion. I will say that the the diet that we feed the mice is a grain based diet. It has a high fiber content about 5%, which is about double the average American diet. So they're they're getting a healthy amount of fiber. They they have their vitamin supplements in the food, so they, you know, they have healthy amounts of vitamins. We don't really know what the ideal diet is for old age, and there could be some elements of the diet that could be improved that would increase outcomes in old age. And I think they would be really fascinating to study. And with the amount of bandwidth that any one group like mine has, we're gonna have to defer that. I I will say that I am very, very interested in this question of do do mice on CR have increased susceptibility to infection? Because we see things kind of going both ways. We see at one level, their immune system looks good. Their lymphocyte proportion's high. They maintain their t cell populations. Their level of inflammation is low, but we don't know. And if the, if the people who are funding the government are generous with us at their next round of funding, we're gonna be doing the very experiments that we need to do to ask whether caloric restriction leads to a better late life response to, important diseases that affect humans. Infectious disease? Or yes. Specifically, Pseudomonas, which is a bacterial infection. You've probably had it, and you were fine. But if you were an elderly hospitalized individual and you encountered, antibiotic resistant Pseudomonas, it could be really bad. So we would like to know whether just like with these mice where we extend their lifespan with extreme intervention, whether when we put them on extreme intervention, we can alter the behavior of their immune system and determine whether we could increase resilience to an infection. And if we can, that tells us that it can be done. It doesn't tell us how to do it in a practical sense for a human as as your question, try to address this. You know, is there something we can add to the diet that will improve our susceptibility to infection late in life? We don't know. Can I make a bet within that context? Yeah. So I'd bet that the ad lib fed mice at very old ages would probably do the best with, Pseudomonas. I bet that calor restriction calic 40% CR probably be the first to die off. They just don't have the energy to to, right, to build an immune or or maybe their immune response is even better. But just to push back on the so standard child, don't get me wrong, is better than a purified diet. It's got soluble fiber, but it's lacking carotenoids just as an example. So it's alpha and beta carotene, beta cryptoxanthin. I mean, it's got a little bit of beta cryptoxanthin because it's, got corn. But, lycopene, it's not in there. Lutein and zeaxanthin. I mean, these are consistently shown to be associated with younger biological ages. So, so we actually did a study where, I created a high soluble fiber diet and compared it against standard chow and fed it to h mice actually at the JAX lab that we published last year and, threefold higher soluble fiber content. So, with that in mind, I wonder though, you know, so I'm leaving most of academia. I'm not gonna, you know, bang my face against the wall to see if reviewers will fund an animal study up for does a high soluble fiber diet extend lifespan? You know, or higher than standard chow. But, I I don't know. Just I have that thought in my mind that what would infectious mortality look like look like at older ages with a three x higher soluble fiber content? What What do you what do you think? Fascinating. It sounds like you've you've already queued up some evidence that it does. And, to, you know, to get people to eat a three x increase in soluble fiber diet would be, I'm I'm sure people do it. But the other side of that, that equation is I've had pushback. So AFRI funded our human study, which is, we're we're enrolled well, in we enrolled our last two participants, pushback from the NIH from, reviewers, which was, even if this works and you get positive so gut muscle access, we're looking soluble fiber impact muscle. Yeah. It's not about me, but just real quick, we got a lot of pushback. You know, even if this works in soluble fiber, a high soluble fiber diet has a positive impact on muscle, who's gonna follow it? Nobody eats fibers as is, but at least it would be a proof of concept that it could work if people decided to do that. Right? So, anyway alright. So I have another I have another, hypothesis that relates to your your study, and that is, so and it relates to the body weight, you know, the law that loss of body weight in all the groups towards the end of life, whether it's the last quarter or last half with the ad lib mice. So when considering that, immune function declines during aging, right, probably regardless of which group, even the 40% CR, they probably have some t cell senescence, for example, albeit not as great as the ad lib, but immune immune function declines during aging regardless of group. So body fat produces or adipocytes can produce antimicrobial peptides, caphylacitin as an example. So for me, it makes sense that with a declining immune system, there's an increase in body fat percentage that may be compensatory for the declining immune system so that the animals who are able to add body fat, which would explain in in your study why higher body fat at relatively younger ages was associated with a longer lifespan. So, what are your thoughts on on then then it becomes the question of, is this an infection story? You know? So when when the system can't add body fat and it loses that, resilience, then it's basically it's just an autoimmune, condition now where it's shedding muscle that may be infected with microbes and shedding fat. So what are your thoughts in on the infection hypothesis as being a part of this story? I don't know that infection is a is a big concern in the SPF, conditions, but I think your conjecture about the relationship between retaining adiposity and retaining immune function is is fascinating, and the data are there. And did I look at that specific dimension of it? No. I I definitely think we wanna take a look at that. And when mice get to the end of life, they are losing weight often. It's a very often, it's very rapid, and it's almost always, fat mass that they're losing. And in many cases, with the mice, it's because they've, they have cancer, and their cancer is is burning all their energy, and they just burn off all their fat. And that's the that's end of life. But in the case of many of the mice in your study, I think you mentioned that or in the paper, it mentioned that, there was no obvious pathology. There was no obvious cause of death, which couldn't that suggest an infectious hypothesis? I'm just going on what we know about mice from having sent them to necropsy, which for a study of this scale was way too expensive. So we did not do cause of death. I think something like eighty or ninety percent of mice die with a tumor. Not die of a tumor, but die with a tumor. Can never tell what they died of, but you can tell what they died with. So mice have a high propensity to get cancer, much so higher than humans. And, you know, that's a whole other question in itself. So just staying on just staying on the infectious hypothesis. So there was a recent paper published on IgG, immunoglobulin g, increases during aging. Right? It's produced by immune cells. Calorie restriction knocks it by about half. So and then IgG accumulates selectively in adipose, adipocytes, which says to me that it's it's either an auto CR is protecting against some autoimmune condition or IgG is produced by immune cells, and then it's going into adipocytes because it's chasing microbes and trying to detoxify. So, I'm still on the infection hypothesis with that, but are there plans to look at markers of microbial burden systemically, whether it's IgG or, LPS or, even whole genome sequencing in blood or tissues? Has not been on my radar. Mhmm. We're really keen on understanding how the mice are gonna respond to an intentional infection. When I say the mice are in SPF, that means specific pathogen free. So the mouse rooms are clean to the extent that we can identify pathogens that might be harmful to the mice, and we've eliminated them. But no environment is ever entirely free of microbes. Obviously, the mice have microbiome. There are bacteria, viruses, fungi of of all types. But, of agents that are known to be harmful, we've cleaned them up. So you, you know, you could very well be looking at, the immune the immune system responding to to microbes that are not necessarily classified as harmful, but they're gonna still elicit an immune response. I didn't mean environmental microbes. So, gut leak increases during aging. So it's possible that what's in the microbiome could leak into the blood, and then triggering the immune response. And then if you can't increase fat when the immune response goes down, maybe that's a part of the increase more dramatically increased, you know, towards the end of life. I don't know. Just just an idea. So alright. So I have, other other questions too. So the genetics of longevity. So that that's always fascinated me. Are you familiar with Michael Rose's work in Drosophila? Mhmm. So what are your thoughts on to me, it makes sense that let's breed, you know, long lived mice to long lived mice and do that and granted it would take forever. But if there were ways we could evaluate based on biomarkers at 10 old like you guys did or or 16 at a relatively young age, you don't have to age in the 15. Could we breed, you know, potentially long lived to potentially long lived and do that for many generations, and then see really what are the genetics of longevity? Yes. We could. But I'm gonna conjecture that the the long lived mice that we breed would be long lived in the particular environmental context that they were bred in. And, if you look at human causes of mortality, thank god it's going down, but, smoking, you know, smoking is a major cause. It's still a major cause of death by you know, whether it's lung cancer, heart disease, whatever. If people didn't smoke, it wouldn't be a factor. And there are genetics associated with risk of mortality due to smoking. And those genetic factors, they wouldn't matter. So I think, in a sense, every gene in the genome is a lifespan gene. If if a gene had no survival benefit or no survival value, evolution would've let it drop off the wagon at some point. It wouldn't be there. So the genes and the genetic variants that are affecting lifespan, my opinion, are largely context specific. So I'm living in, you know, I'm living in a plastic cage. I'm being fed a high fiber diet. You know, everything is just so. In that case, this locus on chromosome 18 is a real genetic time bomb for me. If I have the bad allele or the good allele, it's gonna have a huge effect on my lifespan. But if you take the same mice and you put them in a different context, I don't know. I can't guarantee it. We've compared several of our studies and that chromosome 18 thing still hangs around. Makes me think it's pretty transferable, robust genetic effect. But I also believe that there are, you know, hundreds of loci that are active that are contributing to the heritability of lifespan in this context. And that if we just change some details of the context that those lifespan loci would change as well. And as humans have evolved, if we go back, you know, ten thousand years ago, life was very different. The genes that were beneficial for health and lifespan in that context compared to the the genetic variants that are beneficial or detrimental now, some of them have absolutely flipped. You yeah. I'm gonna have a hard time putting my fingers on it. But some of the, some of the effects of, of genetic variation on metabolic disease in an environment where we have constant availability to high calorie food versus thrifty genes that really helped us when times were times were lean. You can see that these are all gonna be affecting lifespan, and their effect on lifespan is context dependent. So I don't know if if that's helpful answer or not, but, yeah, we could breed those mice. What would it mean? I'm not sure. I mean, if it would be evolutionarily conserved. So so if you see, you know, Drosophila that have certain gene networks, chromosomes that are linked with longevity, and you also see that in the mice, maybe it suggests that in the people. But then what if, you know, what if you don't have that genetic you know, those genetic loci, then it goes to biomarkers. And if it is RDW from chromosome 18, if that is translatable into humans, then it goes back to the idea of what's the recipe for eight resisting that the age related change, which would be the best that one could do. Right? Mhmm. Yeah. I I wish in some ways that I'd, I'd taken up I'd I'd stuck with my Drosophila studies from my teenage years. It would be be much easier to do the micros experiment, than to do it with mice. But I am also concerned that what we learn wouldn't necessarily be relevant. On the other hand, I think looking at these, you know, body weight, body fat, red cells, immune system, these are mammalian traits. They're all some of them are fly traits. They're all parallel to things we can measure and ascertain in humans. So I think that the relevance of some traits is higher than others. And the role of genetics is, I should say this, interesting but not central. I think we really wanna be looking at the physiology and the physiological health, the immune response, you know, at that level. I think that's where the meaningful translation is gonna take place. And then the things that we could do to keep it as youthful as possible, I guess, independent of what the genetics your background genetics may include. Right. Sleep right. Keep yourself life healthy. Right. But it's that it's that striking last quarter of life that just screwed no matter what diet you're on. That's what I'm after now. It's like, you know, if you're tracking biomarkers of all these things, inflammation, RDW, red cells, myeloid, you know, neutrophils, monocytes, lymphocytes, and you can discover that personalized recipe for keeping it low, and you start to see that pattern just deviate at some age, right, then the question is, what do you what do you do? Right? I mean, modern medicine doesn't have an answer for that, at least not yet. How how are you gonna reduce someone's RDW? Well, there are some philosophical questions that I'm not gonna be able to answer today. And, you know, I'm I'm hoping there's still some time before I have to grapple with them myself. We're all gonna die, and I think that it's it the laws of physics, it's inevitable. You know, entropy is gonna catch up. And there are things that we can do that are reasonable. 40% CR is not reasonable. There are things that we can do that are reasonable that will, give us a better chance to to be healthy as we age. And I think those are the things that we need to pay most attention to. And I appreciate what you are trying to do with this, with this podcast and trying to to talk to different scientists and think about the issues. There are a tremendous number of details that we don't understand, even if we understand in some broad sense, oh, lifespan is malleable. We can restrict calories, and we can affect health and lifespan. But, you know, when I showed in the beginning, what does it mean to put a mouse on CR? Well, it's a really complicated manipulation. And what is the dietary composition? That's got to be important. You know, we think they're they're getting a good diet. Maybe they need more fiber. Anyway, they're they're big open ended questions. But I think the, the philosophical question of when you're facing that last 20%, you know, what should you do? That's for somebody else or for me another time. Thanks. Alright. Wait. Hang on. So, hopefully, I could push a little bit, further into that. So everything you said is great for the majority of the population. Right? And I'm with you a 100%. Eat well. Get get, you know, good sleep and eat a normal diet. Not too much. I'm with you a 100%. Right? So what are your thoughts on you know? And I hear you, you know, you say, you said, everybody's gonna die. We're all gonna die. Right? But don't you think they'll come a point at some point, and I can't say when. I I hope it's within my remaining lifetime, your remaining lifetime, all of our remaining lifetimes that we can say that there is no more death. Maybe that's not the case. Maybe it'll be 500 or a thousand or 10,000, some number in the future. Will everybody always die? What are your thoughts on that? I think it is the case that everybody will always die, and it it it's a necessity because we are so complex. The the the the physics of the amount of energy that it takes to maintain the complexity is just it's like gravity. You you can't deny it. Things will break. We have developed mechanisms to fix things when they break, but ultimately, the things that fix the things break. And it there's just entropy is gonna catch up with us. For sure. Heat that Doesn't have to be your opinion. But Yeah. No worries. No worries. That so, you know, heat death of the universe. Right? Eventually, the sun's gonna burn out. Right? Even the sun would die at some point, but who's to say human lifespan has to be capped at one twenty? If medical medical science and and and research can push us out even further, I'd rather take those extra healthy remaining life years relative to, you know, this hundred and twenty, which is just a blip. It's just a period at the end of a sentence and billions of years of evolution. Right? So Yeah. It's a big question. You know, is there a wall? Is there a point, you know, a chronological age that we're unable to exceed? I don't know. I would like to think that for as many years as I have from a personal perspective, we we all want those years to be as healthy as possible. And, as I said, as you know, as we all know, there are things that we can do that are reasonable to improve the odds that we're gonna be healthy for longer. And cross country skiing for ridiculous numbers of hours probably didn't do me any harm. I hope. So no CR for you, exercise, regular exercise, no intermittent fasting. Is that have you integrated any I don't tolerate it well. I I eat a good healthy diet. I probably eat too much meat and eat a lot of blueberries. From Maine, what do you want? Yeah. And then tracking biomarkers, are you tracking lymphocytes, body fat percentage, RDW? Not paying any attention to it. No. I I get an annual physical. I think that's that's generally a good idea, you know, in case some warning marker comes up, you wanna know. I I know you've been doing this incredibly deep tracking. It's amazing. I I I wouldn't have the patience for it. It's just like CR. Most people maybe don't wanna do it, but, you know, I I I love it. I I look forward to doing it. It's like my end of one science experiment. You know? So You gotta do what makes you happy. Yeah. You know? And, if if you live longer doing it or you don't doing what makes you happy, well, you know, let's get into the philosophy of it again. I'm, I'm trying to live, to live the life that I wanna live. And, look, I always wanted to be a scientist, and, look how lucky I am. I'm lucky and grateful, and so far, pretty healthy. Definitely. Alright. So, current projects, future projects, one of them being infection resistance, are there others that are on the horizon that you wanna share? Yeah. No harm. I'm interested in the effects of reproduction on lifespan, specifically female reproduction, whether the whole, you know, mating, pregnancy, birth, lactation, these are all really stressful energy consuming, events that will happen to many females, mice or humans. And, they they must, like CR and IF, impact the metabolic health of individuals and females, women. And I do wonder how that plays out. And, again, the gods at NIH need to smile on me, and I will be right on it as soon as it happens. So So how that how, pregnancy and and going through all those processes that processes that you mentioned, the whole the whole gamut, how that impacts lifespan? Well, lifespan and particularly late life health, immune function being on my shortlist. Wanna see what happens to that RDW. I have some thoughts about what might happen. So, I'm sure you know, but during pregnancy, neutrophils and monocytes go up, like, big time, like, this big spike. Right? So it's a tremendous immune reaction. But I'm guessing your bet would your bet be that the, you know, relative to virgin, female mice, the the the the, you know, the the mice that that gave birth would live longer, or would they live shorter? My speculation is that there are trade offs and that there are gonna be genetic predispositions to to influence how individuals respond to their reproductive cycles, whether they are in the virgin cohort or the reproductive cohort. And we're going to use we we've been working a lot with a new genetic model where we are able to make outbred animals like DOs, but we can replicate the genotype. And so, of course, what we wanna do now is look at the same genotype with and without CR, same genotype, you know, with and without infection, with and without, reproduction, and ask the question whether, you know, whether on average, CR extends lifespan, but is it true for an individual? Because, you know, from the seat you're sitting in, the individual question is the one that matters. Right? Should I do this as an individual? It's not a public health question then. I'm asking the public health question with this study. Nice. Well, looking forward to it and looking forward to inviting you back on the channel to share your work. So thanks again, Gary, and, I hope to see you see you soon. Yeah. Again, thanks for, thanks for having me. Thanks for giving me a chance to to expound on, on my research. I I do love what I do, and, happy to share it with you all. Thanks, Scott. Ciao. Bye.