We develop these immune health grades, which, are, measuring the balance, not not the CD four CD eight ratio, a balance between, as I'll explain in a minute, between CD eight and CD four cells. And the other is this RNA or transcript transcriptomic metrics that I described to you earlier. That is SAS one, which is survival associate signature one, mortality associate signature one. So these are immunocompetous genes. These are inflammation genes. So what we did here was in, 2010, I believe, or '14, I'm forgetting. Sorry. Forgive me. My brain is not very sharp right now. But we measured, in a paper in Newman Journal of Medicine, I believe it's 2010. We screened about, eleven fourteen thousand, HIV negative people and established that the median CD four count of human populations were HIV negative is about the lower boundary was about 800. So we use this as a metric. So if you were to send your lab results to LabCorp and it'll tell you that their normal range is from 340 yard or three fifty all the way up to 1,500. Well, if I had 351 CD for sales, I wouldn't be a happy person. Okay? So we needed to metricize what is a normal remember, Tom, I've drawn and looked at the degree of deviation from normality or some sort of a normal so we established that CD four count of 800 is what I would call, is a good benchmark to have. And we use the CD four CD eight ratio simply as a proxy, an indirect proxy for the level of CD eight cells. We are not studying the ratio. I am studying a balance between CD four CD eight and CD four sales. So people who have a ratio above one, they have preserved lower amounts of CD eights compared to their CD four. So we then took people who have a ratio above one and a CD four count of 800. We then that was grade one. We then took people who have a ratio of bun one, which means they've restrained the CD eight, but in the context of lower CD four cells. Then these two groups have got an inverted ratio less than one, so they have got expanded amount of CD eight cells relative to their CD fours. And this is in the context of having high CD eight with lower CD fours, and this is having high CD eight with low CD fours. So four grades over here. Sunil, quick question. Yep. And I have many, but I'll save most of those for later. And for those who don't know who are gonna yell at me for interrupting, Sunil and I discussed this ahead of time. So it's good with us. So, hopefully, it's good with the audience. So CD fours, 800, I get that that's in the in the, best immune health grade, best IHG grade. But what it I think your, population was 40 79 year olds or somewhere in that range. What's the do you know the average value for CD four in, say, 20 year olds, 25 year olds, a bit younger? And then correspondingly, the average levels for, CD eight in youth? Yeah. So, the general ratio across all ages will always generally be a two to one ratio. Younger adults or younger children will have higher CD four cells. We do not study younger children, but our cohort goes all the way down to 15 years of age. Mhmm. It doesn't matter how you stratify your ratios and your CD four your ratio and your CD four cells as I will show you because we have cohorts as young as five year olds with a particular disease or infectious disease that I will mention in a minute, and it exemplifies the problem that we are dealing with. So more important than an absolute value is the relative proportions of these cells. So, again, the ratio is not an actual I'm not interested in an actual value of CD eight. I'm interested in what is the relative amount of CDAs relative to the amount of CD four counts. And that will be that will become very clear here. Okay. Wait. Wait. One more quick question. Hang on. Sure. Sure. Yeah. So, and then it seems that CD fours decline during aging, and then CDAs increase during aging resulting in a more likely to have a lower ratio with age. Or true? Yeah. So then you are really talking about averages. So you're talking as a group how people behave. Yep. But what you will see in a minute that there are 80 year old people who do preserve the best grade as much as a younger person does, and there will be younger people who look like 80 year old people compared to, you know, who younger people whose profiles look like 80 year old people profiles. So, as a group, yes, you will see. And as an average, that is what would happen. But as I said, that's an average. It doesn't help me at all as a physician or you. If you were to come to me and says, I wanna know how good my immune health is, most doctors will roll up their eyes and not know what to do about it. So the idea is to metricize it. I can't metricize an average going down or up. I mean, as I said, an average of 350 cells at LabCorp may sound three fifty one might sound normal. It doesn't sound normal to me. I would be very concerned if I had 351 CD four cells regardless if I was 20 years old or if I was 80 years old. I don't believe in averages. Averages is just a framework, but doesn't really help me at all. So the goal for us really as clinicians is to metricize it in a way that we can control heterogeneity. If we don't control heterogeneity in a population and we just continue to use averages, we will generally perform conflated studies. So for example, if I were to just take high c d four count people, are we conflating group one and three? If I were to take people who had low CD four counts, are we conflating groups two and four? If I was to, you know, and so on. So that that conflation is a big problem. I'm with you a 100%. Don't get me wrong. And I agree. You know? But what I the question that I'm basically asking is, relative to population based averages that can inform so for example, I'm with you on the metric sizing. You know? I have tested blood tested 62 times over the past ten years, and a majority of my audience a a lot of people in my audience are doing that too. So but the population based average, if you know that CD fours are declining and you look at your own data, independent of what whatever CD eight is doing at the moment, if you know that that CD four declines during aging in the average population and your data is 800, seven fifty, 700, six fifty, then you know I'm on I'm on a bad trend here. I need to do something to reverse that. So I I'd look at the population based averages as informing in terms of where your own directionality should be aiming higher for CD fours and resisting age related decline and aiming lower for CD eights and resisting their age related increase. Sure. But then what do I do with that information? If I would rather be able to if I just looked at my CD four, I would like to bin myself in some category then and further subdivide these categories that I could rationalize because I I if I just I don't have population based averages in America that I could use in Mississippi would be different. People have poverty greater poverty there. Or South Texas would be a little different than me over here. So that doesn't really help me. What really helps me is that I can bin it, and then I could even ask, okay. I fell sick today. And I could tell my physician, I was in grade one before, but today I got COVID. Now I'm in grade two a or two b or two c. But, hey, guess what? I rebounded back up to grade two a, and and I didn't go ever go back up to my original grade one. Now monitor me. So I think it is really about being able to categorize oneself, if you will. So, like, for myself, I used to be a great you know, my grade right my grade started off as a two a, as I'll show you in a minute. During COVID, I went to a grade four. It took me a long time to get back to grade two, so I could monitor it. So if I just followed myself as a group average, I would never be able to inform myself or others or my caretakers as to how my shifts are occurring. So more important is not just to see where I am relative to my age, but relatively see how I shift when I get my next disease, for example, or my infection or something of that nature. And just to add a little bit more, you know, if you have data in your own youth. Right? So if you have twenty years of of CD fours and CD eights, and even if you have the transcriptional data yet, you know, which isn't commercially available. But if you know what your immune health profile look like at at 40, and now you have an infection, and now you know what it is after infection, and it isn't reverting back to where it was in in the 40. Now it's okay. What can I do? Diet, lifestyle, supplements, prescription meds, whatever it may be to try to help your immune system revert back to that more youthful state. Yep. Yep. Absolutely. Absolutely. With you a 100%, Sunil. Yep. Absolutely. You see, if I had acute kidney failure, I would know my b one and creatinine went up. I could stage it. The difference between infectious disease doctors, gerontologists, and people with cancer, the cancer docs are way ahead of us. They like to metricize group people, stage cancer very well. You know, we don't stage diseases very well. So it's important in my books for me, this is a form of staging. You know, immune health is the largest organ system in the body, but physicians don't measure it. It's very sad. So that is that is I think if I had to leave a parting message, it really would be that we are ignoring a very large component of our repertoire of immune of of health systems, if you will. Just to add a little more context, when you say the immune system is the largest, organ in the body, is that by number of cells? So total white blood cells are more than liver cells or kidney cells. Well, every organ system of your body has got the immune health system. Mhmm. From microglia in your brain, which will be there to fight it, you know, fight infections, the glial system as well, the neurons as well. The brain gut axis is very well known. The brain immune axis is very well known. Your entire microbial system of your gut from your mouth to your anus is a huge organ system. Kidney, liver, all have got immune cells embedded in them, spleen. So the fact is that we are being able to metricize those organ systems, but we are unable to or inefficiently at a bedside level monitor or make it accessible to have some better crude measures of immune health. This is why your your work your lab's work is so important. So yeah. Alright. So continue, please. All good. Thank you. So these are the four grades here. This is the large 3,000 person cohort. So you'll see that grade one is the most common. Grade two is the second most. In a generally good population, less amounts of grade three and four. Okay? Now if you looked at the CD four count here, you would argue that this CD four count looks relatively normal. This goes back to your point. So I have relatively I would not say there's biologically any difference over here. But if you look at the CDH, this has got 525 median. IAG three has got twice the amount. If you look at low CD four counts, it's the opposite. So here, these guys have got six seventy five and six sixteen, no different. But this group four has got twice the amount. Amount. So by eye, just looking CD four and CD eight, you can't intuit someone's immune health grades. So this is what it would look like. Grade one being blue, brown being grade two, green being grade three, grade four. And we are taking the data from age 15 to greater than 90 years of age, and our capacity to preserve blue or the best grade goes down and then an expansion of the other grades. So but there is as I mentioned to you, even among people greater than greater than 90, so less number of people here, but those who survive, 22 among those 22, there are about 25% of those who do preserve blue over here. There is nothing that we will learn by studying averages. The only time we will learn anything in medicine is when we study the extremes of phenotype. So that none example over there is a great example of a person who lived a long life. So understanding her paradox is extremely important as much as it would be a paradox for a young child to die at an early age who is otherwise generally healthy. So the extremes of phenotype is how I've lived my life in understanding disease biology. Okay? So so but on the other hand, the reason why studying extremes are so important is you will have younger people who have got black. And so they've got grade four. These younger people, if you were to give them a flu vaccine, would be less responsive just as much as an older person would be less responsive. There'll be some immune traits that are common to blue to blue, brown to brown, regardless of age, as I will show you in a minute in our phenotyping work. Okay? So when people study the concept of age, they're comparing older to younger people. But you're studying younger people who are heterogeneous and older people who are heterogeneous, and that leads to confounding. Okay? Across age is a female and male. Male are have a greater propensity to degrade their immune health grade one across age. So this is not as this is sexually dimorphic across age including postmenopausal. It's not all hormones. K? So the take home message is some people resist Older persons resist, immune, resilience and degradation. The resistance is greater than females and males, and immune traits differ by two factors, age and the health grade.