How good or not is the biological age calculator PhenoAge? So first, what's its correlation with chronological age? And that's what we'll see here. So phenotypic age or biological age is plotted on the y axis against chronological age on the x. And this study was the NHANES four study that included data for more than 11,000 people. In terms of the correlation, we can see that there is a strong correlation for biological age or pheno age with chronological age with a correlation coefficient of 0.96. And note that a correlation coefficient of one point zero is perfectly linear. So a correlation coefficient in this case of 0.96 is as close to as good as it can get. And also note that the p value isn't just below 0.05, it's one times 10 to the negative two hundredth. So this is a very strong correlation for this biological age clock, Levine's pheno age with chronological age. Now data from one study is important, but reproducing these findings in a second study or more is more important. And this correlation was also identified in the NHANES three study, which included more than 9,900 people with a correlation coefficient for for pheno age Levine's pheno age with chronological age of 0.94. So from these two studies, we can see that pheno age is strongly correlated with chronological age. And note that a strong correlation is defined as anything greater than 0.7. Now to put these data into greater context, 0.94 to 0.96 is as good as the best epigenetic clock, Horvath clock, for predicting chronological age. But this is only one half of the story. So a biological age clock that essentially tells you your calendar age isn't very important in terms of health related outcomes. So the other side of this story is associations with risk of death for all causes or all cause mortality risk, which is what we'll see here. So having an older pheno age, a one year older pheno age relative to chronological age is significantly associated with a nine percent increased risk for all cause mortality. Note that that's just the one year increase. There could be a five year increase or a five year decrease. In other words, these data show that having an older FEWA age relative to chronological age is associated with an increased risk of death for all causes. But what about cause specific mortality? So in terms of cardiac death from cardiovascular disease, CVD, having a one year older age is associated with a ten percent, significantly associated with a ten percent increased risk of death from CBD mortality. Similarly, a seven percent increased risk of death for cancer, twenty percent increased risk for diabetes related mortality, and a nine percent increased risk of death for chronic lower respiratory diseases. Now, if there is if there is a weak spot for the levine sphenoid, it's its association with Alzheimer's related mortality as it wasn't significant. So with that in mind, this is a part of the story for trying to slow aging and maximize health and lifespan. In other words, I'd also track other biomarkers potentially specific to Alzheimer's disease like blood pressure, the kyunurine to tryptophan ratio, which are associated with out Alzheimer's related biomarkers. So if your goal is optimal health, I'd recommend including this test, which is free, and looking at other biomarkers too and tracking year to year change. With that in mind, what's optimal for biomarkers? So I created a ninety five minute video that lives exclusively on Patreon. And note that these days anybody can type in to an AI chatbot or LLM what's optimal for biomarkers. But from my experience, they're not yet good enough to to tell you what what the story is. They don't know about directionality. Do you want your biomarkers to be high or low? And that changes for each biomarker. It isn't simply just aiming for midpoint of the range. So nonetheless, I've summarized 40 published papers in terms of how these biomarkers change during aging and what's their association with all cause mortality risk to come up with a what's optimal for each of these 27 biomarkers. So if you're interested in that, it's exclusively on Patreon. Check it out. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself that also go to help support the channel including altalabtest.com which is where I get the majority of my blood test. And I should mention all these affiliates I'm currently using or have used in the past. So I'm not trying to, you know, recommend things that I'm not actively using myself. The Clearly Filtered Water Filter, which I have, I use every day. At Home Metabolomics, Oral Microbiome Composition, NED Testing with Genfinity, epigenetic testing, at home blood testing with Syphox Health, which includes ApoB, but also the DNA methylation test GrimAge, green tea, diet tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Die Trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. Hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.