Hey, everyone. Today's guest is doctor Emily Ho, who is the director of the Linus Pauling Institute and a distinguished professor in the College of Health at Oregon State University. Today, doctor Ho will present data for the impact of nutrition on optimal health and aging well. And with that, welcome, Emily, and let's get into the presentation. Well, thanks for having me. As mentioned, I am a professor at Oregon State University. I'm the director of the Lions Pauling Institute, and we are all about healthy aging, which is, I understand a big area of interest for a lot of your listeners and and followers. So a little bit, about the institute. Well, let let me give a little bit of background first. Let me get this going. So, really, you know, now that more than ever in our history, our health has really become one of our our our biggest priorities. And we're really starting to understand that, we need to be proactive rather than reactive in our health to really improve the health of our nation. So this slide shows here in The US, we're not doing that great, in terms of our health. Many people have a chronic disease. And on top of that, we also know that in less than ten years, the number of older adults is projected to increase more than eighteen million people. So one in five Americans are projected to be over the age 65, very, very soon. We, like to refer this to as the aging tsunami that that that's coming. And the risk that this has is all of these disorders are going to potentially skyrocket. That has the potential to absolutely overwhelm our healthcare system. So, we really need to think about, you know, again, how do we be proactive towards healthy aging rather than reactive in just treating disease processes. And this is really going to be critical, to help our population, and there's a real critical need to act now to find some of these solutions, these proactive solutions towards our health. My big bias, is that nutrition is a big part of the solution, but it's also a little bit complicated. So, we'll talk about that, as well. So, at the Linus Pauling Institute, we are inspired by Doctor. Linus Pauling. This is a book that he wrote several decades ago, called, you know, how to live longer and feel better, and this is really the mantra of the institute. Now how do we discover ways to help populations, individuals, families live better longer? And, this concept of health span, which many of you probably already are familiar with, but it's really not about just adding numbers to your years. It's adding the best quality of life during that time, and that's called health span rather than than than lifespan, where you live, the most vitally, and, highest quality of life for the longest period of time rather than just living longer. Again, it's really about living better longer. So when we think about optimizing our health span, and our optimal health, there are a lot of different components of this. You know, at the LPI, we focus on healthy aging. But when we talk about healthy aging, again, it's not just talking about working with the elderly. It's not just talking about longevity. We're really talking about how to live better longer and how do we optimize that. And there's a lot of different approaches for that. One is looking at disease prevention. So, how do we be free of all those disorders that we had on that first slide? Cancer, metabolic disease, diabetes, neurodegeneration, you know, how do we prevent some of these disorders from happening? But when we think about optimal health and health span, it's not just about being disease free. It's also about optimizing some of those systems as well. So it's not just about neurodegeneration. It's how do we maintain focus, how do we maintain our memory, how do we maintain our immune system so we can be resilient against infections and limit chronic inflammation, which is kind of an underpinning of a lot of these chronic diseases as well. And ultimately, you know, how can we increase our resilience? So, when stressors come our way, that we're able to deal with them, in a better way. And that's really kind of the whole package, in terms of how, the interface between things that we do, like the foods that we eat, and our health. And this has been a big focus, of the institute. So I'm going to give some specific examples of some of these areas, both from my own research and from other researchers at the institute as well. So one of the areas that I study, is around this cancer prevention and intervention, where, we're looking at not only stop, stopping cancer from the first place, but also even if you are at high risk or even have cancer, how do we, limit its progression so you can live with cancer, not for longer potentially. So one thing that I want to highlight, so, when we think about the fight against cancer and many of these disorders, we need to understand what the etiology of these disorders are. And I give presentations, you know, all over the world, to many different walks of life, different education levels, different countries, and it doesn't matter where I am in the world. If I ask the question, if you smoke five packs of cigarettes, a day, does that increase your risk for cancer? Almost everyone understands that association. They put their hand up. Yes. I understand that association. Smoking a lot equals more cancer. If I switch the question, though, and ask the question, does what you eat affect your cancer risk? You know, many of you who are viewing this may put up your hand because you've been following a lot of the research, but on average, that connection between what you eat and cancer isn't nearly as strong. However, when you look at the actual data, the contributions of, perturbations in our diet actually contribute to more cancer cases in The U. S. Than does smoking, than does things like pollution that people are worried about. So diet absolutely, plays a big role. So keep that in your mind, as we move forward. I'm going to show you some more data to show that. Cancer, we also know, is a genetic disorder. So if you have a family member, that, has had cancer, your risk for cancer is much higher, but it's being increasingly clear that it's not just your gene, so your genetics that drive, cancer risk. And some of the early work that substantiates this, this isn't work that has been done in my lab, or through these, intercountry studies, where, we know, for example, in The US, we're number one for lots of different things. We also, unfortunately, are number one for lots of different cancers, including breast cancer. On the other hand, there are many other countries in the world, that have much lower rates of breast cancer, prostate cancer, and colorectal cancer. So in particular, Asian countries tend to have a lower risk of these cancers. This is what is shown here. So this is an example of breast cancer cases in two different countries, Japan versus The U. S. So you can see, there's a big difference here. So what happens now if a person, from Japan, so a woman from Japan, moves to The U. S? So they have the same genetic background, but but now they have a totally different environment, and they've lived in The U. S. For quite, a long time. And what we see is that their risk is much closer to The U. S, which clearly says, unfortunately, something about The U. S. Is not great, in terms of your cancer risk. And there's a lot of things that we can talk about, in terms of why that is. Again, our bias at the Linus Pauling Institute is that it's diet that's being that's a major factor in this. And again, we can talk about this, quite a bit, but I'm going to show you some of the data that we've done in our lab that really shows kind of the power of food, nutrients, and plant based diets in terms of driving some of this cancer risk, even with strong genetic predisposition. So we know, for example, in The U. S, one of the things that we do not do a great job of is eating our fruits and vegetables. So we recommend between five to nine servings of fruits and vegetables daily, and currently only less than twenty five percent of the population, are meeting that requirement. So over seventy five percent of individuals in The U. S. Are not getting enough fruits and vegetables, and I'll talk more about that in terms of what that means. I study a particular vegetable that also tends to be consumed in higher amounts in these Asian countries as well, are the family of Brassica vegetables. So I like to tell my students these are the kids will spit them out vegetables. The reason why so these are like broccoli, kale, brussels sprouts, cauliflower. And, this family of vegetable the reason why a lot of kids and a lot of adults, don't like these vegetables because they have a kind of a a characteristic bitter taste. That bitter taste is due to a a a phytochemical or a plant derived chemical that's specific to this class of vegetables called glucosinolates. And these glucosinolates, when we consume them, get converted into a new compound called an isotherocyanate that, has some cancer fighting properties. So I'll talk a little bit more about that as well. So we, in my lab, do a lot of work with broccoli. This is just a screenshot of a an article last fall that came out, in the New York Times, that I was quoted in in terms of how healthy is broccoli. And the cliff note is it's healthy, and I'll tell you a little bit about, reasons why. So broccoli is a great food. It's a multitasker in terms of things that it does, things that it has, and things that it targets in our body. So what's good about broccoli? It's a low fat food. It's a high fiber food. It's a micronutrient rich food. It's got lots of, antioxidant nutrients, b vitamins, minerals as well. But then on top of the, essential nutrients that the broccoli has, it also has these phytochemicals. So these plant derived chemicals, that also afford some, additional health benefits. So there are some compounds just being green. Chlorophyll is actually a great detoxifying agent. These indoles, which I'm not gonna talk about, but, again, these glucosinolates, which are precursors to these compounds called isothocyanates, like sulforaphane. So you may have seen sulforaphane, or heard of sulforaphane in the past, and I'll talk a little bit more about that. But these are, additional benefits and special compounds that these cruciferous vegetables have that we've discovered and many others have discovered have some potent, anticancer effects. So, what is sulforaphane? So again, it's an isothiocyanate, so a specific chemical class, that's derived from these cruciferous vegetables. It's an amazing detoxifying agent. So the way that this does this is through a genetic mechanism where the sulforaphane molecules help with this pathway that's related to a transcription factor called NRF2. So NRF2 is a transcription factor that helps activate, antioxidant response and detoxification response. And what happens is in the cell, the transcription factor is bound in the cytosol, in an inactive form. And what sulforaphane will do will help it'll help release this KEEP1, which is a protein that keeps the Nrf2 in this inactive form. And the release of KEEP-one will then allow the Nrf2 to translocate to the nucleus, where it's able to bind, to DNA, and then it induces a transcription of these Nrf2 antioxidant response element genes that tend to be things that help with antioxidant response and also help with, phase two detoxification. So, it's very good at this detoxification. The issue is if sulforaphane, sulforaphane works in this way, but if this was the only way that sulforaphane worked, we'd always have to eat our broccoli when we know we're being exposed to carcinogens. And in cancers like breast cancer, prostate cancer, you may not necessarily know when you're being exposed to those carcinogens. And there's many other things that may be going on. So, we thought there must be something else going on in terms of targets of or potential benefits of this compound. And indeed, there are. And the way that sulforaphane works, and then an additional bonus way is through, altering epigenetics. So again, we've talked about cancer being a genetic disease, where it starts off with a mutation, and now we know that many diseases, including cancer, are not necessarily just because of genetic problems. There are also these changes called epigenetics that are outside the DNA, that also impact cancer progression and other disease processes as well. So I know not everyone, maybe a molecular biologist, so I'll just gonna briefly kinda talk about, well, how this works. So if you ever come to visit me here at Oregon State, we've got a couple things that that are go, going on. So when you think of our DNA, our DNA is kind of like the library of our cells. It has all the information of our cells and allows, that tells us, all those, cellular components to do its job. Our DNA is also really, really long, and the only way that we compact it into a small space is wound around these, chromosomal, core proteins called histones, kind of like a spool of thread that allows us to compact, this huge amount of information into the small, small space. So again, if you visit me here at Oregon State, and come to our library, and I'm sure there's many libraries like this, if you think again of our DNA as as a library, you know, there's tons of books in in these libraries. And you'll notice that they're often on these crazy shelves that are on wheels that allow you to pack, the all the huge number of books into a small space. And then there's a button on the outside of the shelf that will open the shelf that will allow you to get the book. So the analogy is when you think about genetic changes, in cancer etiology, we used to think that it was because of a problem with the DNA mutation. So that's kind of like pages ripped out of the book, so you can't read the information properly and chaos ensues, in terms of dysregulation and cancer processes. We now know that sometimes it's not the problem with the book, it's actually a problem with the button. So, again, these changes outside the DNA, that cause a problem. And the endpoint is the same in that when the button doesn't work, the shelf doesn't open, you can't access the information properly, and chaos ensues in terms of cancer progression. The exciting part of this, though, is that rip a page out, that's not something that we can fix very well. So if you a DNA mutation is, so, for example, like a BRCA1 mutation in breast cancer is not something that's changeable. However, if the etiology of the cancer is due to this button not working or epigenetic alterations, that is something that's fixable, that is driven by enzymes, that can be turned on and turned off. And the take home message is that broccoli compounds, I. E, the sulforaphane, are very good button fixers. They affect epigenetic alterations that are dysregulated in cancer and help reverse those to help re express genes that are dysregulated in the cancer process and potentially may help. So, this is an area that we've studied pretty extensively. We've been able to establish this, in cells, preclinical models, and the clinic as well. The other thing that I want to mention, is that, the sulforaphane is produced by the broccoli, at the very beginning, at a seed level. So, I'll show you some studies, that we've done. But, one way that we've been able to kind of deliver sulforaphane in a high, potent way is to use the broccoli sprouts. Because, again, the plant produces these glucosinolates at the seed level, the three to five day sprout has the same amount of glucosinolate as the big grown up broccoli, which means it's super concentrated. So I could say, well, you know, you're gonna eat, you know, 50 cups of broccoli or a cup of these broccoli sprouts, and you'll get, an amazing amount of, the sulforaphane. So, we've done a lot of work with broccoli sprouts. This is in a preclinical model, a mouse model of prostate cancer. So, this is a mouse model where, they have a mutation, so a genetic change in an RB protein, which is important in terms of cell cycle progression. So, when you knock out this RB protein, it again, this mutation causes chaos, in the prostate epithelial cells and one hundred percent of these animals develop prostate cancer. So in this case, high genetic predisposition to prostate cancer. And, what this slide shows is, we gave some of our mice broccoli sprouts, in their diet, and we could see so these are tumor scores, bigger number means more tumor. And, again, a hundred percent of these animals will develop prostate cancer, over, by about three months three to four months of age. What we found was when we gave these animals broccoli sprout diet that we we weren't able to cure them, but we were able to shift the tumor profiles, to be less aggressive. So we were able to slow down the prostate cancer progression simply by providing this dietary, compound. And the reason why I highlight this, again, this contrast between genetic and potential epigenetic alterations, that even despite having a strong genetic predisposition, to cancer, just by adding something to the diet, we are able to help. So again, genetics is not the only determinant of disease processes. We've been fortunate to be able to collaborate with several oncologists and clinicians. This is a clinical trial that we did several years ago, again, in this case using a broccoli supplement in breast cancer patients, where we gave the supplement or a placebo to women newly diagnosed with dipole carcinoma in situ, and looked at some of the molecular markers, like, the epigenetic alterations. In this case, it's a histone deacetylase activity. This was a phase one study, so it was largely not, it wasn't a huge number of individuals. We weren't really looking for cancer outcomes. But what we were really excited to see as a result of this study is not only did we see that the women that took the supplement had, the molecular endpoint, the histone deacetylase, epigenetic button pushing alteration happening, but we also saw, Ki67 staining, which is a proliferation marker. And again, cancer cells that are growing uncontrollably, so you can limit cell proliferation that is a potential prognostic benefit. So, we got to see hints of potential clinical benefit of this compound as well, so we're hoping to do a follow-up study here. So that's some of the cancer story. There are, again, many aspects of this health span, optimal health, that come into play. So I'm going to talk a little bit more about some of the other studies, that some of our other institute faculty are doing. So the bottom line is there's been a lot of evidence that diet plays a role in health span. This goes back to many, many decades of research. Some of the strongest evidence is around dietary restriction. So if you restrict caloric intake, in many different models from yeast, flies, invertebrates, and mammals, that you can see a significant increase, in terms of both health span and lifespan. The issue has been, the evidence in humans has been a little bit more mixed. Also take note, I mean, the biggest increase here is at a 65% dietary restriction. I don't know about you, but restricting my diet by 65% is is a pretty not sustainable, lifestyle factor, and I'm gonna be very cranky. And my my health span or my quality of life is probably not gonna be that high. I wanna emphasize it's not only quantity that matters, though. It's also also quality. So there's been a lot of study that has also looked at food quality in terms of health span and healthy aging as well. So, there is, the USDA has developed this index called the Healthy Eating Index that says a way to score kind of the health quality of diets, and there's been a lot of work that's been able to show that people that have higher quality diets, versus a low quality diet, have increased lifespans, and also, changes excuse me, in a lot of these health span components in terms of lower mortality, lower incidence of these, chronic diseases. So the the question so what is a high quality diet? A big component of a high quality diet is that it's nutrient rich, and in particular, it's rich in our micronutrients, so these vitamins and minerals. Again, when you look overall at The US diet, we do not do a great job, in terms of, again, our fruit and vegetable intake that tend to be high in micronutrients. And overall, many of the population have shortfalls in terms of these essential nutrients. So this slide kind of also shows in terms of the incidence of shortfalls in some of these micronutrients. So you can see, vitamin d, vitamin e here, also some of our minerals, and all of these are essential nutrients. And what is becoming increasingly clear, and this is a whole thing that, perhaps in the q and a, we can talk a little bit more in terms of, you know, do our our current RDAs, you know, really hit the mark in terms of what, we actually need for optimal health. They are geared more towards deficiency signs, not necessarily optimal health, and the levels that you may need for optimal health may be different. And this is especially true as we age as well, and we'll give you some examples as well. And even with a perceived high quality diet, especially as you get older, these shortfalls are potentially, gonna be even more prevalent. And again, I'll show you some data, to substantiate some of this. So one thing, that the LPI does is we do diverge a little bit in terms of our recommendations, especially around some micronutrients from the RDA. In some cases, we're, in a lot of cases, we're a little bit higher than the current RDAs. Another distinction that we have, because of this risk of shortfalls, even with a potential good diet, we strongly believe, especially as you get older, that there are nutrient gaps, that people are highly susceptible for. So we do recommend, and again, this is something that diverts, I guess, or is different than the current RDAs, is that we recommend everyone, all adults, to take a multivitamin to help prevent some of these shortfalls. And again, these shortfalls, are, more prevalent than sometimes you think, even in folks that are trying to do everything right. And I'll show you some of that data. Adjacent to this, so the LPI, we have developed this top 10 micronutrients for healthy aging, and in the I'll provide some resources, in a moment, but these are our top 10. Some of the qualities of these top 10 are one, that they play a big role in some of that health span markers in terms of immune function, disease prevention, so we're not just talking about deficiencies, but at the same time, all a lot of these top 10 nutrients are also ones that are at high risk for shortfalls, especially as we get older. Right now, vitamin, D and calcium are really the only micronutrients that have an age related, older adult related change. And we strongly believe that many of these nutrients also potentially should have a a a different, an a or are age essential, basically, and may need a little bit more attention because of that. In our top 10, we've also indicated ones that especially need to be looked at more closely in terms of your intake if you are an older adult. So what are some of the consequences of not getting, these key micronutrients? I'm going to talk about a couple different domains, especially in the immune function and around mitochondrial function as well. So we know that aging is associated with a compromised immune function, and, the quality of that, immune function change is multifactorial. There are some aspects of the immune system that are dampened, so the they're not working as well. So you're more susceptible to infectious disease, vaccine efficacy is impaired as well, but there's some aspects of the immune system that are actually overactive, and this results in chronic inflammation. And chronic inflammation, as I've mentioned before, is kind of a common underpinning to many of these chronic diseases and can be a precursor to many of these diseases. So limiting, this chronic inflammation is definitely a key factor in terms of improving, health span. So again, when you think about our immune system, there are lots of different parts of the immune system. I have here on this slide kind of three general broad areas, that relate to both kind of acute defense and then longer term defenses as well. So, there are basic barrier defenses. So, these are things, like the mucous membranes in our lungs, our GI tract, as well. And changes in gut permeability or changes in your lung epithelia will cause increased entry, for example, of viruses, bacteria. So maintaining those barriers is extremely important. And then there are also specific components of the immune system that are often that are cellular based. There's our general defense that's related to our innate immunity, that use your white blood cells, kind of broadly. And these are, again, are a class of cells. And then there's the acquired immunity that are more specific defenses. So these are things like cells that produce our antibodies, or cells that create factors that help, engulf or destroy, invading pathogens as well. The bottom line is our nutrients, and especially these micronutrients, play roles in all three of those domains. And there are different micronutrients that play a role, as well. So there may not be a single micronutrient, that plays a role. So this is a, a figure from a recent paper that, myself and some other colleagues at the institute and other partner universities put together, talking about micronutrients and its role in immune system. I know this is very complicated, but the bottom line, it is complicated. And it's multifactorial in terms of different systems from barrier function, B cell, T cell function, that various micronutrients work together to optimize, our immune system and, again, have that, resiliency. So making sure that you have adequate amounts of these micronutrients, is really critical to maintaining a robust, immune system. And I'm gonna give you some examples, from some of my work. So, I do a lot of work with zinc. Zinc is a well known factor in terms of plays a role in immune system. We also know that, again, as we get older, there is complementary to the changes in our immunity, changes in our zinc status as well. So the prevalence of zinc, deficiency is, potentially higher in older adults because it's a bit of a double whammy. One, older adults do tend to decrease their zinc intake along with their protein intake. Zinc often follows protein intake. But on top of that, even if you are getting, X amount of zinc, there's increasing evidence that the ability for you to absorb and distribute that zinc, as you get older is also compromised. So, again, you're pretty, as you get older, you're much more susceptible to not getting enough zinc. Zinc is also important, in all three of these areas. Some of the work that we've done so this is a a animal model that we can show that, older animals so in this case, these are two months old, which are like a young adult, versus 20 old mice, which, is more like a 65, 70 year old. And we can see that even though we're giving them, a purify a a diet that we think is optimal, and has everything it needs, these older animals, even though they're eating the perfect diet, look like they're zinc deficient. They they're they're they're very low. On top of that, we also see that older animals have significant amount of this chronic inflammation. So this is interleukin six, which is a marker of inflammation, and, as they get older, they have much more underlying inflammation. What's interesting is if we supplement these, these mice, with extra zinc, we can bring their zinc levels back to that of young. And, importantly, we can also, pretty well obliterate the chronic inflammation as well. So again, this is some early work that, that we've done at the institute to really help hopefully establish the need for potentially more zinc, as we get older to help limit this. We've also done some other work, with multivitamins. So in this case, this one also contains zinc, but it also contains a whole host of vitamins and minerals as well. And after several months of supplementation, we can see that in a normal adult population that we're able to decrease incidence of respiratory problems, as well. We also have done a lot of work with mitochondrial function. So when mitochondria, so this is the powerhouse of our cell, is known to also decline as we get older as well. And that has significant consequences on various cellular functions, in terms of not only your bioenergetics, but also oxygen stress pathways. It can lead to chronic inflammation. It can lead to, controlled cell death of specific cells as well. And we also know that our micronutrients are highly critical in terms of maintaining our mitochondrial function. So, some of my colleagues at the institute, also did a multivitamin study to look at mitochondrial function, and the first thing that we noticed, again, we recruited healthy individuals to this, clinical trial, and one of the first things that we noticed is we asked for people who kind of self reported as being healthy, trying to do everything right. And when we measured, their micronutrient intake, both from diet and blood biomarkers, notice how many of them so for vitamin D, for example, a hundred percent of them were not consuming enough vitamin D. So even in a apparent healthy population, the prevalence of these shortfalls were pretty pervasive. And this was really something that was quite surprising to us, given the population that we tried to recruit. When we gave these individuals supplements for a six month period so this is just a heat map. On the left are the group that got the multivitamins, and then on the right are the ones that are that got a placebo. You can see there's more green on the left versus the right, which is not surprising that we were able to change the blood levels of micronutrients, with the supplement that we didn't see in the placebo. But other thing to note is that even though these are all the multivitamins that were in that supplement, we don't see changes across the board, in everything. Whether that means it takes longer, but another thing that I wanted to point out is that a lot of these nutrients have problems in terms of a valid biomarker. Zinc, the one I study, is a great example of of the the blood measure that your clinician will do is actually not a great biomarker for for for detecting deficiency as well. So there's a lot of questions and challenges in terms of really trying to understand the impact of these micronutrients on health as well. In terms of mitochondrial function, though, we also were able to show that individuals in the multivitamin group were protected against mitochondrial function loss. That, so in the placebo group, we saw a rate of change in terms of loss of mitochondrial function, and we were able to maintain that mitochondrial function, in individuals that took the supplement. Outside the LPI, there's been some new exciting data, especially in the last year or so, that have also really looked at the power of multivitamins and cognitive function as well. So this is a group, that did this study. It's called the COSMO study. They looked at both cocoflavenoid supplementation and multivitamins in cognitive outcomes. So again, these are patients, individuals that are older adults. They're showing some signs in terms of dementia, cognitive decline, which is not uncommon, even in a healthy population. And just taking this multivitamin seemed to have quite a bit of power, in terms of improving cognitive outcomes. And again, it's not anything crazy that's happening here. It's simply a multivitamin that these individuals are taking. So, this is some new exciting data that's come out in the last year. I believe some more is, coming out, as well, in the coming year for other health span markers as well. So, we're keeping our eye on that. But again, the power of these just simply taking a multivitamin, in many domains of our health span, appears to be a benefit. So before we open up for some questions, just wanted to provide, some resources. So this is an example of the top 10 brochure that I mentioned. This is what it looks like. It's laid out this way. It lists the top 10. It also talks about foods that you find it in, kind of targeting mechanisms, and then we have this kind of little guide, with icons that kind of talks about, if you're interested in cognitive health versus immune health, there are icons next to each of those nutrients and where that nutrient may play. This is a QR code and the web link to the LPI website where the top 10 documents are. I just showed you a general brochure. There's also a health professional's brochure that has a little bit higher level of information on it. And then we have three ancillary brochures focusing on bone health, brain health, and and and immune health as well. So check that out. We definitely, again, are inspired by Doctor. Pauling. This is one of the quotes that I love to highlight in terms of, you know, the power of nutrition, for our health. And it's really kind of the driving force behind what what myself and many of the researchers at the institute do. Lastly, again, just more resources. If you haven't checked out the LPI in the past, we have this great resource, called the Marcinucci Information Center. I like to tell my students, if you are going to Google something, or now I have to say if you're gonna chat GPT something, stop. Come to the micronutrient information center first, and it's everything in one spot around micronutrients, phytochemicals, and health. We also have a kind of quarterly newsletter that we put out that highlights some of the research that we're doing at the institute. And at our website, not only can you find these resources, but we also have, webinars that we've done, as well. So it's a good, one stop shop in terms of, lots of resources around, nutrition and and health. Oh, okay. Thanks, Emily. That was great. I thought you had one more slide. But, yeah, yeah, that was great. I think everything you guys do with the LPI, I think your work and then your ability as a science communicator, I mean, that trifecta is amazing. And, so this was a real treat for me and, the audience. So, questions? Ready for questions? Yeah. Sure. Alright. So, I organized them based on your slide. So we can go through, I guess, sequentially. So when you when you showed the the, lifespan, the health span and lifespan extension curves. Right? So, basically, showed a squaring, you know, so a flattening of mortality and then, you know, basically, a quick, you know, a short mortality period. Right? So do you envision a time that that, you know, precise so right now, we've got, you know, a majority of population not eating real food. So, eventually, that's gotta shift, you know, for population based health in order to improve health and lifespan. But for people who are already on whole food based diets, do you see the next evolution of this, you know, really the precision nutrition and quantifying really, you know, on and it may be different for everyone. You know, precise nutrient demands, and needs as the next step for really pushing out health span and lifespan, in nutrition? Yeah. No. That's a huge area. I mean, the National Institute of Health has this whole, you know, nutrition precision health, initiative, and all of us work that's really trying to get around that. It's very clear, both from medical side in terms of drug responses, food responses, there's a huge amount of interindividual variation. And we don't really know what those sources of interindividual variation are. I think we're still probably a a long way off in terms of individual customized recommendations, but I don't think we're that far off from group effects in terms of, you know, if, you your environment looks like this, if your age is this, if some of the risk factors in your life are this, you need to consider this side, or a little bit more of this or a little more of that. I know, in the institute, a big initiative right now is looking at gut health, as a major kind of determinant of how you respond to our diet and vice versa, as as well. So that's a, you know, an exciting area of research. Again, it's, the technology has really advanced over the last few years. It's really enabled us to be able to to answer some of these questions. So I I really think in the next five to ten that we'll, make some progress, but we're not quite there, Ethan. Nice. So gut health is a perfect example because, you know, everybody may not respond to the same type of fiber. You know, as I'm sure you know, fiber isn't just one thing. It's many different polysaccharides. So, you know, as you mentioned, inter individual variability. There may be people who are great on pectin or great on resistant starch, you know, and or bad on arabinoxylan, you know, found in whole grains. So and then that can impact metabolic health and kidney health, you know. For example, I'm sure you, you're familiar with the metabolites like indoxyl and pericrysil sulfate, which are technically dysbiotic bacteria, bacterial, produced metabolites. I have them in my plasma, metabolome. Granted, they're not high, but I'm on a 90 grams of fiber per day diet. I'd imagine that higher fiber three x, you know, the RDA, I should have superb gut health. I should never see them. TMAO, is in my is in there too, which is, you know, as you know, produced by the gut. So, I should I should never see it. Right? So I've gotta play with my diet to try to see what I can do to really optimize gut health, independent of that super high fiber intake. Yeah. And that's it. I mean, it's just so complicated. I mean, the nutrition world initially has, you know, tried to adopt kind of the the the drug interaction, kind of modality, but it doesn't work for nutrition because it's so much more complicated because there's so many bioactives and so many different factors that are all coming together. And, again, up until now, the technology to be able to really comprehensively characterize all the chemicals, all the metabolites, you know, wasn't possible. And and now it's possible. Where the stop gap is is kinda the interpretation. We can generate a ton of this data, but the interpretation of how things fit together is is still we're still not quite there yet. You know, there's kinda promise with machine learning, but, again, we're not quite there yet, in terms of reliability. Yeah. That that's definitely a skill. Like, if you look at most, microbiome and or metabolome studies or even studies that combine them, you know, they'll they'll generally take their their data. And if there's so much of it and like you said, they'll crunch it down into pathways and then say that these pathways are up or down, but then have no interpretation, no novel insights. So, that's like a real skill of trying to interpret, you know, big data. Yep. Yeah. So in terms of shifting to the cancer story, and I, you know, I think this is has broad applicability beyond just broccoli and sulforaphane. And when I when I see your data, you know, should broccoli and sulforaphane be essential foods and nutrients for everyone who's interested in prevention or slowing cancer progression? Yeah. I mean, that's a great question. I think, in terms of all the phytochemicals, polyphenols, flavonoids, you know, they have a large body of evidence, that they're helpful, in a lot of different areas. I think trying to establish that requirement, though, is where people get stuck, because because they're not essential and because the model has always been the when you don't have it, what will go wrong? And that's not the right way to think about it. It's like, well, how do we enable things that will go right? And we don't we don't have great biomarkers, and we don't have great metrics yet. I'm optimistic that we're gonna get there, because I I do see a bit of I do see a shift. It's just glacially slow, in terms of, practical adoption. I mean, there's, again, a ton of science, that's there. Agreed. Some of the science isn't always, in human populations. So but at the same time, we need to fund those big studies, as as well, which isn't happening. So, it's kind of a catch 22. So until then, would it be probably some broccoli rather than or, actually, some Brassica family vegetables? Maybe it doesn't have to be broccoli. Some Yeah. Yes. I mean, there's kind of the whole adage, you know, eat the rainbow, and and that and that somewhat is true that you want to get different classes of these a lot of these phytochemicals are the colors and the taste in these different foods, and you do want a variety of them. I definitely recommend, you know, to try to incorporate Brassica cruciferous vegetable on a regular basis. And it doesn't have to necessarily be a ton, and it doesn't necessarily have to be every day. I mean, some of our research has even said just two to three servings per week, appears to have some protection. So it's not like you need to go gangbusters, in terms of eating. I mean, I kind of joke with my students here. I live in a small college town. I've got kids in high school, teach at the university. So inevitably when I go to the grocery store, there's somebody that I know, that that sees me, that I know is, like, peering into my grocery cart to see, you know, what is doctor Hoia putting in there? And I, almost always have kale, broccoli, brussels sprouts, or some Christopher's vegetable in in my cart. Nice. I I noticed that you didn't have collard greens on the brassica brassica image, and that's a brassica family vegetable. I mean, that's my staple. And I do go Yeah. I know that we've actually worked with some of the, researchers at at Tufts in terms of doing some collard greens, studies as well. Yeah. So there, I think the dose is important. And, so I I'm with you. You know, I hear you on the just two to three servings of Brassica family vegetables. And just to put that into perspective, one serving is only 80 grams. So that's 240 grams a week, which is essentially 35 grams a day, which is like nothing. I mean, this is I I joke I joke that, you know, most people, they'll have a slice of tomato and a slice of lettuce on their hamburger, and that's their vegetables for the day. I mean, that's literally 30 grams. So so but of brassica family vegetables. But in terms of the collars, I do go gangbusters, and not for any other reason other than it's strongly correlated in my data over 60 plus blood tests over the past ten years with higher HDL and without it. And I don't know if that's causation, but my HDL has been as low as 30 and as high as 67. And I my collard green intake over that time, I've purposely titrated it up in following the correlation with HDL up to now about 300 grams per day. Most people can eat that much color that many collard greens per day, but, I mean, the data suggests that in my case, it may be good. So collard's an all all star, I'd say. And I know, at least based on even the research that we've done, that regular intake is is key. Even more than absolute amounts, that it's consistency over over time that, you know, having a little bit every day versus having a big bolus, but then only doing it sporadically, doesn't have doesn't affect these markers, that that we've measured as as well. Yeah. So I I I agree with that a 100% too. So but that then opens up another question, which I I'd wanna get to later, which is kinda like the fasting story. And, because, you know so calorie restricted mice, 40% calorie restricted mice, Gary Churchill's group. I don't know if you saw that paper, but one of their groups that was calorie restricted was 40% CR. And they gave them the weekend food on Friday. So they basically had three days of food on the Friday. They ate it all on Friday and then fasted until Monday. And then that's extended lifespan, you know, by the most of any of the groups, which, you know, to the argument of, you know, they're getting all of their nutrition in one day and nothing for two days. You know what I mean? So there may be actually some benefit, to fasting in that case. But then that fasting brings me to cancer and the back to the cancer story. So since we're on the, sulfur fan and cancer, are there other things that people could be including to maybe minimize cancer risk or slow progression? Yeah. So we've done a lot of work with other polyphenols as well, especially things like green tea. We've done work with white teas as well, which is the even less processed, I guess, tea. So I don't know how many of your viewers are familiar with the tea process that all the the tea, comes from the same leaf. So black teas, green teas, they're just processed different, and that processing gives the different colors, flavors, of of of the teas as as well. And there's been a lot of evidence that green and the white teas the white tea is basically the tea leaf plucked, and steamed lightly, whereas green teas goes through, kind of a a pan fry and have has a little bit of fermentation, whereas the black teas are fully, fermented. Black teas don't, they have a lot more conjugated, catechins, different totally different phytochemical profile. They seem to be more protective in heart disease, whereas the green and the white teas, are seem to be more protective in cancer. So I personally don't drink any coffee. That's not really for any health reason. I just don't like the taste of coffee, so I drink so I drink tea. So I try to incorporate both black, green, and white teas on a pretty regular basis to heart health and, cancer prevention. And I always recommend to people, you know, if if you are a coffee drinker, maybe consider switching out one of those cups, for green tea or white tea. Yep. So green tea is a staple in my approach too. Everyday, two and a half cups, loose leaf, stainless steel ball. So, could that be could e e g c g, epigallocatechin catechin gallate? Could that be, you know so it it's it it becomes a question too of, you know, what are essential nutrients. Right? What which are vitamins? Yeah. Yeah. Could EGCG be considered a vitamin at some point in the future? Yeah. I mean, I know that I have colleagues that talk about vitamin p, which are, like, polyphenols. So, potentially. Again, it's kinda one of these things, nonessential versus essential. Like, what is that definition of of essential? Gotcha. Alright. So in terms of the cancer story still, so what about fasting? I think there's a lot of pop culture science, and I even looked into the literature. But what for someone that fasting in terms of as an approach to potentially, delay progression of cancer incidence. And for people who may have cancer, fasting as a strategy to maybe get the body to just autophagy out and just eliminate. So, what are your thoughts on fasting in that context? Yeah. It's pretty I don't know. It's controversial, I guess, in terms of both, you know, fasting, intermittent fasting. From a biological standpoint, it it it makes sense that that it could potentially benefit. In practical use, it's not clear. There's also a little bit, it's sometimes difficult to disentangle, you know, obesity, and adipocyte signaling is also a major factor, in terms of cancer progression as well. So it's sometimes it's a little bit just difficult to disentangle weight loss and, adipocyte loss, as as well as potential being a factor and whether or not it's actually the intermittent fasting, that's helping versus weight loss that that that may be happening as as well. I know there's been a lot of work in terms of, you know, is there a way if we if we know the biology of fasting helps, are there, signaling molecules that we know get produced as a result of fasting that could be utilized as a more consistent mode, I guess, of of of enhance or limiting cancer growth. I personally would not, you know, recommend it necessarily, But it I I think it falls in one of these things that won't hurt to try necessarily, but to just be cautious. Especially with cancer at cachexia. I mean, you've got a loss of muscle and fat. Fasting can make it even worse in that context. You don't have nutrition, right, accelerate the process. And then on top of that, again, we already know that even people who are not fasting are just not getting the micronutrients that they they need, as well. That will be important for, you know, the immune response in terms of helping, you know, fight cancer, you know, if you're on certain medications, as as well becomes important. In terms of signaling molecules, wouldn't it make sense that, you know so tumors secrete pro inflammatory cytokines, CRP, TNF alpha, IL six. So, I mean, that just seems like a low hanging fruit that one could look at. Are they lower if someone's fasting or any intervention for someone that may have cancer? Yeah. I don't, I mean, some of the work that I've seen, I haven't seen a decrease in inflammation, with with fasting because it's also a stress on the body, as as well. So, again, things are always more complicated, than you think, I guess, in terms of verb and just, you know, your body is so used is when you change something, there's always kind of the intended yeah. Or the hypothesized reaction, but then there's also just this compensation, hormesis, that your your body also does that are sometimes the unintended consequences. Yeah. Alright. So in terms of the so when the you made the transition from calorie restricted mice and calories reducing them, extends lifespan, and then diet quality matters. So clear clearly, I agree 100%. Most people, as I mentioned, are eating mostly ultra processed food. When you shift them over to a real food based diet, you know, biomarkers improve, general health improves. But for the calorie restricted mice, so there are you know, eat granted in those studies, it's mostly, you know, so chow. Right? So it's corn, wheat, and oats as the foundation. But this is it still even though that's the gold standard, this is still there there are no brassica vegetables. There are no there's no fruit. Right? So what if you put mice on a nutrient dense high quality diet? So, you know, Sameen Madani did some of that work with, fruit and vegetable powders and saw, you know, favorable outcomes. Granted, they didn't look at lifespan. So, could so is it really that, is it all just calories? I mean, because CRM mice have a, you know, like, you know, that standardized diet, corn, wheat, and oats, and they get big increases in lifespan without great diet quality. How much it is it all just calories, or how much really does diet quality matter? I mean, there's a lot of pieces there. I just said I I can comment on. But at the same time, I mean, there's a lot of work, in mice and models that have just added a a bioactive that also increases lifespan. So I I I I do think there's probably room in terms of a mixed approach, I guess. I mean, again, when you look at The US diet, it was one of the few diets that are overnutrition and undernutrition at the same time. So tackling both, I think is, I mean, potentially winning strategy, and it's just difficult to study. Yeah. So I I think also there's an additive thing, but I'm just playing devil's advocate because so if you take, calorie restricted rats, it extends lifespan. Mean, average, and maximal. If you give them a wheel to run, it doesn't impact lifespan at all. It may impact health span related measures. So see, you know, so rats with a wheel extended lifespan. Calorie restricted rats with a wheel, no extension of lifespan, which suggests that exercise for all its salutary effects, no additive impact on increasing lifespan. So I wonder how much of the ROI with a improved diet quality. And I hope it would be true that if you improve diet quality, you know, in animal models or people, in conjunction with calorie restriction, you get the biggest bang for your buck. But I just don't know. There are no studies. Right? So Yeah. Yeah. I don't think anyone is given a calorie restricted rat catechins or, or I mean, there's a there was Veritrol work, that may be the one one exception. But that was only on a high fat diet that, extend lifespan. And that's a few studies and, you know, that was basically a death of resveratrol as a longevity. Yep. Right. Right. Alright. So zinc zinc is an important and big one there too because as you mentioned, plasma zinc isn't a great measure of zinc status. So what could people measure as a, as a just as as a better marker? How can how would we know our zinc status? You know? Because blind supplementation doesn't seem like the best approach either. Yeah. No. I mean, in terms of the zinc world, this is our million dollar question. You know, what is the the better biomarker? And to be honest, we don't really have one. They're I generally recommend folks to to look closely at their dietary intake so they can see, kinda what they're consuming, as a compliment. But, yeah, my lab, many other labs have been looking at different biomarkers, and the problem is many of the things that zinc responds to are also general function. So immune system changes, which are not good specific biomarkers because many other things could be happening, in in response. So, one, I always recommend folks to, again, take a multivitamin. And when you take a multivitamin, make sure it has zinc because that's not always true, in terms of when you go to the big shelf. I I always kinda joke again with my students that my husband, once dared to come home with multivitamins that did not have zinc in them, and that was not a happy day in the household. But, but, yeah, to really I mean, the whole health care system in terms of not really closely looking at like, you have to be very proactive in terms of, like, getting information about your diet. It's not in your electronic health record generally. And, again, dietitians tend to be used more in crisis, or, you know, specialized condition rather than a a proactive. You know, you're very you're proactive way. That you really have to be an advocate to to to do those things. And a lot of the online sources, apps, for example, they don't do a great job. They do great with micronutrients, but they don't do a great job yet with with micronutrient content. I mean, some of our databases, even that we use in scientific world, are not ideal, especially around the phytochemicals content, which is something that we should be looking at as diet quality, as as well. So I wish I had a better answer. And like I said, for me, my default is just make sure that you're getting enough through either a multivitamin. But you can get too much zinc as well, so you can't you shouldn't go too crazy. Zinc itself is pretty nonreactive, but it interferes with other micronutrients. So if you take too much over, no. Currently, the upper limit is forty milligrams. So if you take over forty milligrams, potential to impair copper iron, is is also there. So you you shouldn't oversupplement either. Could could zinc at less than forty milligrams? Could it be thirty milligrams, twenty five milligrams? The RDA, I think, is, around ten or eleven milligrams. They men or women, maybe thirteen. But does it have to be forty milligrams above that where it starts impair, you know, other minerals, and their functions or as cofactors? Forty milligrams is pretty conservative, I guess, in terms of, potential for for interfering. It's probably more on the upper upper levels, closer to a 100 on a regular basis. I mean, a lot of it, is direct gut compensation. So, it it's more high levels for a long period of time. And then type of zinc? Because they're I I'm sure most people, you know, that that they go to the store, and then there's, like, eight different forms of zinc. They don't even know which one to get. So which type may be best for absorption? Yeah. I mean, for all the minerals, calcium, magnesium as well. You know, you'll see, salt forms. You'll see conjugated forms. The organic forms that have amino acids, are generally a little, better better absorbed. When I say better, though, most of the data is maximal 10% better. So it's not a huge difference, in terms of bioavailability. So, for me, form probably doesn't matter quite as much as just making sure that you get it. So I can say my rationale there. So I use I I currently am doing an experiment with zinc. I it it had never been in my approach. My approach is almost all whole foods in contrast with most people who are interested in health optimization or whatever you classify my niche as. Most people are doing 50, a 100, a 100 fifty supplements per day. It's the opposite of what I do. I wanna get it all from food. And then if I can't, targeted supplementation. So I recently added zinc, but zinc glycinate. So zinc, as mentioned, declines during aging, at least in plasma. Glycine levels plasma glycine levels also decline during aging. So I figured, worst case, I'm getting, you know, the biggest bang for the buck there. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. I mean, same like I said, same thing with, like, the magnesium glycinate forms, calcium, as well that that they, basically, they're able to piggyback on amino acid transports in in addition to the divalent metal transporter. So there's just more options for it to get in. Nice. Alright. So I'm going through some of the LPI's recommendations for, the top 10 nutrients, especially, you know, so for brain health or for aging well. I I noticed that you don't have I mean, granted on the LPI site, you do have listings for all of the individual carotenoids, which are probably when in terms of when you eat the rainbow, carotenoids are where it's at. Orange, red, purple. So and I don't think there's an RDA established for the individual carotenoids. You know? So alpha beta carotene, lutein, zeaxanthin, beta cryptoxanthin. So what are your thoughts on recommended intakes? And then, you know, obviously, some better than none, but then it becomes a question of how much is optimal, right, for each of those carotenoids. So what are your thoughts on on individual carotenoids and how much, you know, on a daily basis? Yeah. That's a good question. I mean, so the vitamin a requirements are based on retinol, equivalents. And each of the carotenoids have a different efficacy in terms of converting to to vitamin a. So beta carotene is the most efficient and still not a 100% efficient, whereas the alpha carotene isn't quite as efficient. Lutein and zeaxanthin have very little capacity to be able to convert to to vitamin a. But lutein and zeaxanthin so there's kind of two broad categories of, you know, carotenoids good to help with your vitamin a requirements. But then there's also benefits of these carotenoids, you know, outside their vitamin a activity. You know, lycopene, lutein, zeaxanthin are probably the, the most popular or or well known in terms of, like, non vitamin a activity, but also potential benefit for eye health or prostate health, and that type of thing. So it's a tricky so bottom line, I do think there'd probably need to be different requirements or or different recommendations, depending on the carotenoid because each carotenoid, in terms of even what it targets, is is gonna be different. Yeah. So I guess that goes back to including some rather than none would be Yeah. Yeah. And a mixture. At the a mixture of all of them so that they're covered. I I think so for and, you know, in I know a lot of people who we eat no carotenoids, and that's always the first place to start. It's gotta get some there are studies, you know, a younger grim age, so it's the best epigenetic clock in terms of all cause and allergy risk. There's a study that was just published on beta carotene plasma beta carotene levels and having a younger brain age, MRI determined brain age. So I think that's always the an easy place to start is getting the carotenoids. So so let let's flip it a different way. So just to play the devil's advocate here too. So there there are people who don't do well on vegetables or plant based foods at all. And granted, this seems like, you know, gross science where it's like, I don't eat any vegetables and look at my health. I'm lean and fit. But is is there a path to optimal health and potentially longevity for people who maybe don't do well and have maybe GI issues for whatever reason, genetic background, or who knows what, who don't eat a lot of, you know, fruits and vegetables or whole grains, nuts and seeds, but don't eat ultra processed foods. And it's almost exclusively the opposite of what we think of as a, quote, unquote, healthy diet. Do you think there's a road where that's possible? I guess my, like, nutrition background background is, is is hard to believe that someone can be healthy without those foods, as as a part of a a regular component. But at the same time, again, like, we're increasingly learning that our bodies are very different. And I wouldn't put it outside the realm of possibility, but I don't think it's gonna be the majority. Yeah. Sure. Definitely. That, if you look online though, it seems like a lot of people are eating like that, and, you know, askew all fruits and vegetables like they're poison, which to me is just crazy. But so e even pushing that just to push it a little bit further though, there are animals animals that are carnivorous. Right? So they eat no vegetables, no fruits. They just eat meat. They eat organs. So, you know, evolutionarily, there is a road, I think. But how much of the population fall? Where could it be detrimental? You know? So Yeah. We definitely I mean, if you do that, and then don't even incorporate any supplementation as as well, I just can't I think it's gonna be a small small group. Yeah. Alright. So in terms of other LPI recommendations, so I think vitamin c, I think you guys have that at four hundred milligrams. That's the recommended, daily intake. But the RDA is far less. Maybe, what, one twenty or even something like 60. It's dramatically low. Yeah. And I think it's 60 to 80. Yeah. So vitamin c is an interesting one because I think it saturates plasma levels saturate at very low levels. So is that it it I'm not sure if I saw it. Between twenty and and four hundred is or sorry. 200 to 400 is where plasma levels, seem to saturate. So that's why, that's kind of the rationale for our that we want we wanted to be at the higher end of, reaching, plateau, levels of of vitamin c in the in the plasma. Gotcha. That's a great strategy. But, I guess what I'm asking though too is that plasma vitamin c levels, I think they they decay quickly. So isn't it you know, so if you if you ate vitamin c rich foods at breakfast, maybe you spike plasma levels for an hour or two, and then they start to come down. And then they're down for the rest of the day until the next time you have vitamin c containing foods. So is there value in spreading your vitamin c containing foods out throughout the day so that you have basically constant saturation levels in blood? Or what are your thoughts? Yeah. There's, been a little like, some research, in this area. Not a lot of it seems so especially, even with the supplements, like the slow release forms, versus the the the bolus forms. At this point, there doesn't seem to be a lot of evidence. I mean, the the level spike and but that steady state still it it stays that steady state level between, twenty four and forty eight hours. So, at this point, there doesn't seem to be a lot of additional benefit to to to to spreading it out. Okay. Good news. Easy. That's an easy one. Alright. So the Lending is another one that I think is important, and, I'm not sure what's the LPI recommendation there because the RDA there too is very low. Sorry. I didn't hear you though. Oh, selenium. Selenium? Yes. Selenium is an interesting one. Largely, it it's one of the few nutrients that has a very narrow you know, for vitamin c, for example, deficiency, bad. Upper limit, bad. But the the the, I guess, the the range of okay is pretty wide. For selenium, the range is actually the from deficiency optimum to, excess and detrimental is is is much narrow narrower. So, at the top of my head, I'm not sure, but I think for us that we are pretty close to the RDA in terms of recommendation for selenium, which is a microgram level of of selenium that we don't require a lot. I mean, a lot of that has to do just, selenium is a fascinating nutrient just in terms of how it's so closely regulated, and how it's incorporated into tRNAs, that it's, one of the, like like I said, few nutrients that the molecular biology of it is quite complex, but seems to be pretty well regulated, as as well. So we don't need a lot for it to be incorporated. Yeah. But then the question is optimal. Right? I think the tolerable upper limit is four hundred micrograms per day, and then as you mentioned, toxicity above that. So if the RDA and an adequate intake is 60 or 80, whatever, something in the low hundreds, you know, range. But then when you consider that things like glutathione peroxidase, which gets involved, obviously, in reducing oxidative stress, which increases during aging, and then you have, like, thyroid hormones. So t four is converted to p t three by, DIOs, which are selenium dependent proteins. And that conversion gets worse with age. So it makes me wonder, maybe there's getting it closer to the upper limit without tech toxicity may be best for these pathways. But, you know, how long will it take for us to catch up to the science or for the science to catch up for that to be a real thing if it is a real thing? Yeah. I do that that that I'm not certain in terms of kind of what, the true threshold. I mean, the other issue yes. Selenium is pretty well regulated in terms of incorporation into the containing proteins, but any excess that's not incorporated into that, is just willy nilly incorporated into thiols, that can make, redox action or prooxidant activity, you know, pretty high as as well. So there's a selective insertion that happens, but then whatever is in excess, there's not a a clear the the chances for toxicity are high because there's there's just not a lot of concerted mechanisms to protect against that selenium. Gotcha. Wait. So if it's in a prooxidant environment, then those thiols will be oxidized and form disulfides. Well, chip granted, during aging, I mean, prooxid aging is a prooxidant. Well, it actually replaces the sulfur. Yeah. Alright. That's a tricky one then. Alright. So niacin, vitamin b three. So that's big. And I I don't think I saw that too on the top 10 micro nutrient list. I'm just curious about, you know, the ones that didn't make the list. Right? So Yeah. So the one we actually talked quite a bit both about niacin and iron with the is the other one that we had kind of, like, questions around. Niacin, obviously, especially with NAD, ribosides, and other different forms have had a lot of interest in terms of healthy aging. The reason why it didn't quite make the top 10 is niacin as B3 is actually one that, in terms of getting enough of, in the population is not as high risk in terms of a a a shortfall. There's I mean, the whole other literature in terms of is that the right form, that our body uses, for a lot of these processes. And, so we decided, okay. We're just gonna call it as b three. And given it's not a high risk shortfall nutrient, it's not gonna get to our top 10. I gotcha. So it was more of minimizing disease in that case, not necessarily the optimal side of that equation. Right. So if you had to go to the optimal side, is that something you guys have dipped dipped your toe in the water into in terms of what it a, you know, a tolerable upper limit or an optimum dose might be? Yeah. For for niacin, we have not. I mean, obviously, for vitamin c is we've that's exactly the approach that that we've we've taken, that we've said we're not worried about scurvy. We wanna, do the the level that we know gives the optimal level of of plasma circulating vitamin c, in the body. And we also know that there's very low, toxicity and and risk for it as as well. So that was one that we are pretty confident, about moving forward. There's probably a lot of other nutrients, that we could put in those categories as yellow, but we just don't have quite enough evidence or or, yet to firmly go that there. But, hopefully, we will. And I guess iron is in the same boat there with concerns about, you know, people probably supplementing in order to get it and maybe that being part of a toxic, Yeah. And I think just because there's just such a wide variety in terms of iron response, depending, on race and gender, pre, postmenopausal, that it was just way not I shouldn't say too complicated, but it just wasn't a straightforward story. Gotcha. Alright. So one more nutrient. So vitamin k, I think, didn't make the list, which to me is a surprise because if you're eating Brassica family vegetables, you're gonna get an abundance of vitamin k. And there's all cause mortality data, granted it's epidemiological in association. Right? But people who consumed more than 700 had the lowest risk of death relative to lower intakes. And seven hundred micrograms per day is seven x, you know, what what's considered the AI or, you know, around a hundred and twenty micrograms per day. So, what are your thoughts on the k recommendation? How high should Our k, in terms of our top 10, if if you noticed you know, it sounds like you've looked at some of our other, our brain, bone, and, immune, that we do definitely highlight vitamin k in in in the in those documents as well. Yeah. Like I said, for for us, it was just kind of a a call. Vitamin k is one that potentially has a shortfall. We just felt that maybe it was number 11 of is the top 10 at this point. So so do you think, like, is there is there value in saying this is, like so I get the, you know, minimize disease approach, but and for some of the nutrients on on the LPI, you know, on the LPI site that you guys are targeting higher levels using zinc and, you know, vitamin c as examples. But should we be targeting people to say, this is what you should be be aiming for. Yeah. It may be hard for you to get seven hundred micrograms or whatever it is, pick your nutrient of choice. You know, really challenging people to improve their diets to try to get the higher levels. What do you think? I mean, absolutely. That similar to you, we we're food first, mentality, in terms of, you know, start with your diet, and try to get your needs there. Still tough, so consider taking a multivitamin as well to as kind of insurance. So what are you but what are your thoughts on the recent studies that have come out that, or actually, there's the data is mixed. Right? So some studies, association epidemiologically will show, no association with all cause mortality risk for multivitamin use. And then I think there's one that showed an increased risk for people using multivitamins. So how do you square the circle there for people who are worried about, you you know, adverse outcomes with taking, multivitamin? Yeah. I mean, when you look at some of that data, it's it's just really hard to to interpret. I mean, the problem is we, in a lot of these studies have no idea where people are starting, in terms of the response. You know, are they already adequate or maybe at those high levels and then taking a multivitamin on top of that? Are they deficient? And then taking a multivitamin, then the response is gonna be totally different. And the the way that a lot of these epi studies are done that there's no way through the data that they have to know where they're starting. And so to me, it's not a surprise. Yeah. There's gonna be all this variability in response to a multivitamin depending on the population that that that you look at. But, I still strongly advocate take a multivitamin. Sounds good. Is there some reverse causation potentially going on in those studies where people who are generally not eating real food would be more likely to say, I'm gonna take this multivitamin, and then they're in the stuff. So if you're eating a lot of UPS, and then it's blah. Yeah. And then they they There's so many different factors that can come into play. Yeah. Alright. So a few more questions. So, the big buzz in antiaging and longevity is olive oil. A lot of a lot of people seem to think it's this longevity panacea. And granted, there is and I think I saw it too on it was on one of the lists for the, top 10, either brain health or I don't remember which one. But, it's a processed food. Right? So and granted, there are you know, it's associated with reduced all cause mortality risk. I mean, in numerous studies showing that it's better than other, basically, oils or fats. But the appropriate control is olives, the whole food, which almost nobody's eating. So, you know, what if people would eat an equivalent amount of calories? And maybe you'll say, well, it's too much sodium. But people could cut some sodium out of their diet to get the whole food rather than the oil. So what are your thoughts on the olives versus olive oil, approach for optimal health? Yeah. I just don't know, to be honest enough, in terms of olive consumption, whether or not, you can get to the same levels of, hydroxytyrosol and and medium chain, you know, fatty acids, just with the with the olives. I mean, I kinda view the olive oil as kind of a kinda like the sprouts, a concentrated vehicle to be able to to deliver. But I think there is also I mean, the work with the olive oil is still all about kind of the pattern of diet that that you're consuming, as well. Whether it if it's more Mediterranean, more plant based, that's also kind of in the mix there of of of of these studies that is difficult to disentangle. Is it really truly just the olive oil, that or is it because you're consuming more fish, with the things that you're preparing with olive oil as as as well? Yeah. I see. I got you. Yeah. So they're on a healthier diet, generally, and olive oil is is a part of that mix. So it may not be the olive oil at all. But I generally never see any studies putting head to head match up. Olives, equivalent amount of calories, olives versus olive oil, and then looking at outcomes. So, yeah. Anyway, just the thought there. So I think I I I saw milk and not, yogurt on the it was either brain health of one of the list too there. So, is there a road for probiotic rich yogurt, or would would the LPI recommend milk intake as a source of calcium, instead? I guess, hard to say. I mean, dairy products in general. We have a whole new article on on gut health, you know, talking about probiotics, postbiotics, prebiotics as as well. I think one of the issues, I guess, with yogurt specifically is more from a product standpoint that not all yogurts are made the same. Some have a lot of added sugar. So just consuming a yogurt does not necessarily mean you're getting any bacteria, and you might be getting a a load of of sugar as well. So that was one reason why we kinda shied away from specifically recommending yogurt in in in these documents as well, just knowing, from a consumer standpoint that, we just didn't wanna have the fallacy that just eating a like like I said, because yogurt's quality, in terms of nutrition is is pretty variable that, without having kind of a a ton of caveats, it was hard to kind of substantiate. Even just saying plain yogurt, plain yogurt, no sugar added? Because that's what I that's what I've got, you know. And you could make the same argument for milk. Right? I mean, it's chocolate Sure. All kind of flavored milks. Right? So but I I again, I guess in the bone that it was probably in the bone health that we kind of went with the traditional calcium source. Gotcha. Alright. So then in terms of, our food supply and micronutrients in the food supply, there's also this general thought that, you know, so soil depletion over time. I guess, soil quality has gotten worse over time. You know, it's not just the gut microbiome. It's skin, sorry. It's the soil microbiome and soil nutrition Yeah. Has gotten worse. So, are we really even getting food anymore with any nutrition, or is it just calories that looks a certain color and has a certain flavor profile? So what are your thoughts on soil depletion and mineral levels in soil and in our food supply? Yeah. I mean, selenium is a good example of, you know, of historical impacts of soil quality on, selenium, deficiency and also excess as as well. So it's definitely a concern. It's really just hard to there's what's happening geographically, versus what, is evolving, I guess. That is not it used to be that just geographical areas, in terms of mineral depletion or just geology, I guess, differences. I think there's just not as much science, though, in that area yet, in terms of, you know, how the farming practices affect, the actual nutrients in in the vegetables and and the foods as well. I I still think it's going to be less of an impact. The bigger crisis is people aren't eating them, I guess, in in in in my mind. So I kinda feel like let's tackle that first. Yeah. Definitely. I hear you on that. Alright. So another, so what about sunlight as an essential vitamin. Right? So, I mean, when you can make the argument that vitamin d production, this is something we evolved to have through sunlight, not necessarily through food. It's impossible to get, you know, circulating vitamin d levels up high enough with just food alone. So should sunlight be should there be a recommendation for sunlight as a vitamin, not just for the UV, but also, you know, red light, near infrared light, which may have some health benefits too on mitochondria? Yeah. I mean, I think the science is is getting there. I don't think it's quite there yet, though. There's again, similar to our food, there's just so much variability in terms of exposure, type of type of light, you know, whether or not, you know, people are inside a lot more. And then when they do go outside, they're worried about, skin cancer as as well. So there's just even on the UV side that, I know I'm like that as well. I'm always putting sunscreen on my kids as as well, whereas my husband studies vitamin d. So he's always like, like, what what do we think about this as well? Like, okay. So there's this, kinda internal fight between the derm, population and and the vitamin d d researchers. But I do think there is some emerging in terms of other bandwidth lights as well. But I think, the science is limited right now, and we just we just need more more evidence based work in that area. Definitely. Alright. A couple more questions. So, scientific, influences that got you interested in aging and studying nutrition? Like, who did you see both before you went to grad school, maybe even before you went to undergrad, and you were like, that's I wanna do that. I can do that. I wanna do that. So who who would yep. Yeah. I mean, my biggest influence, was my mentor, Tammy Bray, that, basically, you know, before I started college, I I'm a big animal lover, so I thought I, I I thought my path was gonna be veterinarian. So I I'm from Canada, so I went to the University of Guelph, which has a very strong biological sciences program and a nutrition program. I didn't know at the time, but that's where the vet school in Ontario is as well. And at that time, I think I was a sophomore. I was thinking of, you know, I need to get a good resume for my vet school application. Maybe I should do some research. And I really like my genetics professor. He was doing a lot of work with, superoxide dismutase. At that point in the nineties, they just discovered the familial form of Lou Gehrig's disease that was dependent on a mutation in superoxide dismutase, and that was one of his research areas. So that got me on the path of the free radical theory of disease, and just kind of, like, the power of oxidants and the power of antioxidants. And I just, you know, asked my genetics professor. I was doing, like, fly sorting hard kind of traditional genetic studies. I'm like, well, you know, antioxidants are the answer to to help all these processes. You know, where can we get antioxidants other than these genetic approaches? And he's like, well, it's in food. I was like, well, that seems like an easy thing to figure out and and do more. Why don't we do more than that? And he's like, oh, you should connect with, Tammy Bray in the nutrition department. She's someone who who studies to, some of this. Like, okay. So I started talking with her, and that just totally shifted my path. I just got absolutely fascinated with the the power of food and, at that point, kind of the oxidant antioxidant nexus, in terms of chronic disease. I decided to do a a a graduate school, abort the the vet school, path. I'm like, do I really want to be vaccinating dogs and cats all day and dealing with pet owners? And, like I said, it just kind of got me interested in the research, world, and specifically, like I said, just the power of food. It seemed like a simple thing at the time. So zinc zinc ties into that. I'm sure obviously, you know. Right? Copper zinc SOD. So if you are zinc deficient, your copper, zinc, SOD levels are gonna be down, potentially having elevated oxidative stress. So, even if it's not a genetic model of, you know, like Lou Gehrig's disease, neurodegenerative disease, diet dietary deficiency. And it's not gonna mimic ALS, but it can't be good for health not having, you know, enough, comprehensive SOD activity. Mhmm. Actually, I had a similar that's what's this is crazy. My path started too on the free radical theory of aging too, you know, with Arlin Richardson and Holly Van Remen in in San Antonio. Oh, sure. Mhmm. That that's a story, you know, for another day. So how about now? Like, are there people in the field, whether it's nutrition or other fields that you look and you're like, wow, these people are doing great work. I'm really, you know, you know, these are great people that I look up to or look forward to their work. Yeah. I mean, I was also pretty influenced, my time at at Berkeley, you know, with with Bruce Ames, Janet King, some of the the huge stars, in terms of nutrition, and the the the triage theory that, that that Bruce kind of introduced to me around micronutrients. They're definitely past and present, inspirations. I guess now I am starting similar to everyone else, kind of getting, interested in in this this whole data, side of things, in terms of, you know, people like, sorry. I'm blanking. He's coming to our conference, from Stanford. Michael Snyder. Yeah. Yes. Yes. Yeah. In terms of, you know, really pushing the envelope in terms of how can we really integrate all of these different data streams from wearables, genetics, metabolomics to to really get a bigger picture of of what is happening, with the with the person, is is really exciting. Yeah. They're they're doing everything as you know. I mean, it's, and it's, fully quantified. I just worry about, like, translation. I think they I don't know. I'll probably have to invite Michael Snyder on the on the show here too because, it seems like they lack from it it's more descriptive at this point. It isn't Yeah. Yes. Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. I agree with that. As someone who granted, I'm not track I'm not wearing seven bands like Michael does, but I do track, like, crazy all kinds of stuff. You know, so I I'm more interested in the translation of it, whereas it seems like, so, yeah, you know, they're, descriptive. But alright. So then also, I guess the last question. So are there things in studying nutrition that you've changed in your own approach or, or that haven't changed? That's a good question. I mean, I used to be much well, not that I'm not mechanistic anymore, but I I think earlier in my career, I was very focused, in terms of target molecular target. You know? How do we change that? Yes or no? And now I've I've just, over the years, just appreciated that the yes, no is always a maybe, as as well. And being kind of laser focused on a specific protein and enzyme, just not that it doesn't serve, but to get to the translation piece that you need to consider a lot more things. So I've definitely had more of a holistic approach, and it's a lot more fact finding, I guess, now rather than it's very strict hypothesis testing, that, that I'm doing, like I said. And I think that's the only way to do kinda truly impactful research. That's still that probably gets pushback though from grant reviewers who still wanna see it. It does. Absolutely. Yeah. But I meant, like, dietary things, like, things in studying nutrition that you're like, I need to add this into my approach. I hadn't been doing that. You know, are there things like that? In terms of incorporating them into my, like, daily life? Yeah. Yep. Oh, yeah. I mean, I never thought I would be a broccoli zealot. And and to and, I mean, when I first came to Oregon State, I was a zinc researcher. I didn't study any, natural compounds or or phytochemicals at all. And it, I started on the sulforaphane side of things largely because, that HDAC, interaction, it it's got a zinc in the active site. So the my collaborator, Rod Dashwood, who's now at, who was at the LPI now at University of Texas, he, said, well, why don't we look at some of the interaction? And then from there, I just like, oh, this is really interesting. And, like, there's so many other things to to look at, and we got into the teamwork that we did, with with cancer, as well. So, I've definitely pivoted. Like I said, I when I first joined the university, I was a mineral micronutrient zinc researcher. That's what I was known as. And, through the interactions here with the faculty at LPI, for the most part, that has really expanded kind of my, my breadth of oh, it's not just essential nutrients that we need to worry about. Yeah. Alright. Well, thanks, Emily. That was great. I appreciate your labs work, the LPI, and I'm looking forward to more, you know, more from your group in the future. Yeah. Well, you have all our resources in terms of, things to check out for your viewers to check out as well. Cool. Alright. Ciao. Bye, Emma. Alright. Take care. Bye.