For blood test number one in 2025, when using doctor. Morgan Levine's biological age calculator PhenoAge, we saw that my biological age was nineteen years younger than the chronological. So what might be contributing to these data? So let's start off with prescription meds. And if you're familiar with the channel, the first one isn't a surprise, that's Levothyroxine. I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in my twenties, so I've been taking Levothyroxine for most of my life. Now, that story I'm hoping to change as my free t three to free t four ratio has been low and relatively aged, not, you know, even worse than age expected. So, I'm hoping to convince the endocrinologist to switch me over to cytomel which is t three, which should raise t three and improve the free t three to free t four ratio. Alright. So what about supplements? Now, the first shouldn't be a surprise either. I live in Boston so for eight to nine months out of the year, I'm not able to get full body sun exposure. And the good news is later in the year that will change. So I'll flip it where I'll be getting full body sun exposure for almost all of the year as I'm, moving from Boston. Nonetheless, for now, I supplemented with two thousand IUs of vitamin d per day for all forty nine of the forty nine days that corresponded to this blood test. So what does that even mean that there were forty nine days that corresponded to this blood test? Well, that forty nine day period started immediately after test number eight in 2024 which was on December 17, and then it lasted until the day before test number one in 2025 which was on February 4. So the period went through February 3. The next supplement is nicotinic acid and I'm doing that specifically to raise NAD. As without it, my NAD levels can be relatively low, 20 micro molar. Now, I didn't show the full average forty nine forty nine day average for, nicotinic acid or niacin. We'll see niacin's intake later in the video. And that's because NAD levels in my experience are very sensitive to change relatively quickly with supplementation especially nicotinic acid. So with that in mind, I find it more valuable to look at the one week or how much I supplemented with for the one week prior to testing NAD. And for the one week prior to doing that, I supplemented with two hundred and one milligrams per day of nicotinic acid. I make my own stock solution and then drink about fifty milliliters of that, every day. Now, rather than just assuming it will increase my blood intracellular levels of NAD, I test so that I can find out. And to do that, I send send blood to Ginfinity and if you want to measure your own NAD levels, there's a discount link in the video's description. So on the same day that I tested all of the other blood tests including the biomarkers that are used for pheno age, I measured N. A. D. And on that day, it was 48 micromolar which is relatively high as my normal range is somewhere in the 20 to 20, sorry, 20 to 30 micromolar range with an average of around 25 micromolar without any NED precursors. So then one could say, well look, your NED levels are relatively high compared to your baseline. Maybe that had an impact on your biological age using PhenoAge. So I'm I'm skeptical and that's because I've had biological ages that are nineteen years younger than the chronological and that's with N. A. D. Levels that were 25 micro molar. So it seems like it's not essential. N. A. D. Levels being higher than 25 micro molar in my case are not essential for having a relatively youthful biomarker profile at least when looking at PhenoAge. The third supplement was N Acetylcysteine. I supplemented with one point five grams per day for the last thirty eight days of the forty nine day period. And technically, I supplemented with NAC for forty days as I supplemented with one gram per day prior to that for only for two days. And I did that because there are two clinical trials that have shown a reduction in homocysteine in response to one point five one point five grams per day of N Acetylcysteine. However, in my case, it didn't make much of a dent. Homocysteine was still a relatively high 9.8 micromolar and for those who, may make the comment, maybe you have the, the MTHFR or maybe I'm saying it wrong, you know, the Methylfolate gene, SNP. I don't because, homocysteine levels are about half of where they are now about twenty years ago. So I've succumbed to the age related increase for homocysteine and I'm working to get it back. For now, the only thing that seems to work is high dose b twelve, but that's significantly correlated with a lot more biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. And, sorry for the plug but those correlations are on Patreon. So I'm still trying to figure out the recipe to bring homocysteine down without messing up the rest of the biomarkers. But that's it for supplements which then brings us to diet. What diet composition corresponds to this 19 year younger biological age? And that's what we'll see here. This is the average daily dietary intake for that forty nine day period. Test to test from test number eight in 2024 to test number one in 2025. And note that I track my data or track my diet every day first by using a food scale and then entering that data into chronometers. So, these aren't estimates. This is as close as one can get to accurate dietary records as I weigh my food every day. So this list is ranked in grams with two exceptions. Coffee which is in ounces and note that that's not point four milliliters or ounces of, sorry. They're different obviously. Milliliters and ounces are different. That's not point four ounces of coffee every day, that's one twenty ounce coffee that I made at home. I put some coffee ground, ground coffee in a stainless steel ball and just brewed it. I did that once over this forty nine day period. The second is green tea which is also in ounces. And if you wanna use what I use which is organic loose leaf green tea source from Japan, discount link in the video's description. Alright. So now, were there any experiments for this test? And there always are. I'm trying to improve the weak spots like homocysteine, DHEA sulfate and thyroid hormones, without messing up all the other biomarkers. So what experiments that I do dietarily to try to move the needle for some of the biomarkers? So first, I added alfalfa sprouts back into the approach. I had them in for a few tests. I took them out for a few tests, now I added them back in a hundred and thirteen grams per day. So I'm sprouting at home because they can be expensive buying them at the store. And I did that because they are significantly correlated with a lower systolic blood pressure. Systolic blood pressure increases during aging so I'm trying to resist that and to to try to resist that, I I added the alfalfa sprouts back in with the hope that maybe they'll help. And again, I don't know about causation. All I can do is test the correlation. So I added that bit back in to see if they can help keep my systolic blood pressure relatively low. My current averages are around one twenty over seventy one seventy two. Next up are sardines and this is a cut in the opposite direction. So I cut my sardine intake and I didn't do that for any reason other than to get more or to get some wild caught salmon into the approach. So why did I do that? Well, Astaxanthin which is found in salmon and my diet has no Astaxanthin from anywhere else. Astaxanthin has been shown to increase life span at least in mice. And in a couple of clinical trials, it's been shown to have positive effects on skin and eyes. These are areas I hope to improve or resist age related changes. So with that in mind, with the exception of cost, wild caught salmon is more expensive than sardines. I'm gonna include about a fifty fifty mix of sardines and salmon. So it's not gonna be a 100% sardines going forward. I'm gonna switch it to a fifty fifty mix and I may actually eventually switch it to a 100% wild caught salmon in the future. So I can escape getting, you know, the food from the can. Inherent in that though is cooking and and meal prep. I don't have I don't have that, you know, issue with sardines but, you know, in in the quest for optimal health. Right? Alright. Next up, oranges. Increased that a bit from the last test and actually from two tests ago, that's about 30 grams higher. So I've increased it for a couple of tests to test their correlation with DHEA sulfate as there's a significant positive correlation. But DHEA sulfate didn't continue to rise or didn't rise a little bit or go towards the higher end of my range for this test with the higher oranges, it was actually on the lower side of my range which suggests that oranges may not be causative in impacting DHEA sulfate. So with that in mind, I took them out and I added other fruits back into the approach including blueberries which have been absent for many tests, couple of years. And they've been absent from the approach because following blood test number eight in 2024, blueberries had a net three correlative score with a panel of 26 to 27 biomarkers and those correlations are on Patreon. So rather than just staying in that box of while blueberries may be bad for my data, I added them back in and when considering that the pheno age was 19 younger than my chronological age while including about five ounces per day of blueberries, that suggests that they may not be as bad as their net correlative score suggests. So I've kept them in for at least the next test and we'll see how that story plays out going forward. Now, to stay fructose neutral, I'm not trying to increase fruit and correspondingly fructose intake because a relatively higher fructose intake in my data is significantly correlated with a lot more biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. So So to stay fructose neutral, I cut strawberry intake by about the same amount that I increased blueberries. So from about 530 grams to about 400 grams per day. And that's it for experiments. Next up are cheat meals. So the diet isn't always purposely clean. I've found that in the past when I've tried to completely eliminate all junk food, I can do that for a while. But then eventually, I start thinking about having some junk and then I crack and that could be a nightmare in terms of just going crazy with calories and trying to get myself back on track, following the overall healthy diet approach. So I'm trying to avoid these, you know, binges by incorporating at least a couple of cheat meals immediately after blood testing and maybe for a couple days after that. And then also as a part of that approach, not paying attention to macros and micros as I try to hit nutrient targets every day for most of the dietary period test to test. So what works for me is immediately after blood testing for a couple of days, I won't pay any attention to the macros and micros and then I get satiated on a little bit of junk. I get, you know, alright. It's time to go back on to the approach. I'm, you know, based whatever it may be whether I'm bored with not paying attention to macros and micros or I don't feel as well. So then after a couple of days of that then it's I locked back in. And that approach has worked well for me in terms of avoiding, binges for a long time. But as we'll see in in the next video, blood test number two, I actually did crack following the blood test number one on February 4. So that's that's a story for another video. So in terms of cheat meals for this test or immediately following test number one in 2025, I have the standard which is peanut butter mixed with chocolate and then for a little bit of extra sweet, I added sugar and heavy cream. And I know it's weird but I don't like my chocolate to be hard when you bite into it. It's kind of crunchy. I like it soft. So I try to soften it up a little bit more by adding heavy cream. So that combination wasn't great. In the future, I'll probably just go back to adding sweetened condensed milk which tastes amazing. And then on the second cheat meal day, I made a homemade ice cream. So heavy cream, sugar and blueberries and that that too was pretty delicious. Now, in terms of junk calories, chocolate chips three sixty, sugar was about 500 and when adding them together, that was 859 calories come from junk for this forty nine day period test to test. So test number eight to test number one. And when dividing that by total calories consumed, for this whole dietary period for all those forty nine days, it junk calories contributed point 8% of total calories. So the diet was 99.2% clean. Alright. This list is ranked in grams. What about ranking the list in terms of top contributors for calories? And that's what we'll see here. This is now the top 10 foods for average daily daily calorie intake from test number eight to test number one and that's a forty nine day period. And note that this list is generated by Cronometer. If you want to track your own diet with Cronometer, discount link in the video's description. Now, atop the list is a new food. So if you're familiar with the channel, then you know that sardines are almost always or they have been always going back to since I started making videos, I think 2020, 2021. Sardines have been the top food where I'm getting my calories from. But that's not true anymore as I cut them to get salmon into the approach, and now strawberries are the top food on the top 10 list for calories. Now without going through all of the foods on the list, nine of the foods that are on this list are the same as for test number eight. And that's again, intentional. I'm not trying to blow up the whole system. I'm trying to improve weak spots by making small dietary changes without blowing up the overall approach. So in terms of the food that left the top 10, walnuts and what what entered the top 10 was yogurt. Alright. What about macronutrients? So let's start off with calorie intake. Average daily calorie intake for this test for that forty nine day period was 21 2,121 calories per day. Almost exactly the same as it was for test number eight, twenty one nineteen. And that's potentially important because if you saw last week's video, my lymphocytes for the fourth test out of the last seven are less than fifteen fifty which is going in the wrong direction because lymphocytes decline during aging. Now, in my data, calories are calorie intake and calorie restriction correspondingly has the strongest net correlative approach on more biomarkers going in the right direction than wrong. In contrast, a relatively higher calorie intake is significantly correlated with higher lymphocytes. So with that in mind, I'm not aiming for my lowest calorie intakes of which is twenty seventy six per day as I'm trying to avoid having lymphocyte levels that look prematurely aged. But, we're considering that lymphocytes for this most recent test were about 1,300 and calories were the same test over test with about a 500 cells per microliter reduction in lymphocytes. That suggests that there's more to the story for just calorie intake potentially impacting my lymphocytes. And I'll have a little bit more on that later on. Or just hit me up in the comments and I can explain what I think may be going on and that's based on following correlations with macro micronutrients with lymphocytes. Average daily protein intake for this test was ninety five grams per day which is about 18% of total calories. What about fat intake? That's what shown here. 89 grams per day which is about 38% of total calories. And if we're interested in the fat breakdown, monounsaturated, omega three, six and saturated, that too is shown here. Next up, carb intake. And that's all we'll see here. That's the carb intake that corresponds to test number one. So total carbs, 275 grams per day but note that total carbs or sorry, net carbs equals total carbs minus fiber. So when subtracting fiber from total carbs, we get a net carbs of about a 197 grams per day. When multiplying that by four calories per gram and dividing it by total calories consumed multiplied by a 100, net carbs were 37% of total calories. Now, within carbs, note that about 20% of fiber is soluble fiber which means that soluble fiber is fermented by gut bacteria into short chain fatty acids including acetate, propionate, and butyrate. In other words, a fraction of fiber is converted into fat. More specifically, about a 153 calories are, which come from fiber are converted into fat. And that's about 7% of total calories where fiber is converted into fat by gut bacteria or it's an estimation. So now, we can add that 7% to my previous fat intake of about 38% and we can see what my net macros were for this test that correspond to the 19 year younger biological age. 45% fat, 37% net carbs and about 18% protein. Now, I can't say if this mix would be best for others. The only way to know is to do the experiment. But in my data, this seems to be a part of the overall approach for help keeping my biological age and the nine biomarkers on pheno age relatively youthful. Now, that's probably only a part of the story. Leanness and some measure of fitness probably contribute to that too. So if you're interested in optimizing your PhenoAge, I'd recommend tracking diet, checking to see how your calorie intake may track with biomarkers whether they improve or not. In my case, they do. Getting lean and these are things that I did maybe they'd be beneficial for others. Alright. Now, also note that within total carbs, I track sugar intake but I don't look at correlations for total sugars because sugars aren't a homogeneous group. You know, they include glucose, galactose, lactose, maltose and so on. In my case, I'm tracking total fructose intake. And that's because as I mentioned earlier, a higher fructose intake in my data, I don't know if it's true for others, is significantly correlated with a lot more biomarkers going in the wrong direction than right. So with that, I'm gonna try it aim for the low end of my fructose intake range. So for this test, average fructose intake. So note that sucrose is half fructose. So when adding that to fructose, I get a total fructose of about sixty three grams per day which seems like a lot but that's close to half of my highest fructose intakes, that correspond to any blood test since 2015 as I have more than 50 tests over that time period. Alright. What about micronutrients? So we start off with the vitamins and it may be hard to see. I'd recommend going full screen if you haven't already. And for anyone starting on this journey that's trying to optimize biomarkers through diet and wants to track diet to do it, I'd recommend at least trying to get at full RDA coverage for all, vitamins and minerals. Now, in terms of what may be optimal above that, that takes an iterative process of trial and error. So test, look at correlations, increase certain nutrients, test again. So by using that process, that's why I've come to settle on where the where these vitamin levels are right now. I do try to push certain, levers here and there as we'll see, for example, with niacin. But the micronutrients are pretty much close to set, at least for now. And with that in mind, many of the micronutrients that are on this list, many of the vitamins and minerals as we'll see in a bit, are purposely much higher than the RDA. In earlier videos, I've highlighted vitamin k where the RDA or what's considered an adequate intake is a 100 around a hundred micrograms per day depending on if you're a man or woman. I think it's 90 for men and a 120 for women. You can see in my case, that's twenty five hundred micrograms per day. And I didn't settle on that arbitrarily. It's by that iterative process test over test over test following correlations with diet to see, you know, how high can I go to that can potentially make a positive impact on biomarkers? Now, for perspective, let's pull up the average vitamin intake for test number eight. And without going through all of the data, you can see that most of it is in the same ballpark. So again, not trying to blow up the system but make small changes. So with that in mind, you can see that there are just mainly two main changes. About 30% lower b twelve, so eight micrograms for for test number one versus 12 and that's mainly because of less sardines and overall fish but I've increased that for the next test. So that should be probably close to around twelve micrograms per day for the next test. And then also, we can see total niacin intake which includes nicotinic acid supplementation was about forty milligrams higher per day which highlights looking at that seven day period prior to testing for nicotinic acid supplementation as that was 200. So if I looked at the full, forty nine day period, it would only be a forty milligram increase per day for niacin which includes nicotinic acid. But by looking at that seven day period beforehand, now we can see the specificity of it was actually higher. My nicotinic acid and niacin levels were actually higher. So in other words, I may be under representing correlations from, NAD with vitamins, minerals and niacin. If I look at the full forty nine forty nine day period because NAD levels again are very sensitive to change pretty quickly in response to diet. Alright. Next up, vitamin levels as shown here. Test number one. And for for perspective, for test number eight. If you've ever wondered what's optimal for biomarkers, I've got a new Patreon tier that includes a ninety five minute video with 40 published references for all of the 27 bio biomarkers shown here. Note that this is not what the reference ranges are. This is what may be optimal for health and longevity based on the published literature. So if you've ever gotten a blood test and you're interested in knowing what may be optimal, check it out. And if you're interested in more of my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where I include daily data for fitness metrics and sleep stage sleep stages, daily dietary data. So rather than waiting two months to show average dietary data, I post daily dietary data on Patreon. You can also get early ad free access. So rather than watching videos on YouTube where there are ads every five minutes, ad free on Patreon. And also, I have a biomarker correlations tier where I look at correlations for foods, macros and micros that helps structure the overall dietary approach with the goal of optimizing biomarkers towards youth and maximal health. And last but not least, if you're interested in optimizing your own blood test results, I do offer consults. So there's a specialty on on Patreon just for that. So check it out. And before you go, we've got a got a whole bunch of discount affiliate links that you can use to test yourself which go to help support the channel including ultalablabtest.com which is where I get the majority of my blood test done. The clearly filtered water filter which I have right now and I'm using that every day. And note that all of these affiliate links I'm currently using or have recently used. I would never have anything on this channel that I'm not a proponent of a 100% and you'll never see me trying to, you know, hawk supplements. Never. That's not what I'm trying to do. I want people to test themselves to figure out their own recipe for optimal health. At home metabolomics, oral microbiome composition, NAD testing with G infinity, epigenetic testing, at home blood testing with Syphox Health which includes ApoB but also GrimAge, green tea, dye tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or Die Trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. Hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.