With the goal of longevity, a major focus is to optimize biomarkers of as many organ systems as possible. With that in mind, resting heart rate and heart rate variability provide information about the heart, but also the nervous system and the adrenal gland, which is what we'll see here. So resting heart rate and heart rate variability are measures that are obviously localized to the heart, but their levels are impacted by the balance between the sympathetic nervous system and the parasympathetic nervous system, more specifically, the vagus nerve. Additionally, sympathetic nerve activation of the adrenal gland leads the adrenal gland to produce norepinephrine, which also impacts resting heart rate and heart rate variability. Alright. So what's optimal for HRV and resting heart rate? And my optimal range is a high heart rate variability with a low resting heart rate. Data that are at least 70 for women and 75 for men and less than 45 beats per minute for resting heart rate. And if you'd like to see those data, I have a new Patreon tier dedicated specifically to what's optimal for biomarkers, including a video a recent video on HRV and resting heart rate. Besides HRV and resting heart rate, this also includes 33 other biomarkers, more than two hours of video content, 52 published references, and note that these aren't the reference ranges. This is what may be optimal based on how each of these biomarkers changes during aging and their associations with all cause mortality risk. So, if you're interested, check it out. In today's video, we'll take a look at what's my data as I have almost two thousand six hundred days of data for HRV and resting heart rate. And then taking that a step further, which factors may optimize long term HRV and resting heart rate? So let's start off with HRV. As we'll see, I've consistently increased it over the past seven years. And that's what we'll see here. This is my average yearly heart rate variability since I started tracking in August 2018 through the August 2025. And, again, that's almost twenty six hundred days of data. And these data are from WHOOP, which I've worn all the whole time for that whole seven plus year period. And I'm not here to say that they're the best. I'm not here to promote that I'm not. I don't have an affiliate link, but this is only what I've worn over that seven plus year span. On the waxes, we've got HRV and that's plotted against years. So when I first started tracking in 2018, average HRV was about forty seven milliseconds. And note that I've never been sedentary at any point during this seven year journey or even before. Then, I was able to start increasing HRV over time up to an average of 56 in 2019, around 58 in 2020. I then had a regression in 2021 at 52, up to 59.3 in 2022, 66, around 66 milliseconds at 2023, and then the data has been getting a bit worse over the past two years with average values of 63 in 2024 and currently in twenty twenty five of 59. As a quick aside, I could say, Well, I had this infection or this went wrong. It doesn't matter. The fact is the best athletes are able to stay on the field and produce at a high level year after year after year and that's what I expect when it comes to longevity. So, for whatever reason, I look at it as a learning experience whether it's infection or something else that may have limited the data and the goal is to try to get better year after year or at worst maintain HRV and not allow it to to suffer its age related decline. Nonetheless, when starting with the data from 2018, we can see that I've consistently increased HRV over that seven year span from forty seven to fifty nine milliseconds. And that's important or potentially important because HRV declines during aging. So, at the worst, I've resisted HRV's age related decline for at least this seven year period. But note, again, as I mentioned, that the data has been going in the wrong direction for the past two years. And I won't get into the details of why that could be, although I've been detailing my progress in terms of HRV investing card rate every day on Patreon for a few years. So if you're interested in that story, the daily story, I'd encourage you to check it out. But note that my data is finally or seems to be back on the right track. For the So, I recently moved to Austin about two months ago and average HRV over that two month period is currently sixty four milliseconds and there, too, there are some hiccups that have knocked me off track and and not intentionally and things that actually that I'll cover in this video that were unexpected that should help the remainder of 2025 be potentially even better than sixty four milliseconds. So we'll have more in that story in a minute. But what about resting heart rate? How has my resting heart rate changed over the past seven years? And that's what we'll see here. So on the y axis now, we've got resting heart rate plotted against years on the x. So here, when I started tracking in 2018, average resting heart rate was 50.9 beats per minute, so around 51. And then together and again, I think we should collectively look at HRV and resting heart rate together. Some people only talk about their HRV or only talk about their resting heart rate. They are complementary measures that add information for one versus the other. So my collective HRV and resting heart rate in 2018 was 47 for HRV and 51 for resting heart rate. Then, in 2019, starting in 2019, I was able to start reducing my resting heart rate to an average of 49 beats per minute to 48.1 beats per minute in 2020, a further reduction of 47 beats per minute in 2021, down to 45 in 2022, around 43 in 2023, and to my lowest level yet for any year, 42.4 in 2024. And then the data has moved a bit in the wrong direction for 2025 at 43.3 beats per minute. But, nonetheless, again, note that I've consistently reduced my resting heart rate starting in 2018 from an average of 51 beats per minute to 43 beats per minute. But note that resting heart rate follows an inverse u shape during aging, such that relatively low resting heart rates are found in youth, they peak around midlife, and then they decline from midlife to around 85 years. So, am I just on the downward trend for resting heart rate and on the second half following middle age? So, is the resting heart rate reduction, is that an indicator of youth or advanced age? So note that HRV declines during aging. So if my resting heart rate decline was an indicator of an an aged phenotype, I'd expect to see a chronically lower heart rate variability. In contrast, over the past seven years, I've increased HRV while reducing resting heart rate, which suggests that this is good news. In terms of what's optimal, though, I do have some room for improvement, at least in terms of HRV. As optimal for men, for HRV, my optimal range is seventy five milliseconds as that's the median value that's found in 20 year olds. So, I've got some work to do to get my current value of sixty four milliseconds, our average current value, up to seventy five at least seventy five. Alright. So, which factors may underlie my improvements or changes to resting heart rate and heart rate variability? So, in this video, I'm going to focus on three. These aren't all of the factors, but these are three of the factors that may explain a significant fraction of both HRV and resting heart rate. And, the first one is skin temperature and that might not be the one that everyone was thinking of. The first one is probably exercise, right? Just train a lot and your HRV will be super high and your resting heart rate will be super low. But, as we'll see, there's more to that story. So skin temperature is actually a recent discovery, one that I'm most excited about and probably one that most people aren't thinking about. So how does skin temperature correlate with HRV? And, that's what we'll see here. So I have data for skin temp going back to January 2022 through, again, at the August 2025 and it's more than thirteen hundred days of data. And, these data are tracked by WOU. So on the y axis, HRV, and that's plotted against skin temperature in degrees Celsius. In terms of Fahrenheit conversion, my range goes from 32 c or 90 f to 35.5 c and about 96 degrees Fahrenheit. Then, we can see that there's a significant inverse correlation between skin temperature with HRV. In other words, when my skin temperature reading is higher, relatively higher, that significantly correlated with a lower HRV going in the wrong direction following its age related trend. On the other hand, on days when my skin temperature is relatively lower, that's significantly correlated with a higher HRV. Alright. What about resting heart rate? So here, we can see the opposite trend. A higher skin temperature is significantly correlated in my data over those thirteen hundred days with a higher resting heart rate. And, again, note that resting heart rate increases from youth up until around midlife. So this is moving would be moving in the wrong direction. At least moving in the wrong direction in correlation with a higher skin temperature. On the other hand, a lower skin temperature would be moving in the right direction as it would be correlated in my data with a lower resting heart rate. So then, this raises the question, which factors impact skin temperature? And there may be many. But one may may be one that most people aren't thinking of and that's mattress type. And I learned this, unfortunately, the hard way. So I mentioned that I moved to Austin about two months ago. So I bought an air mattress as what I thought was a temporary fix as my bed didn't hadn't yet arrived even though I ordered it a week before moving to Austin. So, while on the air mattress, over the fifty three nights that I've been in Austin, average HRV and resting heart rate are sixty four forty three. Now, during that time, too, average skin temp was 34.2 degrees Celsius. Now, my new bed finally arrived and it was this model here and, again, I'm not affiliated or sponsored. This is just my story. This is just what I did. I bought what I thought was a bed that was going to be best or one of the best for cooling or it should be good for helping keep me cool at night. This was before I even knew about this correlation with skin temperature. And as you can see in their title, it says most affordable cooling. I mean, that's either clever clever marketing or maybe it's a real effect. At the time, I wasn't as educated on mattresses and the impact of mattresses on skin temperature as I am now as I've been forced to do a deep dive into that subject. So when the bed first arrived, obviously, I slipped on it and my HRV and resting heart rate looked like I had a workout on the day prior even though it was a rest day. So then I thought, alright, this is a weird thing. Maybe I need to let the bed degas or off gas so I put the bed outside for about a week, in and out for about a week, didn't sleep on it, brought it back in, HRV resting heart rate again looked like after a workout day despite it being a rest day. So then, I put the bed away again, didn't sleep on it, went back to the air mattress, revisited revisited it about a month later and the same phenotype. I mean, I saw heart rate favorabilities and resting heart rate values over those two days that I haven't seen except for, like, infection which is outrageous that a bed can make that big of an impact on my HRV and resting heart rate. So for the four nights that I slept on it over two months, you know, being in Austin, average HRV resting heart rate is fifty forty six which compared to sixty four forty three is a big dent. I don't see a dent on HRV and resting heart rate of fifty forty six. Even on workout days which is when you'd expect to see the biggest impact on these metrics. So again, sleeping on this bed which in hindsight was a memory foam based bed which, again, I didn't know at the time but memory foam beds tend to run hotter than either hybrid or inner spring focused bed or constructed beds. So, with that in mind, I've bought I purchased a new bed and I'm still waiting on that. It should arrive next week. I'm gonna let it off gas for about a week and then I'm going to have to repeat this cycle of is the bed allowing for maximal cooling and not helping to raise my skin temperature. So, skin temperature on those four nights of sleeping on the new bed was higher, 34.8. And when using a two sample t test to compare these two groups of data, the four nights on the new bed versus the fifty three nights on the air bed, they are significantly different. So if you're struggling with HRV and and or resting heart rate, your mattress may have something to do with it and, in hindsight, going back to my HRV resting heart rate story, I bought a memory foam mattress topper in May 2024 and, coincidentally, in looking back in hindsight, that's when my HRV and resting heart rate started to make, moves in the wrong direction for the remainder of twenty twenty four and early into 2025. Alright. So, what other factors impact HRV and resting heart rate? Body weight is another factor that may impact both HRV and resting heart rate. And we'll start off with the data for body weight versus HRV as shown there. And this is where I have the most data as I have tracked body weight data on all days of HRV and resting heart rate tracking. So almost twenty six hundred days going back from August 2018 to 2025. On the y axis, we've got HRV, and that's plotted against body weight on the x. Here, we can see a significant inverse correlation. In other words, when body weight has been higher, that's significantly correlated with lower HRV. And, when body weight has been on the lower side, that's significantly correlated with a lower HRV. Now, my current body weight is about a hundred and forty one pounds so that will put me somewhere towards the lower end of this correlation. In other words, towards the higher end of HRV. Now, I could go lower for body weight but in my experience, going lower than one forty or one forty one I'm currently five foot seven that starts to mess with in workout performance and I'm not trying to lose strength or muscle mass. The goal is to optimize that while also optimizing HRV and resting heart rate. Alright. What's the correlation for body weight with resting heart rate? That's what we'll see here. Now, we've got a significant positive correlation and we can see that that correlation coefficient is 0.74. Anything greater than 0.7 is considered a strong correlation. So, in this case, a relatively higher body weight is significantly correlated with a higher resting heart rate and, conversely, a lower body weight is significantly correlated with lower resting heart rates at least in my data. In terms of my current body weight, you can see that that put me somewhere there towards the lower end of a resting heart rate closer to around forty three, forty two. So, from both of these data, from both of these correlations, we can see that a lower body weight is significantly correlated with a higher HRV and a lower resting heart rate. Alright. So then, the most obvious one is physical activity. How might that impact or what are the correlation show for HRV and resting heart rate? So, in terms of physical activity, I'm gonna show data for the average daily heart rate. That's a full day average heart rate. So, in contrast with steps, you could take a thousand steps on flat ground or a thousand steps up a hill. One of those is going to have a higher heart rate as a response, the one going up the hill. So I find that tracking the average daily heart rate is more informative than tracking steps or other measures of physical activity. You know, I could track workouts, but I find that the average daily heart rate incorporates all of that. On the other hand, the average daily heart rate doesn't just include activity or x and or exercise, emotional stress, periods of extreme emotional stress, whether it's work or relationships, can also increase the average daily heart rate, sympathetic nerve activation. So most of this story is exercise driven, but emotional stress can also drive some of this this effect. So, in terms of the data, that's what we'll see here. On the waxes, we've got next day heart rate variability plotted against the previous day average daily heart rate. And, for this, I have about two thousand days of data going back from March 2020 through August 2025. In terms of the correlation, we can see that there is a significant inverse correlation. In other words, when the average daily heart rate is higher, that's that's significantly correlated with a lower next day heart rate variability which shouldn't be much of a surprise. If we do a hard workout, it's reasonable to expect that HRV should be lower than it was on the prior day. Alright. What about the correlation with resting heart rate? So over the same time period from March 2020 through August 2025, now we can see a significant positive correlation. And, again, another strong correlation is that correlation coefficient is greater than 0.75. So here too, the higher the average daily heart rate, the worse the next day resting heart rate. And, again, there too, it shouldn't be a surprise. Hard workout should probably lead to a worse resting heart rate on the next day. Now, I'm not at all suggesting that we remove workouts in order to improve long term HRV and resting heart rate. On the other hand, it suggests that balancing active versus less active days is important for optimizing HRV and resting heart rate. So what does that look like? So here's a one week plot. Actually, this is the August for my average daily heart rate. Now, on one of those days, so starting on the third day, I'll work backtrack to the first two days in a minute. But on that third day, I included fifteen minutes of HIIT, high intensity interval training on the bike outside. And then, on the next day, I did my standard sixty minute workout. So, this is a full body compound movement focused workout. It also includes calisthenics, mobility, flexibility, balance, everything. Everything aimed at full body, functional and strength optimization. And then, note that on the two subsequent days, I purposely titrated the average daily heart rate lower from 56 to 54 and then 52 beats per minute. As in my experience, if I don't allow my average daily heart rate to come down, that won't allow HRV to go back to its relatively high level and resting heart rate to go down to its relatively low level. So I could just train through everything and be chronically overtrained not just in the gym or in the workouts but also based on these metrics of stress, cardiovascular and adrenal function, HRV and resting heart rate. So after that second day, HRV and resting heart rate were close to where they usually are or better. So then I included another sixty minute workout. And then after that sixty minute workout, then that takes us into the next two days where I would titrate activity lower. So 57 versus say 53, 54 beats per minute. And this is the approach that I've used for a very long time. I let HRV and resting heart rate dictate intensity, duration, and frequency of my workouts with the goal of optimizing not just long term fitness and health, but also HRV and resting heart rate. Alright. So now we can put the story all together by asking the question, what percentage of HRV and resting heart rate can be collectively explained by these three variables, skin temp, body weight, and the average daily heart rate. Let's start off with the data for resting heart rate, which is what we'll see here. So, this is a multivariate linear regression model where we've got the collective association between those three variables. Again, skin temp, body weight, and the average daily heart rate against resting heart rate. And, collectively, we can see that this is a significant association. These three variables are collectively associated with resting heart rate as the significance f is far below a p value of less than 0.05. You can see it's six times 10 to the negative two seven 279 and this is a very strong, association. In terms of the adjusted r squared, this is the proportion of resting heart rate that can be explained by just these three variables. It's point six three or 63%. In other words, 63% of the variability inherent in resting heart rate can be explained by just these three factors. So, that's on the one hand. On the other hand, that means that there's 37% that I still haven't yet discovered and my goal is to have it completely quantified where we've got this down to a science. If you give me, say, five variables, maybe I could predict your resting heart rate with 80% or greater accuracy. Alright. What about heart rate variability? So, same setup, those three variables, skin temp, body weight, and the ADHR average daily heart rate and their collective association here too is significantly correlated sorry, significantly associated with heart rate variability. In terms of the proportion of variability explained by these three factors for HRV, it's lower but still pretty good at point three six or 36%. So, together, these three factors explain 63% of resting heart rate and 30 36% of the variability in HRV. Alright, that's all for now. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where I offer blood test consults that also include optimizing HRV and resting heart rate. I also post at least twice a day in four other Patreon tiers. We've also got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself that help support the channel, including ulta lab test dot com, right, which is where I get the majority of my blood tests done, the Clearly Filtered Water Filter, which I use every day, At Home Metabolomics, I've got 19 tests so far for that, oral microbiome composition, almost 19 tests for that. Working my way up to that too. NAD testing with GINFINITI, epigenetic testing with true diagnostic, Cyclox Health, which has the best epigenetic clock amongst epigenetic clocks, GrimAge, green tea, which I drink every day, diet tracking with chronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch including data is my north star, figuring stuff out is my drug, which is what I've got on here, and the conquer aging or diet trying logo as shown there. Link in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.