I've been so impressed with sort of the field of mitophagy and these mitophagy activating compounds, that I'm really kind of keeping my eye on things like urolithin a, and, like, Nicola Venini's group has shown that it's was, sufficient to rejuvenate, old hematopoietic stem cells. You know, other people have shown that nicotinamide riboside has worked with, at least in mice. Right? So we're not talking humans, we're talking mice that it's benefited dysfunctional and aged immune cells. So I think those are some things that maybe you're taking a cell and you're supplementing it with these gerit therapeutics that they aren't getting rid of, say, pathogenic cells like senolytics are, but they're improving, you know, sort of the existing cells function. So would that be then pomegranates and walnuts for the alleged tenants converted into your life? And, a, hopefully, by the gut, or or would you just supplement? I mean, I don't know. What what what would you think would be the best approach? Man, I hit pomegranate, so I'd have to supplement. You know? Alright. Yeah. It's probably it's probably the best measurable amount. Right? Because you don't you know that you're at least getting this guaranteed amount. And you could likely say, well, oh, I'm also, you know, to get that benefit of your life in a, I'm not spiking my glucose levels with a bunch of fruit either. Yeah. And it also gets the dose. Like, how how much can you get enough from the food, or do you need that super physiological dose? And then is is the net effect systemically gonna be beneficial? Right? Do you get some rejuvenation of mitochondria, but then it's such a super physiological dose. You've got xenobiotic metabolism in the liver. It just goes crazy. And now it's like Yeah. Make one thing better and crush a few others. Right? I I think, you know, there's there's the argument on one side of the passive thing is I'll eat a pomegranate. The other side is I'm gonna supplement with x amount, and somewhere in the middle lies the truth of the therapeutic window, right, of, like, I I'm not gonna get any benefit until I meet eat x amount of pomegranates, or I'm maxing out the benefit, and now I'm getting into the problem area too much.