When we eat fatty fish or fish oil, we get an initial plasma rise for the fish oil fatty acids, EPA and DHA, which can then be incorporated into red blood cell membranes. When that happens, this is known as the omega three index, which measures the percentage of EPA and DHA in red blood cell membranes. Now the omega three index is potentially important because it's associated with cardiovascular disease related outcomes. Such that when the omega three index is less than 4%, that's associated with a high risk for CBD related outcomes. And on the other hand, when the omega three index is greater than eight percent, that's associated with a lower risk for CBD related outcomes. Now, others have covered the omega three index in this space so I won't go into it in this video. But one what I wanna highlight is that there are biomarkers of the omega three index. So we don't have to measure the omega three index. There are other biomarkers that we can use to evaluate its status. And one of those biomarkers are levels of these two phosphatidylcholines, thirty six five, which is a phosphatidylcholine that has 36 carbons and five double bonds, and another phosphatidylcholine that has 38 carbons and six double bonds or thirty eight six. And these two phosphatidylcholines are biomarkers of the omega three index. And before jumping into that data, first, let's define what phosphatidylcholines actually are because this may be a new concept for many people. So phosphatidylcholines are structurally similar to di and triglycerides as they have a glycerol backbone and then they have two fatty acids connected at two of the positions of the glycerol backbone. So that would make them structurally similar to a diglyceride as a diglyceride has also two fatty acids connected to the glycerol backbone. Now where it differs from a triglyceride which would have three fatty acids on the glycerol backbone, phosphatidylcholines have a phosphatidylcholine head group. So phosphatidylcholines again have two fatty acids and a phosphatidylcholine head group. And that's what we'll see here. So starting off with the phosphatidylcholine that has 36 carbons and five double bonds or p c thirty six five, We can see first the glycerol backbone and then in the first fatty acid position, it's fatty acid sixteen zero. That's a fatty acid, saturated fatty acid that has 16 carbons and no double bonds. This is palmitate or palmitic acid. In the second position, it has a fatty acid with 20 carbons and five double bonds. And this is the fish oil fatty acid, EPA. So p c thirty six five at one of its fatty acid positions has EPA or contains EPA. And in the third position, as I mentioned, you can see the PC or phosphatidylcholine head group. Or what about PC thirty eight six, 38 carbon six double bonds? Here we can see in the first position, it has the same saturated fatty acid palmitate. In the second position, it has a fatty acid with 22 carbons and six double bonds, and this is DHA. So these two phosphatidylcholine metabolites, p c thirty six five and thirty eight six, contain EPA and DHA, respectively. Now I mentioned that these two phosphatidylcholines are biomarkers of the omega three index, and it's not just because they contain EPA and DHA. There's a study that looked at their direct correlation, which is what we can see here. So on the y axis, we've got the sum in plasma for the levels of those two phosphatidylcholine metabolites thirty six five and thirty eight six. And that's plotted against the omega three index. Again, this is the percentage of EPA and DHA in red blood cell membranes. So one is a plasma measure and another is a measure of the concentration or the content of these two fish oil fatty acids in the membranes. In terms of the correlation, we can see that there and this is a strong correlation as that correlation coefficient is greater than 0.7. Anything greater than 0.7 is considered a strong correlation. And it's a significant correlation as that p value is far below a significant threshold of less than 0.05. Alright. So then the next obvious question to ask is, when is the sum of these two phosphatidylcholines associated with an omega three index greater than 8%? As the goal would be to reduce risk for cardiovascular disease outcomes for those that may wanna measure levels of these two phosphatidylcholine metabolites. So based on extrapolation of the data here, we can see that when the sum of these two phosphatidylcholines is greater than about 60 micromolar, that's correlated with an omega three index greater than 8%. So So in terms of what's optimal, that would be my target value having levels of these two phosphatidylcholine greater than 60 micromolar consistently for every test with the goal of reducing cardiovascular disease outcome related risk. Now this isn't just a health and longevity news channel. I'm also focused on health and longevity potentially optimization. So with that in mind, what's my data? So to find out, I've been using at home metabolomics, which includes levels of these two phosphatidylcholine metabolites, but also more than 600 other metabolites. And if you wanna use this kit yourself, which I've covered in many videos on the channel, discount link in the video's description. Alright. So on to my data. And we're we're gonna see the sum of these two phosphatidylcholines from 2023 when I first started tracking to 2025, and I had 19 tests over that about three year period, which is what we'll see here. On the y axis, we've got the sum of those two phosphatidylcholines plotted against time. Now over the first five tests in 2023, average levels of these two phosphatidylcholines was 98 micromolar. In 2024, over nine tests, average was 89 micromolar. And in 2025, after the first five tests, 80 micromolar. So if you remember, what's optimal for the sum of these two phosphatidylcholine at least based on their correlation with the omega three index, it's greater than 60 micromolar. So for almost all of these tests and when looking at year to year change, we can give that a check mark as I've consistently been greater than 60 micromolar for almost all tests except for one. But note that the trend line is going in the wrong direction and if I'm not trying to get better at worst, I'll stay stay the same and potentially get worse. So I wanna know what may be underlying keeping levels of these two phosphatidylcholines relatively high, resisting their age related change. So again, so that I can potentially reduce CBD related risk CBD outcome related risk. So with that in mind, which factors are correlated with higher levels of these two phosphatidylcholines? So first and the most obvious would be fish intake. Since 2015, every day I've eaten sardines, at least one can of sardines. So that would be the most obvious place to start. And in terms of which brand that I use, it's shown there. It's the Crown Prince sardines skinless and boneless in olive oil. I drained the olive oil before, eating the sardines though. Alright. So on to the data. On the y axis, we've got the sum of those two phosphatidylcholines plotted against my average daily sardine intake. And for those who may wonder how I'm able to calculate correlations, I would because I've weighed all of my food since 2015 and entered that data into a diet tracking app, Cronometer. And if you wanna use Cronometer yourself, there's a discount link in the video description. I then pull the Cronometer data into a spreadsheet. And then every blood test has a corresponding average dietary intake. So with for example, if there are fifty days in between tests, because I'm tracking diet in conjunction with blood and other biomarkers, I can take the average of those fifty days and then it lines up with the latter blood test. And with enough blood tests or other biomarkers, I can look at correlations which is what we what we can see here. So there is a positive correlation in my data for sardine intake with higher levels of these two phosphatidylcholines. But note the p value is outside of that significance threshold of less than 0.05. So technically and surprisingly, sardine intake and this is where I get the majority of my fish oil fatty acids from. For almost no test, maybe one test out of 60 plus tests since 2015, have I supplemented with fish oil. And salmon has made very rare appearances in my diet over the past ten years. It's almost exclusively from sardines. So with that in mind and looking at these data, this would suggest that sardine intake is not significantly correlated with levels of these two phosphatidylcholines that are biomarkers of the omega three index, which then raises a question, what is significantly correlated with the sum of these two phosphatidylcholines? So to address that, I looked at correlations for 53 foods versus the sum of these two phosphatidylcholines. And first, we'll start off with foods that were positively correlated. In other words, higher levels of the food are correlated with higher levels of the sum of these two phosphatidylcholines. And I have 19 tests. Again, I have 19 tests over that about three year period. So that's what we'll see here. And starting off with sardines, just to put it into perspective, I included sardines so that we can see where it ranks compared to other foods. Atop the list though, we can see that it's not sardines and three other foods that meet that statistical significance threshold of less than 0.05, cloves, corn, and bananas. So this these data suggest that when my intake of these three foods is relatively higher, that's significantly correlated for whatever reason with higher levels of these two, phosphatidylcholine that are biomarkers of the omega three index. And if you remember earlier, I mentioned that when we eat fish, fatty fish or fish oil, that can lead to an initial rise for EPA and DHA, but that's only one half of the equation. The other half of the equation is EPA and DHA can be degraded and metabolized in other metabolic pathways. So sure, we can increase intake but if degradation is also high, we won't see a relatively high omega three index and that there are other foods that are more strongly correlated relative to sardines. Again, the major source of my fish oil fatty acids. It suggests that maybe cloves, corn, and banana may be involved in mechanisms that help keep levels of these two phosphatidylcholines high. But this is only half of the story. What about foods that are negatively correlated with the sum of these two phosphatidylcholines? A given biomarker may be impacted not just by foods or nutrients that can increase it but also foods or nutrients that may decrease it. So I also included the top portion of that list here using 0.13 which is the sick, significance threshold for sardines. And if you wanna see the full correlation list, that's in the correlations tier on Patreon. Atop the list, we can see that there are two foods that been a statistical significance threshold less than 0.05, tomato and eggs. And these data suggest that when tomato and eggs are on the higher side of my intake range, that significantly correlated with lower levels of these two phosphatidylcholines. Again, for whatever reason, I don't know what mechanism that they would be involved in. Alright. So what do I then do with this information? I've got the top I've got foods that are associated with higher levels of these two phosphatidylcholines and foods that are correlated with lower levels. So for the most recent test, which I took in mid September, I aimed for higher levels of cloves and corn. And if correlation e equals causation and if these foods are involved in mechanisms that help keep levels of these phosphatidylcholines high, keeping them towards the higher end of my range should help keep these metabolites relatively high. On the other hand, I didn't follow the correlation with banana as I tried to reduce my fructose intake to try to push RDW down based on a correlation for total fructose with RDW. Also note that sardines were on the lower side of my range. Again, I haven't taken them out, but on the lower side of my range. So we'll have to see if following two correlations and not following two correlations that are positively correlated with these metabolites can make a dent or make a positive impact on levels of these fish oil fatty acid containing phosphatidylcholines. On the other hand, for the foods that were negatively correlated with the sum of these two phosphatidylcholines, I also didn't follow the tomato correlation. As tomatoes are significantly phosphatidylcholines. But I did follow the correlation with eggs as I kept that on the lower side of my range. So collectively, I followed three correlations and I didn't follow three correlations. In terms of how the data will look for test number 20, we'll have to wait about a month because that's how long it takes for the metabolomic data to arrive. If you've ever wondered what's optimal for biomarkers, well, I have a new Patreon tier dedicated specifically to that. It currently includes the 35 biomarkers here with more than two hours of video content, 52 published references. And this these aren't the reference ranges. This is what may be optimal for each of these biomarkers based on how they change during aging and or their associations with all cause mortality risk in the largest published studies that I can find. So if you're interested in that, check it out. And if you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon, where I post at least twice per day in five Patreon tiers. We've also got discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself that help support the channel, including ultalabtest.com, which is where I get the majority of my blood test done, the Clearly Filtered Water Filter, which I use every day, at home metabolomics, which I mentioned in the video, oral microbiome composition, NAD testing with Genfinity, epigenetic testing with TrueDiagnostic, at home blood testing with Siphox Health, which includes the best epigenetic clock of epigenetic clocks, GrimAge, green tea, which I drink every day, diet tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch, including data is my north star, figuring stuff out is my drug, which I've got on here, and the conquer agent or diet trying logo as shown there. So if you're interested in any of that, link in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.