Hey, everyone. Today's guest is channel regular, Chris Manloomis. This is episode seven of our podcast series. So with that, welcome, Chris. And, let's get into the outline. What do we have for today? Great. So, thanks for having me on again, Michael. So, today we're gonna talk about, for topics. We're gonna cover, throw down with Simlan, Brian Johnson, and myself, and, with some helpful context and commentary from yourself to put it all in perspective for us. And then at the end, I'll be talking about an opportunity for everyone as I start up the twenty twenty six unaging challenge, following up on the twenty twenty five unaging challenge that's just wrapping up this year, and give people an opportunity to put into effect the habits that will give them the longest life possible. Fantastic. Alright. So we start with that head to head matchup that you've lined up on on your blog. You've seen Brian? Yes. So, there's a lot of gritty stuff in here. So I've, so it started out with Brian Johnson saying I have the best biomarkers in the world. None can match them living nor dead. And, Brian is currently 48 years old and Seam Land responded with, well, that's ridiculous. I mean, biomarkers change as you age and no one has, well, virtually no one has the biomarkers of someone who's a 20 year older, but I'm 31 and I'll compare my biomarkers to yours, Brian Johnson. It did so. And about 80 or 90%, if I remember right, if his biomarkers were better. But the comment is is that same land is about 17, 20, almost twenty years younger than Brian Johnson. So yes, his biomarkers are better. So I'm here to provide context and a different benchmark for that as someone who's 55 and in the straight mark up, well, let's see how I compare to Brian Johnson and Seam Land. So we're gonna group these by areas and I'm looking forward to having some comment for you on, whether we've hit the mark, overshot the mark, or whether we need to improve things. So the first thing to do is just sort of like the raw strength comparison. The grip strength is one that's, oftentimes considered to be, one of the best indicators of overall health, especially even in old people. Sometimes as opposed to having them actually lift a bunch of weights, they'll just have, older subjects come in and compare their grip strength because it's an indicator not only of the muscular strength of your hand, but also because of the vein requirements in order to be able to use your hand effectively can be a very strong indicator of your cardiovascular fitness as well. And for this one, the three of us are all in a quite tight range. I'm slightly stronger than Brian Johnson with my one hand, grip strength of, 60 kilograms. I can't remember the units on this. Sim is stronger than both of us, but he trains quite a bit more and has a good twenty years on us. For the bench press, this has always been a challenge for me. My bench press is not where I wanted to be at merely 98 estimated one rep max. And both Brian and Sim are quite a bit higher than this. Sim's got a very impressive 136 kilogram bench, press. I'm working on it. But for then for the squat, one rep max. For that one, Brian Johnson's about a hundred fifteen. It doesn't seem to be part of his daily exercise. Seems at about a 160 grams for his one rep max. And it doesn't seem like an exercise for him as well that's part of his base routine. For me, this is an everyday thing. Well, actually, every other week, I alternate between squats and deadlifts. But a 160 kilograms estimated one rep max. Very comfortable with it. These lifts aren't increasing probably for any of the three of us at this point. It's mostly maintenance once you've been training for five more than five years. But, I'm continuing to maintain at this level, and I'm quite happy with that. Quick notes, Chris. Yep. Alright. So I'm glad you mentioned that, you know, it's kind of an unfair comparison to have Seem in there, you know, or against Seem. My first thought is, first of all, he's a beast, which in in the most, you know, respectful way possible, lean, fit, dedicated to training his whole life. So it's not a fair comparison because, you know, like you said, he's 17 at least seventeen years younger than Brian and, you know, twenty four years younger than you. So the other thing is that but then he's the positive control. Right? Potentially and all of his biomarkers aren't perfect, but he's got pretty good biomarkers when, you know, from what I've seen. The others so there are two other things too. So one is single time point measurements, which are important. But, you know, when we're talking about aging rate, and I think a lot of people lose sight of this is they'll only measure like once. You know, maybe once a year, once every couple of years, whenever, infrequently. Right? So is one measurement representative of a full year average? Like, you know, for the sports players, if I'm a baseball player and I hit four home runs in one day and then no home runs the rest of the year, am I the world's best baseball player or maybe just on that day. Right? So at some point, we've gotta, as a field, get to the you know, and I even thought about just showing recording all of my workouts. Right? So people can see, oh, look, he did 13 pull ups on this day in 2018. Is he still doing 13 pull ups or is he doing 13 pull ups every workout or is this just peak? And then what does the rest of the year look like? Right? It's kind of that, you know, bodybuilder in season, out of season mindset. Like, are you lean and fit all year round or are you muscle beast? You know, it's what I call, muscle obesity. Right? Where they're gigantic and big and then they lean down. Right? So alright. That's another side of it. And then also so you guys differ in terms of body weight. So normalizing to body weight, you know, strength per unit mass probably has some value if you're really gonna do a head to head matchup because I think what's your, what's your body weight? I'm, seventy one kilograms. Yeah. I think Seem is in the same ballpark, but Brian's a bit smaller than that. Maybe five KGs, but still in the same ballpark. But normalize it to strength to normalize the body, strength to normalize the body mass could be important. Actually, I have one more one more thought. So the other thing too is I believe all of you guys, you know, these are your one RMs. Actually, I have two more thoughts. My gosh. The the spigot Keep going. Keep going. The spigot that is my mind. Right? So so bench press, you know, there's gotta be standardized limits because I don't know if you've ever seen, like, some of these people they'll post their, TikToks. And, you know, the official Olympic lift is, you know, the bar's gotta touch the chest, but then sometimes the person will arch their back tremendously, so they're moving the bar this much. But that's an official bench press. Right? So, you know, some of the bench press is hard to, you know, mock, but, you know, but for something like a squat, someone doing a quarter rep versus a half rep versus ass de grass. You know what I'm saying? So seeing it can be beneficial there. And then the other thing I think to note, the last this is my last, my last thought on this one. Grip strength is pretty easy. You know, it's you can't mess that one up, but and grip strength is I'd argue grip strength may be the most important biomarker on this, on this short list, not of all biomarkers when it comes to strength and function. As you know, is the training for longevity, is it bench press? I mean, if you bench press, what all you're gonna be good at is pushing stuff away from your body. And if you do a squat, all you're gonna be good at is basically, you know, sitting. I mean, you're lowering the weight to a seated position. Right? What about you could make the argument, alright, picking stuff up stuff up off off the floor, maybe a squat would help. Right? But and I'm on it with these compound movements. They're part of my approach too. You know, bench press, dead lift. But, you know, flexibility, You know, being able to pick something up from the floor. Being able to do a lunge, split squat. You know, things that are more functional movement based where flexibility and strength through a full range of motion. You know, so someone's got an outrageously high one arm squat but then can't touch their toes. And I'm not I'm not saying I know your flexibility isn't the greatest, but I'm not trying to pinpoint you. I mean, I think this is a broader so for me, the long the training for longevity isn't just about peak strength, maintaining peak strength, but also the ability to do functional movements. And I don't know how we would how we would measure that. Do we have some yoga or Pilates instructor come in and test this all? So anyway, just something to think about. Well, one of the interesting things, actually, I mean, it it's funny because that exact example you give of being able to touch your toes, but until I got my squat into proper form, it was doing full reps down to below the crease, I wasn't able to touch my toes. But now that I've got full range of motion in my squats, now that flexibility has come. So in some ways these are are brought together. My latest challenge is not on this list, because not many people are trying to do it. I'm trying to work on doing a muscle up. I just started about two months ago. So muscle up is where you you pull yourself up to the bar and then continue beyond that to do a dip to get fully above the bar. It's a mixture of a lot of technique, but the real thing is that there's a whole range of muscle in there that you never exercise doing bench press or lat presses or chin ups in the gym. So it requires you not only to be able to get to this motion, which I can do around 10 or 10 or 14 chin ups, but then from there to get from that to moving down to this level, to getting to where you're here is an exercise that's really never done in normal exercise unless you're a gymnast or something. So in some ways, it's very challenging for me despite being able to 160 rep, do fourteen, ten or 12 or 14 chin ups, I'm starting at zero trying to do a muscle up because it's a different range that I've never practiced before. But I'm finding that doing that is giving me a lot more ab, abdominal exercise and other things and a lot more functional range that I never had to touch before. So it is definitely interesting that it like can be quite different for them. But I'm still the feeling that basically you need to get the big stuff. And I generally feel that the physical exercise is more important than worrying about the flexibility. Although to the point though, I say that and yet I do my, Tabata kind of exercise where I'm doing thirty seconds of high intensity, actually twenty seconds of high intensity exercise, but I'm always doing something very different for that, like jumping jacks or mountain climbers or burpees or something, which is then giving me that kind of a full body thing. At one point as, I got around 50 or so, I started to get what they call in Japan, 50 year old shoulder, which is to say, because you haven't been doing this motion very much, your shoulder now has kind of lost some, range of motion and, went through some exercises. I have a post on it in my blog if you wanna hear more about it or if this is something that's useful for you. But it was a series of just exercises of kind to bring that back into it and then did that for a period of a month or two, and then it just vanished and I've been fine since. But I've continued to do those kind of, functional mo movements, if you will, even though it's only four minutes. The Tabata workout is only four minutes long, two or three times a week. And that's had a huge difference in what I feel in my ability just to do whatever's required of me so I can apply the strength that I have with my grip strength and my bench press and other things. Yeah. Nice. So just to just to push back on the flexibility. I'm not saying that we all need to be, you know, super Uber flexible. It's just, you know, flexible for functional activity of daily living, you know, things. So and within that too. And so I get what you're saying that the burpees and squats and deadlifts, you're gonna have greater flexibility than as if you never did that. But even even training those movements, like, you know, I've seen it where I've trained, you know, I worked as a fitness trainer, you know, twenty years ago. And I've trained a 75 year old couple and they couldn't bend. I mean, their their range of motion to bend getting close to the floor was so terrible that I can't and getting out of bed make that makes getting out of bed hard. Forget picking stuff up off the floor. You know? So, I'm not saying to train like an old person, but at the same point, you know, if we're not trying to take the my perspective is if we're if we're not trying to, you know, optimize strength through a full range of motion for functional stuff in addition to the big stuff, we're short changing it. So also too, the muscle up is great, but there too, you know, it's like, I wanna do part of me has that same mindset. I wanna do these quote unquote fun, fancy things, but then I'm like, what do I care that I can do? And you know, so even, even there too, it's like the technique of it, you know, you do the pull ups. So some people will do the pull up and then they kind of push their way up to do that. You know? But then there are the gymnast types that it's one consecutive movement and it's they're just like they're just they're just like bouncing. It's so fluid. But functionally, I don't see the value. Like, so I I don't I don't spend the time, you know, to do even though I should say, as I'm doing my pull ups, and I don't know, maybe this is just, you know, we're born from the same litter, the same generational litter, and we have a similar mindset for this. But lately, when I've been doing my my pull ups, you know, when considering that the muscle up is a real muscle up, a full muscle up is one consecutive movement, not the squirm up. Yep. As I'm doing that first pull up, I'm thinking about, all right, I'm gonna do this. So I don't know. If I get there by accident, I get there. But if not, I'm content to just do, you know, high quality reps. Yeah. No, you're totally right. The muscle up is gonna help me for nothing except for, being able to do a muscle up. It's kind of bragging right. So, yeah, I don't think it's functional, but, it's fun. Yeah. At some point at some point, you know, as I mentioned earlier, I think if peep if we're gonna really compare strength and VO two max and all this stuff, people have to post videos, not just one video, but like week after week, just like we can watch the baseball players every day and then assess this was the better player versus this one over a full year. You know, I think that's the and that's kind of my general comment for the head to head matchup is, you know, I wanna see more than just one test. I wanna see test, the test, the test, Consistency over time. Well, let's, let's keep working through the one test that we've got for now. I can provide some context on the other measurements and things, which I'll add in. So then now we start to get into some more, well, actually, this one started actually coming to the story of why I'm doing lifting or some of the health stuff that I'm doing at all when we talk about body composition. So the first one, I probably should have written this out is bone, mineral density. So BMD, and this is grams per centimeter squared. And I come in in like last place on this one and far last. And this actually is a great story for me because I, I had a DEXA scan done, which you've done as well, where they do a scan and tell you what your body fat is, your muscle is, and also your bone density is. And when I did this, the answer was my bone density was poor. It was on borderline, I think that would have been around 19 when I was on 45 years old. And the conclusion at that time is, okay, 45 year old person, you are already on borderline osteopenia, which is the one step above osteoporosis where you need to be careful you don't break a hip or a bone or something. And at 45, that's too early to be in that situation. I was there with my brother and he got flying grades on it. His bone density was fine. And the reason is is he'd always been lifting weights and I never had. So, I did the research. I mean, it wasn't just like, okay. He lifts weight. I don't, therefore, I will. And lifting weights is one of the key determinants of what your bone mass density is, bone mineral density is. So I then changed from that, and that's when I started lifting weights regularly every week. So I'm now, no longer osteopenic borderline. I'm now just below around 40 percentile or so, but well within the green range. I think both Sim and Brian Johnson had been lifting from a younger age. Probably Sim had been doing the lifting, but Brian Johnson also, was significantly larger before he decided to become healthy. He was quite overweight. And that is one of the things that carrying the extra weight is another way that you can have higher bone density. I've always been fairly lean. So while I'm, distant third on this one, I'm happy to be third because I'm at least within the green zone on this one, which wasn't where I was when I started. Do you remember, Chris, do you remember what your bone BMD was at 45 versus now the actual number? No. I don't remember what that one was. It was, significantly less. This is like even like if they just look at age irrelevant. So it actually increased significantly as I added in free weights and other things and serious gym time? So for me, that's a more important number knowing that you've not only resisted, you know, age related decline, or you could say, I don't wanna say sedentary cause, but you know, your lack of strength training or less strength training then that you've reversed that because BMD declines during aging. For me that you've resisted that and actually improved it over the past ten years when it should be getting worse is potentially more valuable than people who have already high. We don't know if they started off higher and they've already come down. Right? I mean, and probably not. But, you know, so I wouldn't I wouldn't look at this as, you know, they're killing me in BNB. It's the other side of it is you've resisted age related change. That's a win. In your own, you know, that that that's kind of the reason I don't, you know, and I know I mentioned this where I where I was like, I don't care about head to head matchups against other people. It's me against me against aging. So pardon me. I'm I'm looking this up. Of course, I have all of this online, so I can, let's see. So I can find out what it was at the very first one. It would have been 2004 no. It would have been, yeah, 2014. And I'm not let's see here. We'll just go through this, and let me just take a look. It was, 1.128 at the time. So not that much, less, but the different the real important thing is that is now eleven years ago, and my net bone mass density is much higher. You can see it also when you look at the picture of the actual DEXA scan because they give you sort of like a here's your density through your body. And I looked ghostly from the waist up, Like my upper body had significantly lower bone mass density to it. And now I've evened that up and overall increased it on average. So I'm quite proud of it. As I said, it's pulled me off of what was, borderline. And like a few, hundreds of a point on this made quite a bit of a difference. So the right direction. Yeah. And even if it was stable over eleven years, also a win, you know? So yeah. It doesn't have to be the highest of the high. It it you know, you don't have to have a 400 pound bench press, but are you resisting age related change and even making a small improvement? That's a win. Yeah. On the on the visceral fat, going on to the next one here as well. Seema has trained on this one quite specifically and and deliberately. And as you say, he's a bit of a beast. He's in the gym, longer than I would consider to be healthy, actually longer than he would consider to be healthy by his own book. At the same time, he's 31 years old, it's fine. He's not going to fall over at this point, especially given all the other things that he does. But I have a little bit less, visceral fat than Brian Johnson despite having a few years on him. So then moving on to go ahead. Wait. Going going back real quick. So I think this is an important point because most people, even if they're focused on so when you think about the eat real food and exercise approach, which is great, that'll get most people to 85, 90, maybe even 95, and a few people beyond that. This is the silent, you know, aging right here. BMD, visceral fat, muscle mass. You know, the body weight may stay the same, but the composition body composition changes. Less less muscle mass, higher fat and visceral fat, less bone density. So I I see this as essential in the longevity testing hierarchy. Top tier, DEXA, you know, some measure, consistent measure of body composition. And visceral fat may not seem like a big deal. You know, you just lower overall body fat. You should have low visceral fat. But at least in rats, when you remove visceral fat, they live longer. And it's like 20% longer. So visceral fat's a big one. Now in terms of the absolute numbers for you guys, and again, you know, seeing being 17 to 24 years younger is fantastic, you know, fantastic as visceral fat and he purposely stays lean. Your data and Brian's data is far from terrible. I mean, average values in 20 year olds is about where your data is. Both of your data is half half a pound. So 200 and so 200 or so grams. The other side of that though, is, is having 200 grams of visceral fat worse than seem only having a quarter kg, you know, a 100 grams. And one way to assess that is, you know, so visceral fat is gonna impact things like, liver health. So if you have a lot of visceral fat around your liver, fatty liver, you're gonna have higher triglycerides, worse metabolic health, including glucose and HbA1c. So if at yours and Brian's level for visceral fat, if your triglycerides are less than 45, if your HbA1c is five, it's not bad. Right? And so, and even if it's slightly on the higher side, I mean, both both of your data is in the outstanding range. So Yeah. I'm I'm very happy to we'll get to all of those figures that you just talked about, actually. Like, so the next one is, is to talk about the hormones. Hormones, I think that it's, much overdiagnosed. It seems to be kind of, like, trendy right now to get, testosterone, supplementation. I don't do any of that. Just work out at the gym and do the exercise stuff. On these things, I think I was generally in the middle. Testosterone was a little total was a little lower, but free testosterone in between Brian Johnson and Sim. Sex hormone binding globulin. I'm not sure I'm getting that quite right. You can correct me on that. Then I'm the highest, and that one considered, like, lower is considered to be better for that. And then DHEA, I'm in the middle of them. But I don't, I think these are in a normal range. There's no concern for me, but I don't have too much to say about this. Comments? Yeah. So total testosterone. So, you know, and this goes to my general point too of age related change. Less than three hundred is associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. How much above that is optimal is very debatable. I mean, I don't know that 900 is better than 700 is better than 500 in terms of mortality risk. There isn't any data on that, but resisting that age related change is huge. Right? So was your data once seven hundred? Now it's five hundred. I don't know. Right? That's the big thing. So I don't do the testing often enough to know whether that was just variation or whether that's an age related decline. Yeah. Also I can't get this tested in Japan where I live. So I'm always sort of, jet lagged to some degree and testosterone varies a fair amount, based on what time of the day when you test it. Highest in the morning and lower in the later on. So I'm always kind of like, okay, is this, is this a comparable number when I go back and maybe measure it the first day after I get back and I'm very jet lagged from The States? Because I can get this tested in The States, but not here. So it's, yeah, I I I actually I I definitely could use more data on this one to know where it's going. Free testosterone is an interesting one because, you know, it should track with total testosterone. So if total tea is low, free tea will be low. But things like calorie restriction lower androgens overall, including free testosterone, but there's a lower limit there. Now you guys aren't close to that lower limit. The lower limit is about five, five picograms per mil, being below that associated with increased all cause mortality risk. But knowing that calorie restriction lowers free testosterone and knowing the calorie restriction is like the gold standard for longevity, you know, at least in animal models, it raises that balance of is the is lower free T and even lower total T, not necessarily 500, but not below 300. Is is that pathological or is that a sign of pro longevity? And to that point, SHBG, both all of you guys are in, you know, a quote unquote what I would consider normal, but calorie restriction dramatically increases SHBG to values greater than a 100. So now that may not seem like a big big deal, but SHBG binds to total testosterone thereby reducing it in blood, which would then potentially lower free t. Now in the cow restricted state, as I mentioned, I don't know that that's a big deal, but SHBG increases during aging and higher SHBG just during aging is associated with metabolic syndrome. So now you've got this dichotomy of, okay, well, CR increases SHBG, but that's a pro longevity potential thing. And then you've got the average population where SHBG increases not on CR, and that's associated with metabolic syndrome. So this isn't as easy of a story as as I think most people put out there. And then in terms of DHEA, I don't track that, but I track its sulfated form, DHEA sulfate, which is a neuro steroid and declines during aging just like testosterone. And that's actually, you know, a biomarker of adrenal function. So, that's a big one to me that I'm tracking consistently. You know? So Yeah. All right. Yeah. I mean, it's, all things are okay here. It's hard to sort of see where the big picture is on that. But as then as we come to liver function, and actually I've had a more recent test of these and my results have improved further on these. I'm not sure what the issue was at the time, but this, for me, honestly, I don't have that much to say about this. When they give me these tests, I also get an ultrasound as part of them where they could look for fatty liver directly, right? They can then actually see sort of the fat constant by the reflection or something. Not sure if it's reflection of what it is, but the ultrasound, but my liver is healthy. These ones, by the way, are some of the, you talk about the history of it. When I ran the marathon, was I was training for the marathon, I should say, these were all disasters. They were all like my AST, ALT and DTG, or I think it was my AST and ALT where both of them were over 70, which is significantly outside, like 50 or below is kind of where it's considered to be normal. So, they were very much affected by the overtraining or the overexertion that, was part of the practicing for the marathon. But within a month or so afterwards, I think they were back within the range that they should be. I I mean, aside from kind of knowing where I fall between, the three of us on these, because I looked it up, some of it with, help from some of the reference ranges that you have. I don't really know which of these are better or worse of them. So I'm open to comment. How how do these look? A couple of things. One, that's a great point about, training impacting liver biomarkers. So before every test, I standardize when the last workout is before the blood test to minimize that potential impact of training or overtraining on the biomarker. So if the blood test is on a Monday at it's it's a Friday workout. No later than a Friday workout. Monday or Tuesday test Friday workout. So I've got three to four days. Because if if training is gonna negatively impact the biomarkers, how can I see if other stuff, diet, supplements, etcetera, can move the needle? So I think that's an important point. Now in Brian and in Seem's case, I mean, I don't think they it doesn't look like they did a hard workout the day before testing, but for most people who are new to this, I'd recommend standardizing when that last rep workout is. And that may be some of the pattern in your data, especially when considering your ultrasound on your liver. And I think you're gonna show triglyceride data, which also links into fatty liver. Your triglycerides are super low or low, which would suggest, you know, great liver health. But in terms of what's optimal, AST, ALT, semen, Brian would be closest. So high teens, low twenties. And when I say optimal, this is in terms of all cause mortality risk in study of sixteen point six million people. GGT less than 12 and also GGT increases during aging. So unfortunately, you this here I mean, it's probably training related. I find it hard to believe you'd be that far out, but they they've got you beat there. AOP less than 48. So they're pretty close to that. You Brian, for whatever reason, is off the charts. Well, not off the charts, but he's far away from high. Yeah. High. And that's based on a meta analysis of, 9,000,000 people, about 9,000,000 people. Bilirubin is an interesting one because it's a it's a biomarker basically of red red blood cell degradation. So hemoglobin is degraded into heme, and then heme is degraded by via a series of steps into bilirubin. So at younger ages, the data is where Brian and Seam's values are. But in centenarians, bilirubin is often one or around that or higher. So and that's in association with, you know, longevity and reduced all cause mortality risk. So, you know, on the one hand, you've got bilirubin relatively low levels is more likely to be found in youth. But there's something also about bilirubin, whether it's an antioxidant or it's neuroprotective, whatever the mechanism may be, where at at advanced ages, having higher levels will be beneficial. I don't think having values out at one, though, at your age would be a good thing. I'd be aiming for Brian and and seems that our values are. And then in terms of albumin, actually, I think your data is the best of the bunch. I mean, higher is generally better. Here too though, albumin declines during aging. And for those who don't know, albumin may seem like an obscure biomarker relative to, like, glucose or triglycerides. But albumin's concentration in blood is around where you guys have five grams per deciliter or five thousand milligrams per deciliter. Glucose, at best, 80 per deciliter. So albumin is 60 times more concentrated in blood. Even if you take cholesterol, 200, you know, it's, 25 x more concentrated in blood. So when we think about the biggest trees in the blood forest, albumin is a big tree in that forest and, at least in terms of concentration. So 4.5 to 4.8 or a bit higher is my optimal range. You guys are all pretty close to that, but it declines during aging. So, you know, your data there would be the best of the bunch of firmly comparing one data point. Oh, interesting. Okay. Right. And then, then on the kidney function, this one is always, kind of a bit of a challenge for me. And a lot of it goes to what you're talking about, about standardizing around your workout times. In some of my old tests, for example, I've gone and done a big workout on Sunday and then gotten my blood tested on Monday. So eGFR, as, I'm sure you're, I know you know, is, basically very heavily influenced by the creatinine, which can be produced by a workout. And, oftentimes my creatinine, they'll tell me that it's too high. I have sympathy here for Brian Johnson at 1.21 having a higher creatinine, because he's doing, gym lifting pretty much every day. And then the eGFR, which is your effective globalfibular rate or something, globalfibularation rate? Glomerular. Glomerular, thank you. Fibrillation rate, filtration rate. Then that's calculated off your creatinine. So if you're doing the lifting, then they're gonna say your kidneys are bad, which is not the case. So that's why I have the cystatin C at the bottom below that. And cystatin C is one, correct me, it goes up, no, it goes down as you age, right? Up. It goes up as you age, right? Yes. So, my, cystatin c being a little bit less than Brian Johnson, but both of us are in the fine range. So, Seem was saying that he thought that Brian Johnson had kidney problems. I would say no. I think he's basically has higher creatinine because of the man of workout that he's doing. And he probably didn't take an appropriate break maybe before he did his blood test, which will then give him a poor eGFR, but then the cystatin C, which is consistent with his age, maybe slightly, higher than you would want, it seems to be saying that his kidneys are fine. And then all of us are coming in with a reasonable, BUN rating, I would say. Yeah. So I'd actually agree with Seem. And, so exercise could impact kidney function. I don't know if Brian's supplementing with creatine, which could increase creatinine. Yes. So that, so that could be a part of his creatinine being relatively high. That 1.21 is way too high. But again, I don't know if that's creatine on its own or, you know and then creatinine is proportional to muscle mass. So creatinine can be higher. But if we use that metric and Seem has probably got both you guys be and me by far in terms of muscle mass and density, His creatinine should be off the charts, but it's not. EGFR place no value on because that, algorithm, that equation is based on creatinine and age, chronological age. So, if your creatinine is relatively high, eGFR is gonna be relatively low and they have eGFR equations based on cystatin C also. So rather than using an equation that so you could have low creatinine and just because your chronological age is increasing, eGFR is gonna be decreasing. So I don't like those. Yeah. I've actually no I placed no value in the eGFR. It's I want the actual data. So now if we're gonna assess Brian's kidney function, that Cystatin c does provide more insight because cystatin c is, thought to be not proportional to muscle mass, less influenced by muscle mass. In terms of what's optimal there, less than point seven. So lowest all cause mortality risk increases during aging. I don't know where Brian's data was aside from this test, but when you put those two values together, the creatinine, even though it could be influenced by creatine and cystatin c, point eight seven is way too high. Now cystatin c can be impacted by diet. I know that because my cystatin c has trended upward from around 0.7 to closer to 0.8789, but then making a dietary change, I'm able to bend it back down closer to 0.7. So, you know, it it goes to this idea of, you know, should we and I know Brian has always said things like, you know, my team and I designed this diet and that's why I'm eating x, y, and z. Well, your biomarkers are saying that stuff in your diet may be able to move the needle in directions to improve your biomarkers. Are you looking into that? So, I don't know what it is in his case because, you know, in my case, it's, for whatever reason, saffat, coconut butter, cacao beans, I cut that out. All of a sudden, Cystatin c reversed that six six five or six blood test trend. Point seven four, point seven five back in that range. Still a bit outside of optimal, that point seven. But, Cystatinib and creatinine would suggest that Brian does have some optimal suboptimal kidney function. Additionally, during aging when kidney function declines, blood urea nitrogen or urea will be will increase. So urea and blood is derived exclusively from nitrogen containing compounds, specifically amino acids coming from proteins. So even if your kidney function is normal, if your protein intake is too high or if your protein intake is high, you'll have high bun. Yeah. Just just because of protein, degradation, just not using all of it. So then you could say, oh, well, maybe Brian has a very high protein intake. Well, he doesn't eat meat. I don't know if he's supplementing with, pea protein or other vegan proteins, but it's I find it hard to believe that his protein intake is gonna be so high and higher than Seem in yours that that would be a cause for a higher than expected bun based on kidney function. The other side of that is his protein intake is probably a bit lower than you guys, and his kidney function is probably a bit suboptimal as the data suggests, thereby leading to a higher than expected bunt. So now bunt on its own may not seem like a big deal. So what? It's urea urea circulating in blood. But when considering that it increases during aging and also, I, and I don't know what the value would be for everybody, but in, in cell culture, high levels of urea degrade tight junctions. So in the intestine, you have, you know, it's a tube and then you have intestinal epithelial cells basically that make the inside of that tube. Those epithelial cells are connected by tight junctions. So if you have high circulating levels of urea in blood, the intestine is is it gets a blood supply. Urea can degrade those tight junctions, making it easier for stuff inside the intestinal lumen, poop, microbes, microbial products, whatever it may be, to leak into the blood and activate the immune system. So how high BUN has to be to get there? Does it have to be twenty five? Thirty is found in very old people? I don't know. But on BUN, I lean towards, you know, lower being better, you know, values where you've got it 12 or a bit less. Now just to add one more bit of context too, BUN can be indeed too low because it's produced by the liver as a part of the urea cycle. So for people who have liver disorders, BUN can be very low, five, six, you know, milligrams per deciliter. This is a very rare case though, where you've gotta have extreme liver failure for that to be the case. 12 in your case is probably not liver failure or liver disease or whatever. But it's just something to think about. Oh, my bun is seven. Well, okay. Is that because you're not making it because something's going on with your liver? Or is this just a very low protein intake? So anyway, long story short, I would agree with Seem's assessment on this that, Ryan's got some kidney related issues going on, and it's probably correctable by diet. It's just a matter of figuring out which aspects to move around to to try to get that going in the right direction. Yeah. His diet is quite, atypical, I think. And so I wouldn't be surprised there was something in there that was, causing a bit of issue. And like for all of these kidney function things, despite his being a bit younger, than myself, he's, the worst on all five, all four of these. So, okay. Right. So, as we jump in then and look at inflammation, and this is one where I'm able to basically my inflammation never been measured as in they've never been able to find it. We have high sensitivity CRP here, and they get down to zero point one milligram per liter. And, they basically always tell me we can't detect any, it's below that. And then Brian has about 0.3. And then, under the inflammation, also, I put the white blood cell count. I felt that fit best here, but I'm not really that familiar with what these ranges mean. So I'll leave it for you to commentary. Yeah. So HSCRP, all three of you guys, Fantastic. It's even more fantastic that your data is as close to zero as possible. Meta analysis shows that, less than point three may be optimal. So the lower, the better for HSCRP increases during aging, higher levels associated with increased all cause mortality. Is there better is it better for it to be point three versus point o five milligrams per liter? I don't know. But avoiding that age related change and making sure that it stays relatively low, essential. Now for white blood cells, I find no value in looking at the absolute number because they're not a homogeneous group of cells. In other words, up to about 97%, 95% or more for white blood cells are neutrophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes. Neutrophils and monocytes increase during aging. Lymphocytes decrease during aging. So your white blood cell counts could be stable and you could have divergent things going on at the same time. So, I find no value in looking at the absolute number of white blood cells. But if we did, 3.5 to six would be my optimal. So Brian's would be a bit too low. But then we could take it even a step further because, you know, people often say, like, you know, your ref your optimal ranges are based on sick populations. Well, first of all, I'm looking at the studies that have millions of people if they exist, if not millions and thousands, hundreds of thousands of people, the biggest studies that exist, large population based averages. Could you make the case that less than my quote unquote optimal range, 3.5 to six is optimal at the individual level for certain people? Yeah. Potentially. So could Brian's 3.1 be optimal even though it's a bit lower than the 3.5? It could be. But, you know, it goes back to this division of the neutrophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes. If, for example, his his, lymphocytes are less than thousand, so that would be one point zero of the 3.1. And then his neutrophils and monocytes are, say, 2,000. Neutrophils and monocytes would be pretty close to optimal in that context. But his lymphocytes being a thousand would be far away from optimal. And we could even I know we talked about this a bit before, but you could even subdivide the lymphocytes into CD four CD eight, which is, what's known as an immune health grade. So 1,000 lymphocytes will be subdivided into T cell. And I know I'm gonna lose people here because of loss. We get into the weeds, but this is where the beauty is. We've got to really understand that the depths and the mechanism of our biomarkers. So the lymphocytes getting further subdivided into T cells, B cells, and K cells. If you don't have enough of certain of those cell types to fight off infection, you're gonna be more likely to get infections, stay infected for longer, increase your risk of death from infectious mortality, and all cause mortality risk is a part of that story. So even if his neutrophils and monocytes were quote unquote optimal, but lymphocytes were too low leading to a worse immune health grade based on CD four, CD eight, three point one maybe may not be optimal. So we would need more context to really properly evaluate if that's quote unquote optimal. But in in terms of the the Lustgarten definition of optimal SIEM and your data would probably be closer to optimal than Brian's. I think we have some, more detail on the red blood cells, but I don't think we have that neutrophil kind of, breakdown, unfortunately. So right. I mean, here we are with, some more of the blood counts, and we have lymphocyte here breakdown. And for these as well, I'm not quite sure sort of, like, how to read them. I do know that, like, on the hemoglobin, more is better, and I'm on the top of this one. For the RDW, the, red red blood cell distribution width, if I remember correctly, this one is sort of like you want them to have them as regularly sized as possible. And this one, mine are slightly more less regular than Seem and Brian. Brian coming out number one on this one. And then the platelets or the MCV and the platelets, were all comparable to these, although I have a slightly higher platelets than the others. And then the lymphocyte percentage, which I have is the, lowest of the three of us, and you said that was important. So I know this is something you've been studying. So what do you what do you make of this? Yeah. So hemoglobin, 14 to 16 for men, quote, unquote, optimal, but 14 is not better than 15.9. Sorry. I should say 15.9. That's the upper range. Once you your 15.9 is right on that border because once it's above 16, that's a bit too high. It's associated with increased all cause mortality risk. Brian's would be reason for concern for me. First, it's below that 14 to 15.9 quote unquote optimal range based on all cause mortality. But then as you mentioned, also declines during aging. And, you know, this might be one reason why I think he mentioned something about HBOT. He's been doing HBOT and HBOT has improved biomarkers. Well, hemoglobin carries oxygen. And if you have deficits well, first of all, if you have deficits in red blood cells, red bull red blood cell number, you're gonna have lower hemoglobin because hemoglobin is found red blood cells. Hemoglobin carries oxygen. Your tissues aren't gonna be as properly oxygenated. Actually, in your cells aren't gonna be as properly oxygenated as they should be. So HBOT within that context, you're essentially forcing oxygen into your body and potentially improving aerobic metabolism because now it has oxygen that it didn't have before. So that might be part of the reason why he says things like HBOT improves my biomarkers. Maybe it's because his hemoglobin is lower than it should be. That said, at his chronological age, his hemoglobin is, he's gotta figure out how to reverse that. It it it that's going in the wrong direction. Now for the RDW, your data is a bit too high. Optimal is either 11.4, 11.5 to 12.5. Five. So RDW there too increases during aging, higher levels. I think once it gets to 13.7, now we're talking all cause mortality risk starts to increase. So we've got that optimal that's up to about 12.5 and then 12.5 to 13.6. It's not significantly different than that optimal range. But then then once it goes above 13.7, now we're talking higher risk. So RDW, it just for people who don't know, it seems like an obscure biomarker. It's the top predictor of doctor Morgan Levine's biological age clock pheno age. So or it could the the biggest contributor to it. So if your RDW is relatively high, your quote unquote biological age using that blood based biomarker test is gonna come in higher than it should be. That's just one easy way to assess that it's, you know, it's, something to it's not just an obscure biomarker on a blood test report. MCV is the average volume of your red blood cells. So in in youth, red blood cell volume is relatively small. And then red blood cells are all, as you mentioned, homogeneous in size or in volume. So they're all pretty small, which that's the youthful phenotype for red blood cells. But then during aging, that changes where the red blood cells volume starts to increase. MCV correspondingly starts to increase. So here too, m your and Brian data would be too high. Seam is right on the money with this. My target is close to 90. And I should say not to make this about me and to inter interject my stuff here, but I've actually seen my MCV trending higher too with my latest data being around 96, way too high. Seam Seam's the champion. 96 seems fine to me. I don't know what you're talking about, Michael. It's just the published data, you know. So platelets is a, j or u shaped curve with values around 200 being optimal. But if we look at what the all cause mortality data is, 200 to 300 is optimal, lowest all cause mortality risk. So seam would be best here, but you could make the argument that closest to 200 may be optimal based on the lowest portion of the J or U shaped curve. So you could be actually closest to optimal. 165 would be too low. You know, so I I I'd put up a red flag on Brian. MCH is the average hemoglobin found in red blood cells. I don't track that. I don't see the importance. That's not to say it's not important, but I see other biomarkers. You know, so when we think about red blood cells, most people, you know, just to bring it back to glucose and cholesterol, right? They think of metabolic health as the most important biomarkers, but red blood cells are the most abundant cell type in the human body. Human cell type by far, it's not even close. So then so so tracking total red blood cell numbers, hemoglobin, which is found in red blood cells, as I mentioned, declines during aging, the MCV, their volume, and then the the the variability in their volume, the RDW are the, for me, the four most important measures to be tracking with respect to red blood cells and overall red blood cell, you know, health and, you know, function functionality essentially. So, now last step, live the site percentage. I would've put that in the white blood cell, you know, potentially inflammation. But Yes. But here we can kind of address that that question of is Brian's 3.1, is that potentially too low? Because his, his 38% lymphocytes, so if you do 38.38 times 3.1, so now we're looking at a total lymphocyte count that's probably so what is that? Four thirteen hundred, thirteen hundred lymphocytes. So if we just look at CD four and CD eight, they should probably be about eight hundred and four hundred, but then that doesn't include b cell or NK NK cells. So if your CD4s aren't greater than 800, now you're in immune health grade two, which is immune health grade one is most likely to be found in young people, seems age. So this would suggest his total lymphocytes are on the lower side and not a part of the youngest immune health grade. Now, is that for all of his tests? Is this just one test? You know, we'd have to get more data to find out. Right. Okay. So it does seem to track then. Well, he's living a quite, acidic life, so probably, maybe. Okay. Let's see. In the lipid panel, this one's gonna be interesting, I think. My, numbers in this are quite far out of range in several places. So we started with the APOB, which is sort of an LDL correlate. And, for this one, my numbers are basically a bit higher than the other two. I think I probably eat a messier diet. Although I know Sim, is not vegan, not vegetarian. He does eat meat from time to time. I have friends who love to do barbecue, and I love to eat the barbecue. So, I do have red meat from time to time, and also have, milk with my coffee, every day. Then on the APOA one, and this is an HDL correlate, I'm off the charts on this one. So usually, they'll look at APOA one and HDL and say, well, it should be high and over 40 or so for HDL is good. But I'm way at the 227. On the HDLC, you can see there that as opposed to being over 40, I'm a 113. I mean, I think it actually is okay. I can go ahead and jump ahead to the next one. There are three things that can raise your HDLs, or your APOA one. One is, over is strength training. The second one is alcohol consumption. And the third one is walking and other exercise. And I do all three of those. My strength training, I do it for about thirty, about an hour or so a week, right within range, healthy range, not doing too much, not doing too little. For the alcohol consumption, I have about I have exactly one drink of about 200, milliliters of wine at night, every day. But two or three days a week, I'll go out with friends and have three or four drinks. So that maybe is a little bit of an increase, but I don't consider myself a heavy drinker. But then on the walking, I am absolutely a heavy walker. So I have a walking desk. In some of our earlier videos, I walked throughout the entire video. I'll walk 20,000, 30,000 steps a day without really noticing it. And, there's a chart here. We'll, I'll jump ahead to this, where basically we can see that the more steps that you walk, the higher HDL is. And this is pretty much a linear correlation, right? So you can see here that basically my, 20,000 steps a day are causing my high HDLs. So given that we know that, more steps is actually, although there's a diminishing return after about 10 or 12,000 steps where you're not getting much more benefit from it, we know at least it's not, it doesn't have a u shaped curve or it doesn't become bad for you at any point that we've seen in the charts. So I think my HDL, even though very high above the range in fact, I went to an an HDL calculator to figure out what was sort of a healthy range before, and I plugged in a 113 from a HDL, and it bounced right back at me with an error saying invalid answer. Please change your HDL value, which is a little, a little bit frustrating. But, I think that it's it's fine given that I know the cause of it, which is the walking steps as opposed to having an alcohol problem or lifting more than an hour a week, which I think is the optimum level. Total cholesterol given the HDL then is, above what would be normal, but that is mostly the HDL content. The Trigo slides here, as you noted before are quite low for me. In fact, in my recent test, they came back as 38, so they've even dropped down from the 54 ahead at the time. And the LK1, which you've, talked about quite interestingly in some of your videos is being a mostly genetic thing, although you've been able to move yours, materially. I have good genetics for this one at, 12.3, which gives me a good hope that all of these are going to be fine. Yeah. So alright. Wait. So I guess we I wanna start at total cholesterol. So total cholesterol for me is kinda like the white blood cell story because total cholesterol is not homogeneous. You've got, you know, HDL going in one direction, cardi protective versus, the APO B containing lipoproteins, LDL, lipoprotein a, VLDL going in the other. So I I find no value in looking at total cholesterol. The individual lipoproteins and APO B, I find the most value. So, so that's the one. So two, if if you can go forward to the, HDL, if you can go forward one slide. Mhmm. So if you look at extrapolation of the trend line, even up to 20,000 steps per day, that's probably about 1.6 millimolar on average. Right? So, one millimolar is about forty milligrams per deciliter, which means that if you're walking 20,000 steps per day, the average expected HDL based on this plot, and you can even see the the gray is the 95% confidence interval. So at the highest, you'd expect to see HDL 65, 70. So I don't know that this is the major factor in your case for higher HDL. It may be a part of that story, but based on this, your HDL would be 50 milligrams per deciliter lower. Now, Arwa, can you go can you go back? So unfortunately Right. So Yep. Yep. Go ahead. No. So I was gonna say, yeah. So, I have all three of those factors. So as you say, like that in and of itself is not enough to explain it. Although then I figured that if you add on top of that, regular moderate alcohol consumption, and then on top of that, I do an hour of weightlifting, but as we've talked about before, it's pretty hardcore. It's, full on squats and all of all the exercise, the entire exercise time is based on, multi muscle movements. But so you weight weightlifting may be a part of the story where for whatever reason you're sensitive to producing more HDL within that context. But and I'm not happy to say it, but and I don't know how much alcohol is contributing to it. But how would you know when HDL is indeed too high? So if you look at the all cause mortality data, it's a j or a u shaped curve, actually probably closer to a u shaped, whereas you mentioned less than 40, higher risk. Then once you get above 70, also higher risk. So, APO a one tracks with the HDL story because APO a one is found almost exclusively on HDL. It can be freely floating in plasma, but if it's in blood, it's almost exclusively coming from HDL. And I I know that not just because of the, you know, published mechanism and and that it's, you know, found on HDL, but I've measured APOE one and HDL. I looked at the correlation over seven tests, and the correlation coefficient is greater than point nine. So I I actually stopped measuring APOE one and just, I'm only focused on HDL. There's no need to measure them both. So if you look at the quote unquote optimal range for HDL, 50 to 69 men and women, this is a study of, like, 12,000,000 people or more. I don't remember the exact actual number. It was greater than 10,000,000. But so okay. Let's bypass that. Let's look at APO A1. Well, in a small study, I think this study was about 300,000 people. All cause mortality risk for APO A1 was lowest for one fifty to one eighty milligrams per deciliter. Alright. What about greater than one eighty? Well, although lowest risk was that one fifty to one eighty, all cause mortality risk went away at greater than one eighty. So you essentially lost the lower lowering of all cause mortality risk get values greater than one eighty. So in your case, I'd say that's the best case scenario. I don't think your HDL is gonna be associated with a higher all cause mortality risk when considering 8.1, but there's another factor to consider. So HDL, high HDL, you know, cardio cardioprotective. So then why or in within what context would high HDL be potentially bad for health and or longevity? Well, we're considering that as you mentioned, alcohol can raise it. And knowing that and I'm not saying you're an alcoholic by no means. I'm not saying that. I'm sure you're not. You have moderate alcohol intake. But, for people who are alcoholics, HDL is dramatically high. And within that context, they've got damage to liver enzymes. GGT is relatively high, AST, ALT. So could that be a part of your story where maybe you wouldn't die from cardiovascular disease, but maybe some liver related issues? Could you clean up your liver related issues with train you know, not blood testing the day before the hard workout and now GGT is less than 12, AST, ALT closer to the, you know, low twenties. And then the HDL story doesn't become a liver health story. It's just, okay. Well, it's a maybe it's a bit too much wine where I'm losing the lowering of all cause mortality risk just being outside of that one eighty. So so that would be the context for that. APOB, less than 70. So it's interesting because if you look at blood test reports, they'll say like less than 80 for primary prevention, you know. So these are people who have, or or or diagnosed CBD less than 80, less than 70 for primary prevention. They they get really strict once people have preexisting CBD. But if you look at, studies in the general population, less than seventy six, lowest CHD mortality risk, and then all cause mortality data actually less than seventy. So these are people who don't have preexisting CBD. So the reference ranges are behind behind the times. Now here too, this is a bit, you know, Brian's a a bit of, juicing here. You know, he's he's on some PEDs where he's taking a statin. So his 70 right at that quote unquote Lustgarten Optimal. He he's juicing. Right? He's taken, you know, a statin to lower it. And would that be as beneficial if he could do it naturally? I know seems not on a statin. So I'd actually place the greatest value on seems 58 relative to Brian. You you'd be a bit too high. Now you could say, alright. If if if optimal is 70 and, you know, potentially the slowest progression of CBD is gonna be, less than 70, what's the CBD? What's the atherosclerosis progression rate for someone at 80 or 90 versus 70? Is it one percent per year, zero point one percent per year? But even at a very slow rate, you know, ideally we want it to be flat at the lowest, right? So trying to get it lower than 70 would be optimal. And I'm it's easily, you know, you mentioned eating barbecue and I think it it's probably full fat dairy that's going in that coffee. You know, it's not oh, it's low fat. So APOB is pretty easy to reduce for most people. SAT fat, higher SAT fat will increase it. But then there's there are published RCTs where if you increase soluble fiber and total fiber intake super high, APOB comes down very fast within two weeks. So cutting sat fat and increasing fiber intake, how high people may need may need to go? Is that from 30 grams of fiber to 40 grams? Probably not. May have to double it or go even higher. But for people who are struggling with APOB, it's it's a relatively easy biomarker to move the needle on. Triglycerides, I mentioned less than 45. If you go by all cause mortality data, less than 90 would be optimal. The reference range has less than one fifty. But if you look at CHD mortality risk, it's less than 45. So here too, it's it's is 55 materially worse than 45? Is that a one percent, point one percent, you know, over time increase for atherosclerosis progression? I don't know, but my target is getting it to less than 45. I'm in the ballpark of where you and and, Brian are, 55, 60. Depending on my diet composition, if it's higher carb, I actually goes to 70. So, I'm still working on the recipe to get it consistently less than 45. And lipoprotein a, last but not least, even though it's, as you mentioned, it's a genetic marker and thought to be, you know, resistant to change. From my experience, as you mentioned, it it's definitely malleable. How low you can get is debatable, though. I've never had values where Brian being the high end of this range is. In terms of what's optimal there, although lower should be better, there are published studies where it's just not associated with all cause mortality risk. But on the other hand, there are studies showing that it's six to seven times more atherogenic than LDL, and triglycerides are approximately two times more atherogenic than LDL. So the way I'm thinking about this now is so ApoB consists of LDL, lipoprotein a, VLDL, and IDL. IDL is almost never measured. It's a very small fraction, so we can essentially boil APOB down into those first three. LDL, lipoprotein a, VLDL. So if your APOB is less than 70, quote, unquote, optimum, if the major fraction of that is coming from Lipoprotein a and try and VLDL or triglycerides. So, triglycerides divided by five is a very close approximation to VLDL. So if your APOB is coming almost exclusively from Lipoprotein a and VLDL and less from LDL. That's actually gonna be a worse cardiovascular disease profile, even at very low APO B. So making sure that it's not just about low APO B, it's making sure that is as low as you can get it. VLDL as low as you can get it. And then within the context of low APOB, higher relatively higher LDL. So easier said than done. My Lipoprotein A is higher than it should be. Actually, even higher than Brian's, because that's in millimolar. My millimolar is like eighty, seventy five, 80 consistently. But my, you know so so I've gotta work on figuring out how to get that even lower. But but alright. Just to add a little more context. So fortunately, there is stuff for people like me and you guys aren't in this boat. You know, you're, seems the best of the bunch there. But so even if someone's got relatively high lipoprotein a, 75, 80, nanomolar or more, having h s CRP less than two milligrams per liter, not point two, that, essentially the, CHD mortality risk goes away. So but if you've got high h s CRP, the risk increases based on CHD risk based on Lipoprotein a. And then also the waist to hip ratio. So when waist to hip ratio is less than point nine three, it's not associated with an increased risk of lipoprotein a associated CBD outcomes. But for people who had a waist to hip hip ratio greater than one, and I've got a video commenting on actually, I released it today. It's on YouTube today. But, but so for people who have a waist to hip ratio greater than one, lipoprotein a higher than 50 milligrams per deciliter, which would be 125 nanomolar, way off the charts compared to the three of you guys. That's associated with an increased CBD mortality outcome risk. Whereas people with lipoprotein A less than 50 milligrams per deciliter and 125 nanomolar with a waist to hip ratio less than 0.93, no association with CBD mortality related outcomes. So there may be, for people who have hot relatively high lipoprotein a, ways to modulate that risk by keeping inflammation low and waist to hip ratio low. But, anyway, context. Yeah. That's, it's interesting. I hadn't thought of doing sort of the math to break down below the, cholesterol. I mean, the thing everyone sees is the LDL and the HDL and then breaking that into the LPA, out of the LDL. Interesting. Yeah. This is hard. This is why I get paid the big bucks. You know? It's, get into the numbers deeper, deeper, and, you know, get more correlations. Okay. So let's see. Continuing on sort of metabolic health. So I find this one interesting, and this is actually one of my, wishes for Levine's age, calculator, which he used, very effectively. Unfortunately, the data set that he my understanding is the data set that he used to calculate his, make his calculator with only had fasting glucose. It didn't have hba one c available for all of the data points. Because hba one c is, I'm sure you're aware, is a longer indicator sort of your overall, blood sugar level. So I'm quite, happy with this one. Although, Brian, Seem and myself are all in quite a tight range around the pretty optimal level of 5.1%. Fasting glucose, 86 kind of generally useful here. On homocysteine, a bit higher on this one. I know that yourself and some other people have done some interventions with, vitamin B, if I remember correctly, to lower this. Honestly, I haven't really tried to address this or do anything with it. So I'm kind of just let it as it is. I figured my LPA one and the other things that I had would be enough to protect from the CBD, which is to understand what this is the concern for. And then for the uric acid, semen and I are about the same, and this one, Brian Johnson. Although it's not exactly clear whether lower is better on this one. I think it's more of a range than anything else. Alright. Wait. So h b a one c, five to six percent based on, lowest all cause mortality risk, but then lower is found in youth, increases during aging. As close to five as possible. So all three of you guys, pretty great. Even seems 4.9. I'm not I'm not gonna, you know, nitpick over 4.9 versus five point o. Probably fantastic. I I see more value in h b one c, as you mentioned, just because it's a longer term marker up to about a 120. And I say up to because that's an average. Right? Red blood cells can live shorter than a 100 and twenty days, and they can live longer, which can affect h b a one c measurements. So I see that as a better measure than fasting glucose. So I'm not worried about Brian's 97 because his h b a one c is 5.1. Optimal for glucose, 80 to 94 being closer to 80 being optimal. So, you know, I see yeah. Brian's 5.1 is probably okay within that 97 context. Homocysteine in your case, I'd I'd be that'd be something I'd be trying to reduce. So even though so the argument against homocysteine lowering is that whenever I raise it as a biomarker, people are like, well, look at primary prevention trials that try to lower homocysteine. It didn't improve CBD related outcomes. And then my retort to that is, okay. Yeah. In the short term, but CBD is a long term process. You know, these intervention trials, maybe they're six months, a year, two months at most. Are you really impacting CBD related outcomes if you're reducing homocysteine for a, you know, up to a two year period, but it's been elevated for thirty years when CBD has happened. Right? So so that's one side of that story. The other is that it's in, in vitro and cell and cell culture models. It's neurotoxic and it causes, endothelial cell senescence. So this is a big one in my mind. The question of how to reduce is not not so simple. Most people every time I make almost this thing video, I I get comments like, trimethylglycine, betaine, you know, that that brings it down for me. And it could work, you know, but that's not the only place to look because there are many ways to lower homocysteine. In my case, I've supplemented with four or up to five grams per day. No dent on homocysteine. So figuring out where the weak link is in that methylation chain, it's not just it may not just be about b vitamins. It could be, you know, other methyl donors are lacking that are not donating that methyl group to homocysteine to convert it into thionine. So, yeah, my target is actually closer to where CEMA is at around five. And then folic acid, you mentioned, you know, not knowing if if, I think you said something like that. What's optimal there for longevity? So there's a study that was done on the odds of living to a hundred years in association with uric acid levels. And actually four point two was right at that cutoff. So values less than four point two milligrams per deciliter were associated with about a two fold higher odds. Now, granted, this was like four percent versus two percent of living to a 100. But still, it's people who had uric acid levels of less than 4.2 had a higher odds of living to a 100. Now, you know, this may actually be good news for, Brian because he's got values of 4.2. Uric acid levels are inversely proportional to eGFR. So worse kidney function, e uric acid should increase. So if Brian does have some amount of poor kidney function, I'd expect higher than expected uric acid levels. The other side of that is uric acid levels can increase with a high meat diet, even alcohol, which I know are not a part of Brian's diet, which may suggest that maybe limiting the dietary precursors for uric acid or helping keep him keep it low even within the context of suboptimal kidney function. But, yeah, 5.2, 5.1 is far from terrible. I mean, it's associated with lowest all cause mortality risk, but less than 4.2 is my target based on the centenarian data. Okay. Yeah. I'm not sure how to to move this, one. I'm quite happy with the h p one c. That's one of my, key metrics, along with the h s c r p, the overall inflammation, the h b a one c is the metabolic health. I think these are fundamental. Then in the sort of once again, taking a step away from the direct blood tests on the VO two max, all three of us are quite exceptional on these things. Sam at 66, although he's a younger chap, younger lad. Mine is currently, 58 48 the last time I checked it, which was when I just was having a trip back to The States where there's good machines there available for testing it. Although when I was training for the marathon, it was 61.5. So, when I'm in, full on, giving it all I've got, it's quite a bit higher than this. It's not necessary, and I'm quite happy with the day to day of 58. My blood pressure at one twenty one over 78, is a little higher than I'd like it to be. I've been working with taking potassium to lower this because I don't wanna eat vegetables and fruits all day long. Resting heart rate, all of us are quite low. Heart rate variability at the time was 50. Since I did this test now, it's more like around in the sixty, seventy rate, as it sort of increased. I don't know, just as I've been tuning my overall fitness and reducing the number of days that I work out. As you know, this is quite responsive to whether you're overloaded in your training or not. Comments? Yeah. So, most of this is great news. So VO two max, you know, I I get it's important, you know, the clients during aging. But here too, when you think about what we're actually looking at, it's your maximum ability to consume oxygen under physiologic stress. I I just don't know how functionally related that is to just everyday life. Right? Sure. Sure. If you're trying to run for hours or run for miles, important. But, you know, we're not operating at VO two max. Now you could say, alright. It declines during aging. If you live long enough, your VO two max will decline to the point where You can't breathe and you can't make any energy. Yep. Okay. Yeah. So so sure. But if you look at if you look at all cause mortality data, it's like greater than anything greater than 50 is lowest risk. Is having a VO two max of sixty five better than fifty? Maybe. But even the the groups, you know, that were close to fifty, 40 to 50, you know, all cause mortality is still dramatically reduced relative to someone who's sedentary. So I think here too, just like the, you know, bench press and and other strength measures, the absolute number, as long as you're above 40, 40 ish, not that important in my in my opinion, but resisting age related change, a big part of that story. Also too, you know, what VO two max doesn't really capture is, you know, like sprinting or reaction time. I mean, granted, you'd expect someone with a high VO two max to be able to, you know, sprint relatively fast, but they're not necessarily similar because, you know, the marathon runners are not in 100 meter dash. Right? It's two different types of athlete and even body types. You know, sprinting may not seem like a big deal, but if you're walking down the street and your reaction time is poor because of old age and you can't move out of the way Mhmm. So, anyway, I I see value in in not just VO two max, but other aspects of of, anaerobic fitness too. BP one twenty over 80 is associated with lowest risk. There is obviously data in younger people where average blood pressure is a 100 over 60. But here too, avoiding age related change is important, which goes beyond one test, you know, one test measurement. You know, was your data one fifteen over 75, and now it's one twenty over 80. Right? I mean, that's a big one. And blood pressure is I'm measuring it. I've measured it the last three days in a row. I'm measuring it at least, you know, 10 times a month. I really have to increase my my 10 times a month may not seem like a lot or may seem like a lot to some people, but my dad is, 83 and he just started blood pressure meds. So I may have some genetic predisposition to, you know, it and my averages have been about one twenty over 80, more recently. So this is a big one. And most people aren't thinking about it in terms of CBD risk. You know, they're they're thinking about lipoproteins and insulin sensitivity, but people who have, there there's a study I haven't I haven't made a video about yet, but BP is on that list for, you know, most likely related to having a CBD event is having relatively high blood pressure. And it doesn't have to be one fifty over a 100. It can be one thirty over 80 increases risk. So BP is a big one, and it's easy to measure. It's I get that it's time consuming, and it sucks to have to sit there for thirty minutes, relax for ten minutes, measure it every couple of minutes to take an average. But I mean, it's it's it's an easy biomarker to measure. Rest of the parties I can't I can't, like, I just find it to be too boring. I do, like, a five minute waiting thing and then take my blood pressure and wait a minute and take it again. Although, one of the things that I've talked about on my blog, I mean, I think there's a definite cheat code for blood pressure. It's about three times as effective to increase your potassium as it is to decrease salt. And, they've been saying decreased salt for blood pressure for decades ever since the DASH study came out, which, if you follow the literature, the DASH study was a huge outlier in the effectiveness they had of that. That was not able to be replicated in the amount of, reduction in salt they had versus the blood pressure, results. But, I find it to be much more effective to increase the potassium intake, which you can do, natural sources would be like bananas and other things, but also you can get a powder that you can just take, in dosage that then gets you to the few grams or so that you would need a day to reduce it. And I found that takes down my blood pressure by about five off of the, the, systolic number and two or so off of the diastolic. And my blood pressure is already in good range. I think those, in fact, would be greater if you had a higher blood pressure to start with. So carry on, you were about to talk about resting heart rate? No, wait. So that that's good. That's a great point. So increasing potassium and lowering sodium is probably the lowest hanging fruit. So just along those lines though, note that my average potassium intake, because my diet is abundant in vegetables and especially potassium containing vegetables. Right? So I was when I'm talking about, like, I don't wanna spend my whole dating fruits and vegetables. Wait a minute. Much what Mike does every day. No worries. You know me. I don't I don't get I don't get triggered. But, so I'm on seven thousand milligrams on average about seven thousand milligrams potassium per day to the the American Heart Association. I mean, their recommendation is like four thousand eight hundred milligrams per day. And I've actually been a lot higher for potassium, but, and that's on the context of around twenty two hundred milligrams of sodium per day. So I'm I'm at or better targets and yet blood pressure is not a 100 over 60. So there may be that would always be the first place to start. Increase potassium, lower sodium. And if you look at the published studies, it's right in line with what you said of higher sodium diets, even very high five, six grams per day. If you cut that down, like, to, you know, the lowest end of the sodium intake range, the it's only about a five millimeters Hg difference, you know, for very high versus very low. So it's right in line with what you're saying. Some people may get a bigger impact than that, but there too, I've been playing with my sodium intake because I've gone a bit higher intentionally, 2,700. Now I'm cutting it back down 22 and I may go back down to 1,800 because sodium is a part of the Sodium can impact the stress response including norepinephrine. So if your sodium intakes are actually too low, like thirteen hundred per day, norepinephrine can be higher. And why that's important is because norepinephrine is a marker of chronic stress. Norepinephrine negatively impacts the next two values on the list, resting heart rate and heart rate variability. So then it raises the question of how much sodium intake is optimal for lowering systemic levels of norepinephrine and potentially allowing for highest heart rate variability and lower resting heart rate, but without messing up blood pressure. So I've been doing that experiment. My blood pressure, I'd rather have the blood pressure improvements and, you know, keep it on the lower side. So, okay. So resting heart rate is an interesting one because inverse you during aging relatively low in youth and older ages. It couldn't be hard to discern with a peak of midlife. So heart rate variability breaks that tie. So HRV is very high in youth and then it declines pretty steadily over over, lifespan. So at older ages, you'd expect to see a relatively low resting heart rate, but a low HRV. Whereas at younger ages in fit people, very high HRV, very low resting heart rate. I mean, seems data is a perfect example of that. So, now people then often say, oh, it's genetic. My HRV is terrible. It's always been terrible. It can be improved. Can you get your HRV from 50 to 90? I mean, I know you saw changes during marathon training. And as you mentioned balancing activity versus rest that goes up. It's for me, it's not so much the absolute numbers are important. High HRV, low resting heart rate, it's important. But moving it within one's own genetic maximum. So if you're starting off with an HRV of 35, if you can get that to 60, maybe you can't get it to a 100, within the context of a low resting heart rate, but figuring out that recipe to get it there and then also avoiding the age related change. So lowering your resting heart rate over time, but improving your HRV, getting you closest to that more youthful profile. And I know we've talked about this in in previous pods, but, you know, the the idea of how is it that exercise is good for average but not maximum lifespan. And I think chronic overtraining is part of that phenotype or getting the exercise prescription slightly wrong. Because when you think about function predicting health span, which should predict longevity, if you're overdoing exercise by a bit and you've got chronically, you're chronically stressed, whether through norepinephrine or lower HRV and higher resting heart rate, I'd imagine that's gonna be bad for some measure of lifespan. Is that a one or two year change? Is that a ten year change? I don't know. But if we can keep HRV high and resting heart rate low, function as high as possible, my bet, and there's no published date on this, nobody's done a study on it, this is my speculation, is that we'd be able to push the longevity promoting effects of exercise from just an increase in average to closer to the maximum. So I look at HRV resting heart rate as essential in this equation. That's, I think that's a perfect segue here as we look at sort of the well, here we go to the the the aging biomarkers. So, afterwards, they'll talk about the exercise. But before we get to that, this is something that I honestly don't put a a whole lot of, weight on, although the pheno age reduction, which, you're doing standing at is, the bottom of this. The Dunnington pace, I mean, Sam also has kinda cast some shade on this, and I have to agree with him on this is that it's it's it's kind of a manufactured benchmark that then they measure against. And the people who make the Dunedin paste themselves say that we find no benefit of doing exercise or eating a healthy diet on our own metric. So that for me, I'm like, okay. Those are the most powerful things that we have. If you say that your metric shows them to be of no use, I have no use for your metric. And it's quite expensive. It's around, like, I don't know, several $100 to take. I've done it twice. The first time I was at, point eight. I was like, okay. Well, the second time was at point nine eight. I don't know why. There seems to be a lot of variability in it. Brian Johnson takes this a lot. He puts quite a bit of he's got the Olympics and stuff that he competes on. Telomere length, I don't know. I mean, it's supposed to be more is supposed to be better, but mine is quite low. But, that's the it's supposed to be a cancer prevention marker or something that goes down as you age for sure, but I don't know. The pheno age reduction, this event is cracking back into some of the things I think are quite important, like the, I mean, not the HbA1c, like I would prefer, but the glucose, the CRP, which is the inflammation marker, the albumin, which you mentioned, the red blood cell distribution width and other things. So I think it's useful, although many of the things that I've talked about here would not be affected or reflected in that at all, and I think are quite important like the VO two max or grip strength and other things. Yeah. So so the epigenetics, that's an interesting one, right? Because when you think about genetics, genetics is the prediction for what can happen. Epigenetics is one step above that where you're not looking at the genetics, you're looking at methylation marks on your genome, which then determine if genes are turned on or off. So there too, it's a prediction. It's not a measure of what's actually happening. In terms of the what's actually happening, how they derive the algorithm, it's a it's an epigenetic prediction of 19 clinical chemistry biomarkers, including hs CRP, HbA1c, APO b, waist to hip ratio, oral health. So but it's still a prediction of actual biomarkers. So I measured, Donita Pace. I use True Diagnostic not and I love their company. I love their leadership. It's not a knock on them. I got tired of looking the prediction of real stuff and I'm just focused on the real stuff. So I added HbA1c into the approach, you know, for basically the same cost. I added the actual biomarkers. Now in your case, so in terms of how good or not that it is, you know, so Matt Caberlein and Seem have kinda poo pooed on epigenetic testing as a whole, but it's important to know that all epigenetic tests are not the same. There are many epigenetic tests that exist that are not based in published literature that are just giving you a biological age. And this isn't just the epigenetic clocks. It's other clocks too that companies are using and those they'll say, even WHOOP has a your biological age is x. Well, what is that based on? Show me your algorithm, publish the data. Let's see how good it is. Because if someone's epigenetic or any biological age test is not significantly correlated with chronological age, for example, Dunedin Pace's correlation with chronological age is only like point three, very weak. Whereas PhenoAge, which includes said nine clinical chemistry biomarkers, its correlation is like point nine four to point nine six. But now the other side of that equation is, is your biological age test associated with risk of death for all causes? For Dunedin, PACE, and PhenoAge, this is true. But then even there, there's a scale. If you take all of the biological age tests, how strongly or not do they correlate with all cause mortality risk and or chronological age? So for something like Horvath, Horvath's methylation clocks, they strongly correlate and are the strongest correlates of chronological age, but they are weakly correlated with all cause mortality risk. The need and pace is consistently strongly correlated or relatively higher has a higher effect size for all cause mortality risk relative to Horvath. But GRIMH, which I'm sure most people don't know anything about, it sounds like an obscure name, also an epigenetic test, is consistently in head to head matchups versus Dunedin Paste. And even against PhenoAge, the clinical chemistry blood bio blood biomarker based test that I always talk about. GrimAge better than them all. So but PhenoAge is in the same ballpark. And actually, Dunedin and PACE is probably top three. If we're gonna make a top three biological age test for all cause mortality risk, those three are in the boat. A grim age is far and beyond consistently the best. Now, then that raises the question, all right, we know what the biomarkers are in PhenoAge, and I'm measuring it, you're measuring it. We know what the biomarkers are in Dinita PACE, and you're measuring most of them. What are the biomarkers in GRIMH? So most of those are not on a clinical chemistry blood based biomarker test, except for Cystatin C. So if we look at the seven or actually it's now nine biomarkers that are in GrimAge. So GrimAge has version one and version two. Version two now includes h hs CRP and, HbA1c. So we're covering that base. But for the six of the seven other biomarkers, not including Cystatin c, they're not stuff you find on a standard blood chemistry panel. And then also of those six of the seven biomarkers, they contribute more or less strongly to the overall GrimAge algorithm. In other words, just like the RDW is a major predictor of PhenoH, which in your case is bringing your data down and making it look older than it is. Some of GrimAge's biomarkers are actually more strongly correlated with the overall GrimAge algorithm. And this goes just to the idea of can we measure the actual biomarkers relative to the predicted? So long story short there, cystatin c is a strong contributor to the GRIM age algorithm. So essential in my mind, essential biomarker for tracking quote, unquote longevity and and overall health. But there's another that I'm tracking regularly, which is beta two microglobulin. That's another one of the, nine grim age version two point o biomarkers that has a correlation of greater than 0.8 as a predictor of the overall grim age algorithm. It includes other proteins that are less strong, less strongly related. There is one that I wish I could measure, which is GDF 15, which is like point nine, not commercially available. But when it comes to the epigenetic test, I agree mostly with Matt Caberlein's assessment, especially the ones he went over in his video for most epigenetic tests being rubbish because the ones he covered in that test were pretty much rubbish. There is a difference between all epigenetic tests. In terms of telomere length, that's also a methylation based estimation of telomere length. For that, I wouldn't worry about the absolute number, but avoiding age related change for whatever that metric is measuring because it's still it's still a prediction, epigenetic prediction of an actual number. But for the pheno age, this is an important one because, you know, and I hate to say it, but, you know, for someone like Brian who says he's got the best biomarkers in the world, bro, you gotta do better. Your pheno age is terrible and his RDW is fantastic. So it's not an RDW problem. You know, and it's not a hard one. And I get you're in the same boat as him, but your RDW is a bit high right now. But he he you don't proclaim now the best biomarker performance. Aside from this video, he's been saying it for a while. So, you know, and there is a longevity world cup and I don't wanna say I'm currently leading it, but once I got in there You're currently leading it though. Yeah. I am currently leading it though. And if you rank my data every year going back years, I'd still be top 10. So here too, it's not just about the absolute number. It's this is a composite of nine actual biomarkers. So if you are not, if you're if you're resisting age related change for all all those nine, I'm more interested in the overall number over time. Where is your quote, unquote pheno wage seven, ten years later compared to where you started? And if it's the same, well, you're you're not you're you've potentially slowed aging rate for at least those biomarkers. Right? Does that translate into better health? Well, having a younger pheno age is associated with a lower risk of death for all causes. So that's a positive. That clock will increase by point nine years for every one year of chronological age. So if you fast forward ten years, you should be nine years older. But if you've minimized that where there's no age related increase, well, you've increased your biomarkers and potentially slowed aging rates. So I'm more interested in long term trends and I have a video I just posted on Patreon yesterday that won't make it to YouTube for about maybe about a month, where I show that data. Seven years of PhenoAge. How am I doing in resisting age related change or not? How well am I doing? So it's not just about the one test. It's it's about long term trends. Right? A true pace of aging, not not one test. Yeah. It's been, it's been an interesting one. That was one of the ones that I started with was the PhenoAge and then punching into there actually because you provided online and, immediately put in my data on that one. Yeah. It's, I have these as deltas in here as I think they should be because as you mentioned, it sort of just will go up with your age, because it's part of the formula. Yeah. So, a quick note, Krista. So, I my adding the free Excel spreadsheet is now outdated because I guess if you just go on grok on x and you type in calculate my pheno age, done. Easy. Done. Nice. Yeah. Cool. I mean, I'm gonna do that now. Next. But you've gotta ask it for the corrected version because there was an error in the, you know. Oh. We've got maybe we're not outdated. The Excel version has the updated algorithm. There was confusion about the algorithm for better or worse. But, yeah, you've gotta you know, with all things LNs, you've gotta give it the right question, you know, and ask tell it to have the corrected version. And check it. Definitely. So this is, the next one here, I think is, the key for me at least. Well, as you mentioned, my my numbers haven't been the best on everything. As far as the amount of effort that I put into it, and this is what I optimize for, I'm quite happy with it. So as far as the weekly workout hours, both Brian Johnson and Seam spend about six hours a week, working out. Brian literally works out for an hour every day except for Sunday. And then seeing when I added the times together came out to about six hours as well. And my, whole intent behind this is I go to the gym once a week for, about forty minutes, do one HIIT workout for about twenty minutes and one run for about thirty minutes. And as far as my straight up workout time, that's all that I do for the entire week. So the payoff, I think, has been fantastic for this amount of effort. On the daily steps, this is where I, bring up the, bring the thunder because with my walking desk and other things, and I think this is one of the most important things. The benefit that you can get for it, I think this is one of the reasons why my CRP, my inflammation is so low, is because of the amount of walking that I do. And I'm able to do it while I'm doing, computer stuff, working in my computer. Daily supplements as well. I mentioned the only thing I'm taking really is potassium, which is quite a mild, simple, vitamin, that you could get with, any bananas or anything. Whereas, Sim's taking about 15 of them. He has a number of them, glycine, taurine, creatine, other things. And then Brian Johnson has over a 100 of them, and many of which he actually sells in pills that you can buy. I don't think that the evidence is conclusive on these drugs, and I think that the majority of the benefit is available from the exercise and the diet stuff. Similarly, in the monthly cost, Brian brags about spending, $2,000,000, a year on his health coming to a $170,000 per month. Seem, I think, is, paying more than that when I add up to get the, estimated cost for his supplements. This is my estimate for his number, not his own. He doesn't publish these numbers. And for myself, I have a $60 gym membership, which enables me to do those squats and bench press that I do. And the potassium is basically a wash, so there's virtually no expense put on my health. Couldn't you technically add the steps? So that's about seven ish hours of walking. Wouldn't you technically add that to your weekly workout hours? So it's a workout, and it's I mean, it's not aerobic or anything for me. That is that is one of the things that I kind of, slide under the table, if you will. But, also, I haven't added that in for the other people as well. Although I think actually, although I think Sim does a certain amount of walking, maybe around 8,000 to 10,000 steps. Brian Johnson, as far as I can tell from having rid of stuff, doesn't walk any appreciable amount over an average American, which is gonna be around 4,000 to 6,000 steps. He does things like on the weekend where he'll climb up a mountain, but that's clearly aerobic. He's doing it, with brooking and with heavy weights, and he's going up at speed, which isn't really the point of walking. You can't, speed run the walking to get the benefits out of it. The benefits of walking is the long time. It's about an hour and a half to two hours of walking a day just to get 10,000 to 12,000 steps. So you're right. If I include those, daily steps into the workout hours, then I am the worst of this because that's, two hours per day. It's gonna be around fifteen to eighteen hours of, walking per week. But for me, that's time on my computer, when I can be writing emails, responding to emails, reading things as well, reading studies. So I don't consider it to be extra time. Yeah. So I and I think walking is great exercise. Don't get me wrong. But, you know, it's the it's there are other ways to get that cardiovascular stimulus that are not that are lost because they're not technically taking steps. For example It's not it's not cardiovascular though. There's, I I make a distinction between it. I mean, it's low physical activity, low intensity physical activity, but you shouldn't be out of breath at all. I mean, it it depends. For some people, if walking is cardiovascular activity, I'm usually, thinking of people for whom it is no longer there's no, effort to do so. But even if your resting heart rate is 50 or 60, and if you're going for a walk, your resting heart your your heart rate during that walk is gonna increase. Maybe it's up to if you're highly fit, maybe it goes to 75, 85, 90. That's a cardiovascular stimulus. It's not a you're not doing a hard, quote unquote, workout, but there is gonna be a benefit for a low you know, a high volume, low intensity walking, you know? But anyway, my point around that is the one reason I don't focus on steps is, you know, there are other low to moderate intensity exercises that are beneficial for cardiovascular health, that don't have to be walking. Like, you know, my workouts are right now seventy five minutes circuit trading based. I'm getting, you know, my average heart rate, which is an underestimate by WHOOP, is around 120 beats per minute. It may be a bit higher, 130, because WHOOP is known to underestimate heart rate during workouts. So I'm getting a seventy five minute cardiovascular stimulus. I mean, which is pretty much if you translate seventy five minutes, whole body elevated heart rate for that time, that's, you know, an eight mile run if we if we were so if we tracked it over a at worst, that's a slow pace. Right? So if I track steps, I would never get that because I'm not walking anywhere. I'm just moving I'm distributing it everywhere. Another thing also is, like, if we put my steps on this list, I'd probably be, just as low as Brian. You know? Walking is a part of my approach, don't get me wrong. But for example, for the past two days, I've been doing some, chainsawing, you know, cutting down trees. I mean, yeah. It's Okay. For me, it's exercise. It's a nice workout, but I'm not going anywhere. And I am getting a cardiovascular stimulus. When I look at the data, it's a stress trace that looks like I'm doing. And I have to be careful to modulate that. Otherwise, it'll start to negatively impact my HRV resting heart rate recovery. But there are other things we can do activity wise. It doesn't just have to be steps. You know, it can be in a variety of ways to get that cardiovascular, stimulus. Alright. I have one more note about this is the monthly cost. Brian's is dramatically, under because if you just factor in, I think he took 26 done eating pace tests in a year or some outrageous number, you know, because he's trying to get his lowest number ever. Right? So he's taking he's, you know, taking the test as many times, and it's a 200 plus dollar test. So that's at least twice per month. That's $400 a month just on Dunedin test. Now I get you've got it for supplements, but we can add at least $400 to that cost. Plus what about the cost of having your own HBOT and doing all the stem cell therapies and all the other therapies? I mean, the cost is off the charts. So Yeah. Also the the point I wanna make is with all those supplements, that PhenoAge is still not great. Right? So Yeah. You know, and I I like Brian. I appreciate him. You know, I'm not the type to ruin someone's spotlight to shade them for their spotlight. I'm not that guy. But constructive criticism, you know, for for someone that claims to have a team of we do this for this reason and this for this reason. Well, what are those 100 supplements doing? You know, are you actually moving the needle on, more things than not? I'd like to see some correlations, you know, between, you know, supplements and biomarkers and, you know, planned approach. He did he's been doing that for psilocybin. I mean, he heavily has documented that. I'm awaiting the blood test, you know, data. And I'm sure that there are gonna be some, over exaggerations based on pre votes because you would need to do that experiment five times. Show me some five at least five tests baseline and five tests with without psilocybin. But, yeah. I mean, for for a 100 supplements, it's a lot to be taking to have a nine year younger pheno age. And that just shows you can't biohack your way to having, quote, unquote, optimal biomarkers for at least those nine. So not not with the, supplements. Those are gonna have a very indirect if like yeah. It does I don't think that we we shows the path doesn't really get that way. It could, but, you know, it's maybe that they're just not targeting the right supplements or some supplements are just, you know, doing more harm than good in some cases. So and which would those be? Okay. Well, that brings us to the end of this one. Right. So we're gonna, jump straight now into the, unaging challenge. So I've talked about this a few times, on your podcast. It's been an exciting journey. So, we're just wrapping up now the we're in the last month of the twenty twenty five unaging challenge. We started with about a 130 people, who registered for the challenge. It's a free challenge, and I've been watching it go steadily through, and I must say the numbers have dropped significantly. So I would say that it's living up to the challenge name. It's not easy to do the things. Although the time, as I've mentioned, is not that significant, is not that much of your week. It's about an hour and a half of, exercise time per week, and that's not including the walking. Don't spoil that. But the actual gym time is only about an hour and a half. And in return for that, you get about an approximated estimated extra twenty years of life taking you to nearly the centenarian level on an average according to the actuarial tables and the observational tables. There's no guarantee on that. You won't get any money back. It's not going to cure cancer, but it will give you a significant health increase. At the end of it now, we already still have around around 10 or 20 people who are still continuing the challenge, and we've made some improvements to it, in the clarity, the emails, the support structure that we set up for it. So we're doing the 2026 challenge. So to talk about some of the things that they did in the challenge last year, oops, that's the wrong way. So, people had about a 65% increase overall in strength. This is a very blended figure. So for some of these people, they were beginners and had a doubling or more, it's hard to say because they're just starting to lift weights. But even the experienced people, myself, when I did it with the early adopters, I grew at about 10%, strength from doing more intensive stuff, as well as taking the creatine, which I don't take regularly. But for special occasions and for really building bulk, it's a great way to do it in a shorter period of time. But what I the way I like to think of it though is you put all the people together who did the strength challenge part of the unaging challenge and all of the amount of weight that they lift in kilograms, it was enough actually to lift a fully loaded semi between all of us. So this is our joint effort in, moving heavy objects, picking them off off the floor, or pushing them away from the bench. And, through the challenge, we go through and let people customize and work out the best way to do an exercise for you and make sure that people are doing it at the level that's appropriate for them. It's for people who are beginners, who are also trainers, can learn ways to treat their own, routine and other and weightlifting routine to get the most effective one for the least amount of time. So then after that, we go through a walking challenge and see how far people can walk and get closer to that 12,000 steps, which I think is ideal per day. And between the entire team, we walked, 11,000,000 steps over a period of three months, which is enough to have walked from Anchorage, Alaska down to Miami, Florida and, enjoy the beautiful beaches down there. So we'll continue to do these things. Part of the whole idea of the unaging challenge is not only that you learn to do some things yourself and you track it, so it's a challenge. Just make sure that you're doing it. But we put people into groups together, teams that are then visible on a semi private level so you can see what the other people are doing. Not only are you accountable to yourself for doing the challenge and doing the steps or the weightlifting, but also other people will be able to see. And you can compare trade notes. We have a discord that we set up to do for it and weekly emails that go with these are the goals for the week. Best of luck. Here's how things are going. And sort of in that line, here's the, the group of people who were the early adopters, for the unaging challenge. These are friends of mine, from around Tokyo who did it. We had around 25 people who did in the very first batch. And I can tell you it was one of the most rewarding things to have worked with the people I know and to have worked through the program and had actually seen the transformation. My birthday is around September. And so then when I had a birthday party and had a bunch of people come over, it was very apparent that these people were more fit and in better shape than they had been than we started at the beginning of the year. So, enrollment is free. It's open now on my website at unaging.com. If you'd like to participate in the twenty twenty six unaging challenge, welcome. You can come by yourself, or you can come with other people. There's a a place in the form if you'd like to be placed with, another group of people. I had some people from my high school, several who have continued all the way through to the end, who've done it with me or with my other friends or with a group of other people. All is welcome. And, make 2026 the year that you, achieve your health goals. Anything you wanna add or say about that, Michael? No. I think it's great. I think it's great that, 25 people is a lot, you know, and, and, anything, any, anything intended on improving people's health through lifestyle, it's great. Like, we don't have to wait for published trials. I mean, you're you recruited a big enough group to potentially positively impact, you know, a lot of people. So I think it's great. I think in an earlier in the one of the earlier on aging challenges, you showed some, biomarker data, maybe HRV or something like that. So are there plans to include at least HRV, resting heart rate, and or maybe even like, you know, blood tests? Cause that would be really interesting to see, you know, blood pressure function, even blood pressure. If you have everyone come in for a blood pressure reading, you know, a couple days in a row before starting and then, you know, a month in two months in and really, you know, looking at something that would change over time, to show that it's not just fitness, it's also the stuff on the inside that's potentially improving. I think I I don't know. Are there any plans to do some of that? So, the only, device that, we regularly ask for is the HRV and the resting heart rate and also the VO two max as measured by a wearable. And we leave that to people to determine for themselves what they wanna use for the wearable. We had one person who said, I'm not sure for the walking thing. I don't have a pedometer, and I'm not sure I can do this. And then she's like, wait, my phone counts my step. It's fine. I got this. So, we wanna be as, as free for people to pick their own thing. Many people have done exactly what you said where they've tested it, but we haven't recorded all of that data. One is that I don't want that much personal data. Though we do go through with the amount of weightlifting that's been done and the resting heart rate and the other things, we can see the benefit over time. And, some of the things have been surprising. Like, some people have said that they've had the best sleep, from the resting from this unaging challenge that they've had in years. Specifically, the walking seems to have a huge help with that. One of the other people in it said that, they're able to sleep in the same room with their wife again because their snoring has greatly been reduced by doing the unaging challenge. It's not a weight loss program. There are other things, for that. It's more on overall health and longevity. Although several of the people on it have found that they've been losing weight if they've just kind of taken a different focus for it. The last, quarter of the challenge is called the unaging plate challenge, where then we take a look at diet and just see what it would be to take a simple framework that give you the steps that you need to make sure that you're getting a healthy diet to take out, put in the big winners and take out the big losers so that you can have a healthier life. And we track all of it meticulously on if you eat this food, it costs you this many minutes of life or gained you this many minutes of life. So it's, it's very much numbers based, but it's, more so about the team and coming through together and doing the best thing to improve for yourself. We don't have a leaderboard on it because the leaderboard is what we achieve together and how much life we save on it. So I'm very happy with it, very proud of it. And I hope that, more people participate in it this year. Nice. And then so is the intention to have it relatively small? Because what happens what happens, at some point, because I'm gonna be doing this forever or as long as my forever is and you too, I'm sure in terms of health and, you know, longevity optimization. So I can only imagine that so in '20, in this year, were there more people for this version of the unaideding challenge, weren't there more people than last time? We've, we've, operationalized it and, the teams are always small. So the teams are around 10 to 20 or so per team for a couple of reasons. Just, one thing is to keep sort of the information a little bit tighter and so that it's a group of people that you could say, okay, you sort of recognize. But we can scale up to a larger number of teams. We with my initial early adopters group, we had just one team of about 20 people or so. But then when we did the challenge, we started out with 14 different teams of people. Actually, I think we had about 14 different teams. So we'll continue to increase the number of teams. We're also looking at the input mechanism to see if we can make it a little simpler, and make it a little bit more intuitive. Eventually, probably we'll make it into an app if it continues to be popular and we continue to increase the numbers. And then that will give us a lot more ability to sort of pull some of that data stuff to make it perhaps more rigorous on the reporting side. Nice. So it could be a global movement, right? At some point, if it gets big enough, I know I'm, you know, this is a delusional It's the goal. Or grander. Right? Right. But you never know with these things. So and the intention is good. The intention is to do, you know, to improve people's health. So so do people have to be in Japan? Is this a Japan logo only? Not at all. We have someone doing it right now at Antarctica. So no. You can be wherever you are. It works with the materials that you have at hand. For the weightlifting, portion of it, you do need to find a place where you can lift heavy objects. But many people have done that in their own houses, or with their own home gyms or with straps and other things. So no, there's no, geographic requirement for it. Open to all. I guess the, Antarctica, we can find out about the, alien bases. Right? I'm joking. He's taking it up now, sending him messages. I'm like I'm like 99% joking. There's like these Internet memes of, you know, there are aliens in Antarctica and US studying this and this and that. So anyway, Thanks, Chris. This is great. I appreciate having you on. You're always great to, we could go for hours. So yeah, this has been great. And, thanks for being on today. Yeah. Great. Thank you so much for the opportunity and all the feedback on, the biomarkers and things. Lots of stuff to think about. Always a pleasure, Michael.