Top 10 micronutrients for healthy aging. And in the, I'll provide some resources, in a in a moment, but these are our top 10. Some of the qualities of these top 10 are, one, that they play a big role in some of that that health span markers in terms of immune function, disease prevention. So we're not just talking about deficiencies. But at the same time, all a lot of these top 10 nutrients are also ones that are at high risk for shortfalls, especially as we get older. Right now, vitamin, d and calcium are really the only micronutrients that have an age related, older adult related change. And we strongly believe that many of these nutrients also potentially should have a a a different, an a or are age essential, basically, and may need, a little bit more attention, be because of that. In our top 10, we've also indicated ones that, especially need to be looked at, more closely in terms of your intake if if you are are, an older adult. So what are some of the consequences of not getting, these these key micronutrients? I'm gonna talk about a couple different domains, especially in the immune function and around mitochondrial function as well. So we know that aging is associated with a compromised immune function. And, the the quality of that, immune function change is is is multifactorial. There are some aspects of the immune system that are dampened, so the they're not working as well. So you're more susceptible to infectious disease. Vaccine efficacy is is impaired as well. But there's some aspects of the immune system that are actually overactive, and this results in chronic inflammation. And chronic inflammation, as I've mentioned before, is kind of a a common underpinning to many of these chronic diseases and can be a precursor to many of these, diseases. So limiting, with chronic inflammation is is is definitely a key factor in terms of improving, health span. So, again, when you think about our immune system, there are lots of different parts of the immune system. I have here on this slide kind of three general broad areas, that relate to both kind of acute defense and then longer term event, defenses as well. So there are basic barrier defenses. So these are things, like the mucous membranes in our lungs, our GI tract, as as well. And changes in gut permeability or changes in your lung epithelia will cause, increased entry of, for example, of viruses back bacteria. So maintaining those barriers is extremely important. And then there are also specific components of the immune system that are often that are cellular based. There's our general defense that's related to our innate immunity, that, use your white blood cells, kind of broadly, and these are, again, are a class of cells. And then there's the acquired immunity that are more specific defenses. So these are things like cells that produce our antibodies, or cells that create factors that help, engulf or destroy, invading pathogens as well. The bottom line is our nutrients, and especially these micronutrients, play roles in all three of those domains. And there are different micronutrients that play a role, as well. So there may not be a single micronutrient, that that plays a role. So this is a, a figure from a recent paper that, myself and some other colleagues at the institute and, other partner universities, put together, talking about, micronutrients and and its role in immune system. I know this is very complicated, but the bottom line, it is complicated. And it's multifactorial in terms of different systems from barrier function, b cell, t cell function, that various micronutrients work together to, optimize, our immune system and, again, have that, resiliency. So making sure that you have adequate amounts of these micronutrients, is really critical to maintaining a robust, immune system. And I'm gonna give you some examples, from some of my work. So I do a lot of work with zinc. Zinc is a well known, factor, in terms of, plays a role, in immune system. We also know that, again, as we get older, there is complementary to the changes in our immunity, changes in our zinc status as well. So the prevalence of zinc, deficiency is, potentially higher in older adults because it's a bit of a double whammy. One, older adults do tend to decrease their zinc intake along with their protein intake. Zinc often follows protein, intake. But on top of that, even if you are getting, x amount of zinc, there's increasing evidence that the ability for you to absorb and distribute that zinc, as you get older is also compromised. So, again, you're pretty, as you get older, you're much more susceptible to not getting enough zinc. Zinc is also important, in all three of these areas. Some of the work that we've done so this is a a animal model that we can show that, older animals. So in this case, these are two months old, which are like a young adult, versus 20 old mice, which, is more like a 65, 70 year old. And we can see that even though we're giving them, a purify a a diet that we think is optimal, and has everything it needs, these older animals, even though they're eating the perfect diet, look like they're zinc deficient. They they're they're they're very low. On top of that, we also see that older animals has significant amount of this chronic inflammation. So this is interleukin six, which is a marker of inflammation. And, as they get older, they have much more underlying inflammation. What's interesting is if we supplement these, these mice, with extra zinc, we can bring their zinc levels back to that of young. And importantly, we can also, pretty well obliterate, the chronic inflammation as well. So again, this is some early work that, that we've done at the institute to really help, hopefully, establish the need for potentially more zinc, as we get older to help limit this. We've also done some other work, with, multivitamins. So in this case, this one, also contains zinc, but it also contains a whole host of vitamins, and minerals as well. And after several months of supplementation, we can see that, in a normal adult population that we're able to decrease incidence of respiratory respiratory, problems, as as well. We also have done a lot of work with mitochondrial function. So one, mitochondria, so this is the powerhouse of our cell, is known to also decline as we get older as well, and that has significant consequences on various cellular functions. In terms of not only your bio energetics but also oxygen stress pathways. It can lead to chronic inflammation. It can lead to, controlled cell death of of specific cells as well. And we also know that our micronutrients are highly critical in terms of maintaining our mitochondrial function. So, some of my colleagues at the institute, also did a multivitamin study to look at mitochondrial function. And the first thing that we noticed, again, we recruited healthy, individuals, to this, clinical trial. And one of the first things that we noticed is we asked for people who kind of self reported as being healthy, trying to do everything right. And when we measured, their micronutrient intake, both from diet and blood biomarkers, notice how many of them so for vitamin d, for example, a hundred percent of them were not consuming enough vitamin d. So even in a pop a a parent healthy population, the prevalence of these shortfalls were pretty pervasive. And this was really, something that was quite surprising to us, given, the the population that we tried to recruit. When we gave these individuals supplements for a six month period so this is just a heat map. On the left are, the group that got the multivitamins, and then on the right are the ones that are, that got a placebo. You can see there's more green, on the left versus the right, which is not surprising that we were able to change the blood levels of micronutrients, with the with the supplement that we didn't see in the placebo. But other thing to note is that even though these are all the multivitamins that were in that supplement, we don't see changes across the board, in everything. Whether that means it takes longer, but another thing that I wanted to point out is that a lot of these nutrients have problems in terms of a valid biomarker. Zinc, the one I study, is a great example of of the the blood measure that your clinician will do is actually not a great biomarker for for for detecting deficiency as well. So there's a lot of, questions, and and challenges in terms of really trying to understand, the impact of these micronutrients on health as well. In terms of mitochondrial function, though, we also were able to show, that, individuals in the multivitamin group were, protected against mitochondrial function loss. That, so in the placebo group, we saw a rate of change, in terms of loss of mitochondrial function, and we were able to maintain that mitochondrial function, in individuals that took the the supplement. Outside the LPI, there's been some new exciting data, especially in the last year or so that have also really looked at the power of multivitamins and cognitive function as well. So this is a group, that, did this study. It's called the COSMO study. They looked at both cocoa flavonoid supplementation and multivitamins in, cognitive outcomes. So, again, these are, patients, individuals that are older adults. They're showing some signs in terms of dementia, cognitive decline, which is not uncommon even in a healthy population. And just taking this multivitamin, seemed to have quite a bit of of power, in terms of improving cognitive outcomes. And again, it's not anything crazy that's happening here. It's simply a multivitamin that these individuals are taking. So this is some new exciting data that's come out in the last year. I believe some more is, coming out, as well, in the coming year for other health span markers as well. So, we're keeping our eye on that. But again, the power of just simply taking a multivitamin, in many domains of our health span, appears to be of benefit. So before we open up for some questions, just wanted to provide, some resources. So this is an example of the top 10 brochure that I mentioned. This is what it looks like. It's laid out this way. It lists the top 10. It also talks about foods that you find it in, kind of targeting mechanisms. And then we have this kind of little guide, with icons that kinda talks about, you know, if you're interested in cognitive health versus immune health, there are icons, next to each of those nutrients and and, and where, that nutrient may may play. There this is a QR code, and the the web link to the LPI website where the top 10 documents are there's I just showed you the general brochure there's also a health professionals brochure. That has a little bit higher level of information on it, and then we have three ancillary brochures focusing on bone health, brain health, and and and immune health as well. So check it out. We definitely, again, are inspired by doctor Pauling. This is one of the quotes that I love to to to highlight in terms of, you know, the power of nutrition, for our health. And it's really kind of the driving force behind what what myself and many of the researchers at the institute do.