Hey, everyone. Today's guest is doctor Matt Youssef Zadeh, who is an assistant professor of medical sciences at Columbia University Medical Center. Today, Matt's presentation will cover the three i's of immunity and aging, including immunosenescence, inflammaging, and immune resilience. So with that, welcome, Matt, and let's get into the presentation. Yeah. So thanks for having me on. This was a, review article that we wrote that just got published in Frontiers in Aging. It was largely undertaken by an undergraduate in my lab, Mariana Rona, who couldn't be here today. But, we got really excited about this topic of resilience, and I remember sort of sitting in a meeting years ago where people were discussing resilience. You know, what even is resilience? How do you measure it? And there was an opportunity to write a review article on the topic of resilience, and I sort of thought a lot about, well, how do we measure immune resilience? What is it and what is it useful for? And kinda jumping into it, you know, why do we even study the, immune system and why, you know, why do we study aging in the immune system? And it's, pretty important. Holds up. Sorry. Because as we get older, our body responds to things like vaccinations less, efficiently. We become more prone to infections. And a lot of elderly people, you know, what actually they may have, you know, lots of chronic diseases, but what ends up killing you are opportunistic infections or pathogenic infections. And a lot of elderly people die from things like influenza or sepsis. And so I think it's really important that we sort of focus on the aging in the immune system. Also, the immune system is circulating throughout our body, so it's sensitive to changes that are occurring in the rest of the organs, and it can be a nice readout for sort of what's going on systemically. And probably a lot of your viewers know a lot about epigenetic clocks, which you've talked about before, the immune cells in the blood are really the basis of the epigenetic clocks. So it's another reason to sort of look at this as well. And just as a quick primer to break it down, the innate the immune system sort of breaks down into two pathways or two sort of versions of itself, the innate immune system and the adaptive immune system. And they're both really important, and there is a lot of crosstalk between the two, but the innate immune system is really your rapidly responding system for infections, whether they sort of be bacterial or viral, and it depends a lot upon phagocytosis or sort of sampling or eating of things in the environment and then, you know, trying to sort of consume them, but also those antigen presenting cells or phagocytes, also known as APCs, can present those antigens to your t cells, and then you can get b cell antibody response. And this takes a lot longer than this immediate response. So really, it's it's the best of both worlds. You have this immediately acting nonspecific immune response and this really highly specific immune response, but it takes more time to develop. And, as we get older, every sort of aspect of this function is touched by aging. And there's this process called immunosenescence, which is the progressive age related decline in immune function. It's a little bit different than cellular senescence, which we'll cover a little bit later, but there's all these hallmarks of immunosenescence. So things like, lymphoidal atrophy or thymic involution, decreased antigen responses, mitochondrial dysfunction, myeloid skewing, loss of naive immune cells, and this increase in inflammation. And just to kinda give you a little short table to look at, All of these cell types these immune cell types are affected, whether it's the hematopoietic stem cells, cells of the innate immunity, cells of adaptive immunity. And if anyone's interested, I put the PubMed central IDs right here so they can go and find those papers. It should be readily available. And if they're not, they can contact me, and I'll get them, a copy of the paper, whatever they're interested in. So, there's kind of a lot here in the tables. But just to show you that these cell types are all affected by aging. And, you know, how are they affected? And once again, it always goes back to sort of those hallmarks of aging. What are those molecular pathways, that were really kind of pivotal for driving the aging process in ourselves and the tissues all throughout our body? And the And the one that I focused a lot on is cellular senescence, and that's what I worked on as a post doc. And so just to quickly kind of give you an idea, when you're young, you're healthy, you undergo stress, and the stress can cause cells to invoke a number of different cell fates. So, a damaged or stressed cell could undergo apoptosis programmed cell death or some other cell death pathway. There is transformation where a stressed out cell or damaged cell could become a cancer cell. And then there's also cellular senescence where the cell becomes senescent, so it's no longer able to typically proliferate. Usually, there's a stable cell cycle arrest. And, you know, that's great. Maybe you prevented a damaged or stressed out cell from becoming, you know, cancerous. But these cells are metabolically active, and they take on a secretory phenotype and release these soluble factors in what is known as the senescence associated secretory phenotype or SAS. And a lot of these inflammatory factors are things like interleukins, you know, other chemokines, cytokines, matrix metalloproteinases. And what they can do is damage adjacent tissues, sometimes even causing secondary senescence as well as sort of feeding back on themselves to restimulate them. And these SARS factors can hit the bloodstream and sort of act in long distances and almost like an endocrine fashion as well. But these senescent cells, you know, they're we're learning more and more about them. There's a lot of features that they can take on whether it's morphological changes, changes in metabolism. We see DNA damage, of course, the cell cycle arrest. They resist apoptosis, the secretory phenotype, and even epigenetic alterations as well. But I will, caution people that senescent cells aren't a monolith. They're really heterogeneous. There's quite a mixture. There's no universal, cellular senescence marker. And so it takes a lot of work to sort of define what a senescent cell is. But, you know, where they're really damaging is that secretory phenotype, and that secretory secretory phenotype can contribute to this phenomenon that's known as inflammaging. And inflammaging is as we get older, there's this increase in low grade kind of chronic sterile inflammation. It's almost like you have a low grade infection, but you don't. And so it's quite damaging to your tissues and sort of, you know, it's the thief of vitality as I like to call it. And so it can help to drive a number of chronic age related diseases, or if you have some type of challenge, it can cause an over response or make things worse. Probably in the case of patients with infections, it can cause, these pre primed immune cells to release cytokine storms. So it can be quite damaging. But getting to it, there's other things that can influence, immune aging. One of them is gut biosis or dysbiosis, excuse me. As, you know, we get older as that things occur, you can have gut leakiness. And so you can be leaking, you know, even things like commensal bacteria into the blood system where they're not normally found, and you have these shifts in the the flora in the gut as well, and that can have a profound impact on immune cells. We even know social determinants of health. Things like chronic stress, social stress, even income and housing level, can be tied to some immune changes as well. And lastly, there's sex based differences. And there's a lot of really good work that's being done on this, by two people that I just wanna highlight, Berenice Benayoun and Dewey Gu Yacar. Berenice does a lot with mouse models of immune aging and Dewey Gu with, human, humans and immune aging and looking at the differences between males and females in vaccination efficacy and immune responses to vaccination. And sometimes what you'll see in the immune cells is the changes with age pale in comparison between the changes in sex. So it really is important to not just sort of lump us all in together, but to sort of stratify us out into study the data a little bit more in detail there too. But getting back to it, you know, I my interest is in cellular senescence, and we're you know, that's what a lot of the lab works on, whether it's in the immune system or outside of the immune system. And just to kind of give you a little idea about them is when you're young, you can accumulate senescent cells sort of shown here, but they're cleared out effectively and they're actually cleared up by, different cell types of the immune system. And what we see as you get older is not only are you producing more of these senescent cells, but you're starting to lose some of that clearance mechanisms or because the immune system's not working as well as it should be. And just again to show you that these, immune cells themselves can become senescent. And so that was kind of what I looked at when I was a post doc. It was looking at the impact of senescence in immune cells and on the rest of the body. And so when you study senescence, you kinda have to choose one of the two ways that you wanna do it. A really effective way are people use chemotherapeutics or radiation. I call this the sledgehammer approach. It's really quick, it's really fast, but it's nonspecific, and it's sort of super physiological levels. Like, other than, you know, somebody receiving chemotherapeutics, you would not generate that level of DNA damage or stress that wouldn't do senescence in that quick acute period of time. So what we did was use DNA repair deficiency. So if you take away a DNA repair enzyme, you accumulate DNA damage that's sort of spontaneously occurring endogenously. So normal DNA damage that just happens with living. And so there's no exogenous form of it that's typically occurring, and you can use that to, drive senescence and study aging. And what we found is that if you remove a DNA repair enzyme from immune cells, you can drive DNA damage in those immune cells and drive, senescence and features of immunosenescence. And this causes premature aging and can affect the overall health of the mouse likely due to that secretory phenotype of senescent cells. And so just to kind of run through it, what we did was you can take a mouse model where we take this, DNA repair gene ERCC one and remove it from only the immune cells of the mice. So there's a complete knockout of ERCC one in, hematopoietic cells, but you leave a functional copy throughout the rest of the mouse. And what you can see is the mutant mice are shown in red and the control mice are shown in blue. They start out normally, but over time, if you just do a CBC, which is clinically done on a lot of people with a blood draw or finger prick, they start to lose white blood cells over time. They develop lymphopenia, and this is actually a loss of lymphocytes. And what we can see is at some point, there's actually no difference there. So the phenotype or the the physical manifestation of the changes that are occurring in these mice are degenerative and not developmental. And that's kind of important too. And we always look at that in these mice. And if you go and you survey their immune organs at a very early age, let's say that three month window, there's no increase in senescence in the, like say the spleen or the bone marrow. But if you look in the, spleens later on, we see an increase in senescence related genes, p 16 and p 21 are two classic related, senescence genes. And that level is comparable to that of a naturally aged mouse. So the spleen of this eight month old mouse looks like the spleen of a two month two year old mouse, at least molecularly. And we see an increase in MCP one and interleukin six, which are known SAS factors that are expressed there. You can even go in and do things like measuring immune function. And so we did this at about five months of age and kind of like a TB test that people get where you look for swelling on your arm. You can sensitize mice to an antigen and then go back and rechallenge them with it, and you look at footpad swelling. And it's just a slight swelling in the footpad. And, what we can see, the mutant mice where they lack DNA repair in their immune cells, there's a significant decrease in footpad swelling. They produce less antibodies against that antigen. And what's interesting is if you challenge their NK cells, they don't kill target cells as effectively as they should. And that's really important because NK cells are one of the really important cell types for clearing out senescent cells. So showing you that, you know, if you cause senescence in the, immune cells of mice, it's sufficient to really drive a profound amount of immune dysfunction that looks like that that occurs in natural aging. And if you wanna look outside of that immune system and say, well, we know this mouse has, immune dysfunction, but what happens to the rest of the mouse? And, you know, is this this inner organ communication of aging starting from the immune cells to the other cells? We do see that. We look for again that p 16, that senescence marker, and we look at the mutant mice in these different tissues as compared to the controls, and we see a high level of senescence cells in all these different, tissue types. And we've gone back and validated that this is actually bonafide senescence in, say, a liver and not just senescent immune cells within the liver themselves. And going forward from that, after the onset of immune senescence, we see the solid organ senescence. And what ends up happening is if you look a little on later down the road, they actually develop, solid organ dysfunction. So we can see liver damage markers, your alanine and aspartic, aminotransferases, which are usually done in your regular metabolic panel that you get blood work every year when you go get your physical, we see an increase in that. We see increased proteinuria, so protein in the urine that could be indicative of kidney dysfunction. We even see senescence in the, the disc, the intervertebral disc, as well as reduction in these proteins called glycosaminoglycans that help your disc cold water and keep your disc nice and full. And as you get older, your GAGs decrease and your intervertebral disc start to sort of thin out. And lastly, if you challenge muscle regeneration using cardiotoxin, we see increased wound areas and disruptions in the kind of, ratio of anti inflammatory macrophages to the inflammatory macrophages there. And so while I was working as a postdoc and doing, the revisions to this paper, at the same time, I was really fortunate. There was another great paper that came out from a group in Spain from Maria Middleburn's lab. It was led by, Gabby Desdemico, who's a friend and she's a really talented, early stage investigator in Switzerland right now starting her own lab. And what she found was that if you deplete a mitochondrial protein called Tfam, it's a transcription factor. It helps to also bind mitochondrial DNA and keep it structured. Well, if you delete Tfam and T cells, these T cells show many of the same features of immune dysfunction. So we see increased expression of these transcription factors related to exhausted t cells. We see increased levels of p 21 and senescence markers in different tissues of these mice that eventually lead to a shortened lifespan in these mice. And this was really impactful work. It was actually while I looked at all the different immune cell types, this was showing that mitochondrial dysfunction just in t cells alone can drive a really strong premature aging phenotype and solid organs. And kind of based upon both our data, what is likely happening is that, you know, we have a normal immune cell. Either you can take away DNA repair or remove a mitochondrial maintenance protein or just with age, you develop this endogenous damage or stress, and you get a senescence immune cell. And eventually, that senescent immune cell takes on that secretory phenotype and can cause secondary senescence, whether it's other immune cells or epithelial cells or other cell types, you know, it's probably a mixture of all of that. And so what I say is that senescent immune cell is helping to build up a lot more immune cells, sort of building up a lot of trash. Well, at the same time, the immune cell is losing its capability of doing its job of removing the trash. And, ultimately, it's sort of a two phase mechanism that's related to, you know, that's driving this profound interorgan communication of aging and driving systemic age. And so, you know, we're starting to learn more about the mechanisms. We're sort of investigating this, and it's a portion of what my lab does. But kinda to get back to it, we wanted to sort of use some of these models and see, you know, could we restore immune function to an old system? And, you know, how do you do it? How do you think about it? And once again, you know, this all goes back to immune resilience. And, yeah, jokingly say, you know, how do you define immune resilience? I don't really know, but this seems to be sort of a consensus definition of, you know, can you restore function? Can you promote disease resistance and control inflammation during either infection or some other form of stress? And there's a lot of really good people in the field that are working on this. And so how do you measure, immune resilience? So you can do things like surveying for immune cell populations. You know, what are the t cells? What are the b cells? What are your naive t cells? Some people go as far to do transcriptional profiles of immune cells, RNAseq analysis, which can be highly informative, but it may not be feasible for large population, scale studies. But there's a lot of good work that's being done by David Furman's group in the thousand immunomes project there. Same thing using the transcriptional profiles and cell populations. You can generate these things like immune health grades, sort of, you know, are you immune health grade one, two, three, or four? And this is a lot of work that Sunil Ahuja's lab is doing. Another cool thing that I like is just functional assays. So if we take your t cells out and we stimulate them, how well do they stimulate? Or if we take your NK cells and survey for how well they are cytotoxic? You know, I I like this because functional assays are sort of where the rubber meets the road. You know, you can get an idea of the molecular changes in immune cells here. This would be telling you, can the immune cell actually do its job? Like, can a macrophage, phagocytize or sort of consume material? And lastly, probably one of the best readouts for immune function and immune resilience is something that we all do a lot of. So vaccinations, like, you could look at how well does somebody respond to the annual influenza vaccination. What are their tighter levels? And so knowing these things now, you can sort of get into what what are some strategies to rejuvenate the immune system? And sort of you know, in the paper, we sort of break it down by what's been tested and shown in mice and what's been tested and shown in people. And so there's a lot of things. And just getting into lifestyle interventions, things like caloric restriction or dietary restriction have been tested in both and shown to work, and I'll talk a little bit about that. You know, pharmacologics, things like metformin may reduce some version or some forms of immunosenescence, especially in mouse models, and there's a little bit of data in humans. I think rapamycin is where we have some of the best data with pharmacologics, and I'll talk about that. There's other forms in mice that people have tested in a d supplementation or these, mitophagy activators like burelithin a. Biologically, you know, we know that people use PD one inhibitors to treat cancer. We know that also it's been shown in mice to have some benefits. Even antibodies targeting these myeloid bias hematopoietic stem cells. And what can happen is your hematopoietic stem cells can sort of become unbalanced with age. And rather than promoting lymphopoiesis, so the production of lymphocytes, they produce more granulocytes, and this is what contributes to this thing called myeloid skewing. And it's kind of hyper inflammatory and probably helps to also drive inflammation as we get older. And so, you know, targeting those, myeloid bias HSCs has been shown to be beneficial for health in mice. And lastly, can you do stem cell transplantation, thymic progenitors, or the use of CAR t cells? And so where CAR t cells have actually been used in mice is CAR t cells have been programmed to target senescent cells by effectively searching for this protein called uPAR on their cell surface. And Karina Moore and Scott Lowe's lab have done a lot of this, and it's actually shown to be effective at improving health in mice. It's a durable effect. Sometimes you only have to give one infusion of CAR t cells and they last. And I think, some of Karina's early data that's coming out from a preprint that I read is it looks like it may actually even be rejuvenatory to the gut by giving these senolytic CAR T cells as well. But kinda to jump into some of what I thought were the highlights of data from this is let's go back to lifestyle interventions. Right? That's the easiest thing that we can do. And so looking at caloric restriction, there was a study called the calorie study. And the calorie study is basically rather than we know the caloric restriction works in animals, works in just about every single animal model. And the more you calorically restrict to a certain degree, the better the benefit you get. Well, Calorie was doing this in healthy, non obese individuals where they would calorically restrict for about two years. And ideally, they wanted them to calorically restrict by about 25%. But realistically, I think they only got to around twelve to fourteen percent. And so if anyone's really interested in the calorie study, here's the website where you can look up everything. A lot of the data, even the underlying data is all made public to everybody. And this was a paper that was shown that caloric restriction in those humans of the calorie study actually improved thymic function. So, you know, we actually can see the caloric restriction has some positive impacts on the immune system. Other groups have shown that caloric restriction, reduces the epigenetic clock. So that's, once again, the epigenetic changes that are measured in immune cells. It reduces circulating SAS. So, you know, there's a lot of positive impacts to this, and this is probably something that, you know, we all could do and not have to sort of wait upon pharmacologics or other interventions. The next one, and I think this is probably one of the best pharmacologics out there, it's sort of the the gold standard for what we call gerotherapeutics or age related therapeutics is rapamycin. And rapamycin has, you know, been used a lot. And sorry. I'm going a little bit out of order. I'll jump to this slide. And so in 2009, there was a paper that came out from the NIA's intervention testing program where they put mice on rapamycin, and it made them live longer just through the inhibition of mTOR. We we found out in subsequent studies, if you do late life interventions, it still works quite effectively. It reduces circulating inflammation. It reduces cardiac pathology. It's almost in a way that, broadly speaking, rapamycin can make a lot of things better. And so, it was also shown around the same time that if you give rapamycin to mice, it rejuvenates old hematopoietic stem cells. And it even made these older mice, more resistant to influenza challenge and actually increased survival in the old mice that were challenged with the h one n one, influenza strain. And kind of about five years after that, there was a study by a group at Novartis, where they took elderly individuals, and elderly individuals typically respond very poorly to vaccination. Sometimes you're giving double, triple, or sometimes even up to 10 times the amount of vaccine that you might give to a younger person in order to elicit a more profound response. And what they found was that they gave older individuals short course rapamycin, it increased their annual, influenza titer levels by twenty percent, which is a huge jump in the elderly. And what we also saw was that, them on this, Rapalog or version of rapamycin, it reduced PD one, which is an immune dysfunction marker on both their CD four and CD eight t cells. So, you know, showing that this could actually be a benefit for vaccination as well. And what we did was we went back to our immunosenescence model and treated them with rapamycin. And so things were foot pads swelling. We saw deficits. They actually got better. Not completely normal, but it made improvements where there was losses. And I think this is important showing that, you know, to some degree, aging is malleable with some of these interventions. But then broadly, you know, as I've started my own lab, I'm really interested in, you know, what immune cell types are rejuvenated by mTOR inhibition or treatment with rapamycin. So we know t cells are we know gamma delta t cells are, but sort of disparately from all these different individual studies. But I kinda wanted to broadly study it. And so what we've done is we have given or we've been part of a study where mice were given rapamycin for seven months starting at 18 old. So really kind of that 55, 60 year old equivalent of a mouse, you know, is a human. And looking at differences in males and females, again, because there are sex based differences there, and looking at the effects of rapamycin in hopes to see, do we see immune cell types that are given a more youthful expression profile? Because those might be sort of the immune cell types that are rejuvenated or sort of given back resiliency from rapamycin. And once we've identified them, we'd like to go back and do functional assays on them. So if it's a macrophage that benefits from rapamycin, does it phagocytize better? If it's a t cell, you know, does it stimulate better? Is it less sort of hyper inflammatory? And so we embarked on a single nuclei RNA seek experiment. And just to show you, we've got all these different immune cell types from the, spleens. And what we see, not to sort of dive into the data too much, is that there's immune cell types that increase with age and there's immune cell types that sort of decrease with age. And what we're seeing from some of these different populations is that rapamycin shifts those populations back from sort of the age proportion back to the younger. And we're sort of seeing some, you know, gene expressions in there too with, you know, where we may have this increase in exhausted t cells. We're seeing less of those exhausted t cells and less of the exhausted t cell markers within that population. And so this is kind of, you know, within that population. And so this is kind of what we're really interested to work on and kind of where we sort of see the lab going. And, hopefully, this can be informative for other people that want to study rapamycin in the immune system, or it can just serve as a bedrock of knowledge for the future of how people look at other Jira Therapeutics, and they benefit the immune system as well and just kinda give a better insight into, you know, immune resilience. And so, you know, this is kind of how I wrap up. But if people wanna get in touch with me, there's my email and all my contacts. And once again, I'd sort of found this on x k c d, and I always love this sort of cartoon. Thanks, Matt. That was great. It's great. I had I had a whole bunch of, questions that I I I wasn't sure if you were gonna cover and you covered them, but I just wanna, like Yeah. Let's keep the conversation going. Yeah. Cool. Because, some of the all of the stuff you presented is is is so amazing and, I think incredibly underrated. For example, you know, your findings that, senescent cells, senescent immune cells drive senescent cells in other organs and decreasing organ function or markers of organ function is a humongous finding. And I, honestly, I haven't seen anybody talking about it. I'd expect it to be everywhere. Like, the focus on on gerontology, like, from my point of view from the preventative side would be how can we prevent you know, how can we extend youth and definitely minimize our senescent cell burden so that we can extend the health and functionality of our organ system? So, so my first thought then goes to biomarkers. Right? So how could we how could we start off in youth and and and keep it there? Right? So for example, you know, you mentioned the the, white blood cell counts, which are met obviously commonly measured on a CBC. So just looking at that doesn't tell you anything, you know, in terms of neutrophils, monocytes, lymphocytes. Right? But then do we need to dig deeper? Like, is only looking at the differentials. Is that, not enough of the story? So if I'm looking at total lymphocyte counts during aging and knowing that they decline during aging, should I also be look be looking at b and t and natural killer cells? But then even subdividing that, do I have to go into the more granularity to really you know? So is only looking at the number of, you know, the different white blood cell differentials. Would would you think that's sufficient, or what would be your best way to address biomarkers of keeping the immune system as, youthful and functional as possible. So that's a great thing. You know, CBCs, we use because they're really cheap and really easy. Right? Like but that doesn't mean you're gonna get the granularity of data that's really good. Yeah. If if everybody we could run spectral flow panels of, you know, 40 markers, and I could tell you this is your your CD four population, your Treg pop oh, by the way, your c your CD fours have a lot of PD one and immune dysfunction marker on them too. So I think, you know, there's another common biomarker that's used a lot. It's sort of a really good robust sort of surrogate biomarker for biological aging, and it was developed by Ned Sharpless's lab, like, fifteen years ago. And they measure expression of p 16 in peripheral blood t cells. So you you harvest blood, you can either flow sort or magnetically purify out CD three T cells. And CD three is just a pan T cell marker. So it's really nonspecific. And what Ned's group did was take these different immune cell types and find which ones were really sensitive to senescence. And it just seemed to be that, broadly speaking, T cells were there. And so they measure it, and it's a really good biomarker that's used by a lot of people. We use it for some of our clinical studies. We had a paper that came out that showed that senescence in the peripheral blood t cells in liver transplant patients was actually predictive of baseline frailty and length of stay in the hospital. And so, like you said, can we use some of these immune dysfunction breed outs to sort of pick people out and say, oh, this person, we're gonna predict that they're gonna probably have more complications, or if, like, from length of stay, they're gonna consume more health care or they're gonna need much more vigilant, sort of surveillance and watching. And based upon knowing that sort of a a priori, can can we get those people interventions before they go do some of these surgeries or things like that. Right? So I think that's another good marker. But I also think there's other work, like, coming out from David Furman's group where he's doing the thousand immunomes where, you know, when you do such a large based population study, I think he's going to be able to extract biomarkers that are quite meaningful and very robust and will work that, you know, we don't get to do like, I don't need to do because I don't have that large population subset. So, I think it's one of those things that what we have, it's it's okay. It's not great, but stay tuned. Hopefully, we get some better biomarkers. And like you said, the the epigenetic clocks. Right? But those are still questions around functionality to some degree. But Alright. Wait. So the senescent, T cells, would a senescent, c T cells, they should be cleared. Right? Shouldn't they be cleared? So is the first step senescence? And then the second step, it should be that they're cleared so that, you know, that there's turnover. So you have new fresh t cells. So I guess the mechanisms for removing senescence c t cells is also a problem. Sure. Yeah. We we're still and I think so I was talking with a friend, and we were looking at immunosurveillance of senescent cells. And there's actually not a lot of papers. We were joking. There's probably only about 30 papers, and we were starting to try to count them on hand. And it's a really wide open field. Like, a lot of us, we know a lot about how we generate excess senescent cells. The sort of homeostatic mechanism of removing them, how it's lost, we need a lot more people working in that area. So So if if total lymphocytes were experiencing the age related decline, the well known age relate related decline, probably could would you say that, it's probably some aspect of senescence or or you know, so senescence and then so so in other words, what I'm trying to say is if you had a lot of senescent t cells or even b cells, natural killer cell, if they were all senescence, right, is it possible to have, you know, relatively normal levels of total lymphocytes, but just their just their functionality is is is poor versus it's more likely that that, you know, most of them are cleared, and then we see that age related decline for lymphocytes. How how do you how do you think about that? Yeah. It it's wide open. I so I don't I think the answer is there's not a good answer right now. We struggle with you know, there's a there's a immunological definition of senescent cells that's a little different than the geroscience version of it. It. And, you know, how do we sort of merge the two together? Like, where do we find what is the true consensus senescent cell? Because the immunologists have their criteria and the, you know, geroscience or aging biologists have their own based upon our markers, their markers. And, and how do those differ from even say an exhausted t cell? So what's a senescent cell senescent t cell versus exhausted t cell? There's some overlap there in the markers. Exhausted t cells can have a reversible cell cycle arrest. We think that senescent t cells are more permanently or stably arrested in the cell cycle, so they're no longer able to proliferate. But with aging too, as you are losing the lymphocyte population, you're building up more of the myeloid population as well too. Right? So more macrophages, monocytes, granulocytes as well. So you're you're seeing just overall shifts. Not just so the, myeloid precursor doesn't just shift it to the neutrophils and monocytes and less lymphocytes, but then also away from red blood cells. Right? Because don't they also so now you've got less, you know, oxygen carrying capacity of the blood, which is gonna be used for metabolism. And then you've got basically, you know, cells that are starved for energy because right? So so then the question is, I know that a a component of inflammaging is thought to be sterile, but couldn't it be possible that many of these senescent cells are, you know, virally infected or infected with other microbes, and then it's just we're bad at clearing them. So the cell goes senescent to basically turn off the protein, replicating machinery, thereby limiting viral replication. But at the same point then, you know so it's a balance between aging and, you know, infection. Have you what do you think about it? I I I think you're spot on. I think we say sterile because you're not sort of you don't have walking pneumonia or something, but per se, but you could have, infections, especially, say, CMV cytomegalovirus, which at some point, 20% of sort of your antigen experience t cells could just be dedicated to CMV. The other route for this is that chronic, sort of sterile infection could honestly be the gut dysbiosis and the leaky gut. Right? Like, that could be the source of it. Yeah. And and not just gut gut dysbiosis, but but their metabolites. Right? So Mhmm. If you've got a shift in the you know? So for example, I I don't know how how much I'm, like, deep into the the gut physiology stuff, but Let's go. Low short chain fatty acids Mhmm. Low colonic acidification. Colonic acidification keeps the growth of things like enterobacteria in check. So when you have a more alkaline pH, which is what happens during aging, at least in this few studies that have been shown on colonic pH, you can get an expansion of the enterobacteria. And, actually, there's a few studies that have looked at, neurodegenerative disease with a more alkaline pH. So now, potentially, you've got more of these enterobacteria, which contain genes for things like pericrystall sulfate and doxyzole sulfate, which I'm sure you know are you know, they damage everything. Kidneys, muscle Yeah. Linked with neurodegeneration. So if that's if more of that is in the blood, I'd expect that to potentially impact, you know, pro inflammatory pathways. Is that inflammation, though? I don't know. But I I think we use inflammation as a broad term, and probably some ways we use it a little too loosely. But, yeah, I I I can totally see where that contributes to. And you're you're spot on of, you know, there's the neurodegenerative disorders, like, say Parkinson's. Right? There's sort of a gut brain axis. And, you know, they sort of feed into each other and everything. So, you know, it's what is what is the effect of the immune system on the periphery and the periphery on the immune system? And as we sort of talked about, there's all these immune cell types. You need all these immune cell types to sort of build a village of having a very healthy immune system. And then when you get older, everybody in the village sort of breaks it down and sort of tears it apart too. So it's not one immune cell type sort of the smoking gun. They're all kind of going through it, and it could be, you know, exhausted t cell, a senescent t cell, or even are we putting things are we losing sort of this process of what's called also energy. Right? So this hyporesponsiveness and energy is really important for preventing autoimmune conditions. And so could that sort of be occurring as well as is there either too much energy or is there a loss of energy, and is a circumstance dependent. And so kind of one of the things that we wanna look at beyond senescence, the lab is trying to look at which sort of pillars of aging, you know, can drive this systemic aging if we say we cause DNA damage or we impair proteostasis or mitochondrial function in immune cells? What happens? And does it happen at the same sort of strength and same timing? Or because it would sort of tell us which pillar of aging might sort of have primacy in the whole development of immune aging. And we're trying to create reporter models that would allow us to track things like senescence, autophagy, and maybe DNA damage all at the same time and just watch the immune system longitudinally as that mouse ages out and see how these things all change in relation to each other. Because I think we sort of we're really good at studying one hallmark of aging at a time. I don't think we're so great at sort of studying them comprehensively and integrated changes across them. And I'm hoping that we can sort of create some tools that will help the, you know, the field to do some of that. Nice. What about, infection as a trigger? Is that Yeah. Yeah. So that's an argument from mouse models. Right? Like, most of our our mice, they live in a really clean, sterile environment. And so we jokingly say, do they even really develop an immune system, or do they just develop this kind of premature immune system? So there's people that do, you know, viral infection. Sepsis is another really good, model, that people do that. There's also, sort of communal pathogenic infections. Like, I worked before, we actually use pet shop mice. And you would co house your mice with pet shop mice, and they were full of bacteria and viruses. And, you know, young mice eventually would clear them. They would make productive antibody responses, but old mice would not. You know, they would be sensitive to death. But if you could find a lethal agents, like, in one case, we found mouse hepatitis virus as a lethal agent in the bedding. If you immunize the old mice against it or you treated them with some gerit therapeutics, it would increase their survival. Yeah. So that that brings in the idea of the precision, you know, to the whole approach, and I think that's what's lacking. And I don't know how long it'll take the field to catch up to that. But even when you think about, you know, rapamycin is you know, I saw all the effects that you and others have have shown in terms of, you know, basically, not necessarily rejuvenating, but improving immune function. Is that because rapamycin is doing something it's a known antifungal. Is is it doing something antifungally? It can potentially also impact, viral infection. There's some evidence on that too. So, if we know the exact trigger that may be causing senescence, and maybe it's polymicrobial or it's polyfactorial, that's a whole another in a worms. But, what are your thoughts about when the field will move towards the precision aspect of this is what the the root cause of your senescent cell burden is, and and this is what we'll do to directly address it. Yeah. I think just to shift back really quickly, the rapamycin does so many things. Right? Like, antifungal increases the expression of antiviral, you know, genes. Oh, by the way, you're lowering systemic inflammations that's probably also making your immune cells work better, if not rejuvenating the immune cells themselves. I think in some ways, we've gotta create we've gotta get better biomarkers. We gotta have better granularity. And then we've gotta create more specific compounds that are really selectively targeting, say, an immune cell versus, you know, the parenchyma. Right? Like, are the immune cells functioning better because I made the other organs in the body better too? So it's, you know, in some ways, it's hard to do that in a human right now, but with the genetic interventions, we're a lot more adept at doing that in the animal models. So I think that's where we'll learn some stuff from. But, you know, I think it's also, looking at these different, gerotherapeutics and testing them and see how they work on immune functions like the, conigaflows in the sodium glucose transport, SGL two inhibitor is shown to increase sort of immune surveillance. I think it was a recent paper that came out in the last year. You know, is it because it's solely benefiting the immune cells or is also the princum as well? We don't know. And it's just a function that we can't really tell because these things work broadly across many cell and tissue types. So then it for me, it makes sense that for people that were having issues with immune survey like, identifying what the trigger is and what the weakness is and then giving them that specific, you know, therapeutic. Right? So if it's immune surveillance, you give them the can of flop, however you say it. I can never say it. It's always hard for me. I I call it I I just call it the SGL two inhibitor. Right? Like, because it's GL two. Yeah. You're right. Or, you know, our cell based therapies, if your t cells, your NK cells aren't very good at doing immune surveillance, can we give you adoptive transfer of younger, more youthful immune cells? And or can we take your immune cells out, reprogram them, sort of turn back that clock and increase that functionality and put them back into you. Right? So that's probably an easier way to go about doing it rather than saying, I only wanna pinpoint the immune cell and not everything else. Whereas with, like, rapamycin, you're like, I'm kind of okay with pinpointing the immune cell and everything else because everything else seems to be benefiting to some form of fashion. It's interesting because I had that on my list of questions to to ask you too. So I think, obviously, I think that's a great idea, you know, you know, giving yourself more warriors in the fight. Right? But then what if the question becomes, and this is kind of the the argument that I have against the parabiosis stuff too is if the milieu if your systemic milieu is aged, right, whether that's lots of inflammatory factors or whatever it may be, you know, would your would the autologous stem cells, that you're putting back in there that make more t cells or b cells or whatever you're missing, would that be a suboptimal approach? Do you have to address the milieu in conjunction with the stem cell transfer? I would think yes. I would think, you know, with something, some gerotherapeutic that at least is reducing overall inflammation levels. Right? Like, you're giving your best shot in the fight of, like, you're putting in a fresh army and you're sort of making the battlefields the most advantageous for you by reducing the inflammation or or making the niche better. Because if you take young cells, you put them in an old niche, those young cells are gonna age out really quickly. Yeah. So then it gets to the question of now I'm back on the precision aspect of it all, which is, you know, like, we think of even calorie restriction as this broad term, but, you know, how much protein, how much fat, carbs, fiber, macro, micronutrients, you know, all of that recipe goes into the health and function of the immune system and all the other organs and cell types too. So, you know, just the idea of what we can do with that recipe, you know, for the art of motorcycle maintenance. Right? That's there's such a black box there. So Mhmm. So wait. So I'm back on the biomarkers. Right? So that brings me back to biomarkers with the precision, you know, therapeutics. So if should we all be looking at I mean, we can't get to the granularity of I mean, beyond, you know, the specific, beyond c d four, c d eight, even c d three. I think those are commercially available. So going below that may be a challenge because Yes. That's just not commercially available. So, like, I'm still uncertain. Like, with looking at total b and c, a b and t and natural killer cells, would looking at their levels be informative at all, or is even that, like Yeah. With u shape? There's a lot of population based studies that look at the ratios of the the lymphocytes and the, you know, CD four or CD eights or the the naive, and that's just done with regular standard flow cytometry panels. And that's some of what was done in the where I previously touched upon the social determinants of health. A lot of those studies did that with banked PBMCs from, the subjects, and they just did flows flow cytometry. So and that's something that quite frankly every at least hospital or academic medical center can easily do. Right? Like, every clinical pathology lab has a flow cytometer. They already these panels set up because they're running them for leukemia lymphoma patients. You know? It's just has it been democratized out to everybody else beyond just, oh, I can get a CBC, but I don't get to see much else. You know? So I think that could be something that would be really impactful. I know there are companies that do offer the looking at p sixteen expression in the c d three t cells. I know they are sort of expanding their biomarker panel in the peripheral t cells to looking at other sort of inflammatory molecules as well as maybe immune surveillance gene expression as well in there. So, yeah, but that's not something that's readily available to everybody. But I would say that flow panels could be. Right? Because every somebody's probably within 50 to a 100 miles of a hospital that could easily do that. You know? So So looking at just individual b and t and natural killer, that's not enough? Or you you I I think I think it I well, it's not probably gonna get you a huge amount of precision, but it's gonna get you more precision than what we have. And I think it's sort of that Goldilocks, that happy middle. Right? Like, if you're something that gives you total granularity. It's incredibly expensive, and it's inaccessible to most. And here's something that's incredibly accessible to everybody, but may not be that informative. And so maybe this is where we we get to hear, and we hope that we can make this more accessible and more affordable at some point. Right. So I'm still trying to it's crazy. I'm still trying to biohack around that idea. So what if what if we don't even, you know, we can't get the granularity because it's not completely available. And the b and and t and natural killer, maybe that's just not as informative. Right? Because I mean, what should it be in youth? Like, if you have low b cells or low t cells, is that because of a low cumulative microbial burden and you just don't need the large repertoire, or is that, you know, just it's it's low because you've got your your immunodeficient in some way. You know? So so I I'm I'm starting to think about it from the point of view of, what if I looked at total lymphocytes and then some of the SAS secreted Mhmm. Pro inflammatory proteins, IL six, TNF alpha? Yeah. So if you had low levels of lymphocytes and high levels of SAS proteins or SAS SAS right. Right? That would probably would that provide information, you know, kinda without all the granularity of the individual immune cell types? And how how would you I think I I think that could the lymphocyte numbers, I really like, you know, ratios or or naive t cells. Like, I think that's gonna be the most informative for say something. SAS factors, yeah, I wonder a lot of people have really gravitated towards in the field is g d f 15. Like, it goes up with biological aging or really disease. There was always a question of what, how does GDF 15 change in healthy people that sort of age? And there was a really cool study by the Mayo Clinic that was done that showed that GDF 15 in healthy people that had one chronic disease or less was predictive of risk of death. So I think that's probably a really good SAS factor or or or blood based biomarker. And, again, not specific to senescent cells. It's very systemic marker. But maybe if you put that in combination with, you know, your immune cells, then that's important because other people will measure interleukin six. It's very common in sort of these panels, and that's, you know, clinically available. But if you have any hint of a cold, your IL six is off the charts. So you could be a a five year old kid with a cold, and you look like a 95 year old man with a heart condition. Right? So, you know, some of these things, a little bit of these biomarkers that we use, they are imperfect. They are precisely imprecise and, very context dependent to some degree. And so but I think you have to build sort of a panel of your most robust ones. And, also, I think the way we learn about these things is we study natural sort of immune aging, but we should also be looking at other populations and seeing how what changes in them. So people with inborn errors of immunity, I like to say the ends of the aging spectrum, let's look at progeria patients and let's look at centenarians. Right? Like, who are the outliers? Yeah. Alright. Wait. So is GDF fifteen produced by the SAS? Yeah. It's it's sort of it's lumped into the SAS. And then is GDF, 15 just like TNF alpha IL six? Yes. Yes. Interesting. But not commercially available. I've I've looked. It's not No. No. No. No. Not not, you know, when we do it for patient stuff, it's we're we're doing it ourself or we're doing it in a biomarker core. It's not sort of a CLIA certified. Right? Like, it's really research use only or RUO is what you might see. So, but I think in time, hopefully, the field and, you know, clinically, it will be adopted. I mean, that we're just every year stacking study upon study, and it to me, it's a really good one. But I don't know. It just hasn't been sort of broadly adopted, you know, yet. Just as a side note. So, so GDF 15 in terms of, its concentration in blood, it's probably very low. Right? So most of the proteomic studies that look at all cause mortality risk, they'll they'll take out because, you know, the two d gels, the the most abundant proteins are albumins, globulin, globulin, fibrinogens. You have to take them out, and then you're looking at the low abundance protein. So, I I worry about some of the proteomic studies like that where they identify GDF 15, even cystatin c, which is a big one. But albumin, is also associated with increased for me, those are the biggest trees in the forest. Right? And, especially, that goes back to even the globulins. Right? So IgG, couldn't that be an indirect or or maybe even a direct readout of, you know, your overall microbial burden, not so much a senescence marker, but, right, that's telling you something about what your immune system is under undergoing. Right? So, yeah, I would say the the GDF fifteen data that I've seen in humans so far is largely based on singleplex or multiplexed ELISA, and that seems to be reliably measured. I know there are people that are doing proteomics, so they're using sort of SEER to preserve, like, the lower end of the the abundance versus, you know, the high end where, my god, every sort of proteomics person I ever worked with, they love doing tissues and you say, let's do blood. They're like, no. I I I spend my days, you know, getting rid of albumin or dealing with it. Shoot. Wow. What was the other thing? I get that. IGG. IGG. IGG. So I recent papers actually showed that IGG levels increase with age. Yep. And these immunoglobulins actually can cause macrophages to nest. It can cause metabolic dysfunction. So but the question is and we know from the tabula mercinus that there's this buildup of plasma cells and tissues with h two. Right? Like, that was one of the most robust immune cell markers. And anyone that's looking for plasma cells, it's really easy in RNA seek datasets. You just look for the expression of j chain. And so you can see it there. And so, you know, are with age, are we building up plasma cells that are invading into these tissues producing a lot of immunoglobulins? And are they beneficial or not? Very likely, maybe not. And my question is, of those immunoglobulins, what percentage of them are autoantibodies? Right. Yeah. So then the if when autoantibodies, couldn't that be back to the infection story? Because I I'm not convinced that. Right? So Or you say, like, we have reduced tolerance. You know? This is what's building you know, we're starting to get some self recognition in there. And, you know, we're losing energy where we need energy, and this is what's causing, you know, autoimmune conditions. So is this your rheumatoid arthritis? Is this your, you know, Crohn's disease? Yeah. So so, wait, I'm still trying to build the, this panel of biomarkers that I could use to potentially, you know, slow immunosenescence to keep the health of my immune system fresh and young. Right? So, if if I included IGG, that would be some kind of a readout, right, of, Yeah. And then on the other side, I think complement is a a mark could be a marker, but then which complement right. So so if if IGG is high, that says something about the burden you're under. Right? And then Yeah. If comp but complement has so many different subfractions, I wouldn't even know where to start. Is it three c or three d or c one q or yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And so so I I jokingly say, like, if you if you held me at gunpoint and said give me biomarkers of immune aging, you know, I would give you I like systemic GDF fifteen. I think it's really good. It's growing. I like, you know, just give me some basic immune ratios. Like, what are your CD fours, your CDH, your b cells, your naive cells in there? Throw in an epigenetic clock, and I'm not buy and and I'm not just saying this because he's my neighbor across the street, but, Dan Belsky created Dunedin Pace, which is one of the epigenetic clocks. And I really like it because it's sort of your speedometer for aging. Right? And so, I I think if you kinda do some of that and then, you know, if we were checking for as we get older, you know, vaccination tighter levels, right, for your annual influenza. But vaccines are really hard because it's based upon your immune memory. Right? Like, there is some follow-up to it and, you know, is there a bias of how many antibodies you start with versus next? And so, you know, ideally, the best thing would be, like, ex vivo stimulation with the new antigen you've never seen before. And these are, honestly, these are really good questions and really good biomarkers. And this is stuff that I know that the that the XPRIZE is gonna have to deal with. Right? Because they wanna rejuvenate three sort of organ systems by ten years, the immune system being one of them. Right? So Yeah. So I've got the I'm looking at it from the other side, though. I'm trying to keep it what's the recipe for keeping it as young as possible so that I don't need their therapeutic plasma exchange? I've already got a youthful milieu. Right? So Yeah. Yeah. So just keeping it on the biomarkers. I don't know if so obsessed with biomarkers with you today, but, so we or if if we built it with off also with, like, IL six and TNF alpha Mhmm. Right? So now and and I'm not just thinking about it, like, in one in terms of one, one time point. Right? Mhmm. You're You know, I want longitudinally. Right? Longitudinally. And year to year change with many tests. Right? So if you know what your the pro inflammatory pro proteins are, IgG, maybe even complement your lymphocytes, some subdivision differentials down there. Mhmm. You're looking all that on a year to year basis. Couldn't you, like, in theory, you know, identify the recipe that keeps that all relatively youthful and then slows the pace of aging there without going to the epigenetics, which, you know Yeah. Yeah. So, you know, I I I really if if we could go back and redo a calorie study. Right? Like, I would love to see these changes as the the patients came in. You know, if we were doing they're their calorically restricting. Right? Because that's the easiest intervention we could do and kind of something that works really robustly. And, you know, are there are there, sort of, immune population staying in the favorable, you know, categories? And likely you say, was that once again, is that a benefit to the immune system, or is that a benefit from the periphery to the immune system as well? So but, you know, I'll take it if it benefits the immune system. I don't care how it happens. Right? So Yeah. So calorie restriction may be the most powerful intervention, I think, for, you know The other thing we did, so we looked at senescence markers in those peripheral blood t cells with a a study that was run by Davis England who was a postdoc at the Mayo Clinic. He's got his own lab now at UAB, and they took, healthy elderly people at the Mayo Clinic. They have this, like, elderly population, and they put them on progressive resistance training. And they found that over time with progressive resistance training, physical function markers improved, circulating SAS went down as well as did p 16 expression in the peripheral blood t cells. So not really a readout of immune function, but at least there's positive changes we see going on in immune cell types, you know, as well as, like, reduced p d one expression. So calorie restriction and exercise, those are the Yeah. Why not? It's the easiest stuff we can do. Right? So Definitely. Alright. So then, I think also fiber. So fiber could be a part. I'm I'm I don't know. Maybe you've seen it, but probably seen it where soluble fiber supplementation. I can't remember if the model was rats or mice, but Mhmm. Better survival after, flu, influenza infection. So there is a gut lung axis. So that makes me think, what about, you know, could and I'm sure you know, soluble fiber, I think can increase Treg expression in the in the gut. So that's probably an a hugely underrated factor in this whole story. I mean, sure, you've got calorie restriction and exercise and that, you know, senolytics or or or, rapamycin. But fiber is is, like, completely unknown. Nobody's talking about it at all. What do you what do you think? Yep. I I think you're right there. Right? Like, basically, what can you do to preserve gut function? And I will say, at least from the aging immunology perspective, and I can't go too much into detail because I don't wanna spoil their study their stories that are about to come out, but there's effects of the old immune system on the gut and maybe some other things that you can do to rejuvenate it. But, yeah, I can totally see fiber as, you know, one of the methodologies to sort of how do you preserve gut biosis? How do you sort of is it does it sort of stave off or alleviate gut leakiness? Nice. Alright. Then some other questions too. So astaxanthin, I know you're a part of that study that where astaxanthin extended lifespan. So could astaxanthin be sort of, you know, an essential nutrient knowing that it extended median lifespan in the ITP mice? Yeah. So I think, you know, I wrote at one point, there was this, granting program impetus. And I wrote a a grant to emphasis that didn't get funded. And, I thought it was the world's greatest idea was to take whatever worked in the ITP or a couple of these molecules and some that worked in males and not females or females only, and let's test them on immune function. Like, let's put mice on them, and I would use rapamycin. Right? That was our positive control. And let's let's look put these mice on it for about a month or two or maybe even three months, and then look at, you know, how well do t cells work, how well do macrophages work, and sort of look into that. Right? Like, let's take these hits and screen them. What are gerotherapeutics impacting the immune system? And, you know, the conigiflosion data says yes. You know, I didn't know that paper had come out. This was sort of a year after I wrote the failed grant, but, you know, it just kind of proves the point. I I you know, there was a a great immunologist, Yehuda Schonfeld, who said that all diseases are autoimmune in nature until proven otherwise. I sort of wanna coop the statement and say aging is largely based on immune dysfunction until proven otherwise to some degree too. Right? Like, sort of coop that. And so I think a lot of these Jira Therapeutics are probably doing some benefit to the immune system. We just haven't rigorously tested it yet. Yeah. Alright. So have you included any aspects of, you know, astaxanthin or CR exercise? Has any of that made its way into your own personal approach for slowing, you know, or slowing immune aging? And I you know, I'm more of a I'm more stuck in the grant writing mode, so I'm really just trying to focus on, you know, getting into the gym to exercise and trying to eat, you know, a balanced meal in my office while I'm writing a grant with one hand. You know, got a fork in the other. So, but yeah. No. I haven't I haven't sort of done too much with that. I was I'm really kind of interested to see, you know, what's gonna happen with the with the XPRIZE. Right? Like, in the next year or two, three years, we're gonna see some of the the molecules or interventions that are working. And, you know, from there, I think that probably is going to be where a lot of us will maybe start adopting some of those things, whether it's a lifestyle intervention or it's something that's on the, you know, the grass list generally regarded as safe or something like that that people are giving. I know a lot of people were talking about what they wanted to submit to the XPRIZE, like, epigenetic reprogramming, but these things have to already be off the shelf things or approved for use. So, but, you know, I I like whatever works there is gonna be the best of what is accessible to everybody to some degree. So if you had to make a bet, which do you think, you know, any molecules, small molecules, or, you know, to your protectors, what would you put what would you put your bet on? I really I'm I'm really I'm a I'm a a cellular senescence guy. Right? Like, so I love senolytics, but I'm gonna tell you. I really I've been so impressed with sort of the field of mitophagy and these mitophagy activating compounds, that I'm really kind of keeping my eye on things like urolithin a, and, like, Nicola Venini's group has shown that it's was, sufficient to rejuvenate, old hematopoietic stem cells. You know, other people have shown that nicotinamide riboside has worked with, at least in mice. Right? So we're not talking humans. We're talking mice that it's benefited dysfunctional and aged immune cells. So I think those are some things that maybe you're taking a cell and you're supplementing it with these gerit therapeutics that they aren't getting rid of, say, pathogenic cells like senolytics are, but they're improving, you know, sort of the existing cells function. So would that be then pomegranates and walnuts for the alleged tenants converted into your life and, a, hopefully, by the gut, or or would you just supplement? I mean, I don't know. What what what would you think would be the best approach? Man, I hate pomegranate, so I'd have to supplement. You know? Alright. Yeah. It's probably it's probably the best measurable amount. Right? Because you don't you know that you're at least getting this guaranteed amount. And you could likely say, well, oh, I'm also, you know, to get that benefit of your life in a, I'm not spiking my glucose levels with a bunch of fruit either. Yeah. And it also gets to dose. Like, how how much can you get enough from the food, or do you need that super physiological dose? And then is is the net effect systemically gonna be beneficial? Right? Do you get some rejuvenation of mitochondria, but then it's such a super physiological dose. You've got xenobiotic metabolism in the liver. It just goes crazy. And now it's like Yeah. Make one thing better and crush a few others. Right? I I think, you know, there's there's the argument on one side of the passive thing is I'll eat a pomegranate. The other side is I'm gonna supplement with x amount. And somewhere in the middle lies the truth of the therapeutic window, right, of, like, I I'm not gonna get any benefit until I meet eat x amount of pomegranates, or I'm maxing out the benefit, and now I'm getting into the problem area of too much. Yeah. Alright. So another one of your studies, you looked at, flavonoids, and I think, what was it? So, curcumin and, fisetin were best, and that was for what what was I can't remember what that was for reducing, but those are like yep. It's Fasetinib is sort of a synthetic and basically can reduce an essence of burden. And so it's kind of it was built off of the first generation senolytic with dasatinib plus prasatin. And, you know, dasatinib and another, senolytic, navidaclax, are, you know, chemotherapeutics. So people may be refracted to that. So could you take something that's there and is sort of naturally safe? And, you know, again, it's it's weekly synthetic. So can you it's also has sort of oral bioavailability issues. So can we make other synthetic therapeutics that, you know, work better? And so, you know, probably likely the field is, you know, moving on to second and third generation compounds. And I think that's where, you you know, can we increase potency and increase oral bioavailability? Right? As well as can we make even more safer compounds? So you mean better than d plus q or better than and, curcumin? Hopefully, better than all. Right? I think, you know, d plus q is nice because it's so facetin is a more active version of quercetin, and so f is better than q. You know? But is f better than d plus q? And we haven't done really full head to head analyses. At least the field hasn't yet. D plus q, you know, all these drugs target these senolytics are supposed to target the senescent cell anti apoptotic pathways. So these pro survival pathways that senescent cells upregulate that, look very reminiscent of cancer cells. Right? They they they turn on or suppress pathways to basically persist and and, you know, resist and just sort of make it. And so, like, BCL two families are inhibited by navitoclax. You know, you have PI three kinases and some other things. And so, ideally, what we need to know more is we is in these different tissues and conditions, what senescent cells or what cell types become senescent, and then which ones of these scaps or prosurvival pathways do they up regulate so that we can do precision synotherapeutics? So, basically, oh, you have, say sarcopenia. We know your muscle cells, the myofibers, and the satellite cells are senescent, and they each sort of up regulate these pro survival pathways. We'll put the right combination of drugs together to treat. So, you know, once again, we're we're not precise yet, but I think that's where we should aim for because I don't want to touch upon pathways that aren't dysregulated. Yeah. That's the best approach. You know, for now, like, you know, we've got the general d plus q or fisetin. Are there others that would be on the radar until then in terms of, like, if you had to pick a flavonoid besides fisetin and curcumin or even quercetin? And and then is getting it from food enough, you know, including those strawberries, onions? I I I think a lot of this is gonna come to supplementation. And so, you know, for us, I think, you know, I would really like to see a head to head comparison of a lot of different senolytics together as well as, you know, chuck in one of the senolytic CAR T cells. Right? And that relies upon the premise of these senescent cells up regulate uPAR. And is it, you know, is it killing the same cell that, say, d plus q is killing? So we don't know enough about that yet. And so I I think some ways, you know, we can be making better drugs, but I think we should also be doing a lot of really good discovery biology because I think that's gonna inform us on how to make better drugs. Definitely. Alright. Great stuff, Matt. I appreciate you coming on and all the questions I bombarded you with. No. This is fun. Thanks for having me. Cool. I'm looking forward to everything your lab produces, and, hopefully, we can have you back on at some point. Great. Thanks.