Iron is necessary is a necessary element for all living things. And as far as human beings go, go, we have, finely tuned, iron regulatory mechanisms, hormones, and so on that regulate the absorption of iron from our food. So at least in theory, if somebody is very metabolically healthy, everything else is right, when people get to a certain, level of body iron stores, basically, the regulatory system will really kind of shut down the absorption of iron so you could keep that in fine tune. In practice, many people are not metabolically healthy, and there's there are sources of iron that, we we, didn't necessarily have before. You know, for example, flour and cornmeal in The United States is mostly iron fortified, and people take multivitamins with iron supplements and, you know, this kind of thing. So the result is is that, generally speaking, people's iron iron level body iron stores as indicated by the marker ferritin rises with age. And this has been shown to be associated with all kinds of ill health and higher mortality and so on. This this whole line of reasoning and investigation basically started when, the late Jerome Sullivan, several decades ago, was thinking about, well, why do women have such lower heart, rates of heart disease? And, you know, at the time, and for all I know, maybe still now, a lot of people are are saying, well, they have estrogen and various things that, you know, prevent heart disease. And he thought, oh, well, gee. Women have much you know, premenopausal women have much lower stores of body iron. Their ferritin is low. And, you know, in middle age, like, you know, let's say between the age of four 40 and 50, you men have, about five something like four to five times the levels of ferritin that women do, and they also have about four or five times the rates of heart attacks as women do at that age. So that's where where it all started. There's been a lot of research. Iron is important, for instance, in cancer. Cancer is a rapidly growing tissue. Anything that is growing requires iron for growth. Some many, tumor cells upregulate transferrin receptors so that they can accumulate a lot of iron. Another side of this evidence is is that, and, again, this this research goes back a few decades, and and there there's more recent research too, that blood donors have better health than nonblood donors. Now, of course, you've run into a big problem there, which is the healthy donor effect because you gotta be healthy to donate blood. And and not not only that, probably people who don't feel so healthy or not even gonna try. But this is so this has been looked at as well. You know, try trying to statistically account for the healthy donor effect is, you know, to see how much of this is real, and it certainly does appear to be real. There was a paper that came out a few years ago that said that so one thing they do to account for the healthy donor effect is they look at, for example, they compare frequent donors with nonfrequent donors. So, you know, this this doesn't necessarily count for the whole thing, but at least you're not comparing just blood donors to non donors. So, anyway, they they looked at this and found that it it it was something like every blood donation beyond two donations a year was associated with seven and a half percent lower mortality rate. I think I got that right. So this this was trying to account for the healthy donor effect. They've also looked at things like, like, in some countries, people are, not allowed to give blood after the age of 65, so they compare current blood donors with former blood donors. And so, anyway, that that's the whole thing with iron. And and so, the idea is oh, and, also, let me let me add another part to this. Therapeutic phlebotomy, in other words, bleeding people, bloodletting, does all kinds of good things for metabolic syndrome and fatty nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, all this kind of thing. So iron is a very reactive metal, and and, you know, can cause oxidative stress, does all kinds of, all kinds of bad things. So, so keeping iron body iron levels low is, in in in a low normal range, I should say, is the thing to do for good health and longevity. So it it's not just looking at iron by itself, but iron with, ferritin, Or is it could you look at iron by itself as a biomarker? Right. So so bay basically, no. In most cases, you have to look at ferritin. Now so this is this brings up an interesting point because the iron that is causing trouble in the body that causes damage and so on is what they would call free iron or labile iron. In other words, this is iron that is not bound by the protein molecule ferritin. So the, you know, the the question is, well, so if you, donate blood, for example, you lower your ferritin. Does that but the in in my book, the I use the analogy that, for example, if you look at dynamite. Okay? So dynamite is, you know, allegedly, if it's just sitting there, you know, it's all safe, you you you know, until until you do something to it, like, I don't know, light a fuse, whatever they do to dynamite, it's okay. But, you know, you wouldn't necessarily wanna store a case dynamite in your house. And and so that's the analogy I use with ferrocin. So if if the if the iron atoms are locked into the ferritin molecule, then there's no problem. But in practice, this whole system becomes dysregulated. One of, the late, doctor Leo Zakarski, who wrote the preface to my book, and he he had done a lot of work on iron. He he talked to me about, for for instance, the ferritin molecule can become glycosylated. It with you know, if somebody has high high glucose excursions or generally high blood sugar, the you know, it become it can become glycosyl. It and then it does just doesn't work properly, and it leaks iron. So, so in in that sense, yeah, get you know, getting the ferritin down to a low normal level is helpful So probably looking at both. Right? Not looking at only at iron levels in blood, but also ferritin. Probably measuring both be a good idea. Because if you only have the iron, you don't know the ferritin. And if you only have the ferritin, you don't know the iron. Right? So Well well so so if you're looking at, if you're looking at serum iron, yes, it does become dysregulated sometimes, but but the damage of, of the iron is going on inside cells. And and so, you know, this this gets really technical into sort of, you know, the kind of territory a hematologist would be looking at, you know, iron and transferrin and, total iron saturation and all these kind of things. So, there there are a number of studies that, you know, they've been done, I don't know, a few decades ago where they were looking at, what what were they looking at? Transferrin, I guess, or iron saturation. But this is just not as if somebody has a high iron saturation, that generally means they're absorbing too much iron, And, you know, so, like, they they might have hemochromatosis or at least, you know, some gene variant that is causing them to absorb too much iron. Interesting. So then it's maybe it's not just looking at iron as a biomarker in ferritin, but total iron binding capacity. Right? Because if that's high Right. Then you've got a lot of iron being released from hemoglobin and wherever else it's coming from, and that's indicative of cellular damage. And, you know, for whatever reason, whether it's microbes causing it or your cells are just dysfunctional. Right? So Right. Right. Just think wow. Yeah. So so what I I didn't even think I was gonna bring in microbes into it, but do you think microbes, when considering, you know, gut leak, there could be a blood micro microbiome that maybe just overgrowth during aging. Do you think that that's a component in the iron equation since microbes compete with human cells for iron where, Yeah. That's interesting. And and, you know, I'm not sure. I I only have, an idea or two about that. We you know, one thing that I found so interesting was recently, I I I learned this is is so two two genera of bacteria that are generally generally considered probiotic, namely lactobacillus and bifidobacterium, do not require iron at all. They are like one of the very few species, you know, genera, you know, life forms, whatever we wanna call it, that do not require iron. And it, you know, it it it seemed curious to me that the fact that they don't require iron and they are considered healthy for the gut, you know, does is that related? One thing I I could say is is that as far as, you know, the gut goes, well, the liver is the first organ to, you know, to see the basically, you see the contents, you know, that that what's coming in from the gut. And, of course, we get, you know, fatty liver and cirrhosis and things like that. Iron is involved in in that, definitely. You know, it's free iron, of course. An interesting thing kind of as an aside, you know, a lot of people don't know this, but being on Twitter, I'm sure you do. You see all the stuff about seed oils. Yeah. Right, and and what they're doing and as far as they they polyunsaturated fats are very reactive molecules and and lead to, you know, oxidative stress, molecular damage, and so on. So what's going on there? Well, in at least in many cases, it appears to be it's a combination of polyunsaturated fats and free iron. The free iron is reacting with the polyunsaturated fats to create this problem. This is exactly, you know, you you know about this too, lipofuscin. So, you know, this is a so called age pigment that builds up in inside, lysosomes and just basically totally messes up the cell. It's been called the garbage catastrophe of aging because it's garbage that the cell can't get rid of. What's lipofuscin made of? It's made of polyunsaturated fats and iron. And and then and then and then it it just it it messes up the protein molecules and then just forms all this junk. And so it's yeah. Iron and polyunsaturated fats. That's that's what causes the buildup of lipofuscin. So microbes potentially playing a role in that process outside of the lactobacillus and bifidobacteria? So so for example for example, if, you know, like, in the gut, if, there is there can be, like, you know, the degradation of the mucus layer, so now the bacteria can get into the endothelial cells. So could there be a situation where the microbe microbes had infected a cell and, you know, it's inside the cell? You you know, the and maybe that's a part of autoimmunity. I mean, this is speculation. Right? But, could there be a process where microbes are competing for iron and then there's cellular damage as a result? Iron is released, as a part of that process, which then is a cascade of, you know, horrors for the body. Right? Right. Right. So, yes, for one thing, well, what's interesting is that, yeah. So so all all bacteria, microorganisms, apparently, other than lactobacillus and bifidobacterium, all require iron. And if if we're talking about pathogenic bacteria that invade the human body, iron is absolutely the limiting element for their growth. They absolutely have to have iron. So they have developed ways to acquire iron, and we have developed ways to withhold it from them. This has been called an evolutionary arms race where where it, you know, like our transferrin molecules, for example, have grown to become ever you know, to ever to hold iron ever tighter and tighter and tighter, you know, so that bacteria can't get them. And then they the the bacteria or other microorganisms have developed ways like Siderophores. So these are, you know, that the the proteins and that they secrete into their environment that grab iron. So, whether, you know, whether that's, well, another thing is that when people are, critically ill or, or they have severe injuries that, you know, this can lead to the release of free iron. And then you have the bacteria or other micro microorganisms swooping in because they've got all this free iron, and then you see, you know, you see infections and so on. Whether that dynamic has anything to do with, you know, disordered iron metabolism, you know, as most people would experience it, I couldn't say. Yeah. I don't know. That that's the, yeah, that's the next step in this evolution of the story. Right? Are microbes causing it, you know, causing the the, you know, the leak? But who knows? Right? So