Wanna introduce you to the audience because I don't think a lot of people know who you are and your story, backstory, your, you know, current current age, and then also your whole approach for, you know, aging and longevity. So K. So let's take a step back. Because so when I got into this space or when I got became interested in in, aging and longevity probably about thirty years ago, Bill Falloon and Life Extension were probably one of the biggest impacts on my, you know, future focus. So Yes. Think that had an impact on you too, but I think you go back even further than Bill Falloon in life extension. So could you tell the audience about your interest in longevity and how you got interested in it? And then, yeah. So let's let's start there. Your interest in longevity from, you know, younger age. Yeah. Well, that's a lot because I have to go back, like, 65 or something like that because I was, like, 11 years old when I actually lost my grandmother who I was very close to. The short story of that, it was painful. I think for any of us that, you know, for our first time you experienced somebody that you love that you lose. And I said to my mother, I said, you know, when will I see her? And my mother said, it was a Christian woman. She said, well, you'll see her when you die. I didn't like that answer at all. You know? That didn't make sense to me in some level. So I said, okay. When when I die and go to heaven, she said, you know? I said, well, why can't we have heaven here on earth? I asked her. You know? And, she she always would, through the years, bring this up to me, you know? And so I said, why can't we have heaven on earth? She said, oh, that's a good thought. You know? Why don't you pursue that? So that was in me. You know? And interesting enough, no matter what I did through life, that was that was present in me. Through school, through grade school. I when they when they say write a theme about something, I'd write a theme on that. And, many times blow my teachers' minds, but they but they actually loved it. And they come to me and go, oh, wow. This this is special. And and and I had one particular, teacher, that really, nurtured that in me. I was really grateful for it and said you need to you know, you're gonna do some great things at this level, I feel. And he encouraged me to keep writing and keep thinking in these terms because I was writing about, you know, unlimited life and creating a new world. So, you know, the best best way I could put it. So I would write all my thoughts at that time. I wasn't a person that spoke a lot much. You know? I was pretty quiet, and and I still am a little bit shy, although you can't tell that. So so, anyway, I, then in 1968, I met, Bernie Dean Brown and Charles Paul Brown. Okay? I my mother would I'd go to she'd take me all these places to different speakers all the time. And so she took me to see them, and and they were saying that immortality was possible, that that, the human being should not die at that time. I'm going, oh, wow. You know, I thought that's what I that's what I wanted to hear. That's what I as a first time, I heard somebody else actually expressing that to that degree. Okay? And so the okay. That's what I I I wanna I wanna work with them. I wanna so I started just going to all their events everywhere they were. They were in Colorado at the time. I was in Arizona. I went to their events in Colorado. When they were here, I went to those events. And so, I was in college at the time. I graduated, from Phoenix College and I went to ASU. And I was a junior, getting ready to go to the senior year. And and and then, they I I started going to their events more, and they actually asked me if, I would like to because I was very avid about it and very big avid. They said, that they if I would like to work with them at all. And, I said, yes. I would. It might be my be my dream come true. And so at that time, I just, started traveling with him. I, I thought, I had a business experience, and I said, I think what I would like to do is work, and help bring in funds so you guys can travel more and get the work done you wanna do. So that's what I did. And so I created businesses. I created, different kinds of businesses that were brought in some cash flow, enabled them to travel when they wanted to and and subsidize the the movement more. And that turned into me then eventually speaking, you know. And my first time I spoke, I remember speaking in an event in, Colorado, and, I was, so nervous. I was holding on to a bench next to me shaking, but there's about 500 actually, about 350 people in the room. And, but I just, you know, I had I had a lot in my heart to say, so I just started to say what I felt about life, and and it it was a breakthrough for me. And, so from there, we ended up working together since 1970, one. And speaking of Belle Flewn, we I got invitations after that to go on TV shows. Larry King Live, you know, several several others that, that, Bill and, his his partner at the time, I'm trying to think of his name now, that's just passed recently. A great great guy who did a lot of great work with Bill. He, that we had we would meet with him on shows. They they were sometimes in the same panel we would be on, and that's how I first met Bill. And then I learned about their foundation, Life Extension. Then, of course, I I started using their supplements, you know, started working along those lines. But, yeah. Then and we formed we started traveling all over the world, Chuck and Bernie and I talking in mortality, to everybody that we can meet and everywhere we're invited. We we created a big movement throughout the world called People Forever, and, it was very successful. And then in 1995, Bernie and I had some and Chuck, we had some differences of, I'll say, ideological differences between what we how we felt to move at the time. So we, separated but not in in a friendly manner from Chuck, and we formed People Unlimited in 1995. And, then we started working in, together, and this is the center we have here now, in Scottsdale, Arizona, and People Unlimited is still, active here, of course. It's one of the top communities now in longevity in the in the world. And, yeah. So now I, in 2000, '14 is when I reached out to Bill Fallunto. Bill Bill loved the idea, the Coalition for Radical Life Attention, concept. And he wanted to be a sponsor. He board. And, he was really, really it's such a blessing to have him and his passion for life that he has and his dedication, and we clicked on that. And so, we started, you know, putting together this whole package, for the radical life attention and and RadFest. That's kinda the really fast version, but this is how I got here. Nice. So was RadFest always a part of the vision, or it just evolved over time? The the It evolved over it evolved over time. We did always talk about having some major major event, but it never came to fruition. And it wasn't only until 2014 that we began to see that, okay, we're getting response from a from a broad community now, people we reached out to, and they all felt that if it this is the time to create this coalition, to galvanize the community, and to create within a launch launch it with RadFest. Nice. So, alright, where do you see RadFest going? Is it just continuous growth in terms of people, showing up? Because that's been growing over time. But where do you see it going, like, in the next five, ten, and plus years? Well, interesting enough, I'm glad you mentioned that because, in 2026 in the spring, we're working to put together a, a walk, a a rally for longevity rights in DC. We wanna do it at the steps of the Lincoln Memorial. That's what we're working to get. Okay? We already have our forms filed, everything else, and we're waiting for a response on the date for sure. But we'd like to have it in September, and then we will also, coincide that with a, RadFest in the same area. We'll probably have RadFest first and then do the rally right there in the area, but have but have them both in the same area in '26 September 26 approximately. So that's so that's one step. But we also have a whole global strategy now that we're gonna be presenting at RadFest for the coalition. It goes from a to z. It's pretty impressive. We worked on it for about six months now. And and what what what we wanna do outside of not just RadFest, but what we wanna do in a global level. And part of that is we we're thinking we want to start taking a RadFest on the road like a roadshow, one day events, around the country and and and eventually around the world. So that's that's a little bit of the the the thought process in that that we're all working on. So kinda introducing longevity to average people or how Yes. Yes. Going everywhere everywhere we can. We're hoping, what the the the idea is that if we and we feel we we'll get a good response in DC, we're going to move to integrate everybody. I mean, this is this is not my movement or your movement. It's everybody's movement. You know, that's what we're about. And by bringing more people in, we'll be able to get enough energy to launch to launch more of a tour, of it. Instead of just doing these three, four day events that that are great, but but they're also just once a year. It's not doesn't move things fast enough to educate the public. So we wanna do, like, a road show and take it, you know, possibly have a more festive in that context that people can come here hear a good, you know, performance from some, upscale group, you know, music and also celebrate the science and hear the best of science. But most likely, it'll just be, like, a one day maybe one night, one day, or just one day shows. And then the longevity rights, what's the, plan there? So yeah. So we are we are we are gonna be, pick the rally is all is about getting, number one, to get the FDA to, to identify aging as a disease. That's a big one. Right? Also, best choice medicine. Okay? We've already got some headway in that, but we want we wanna broad that that to be broader. Liz Parish, Belle Andrews, and some of them are moving on different initiatives in that way. We have others that are doing that, but we want a a really strong initiative in that. But the key thing, for me personally and for our our board is to get, aging defined identified as a disease because I think you know yourself what that could do then as far as getting support and people begin to realize that what we're dealing with here and and get get the financial backing we need Yeah. To to cure to cure it. So I'm on on board with that. Obviously, I wrote a paper, that was published, like, I don't know, seven years ago. So when the whole idea of aging as as a disease was first, being so Sven I don't know if you know the name. Sven Bolt Ferris, something like that. He published, aging as a disease. You know? And so that was a few years ago. So but but what people were missing at that point, and that was before the hallmarks of aging were even published in the thing in, I don't know, '20 whatever, was the microbiome. Right? So I I read a a paper that was published basically saying, okay. If we're gonna classify aging as a disease, don't forget about the microbiome. And then here we are now, you know, ten years later, everybody knows about the impact of microbes on, you know, COVID infections, living lifespan. So Yeah. Definitely. Yeah. So so my point there is, one side of it is classifying aging as a disease and getting more governmental funding, you know, taxpayer taxpayer funded support. But my perspective is actually the other side of that. I think government is too slow. I think if we wait for government funding and randomized controlled trials, you know, we'll be waiting decades to have Right. Yeah. So my side of it is using the commercialized labs, whether it's Quest, LabCorp, the, you know, the finger prick stuff you can do at home, to test yourself many, many, many times, generate that data, and then use AI or or other other tools to figure out your own personalized recipe. So it's almost like a, you know, a decentralized optimal health approach relative to the, you know, government, you know, studies and other people. This is what we think the population should do, but does it translate to you? So Well, I like that a lot. I like that a lot. We have to talk about that more and and, maybe consider being on our on our advisory team on that because you get some that's very good points. And, you know, the the the big thing in in the the rally in DC is just to, make an impact. You know? Yep. I I agree with you a 100%. I I say this all the time. We cannot wait for what the government's gonna do. We can say now, oh, this government's gonna do it. I heard that back when I was, you know, twenty years ago. This government, this administration, this administration, you know. Okay. So they're gonna do what they're gonna do, but we have to lead the way. You know? We have to lead the way. We have we can't wait for them to do something in any level for that matter for your life. It's like, you know, you can go to a doctor, do same thing. You go to a doctor. Don't don't wait for them to do everything. You have to be proactive for your own health. This is what Yeah. Yeah. So 100%. And most people are not proactive. They go to the doctor once a year. And then he and what what what recommendations can you make? So when you think about the Jack Elaine approach, which was eat real food and exercise, what's the higher level to that? Right? The higher level is personalization. That's right. What should the diet look like? How much exercise? How often? You know, at what frequency? So, I see personalization in the in the, you know, self testing. So Brian Brian Johnson really blew that up because, you know, in terms of in a good way where shining the light on multiple testing and and Right. So, I can see a lot of people moving in that direction, but I think there's still a lot of uncertain. Most people most people don't know what to do. You know, they generate their own data. What do they do? So, you know, that's one reason it started. Well, you know, and nothing and this isn't, you know, criticism of anybody, but what happens is they, you know, either are waiting for somebody to tell them and waiting for a doctor instead of digging in themselves. We have to dig in each of us individually. And we share information then, and that's the power of it too. Right? But if you don't take take an interest in your own health and you're waiting for what the doctor's gonna tell you or somebody else, you know, then then so many times it's too late, or you're not getting what you really need on a personalized level. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. 100%. Alright. So you mentioned the the one day approach and really trying to get out to the masses and spread, you know, proselytize, right, longevity preachers. Right? Yeah. But The gospel of longevity. Yeah. I I love it. You're great. You're great. You're perfect for that role. So Thank you. I'm I'm writing a book called that now. I'm in the I'm in my fifth chapter. Nice. The gospel of longevity. If I could suggest, I would just go with the book. I know you also have a, YouTube channel. Right? So, but it's not I think if I could suggest Yeah. Please. Saturating social media with, you know, not just YouTube, but TikTok, Instagram, you know, x, blue sky, bubble, everything across the spectrum. Yeah. And and I know that you public you you you've got a bunch of videos on the coal coalition for lifespan or coalition for Radical life extension. Radical life extension. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But I think being more active would help the help your cause a lot. Yeah. Yeah. I'll do it. So people myself, so thank you for the push. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, posting every day or posting as often as you can or in all the things you're doing at Radfest, like, having all the speakers, and I've seen seen you interviewing. Like, I think you in interviewed Liz and some other people on your channel. Like, interviewing lots of people on the channel, you I think you'd be great. Like, you'd be putting out content like crazy, and that would really help, I think your approach too. Great. Appreciate that. Alright. So let let's take it even a step back further too. So for those who don't know, you said your chronological age was, I think, 76 or 77? 76. That'd be 77 this October. Yeah. There's this you're just redefining what 76 is even like. I mean, this is crazy. I mean, I mean, congrats to you on that. So Thank you. Yeah. I mean, it's exciting because I can do all the things. I mean, you know, yesterday, I played pickleball with my son. You know, we played, like, you know, five, six game. I can do, you know, mountain bike ride, all the things I like to do. And and really really, I don't know. I I I consider myself, very very blessed in that, but also not elite in that. I think this is what, everybody can be. You know? Everybody can do and more so. We're learning. And and, a lot of it is, to for me is mindset. I don't I don't even relate to my age unless somebody asks me. I don't dress for my age. I dress how I feel. You know? I I I, I keep in contact, you know, with my body and the level of, you know, biomarkers and the, you know, the basic things, but I don't I don't go extreme in the sense that, I'm, you know, chasing health. You have to be have some enjoyment of life at the same time, and not be caught up in survival. That's a big thing. We're we're all so been so caught up in survival. We don't even really know who we are. We're struggling half the time to survive. And so there's a whole new finding out of who we are that that is that is so powerful. And and we we have this within us, this innate ability to regenerate and and draw to us what we need. We're drawing the science. We're drawing the innovations to us rather than chasing things, I guess, is what I'm trying to say in that. Do you have, longevity genes? Like, how long did your parents live or still alive? No. I don't I don't really have. That's interesting enough. My parents were were healthy, but and my brothers were, but my brothers were abusive to their bodies. Mhmm. No matter what I would try to say. Both of my brothers are are passed now. Wow. You know? Yeah. And they were abusive and but they had good strong bodies, but, you know, and and so that just you know, sadly enough, it it verifies what we say about, hey. You can have a great genetics, but if you're if you're environment and you're just beating yourself up every day and and, you know, a lot of stress, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera, you're going to sabotage yourself. And so I had I I had from an early age, I was with him. I was you know, we had a really close relationship, but I was totally different. You know? Know? I'm the one I'm the one that would that, like, would love to eat, drink the carrot juice, or something else, you know, or or try the new thing my mother but my brothers wouldn't touch it. They're more into Cheerios or whatever it was. But I was the one that always wanted to do the you know, whatever new innovation for your health. I just had this in me. And I'm grateful for that today because it was a great contribution, you know, to what I how I feel today. But but, yeah. Unfortunately, I don't my parents are both passed, and, they lived in their in the eighties, early eighties, but that's, you know, wow. That's so little, right, compared to what we can do. What was the cause of death? Parents and birth? For my mother. And, it was oh, my dad actually got, a flu, a bad of some virus, and ended up in the hospital. He shouldn't have died, but they they caught an infection in there, right, like so many people do in the hospital and died of that infection. And your brothers, what was their cause of death? My brother, stroke, one of them. And the and the other one was suicide. Well, I shouldn't say suicide. Self imposed. I mean, that's he he he, had a drug issue, and and, he, overdosed. Alright. So your brother your sorry sorry to hear that. So your brother who died of a stroke, what was, his age when he died? 75. 75. And then, mom and dad, their age of death? 82, 83. Wow. Okay. So do you monitor specifically in your biomarkers for cancer or Yes. In, like, white blood cells, lymphocytes, inflammation, things that could be related to infection? All yes. All the time. And how many how many times a year do you blood test, or is it just once a year for you? No. No. I usually I usually blood test, a minimum of three times a year. Three times? And then times four. Do you have, like, a specific, approach, after getting your blood test data? Or have you crafted your, approach to optimize your biomarkers to minimize risk of disease and death? Or is it just you get the data and then you know? No. I so so I have a, because I'm proactive myself in in what I, you know, take and don't take. I mean, I've done things like TPE and and eBoo and all those things to, you know, constant and infrared sauna, blah blah. You know, every day every day I'm doing something. Right? It's a it's a lifestyle. You know, health is a lifestyle. But then along with that, I have a really good holistic doctor here in town that, you know, it's not easy to find, you know, that well, this is another subject. But so I got a really good holistic doctor here in town. In fact, he spoke here at PeopleLumber the other day. And, he, does these really deep dives of blood tests. I mean, not only just the basic blood test that we can see on he goes and finds out is are there any latent infections, latent disease, anything going on? Some of these things and and last year, I never even heard of before he comes up with. I went to, to Labcorp with his blood test, and they said, oh my god. Says, we have to draw more vials from you than anybody we've ever drawn. 26 vials. Holy cow. What was what was what was he measuring for? What what, Any any any type of latent, whether it's ethylene bar or anything of that niche that was latent there. I mean, some of these things, I I I couldn't even pronounce to you now too that I mean, while, viruses or or latent viruses or infections that would lay your body from from, you know, back back from your birth or whatever. I mean, it was pretty pretty impressive to to see. And and, you know, he didn't find, fortunately, anything he did find was was latent. There was some type of, I'm trying to think of the name of it now, small, I'll call it bug that was there that, is still there in my body, but it's latent. And he says but he says he said your report was really very good. Most people have numerous issues going on with that level. And they don't understand then why they're having conditions that they're having, you know, weakness, you know, maybe flu like symptoms all the time or cold like symptoms because of this latent bacteria that's there. So so most blood work just goes and finds, you know, the certain basic things, and they don't find these latent, you know, bacterias that are there. Yeah. Well, not just bacteria. It could be fungi. It could be fungi. Exactly. Yeah. Oh, he tested all that. He tested all that. Fungi. Yeah. You know, the whole work. So I'm guessing he did, like, candida, IgG Oh, candida. But, CMV, IgG, EBV, IgG, and he was looking to see what you have. You know? So do you remember which specifically? I mean, I think you mentioned it was a bacteria, but but it's late. I I I don't. You know, no. I can't really remember what that was. But Yep. So after pay a whole lot of attention at the time. I mean, I'd pay attention to it, but but I was glad that it was, you know, late and not not I wasn't having to deal with it, you know, energetically. Yeah. So after you get your blood test and your whole you work with your holistic doctor, is he are you guys working together in terms of an approach? Like, if you see something in the blood test data, like, are there examples of of stuff you've done based on the blood test data to Yes. They take that blood that data and and, may give me different peptides, for example, different, you know, different, well, he has a lot of different, big list of things he works with, but but it might be peptides. Well, it definitely gives me different peptides. I take I'm trying to think of the infant now. I went on I went on a dose of, ivermectin for a little bit. You know? I said, oh, why ivermectin? You know? I mean and so but he had a reason that I did that, and it was great. It it just it is, took my information markers down more. And so he that this is kind of he's he's constantly working that way and is very proactive with it. Do you remember why specifically it was ivermectin? Like, what infection In that in that case, I had some inflammation in my prostate. Mhmm. And and, you know, he wanted to build up my new system more for a period of time. And, there's another I'm trying to think of name of it. I'm sorry. Some of these things I just, I they're they're new, and I'm trying to remember some of the names of them, but I'm, I'll next next time, I'll I'll have more of a good report for you in that. Yeah. So wait. I so I I have a science background. Right? So for me, that's fine. Scientist. You're the scientist. I know. So so was, you had some prostate related issues. Did he take a bi or, I'm guessing it's he, the the doctor you met, your host? Yeah. I did an m r I did a prostate MRI and also did a, did a PET scan, for PPI just to see if there's anything, and there was nothing going on like that. But there was some information that he detected there, so they're treating the inflammation. Ah, so they didn't take, like, a biopsy, and then from that biopsy, try to figure out what was causing the inflammation in your prostate Yeah. And then seeing exactly what microbe could be there if it was an infection and then saying, okay. Ivermectin can kill those microbes, so we're gonna go specifically with Ivermectin. You don't you don't know if it was like that? No. He didn't feel like I needed I should needed a biopsy for that for this. It wasn't to that extent. So he just thought this treatment that he gave me a different, therapies that he gave me would would treat it. And so we'll be retesting that soon. Nice. Yeah. Alright. So goal some good thoughts you've got. I'm gonna have to to I'm gonna have to have you have a conversation with him. So so, you know, I I don't know if you know, but I blood test eight times per year. So Wow. I'm not just going based on reference range. I'm going based on what I think is optimal based on the published literature for, like, you know, markers of kidney and liver immune. So if you think about if you think about, like, you know, the whole don't die and, you know, live forever approach Yeah. You know? So there are specific things that are gonna kill us. Us. Right? Heart disease, cancer, kidney disease, liver disease. There are gonna be biomarkers of that systemically. They aging is as you know, aging is a disease that happens over the decade. Right? So there's gonna be that pattern. And if you know what these biomarkers look like in youth and in health, we can track that and then say, wow. My kidney function biomarkers look like an 80 year old. What can I do to bring them back to a 30 or a 40 year old? Right? So so that's my approach is is track the biomarkers. Yeah. That's great. Yeah. But then it the question is what's the recipe. Right? Because it's gonna be different for everyone. What works for everybody? And then even, like, you're mentioning about the, infection and latent infections, you know, most people probably have this, like, CMV infections. Everyone above, I think, seventy. It's, like, a hundred percent all infected, and nobody knows that they're infected with it, which may not seem like a problem, but it's associated with immunosenescence, which is a major driver of aging. Right? Right. So, anyway, I'm obsessed with the biomarker stuff. Yeah. I love it. I love it. Yeah. Alright. So let's think about some philosophical issues. Right? Let's say that, so, eventually, I think and I'm sure we can agree that, eventually, immortality is gonna be a real thing. Right? So you've got the the rate of aging is a pretty constant. Right? You can have a terrible diet, and your rate of aging is faster. Right? Or you can or or terrible lifestyle. Right? Or you can optimal diet, exercise, sleep, all that stuff, and you flatten the rate. You know, you can flatten the rate a little bit, but it's still a pretty constant rate of age. Right? So what we know, are we down here, or are we somewhere close? You know, longevity is escape velocity like Aubrey always says. Right? Yeah. How close we are to those slopes matching and being at a true flatlining of mortality risk, nobody knows. Right? Yeah. True. There are no immortal mice. But eventually but eventually, it it will be flat. It's just a matter of time. Right? That's right. Yeah. Fifty years, five thousand years. Who knows? Who knows? So so, what philosophically, right, if we're not in that fifty or seventy year window, if it's a if it's a wider window and we all die trying to achieve more immortality. Right? Is this physical existence the end, or is there more beyond what our senses can perceive? Wow. You're going deeper now, Michael. I love it. I love it. Okay. So so for me personally, alright, and from my experience and, you know, going taking deep dives in all this all my life, you know, from early age of integral yoga to cyber cybernetics, many things I've done. Okay? I think that, the the the bottom line that I have experienced in it is that, once, we die, I, you know, that's it. Okay? But the only but about it is is that, because I had an experience in this myself that, and and and it's well, I'll put it this way. Anybody that, say, is close to us and we've lost them, okay, the only way they're they're really kept alive is in us. Alright? And that's an important thing. Alright? You know, like Bernie, we lost her back back June to breast cancer. Okay? The pain it was it was extremely painful. Alright? I worked with her, since 1972. I knew her in '68. From '68, we're very, very close, you know, just had such a a flow together, energetically. And, anyway, though but, so I don't think I would have been able to withstand that and move forward hadn't I got in contact with that. There's a spirit of immortality in us. Okay? I'll use that term. And this is something that I'll say, is more explorative. Right? Because we're talking about something that are unknowns too. So but I think there's a spirit, and I and I I actually get goosebumps as I say this because there's a spirit of immortality in this, and and it connects us. Alright? That was in Bernie. Alright? I lost her physical body in which is not replaceable. Now she is cryopreserved. Alright? And and, obviously, that's, you know, that's and interesting enough, that's a certain comfort for me because I can think, oh, you know, I may I may be able to experience her again, you know, physically. But also now, what what about now? Alright? And this is why this is don't you think this is why we create? You know, sometimes we want that afterlife thing so bad because we don't wanna think that we lost completely somebody we somebody we love. And the reality is we're we're we're we're not going to, maybe see a reappearance of of somebody who say it just passed that way, but what we can what what we can feel them here in our bodies. There's that common denominator of that spirit of energy, of of their bodies, and that's where they're kept alive at. If if, if I wasn't present, if I was past, then I wouldn't be able to feel that, you know, myself. But I'm alive and she can live. She can I can feel her spirit in me? I can feel her sometimes that I'm even expressing. You know? I can feel the energy of that. And I had an experience about this a while back in my own person that was quite, profound. It was about three years ago, and I've been working in this field for so long. As and and then go and see the pandemic and seeing people die, losing people, seeing the condition of the world per se. I begin to feel like, oh, wow. It's gonna take a lot more energy and strength than anyone even knows to actually walk this longevity path. You know? It's not just, you know, okay. We're we're bringing in better science all the time. We're bringing which is great. Right? We're we're checking our biomarkers. But but, you know, to really think about it, to live, and to be and to unlimited lifespans and to see everything we're gonna see, to see people that we're we are gonna lose people that are close to us. We're gonna we're gonna see all kinds of who knows what in the world. We're gonna have to have a certain strength and resilience that that that most of us don't have. I knew three years ago, I I was felt good. I was I was strong, but I still didn't have this energy I feel today. Alright? And so I I, this is gonna sound funny, but I I, but, one night, I was just thinking, oh my god. You know? What is it gonna take? I need something more. I need some, like, supernatural feeling. Right? So, I said to myself, where is that gonna come from? What am I gonna you know, where what am I gonna do? You know? But I got kinda tired of thinking about it, so I went to bed. I thought I'm gonna watch a movie and get my mind off of Netflix. So I started flicking through the movies, and I came across I don't know if you heard, the, about the, it's a series called The Chosen. Mhmm. Okay. So it's a it's a story. And I and I had completely, you know, walked out of religion and still have, but I saw this chosen and it's a story of Jesus. Alright? And it was remarkable because it's at first, I thought, oh, I don't wanna watch that. It's some more maybe part of the expression, some religious propaganda maybe. And I and I thought, I don't really, then then as I begin to read about it, it said, oh, it's it's crowdfunded. Okay. You know, no. It's not not not put in together in a prejudiced way. It's it's the most accurate historical account that's been up to this time. So, okay, I'll check this out. So I started watching it. You know? And when the actor came on of Jesus, amazing, it was really well it's really well done. Okay? I mean, the whole settings of the disciples. And they make Jesus more of just a human being like you and I, not some, you know, theorial figure per se. And and so when Jesus when the actor came and we would pretend Jesus start expressing, I felt something in my body I haven't felt ever. Okay? And I felt I felt a a warmth. I felt a comfort. I felt energy. And I thought, what is that? You know? What am I feeling? And so I thought, oh, well, this is this is great that I feel this, but I'll probably wake up in the morning and be gone. You know? But I kept watching it because it felt good. And every time he this actor would come out and speak these words these these words of Jesus that was, you know, profound words, it it it hit me and it struck me very strong. And I begin so when I when I woke up in the morning, instead of being gone, I felt all the burdens taken off my shoulders. And and and in that in that series, he said, I'll take the burden off your shoulders. And so I felt this great warmth in my body that I never felt before. And I felt I felt the I felt like, wow. And and it wasn't a spiritual experience per se. It was more of a very physical experience. And And then as I begin to to, open up, and I end up watching the whole series, and and I realized too it wasn't just a series. It was that I came in contact with a DNA, you can call it that, of of a light of a man who actually I call now was likely Roger Bannister of the four minute mile. He was like the Roger he he broke through the death barrier. Jesus did. And we missed seeing who he really was. He wasn't, you know, Jew or Gentile. He was about he was about a human being that had a passion for life that that never was before. And that struck me in my body. And and since then, all I can say is that I've had this change for three years, and I talk about it all the time. And and when you ask this question, I thought, wow. You know? It's no coincidence because I've had this experience that that this is the resilience that's in us that he was speaking of, that we would do greater works. It's in us. This strength, this this life force that he felt is in us. He they they they took his life, but they couldn't take this away. Okay? It's implanted in us. He was the he was the Roger Bannister of breaking through the death barrier. You know? And and and I and it penetrated me. It was that physical when it happened. And the reason I'm talking now, I feel this I feel that energy in in in that new energy in my body. And I think it's something for us all to tap into. You know? It's there. Immortality, the the the life the spirit of immortality is there in our bodies for us to tap into already. Not chasing it out here somewhere. Not not trying to not trying to it gets us out of survival. Alright? That's what he was about too. He said he said, I'm the end of, sacrifice. I'm the end of, I'm not here to to support, the life that's going on. I'm here to bring a new word, a kingdom here in heaven now. They couldn't understand what he was saying just like just like they don't now, most people. But he was really about life right now and more abundantly, that that that we can walk that we can walk over the troubled waters and give us a new resilience and strength. So out of that, all I can say is I I gained a new resilience and strength that I never had before. You know? I I I was wondering three years ago, how am I gonna keep going this way? And seeing friends die, seeing some of my friends give up in in the longevity community say, oh, I'm going for plan b now because I don't think we're gonna make it. I said, so what is it gonna so I thought to myself, what is it gonna take? And now I have this new resilience and strength that that that that just keeps overflowing in my body that I'm so grateful for. So that's the best way I can put it. And and and and, yes, Bernie, and and now Jesus okay. So Jesus so even though he was dead, he's dead. I can feel the spirit of him in my body. Even though Bernie is dead, I can feel it not here physically. I feel the spirit of her in my body. And I think that that's that's the the culmination. That's the the beauty of what we can have as human beings in the midst of loss, in the midst of what that that brings us new energy and resilience. Yeah. That's great. I appreciate that. So Yeah. But wait. That's more the spirit of life and the drive for immortality when you're alive. But Yeah. Is there more to you know? So if I if I am gonna die, I'm going down swinging. Like, I'm not there is no there is no plan b for me. Like, I'll give up on this journey. Me too. Yeah. So but that said, you know, and I'm not religious at all. For those who are religious, you know, good good for them by heart. Yeah. I'm I'm fine with that too. I'm not related. Yeah. But, have have you ever I haven't done psychedelics, but the psychedelic experience for for people on, like, psilocybin or LSD where they say that they see things their brain has a greater capacity where they're seeing all kinds of things that they don't normally perceive. So then is it like they're perceiving something that we weren't we haven't evolved to perceive that exists, that our limited senses, you know, that evolve for survival can't normally perceive, so they're perceiving maybe a bigger world that exists that we aren't aware of. And then do we tap into that world if our physical body dies? I don't know I don't know what the answer is, but it's just a nice idea that I think about. So what are your thoughts what are your thoughts what are your thoughts on on Yeah. Yeah. I think, psilocybin is I mean, some people, it does amazing things for it. Right? I mean, I'm not I'm sure not against it or, but at the same time, I feel like we haven't allowed as human beings, I think there's a a natural, I'll use the term, high, of of life that's in our bodies that we have suppressed. I mean, just like now, right now, I feel like we're and we're exchanging this. You know, we're we're we're moving in a higher frequency of our bodies. Alright? We're stirring up we're stirring up the body electric per se. Alright? How how often do we allow ourselves to go there with each other? Is there is there a stimulus? Is there a a a chemical reaction action we can create in our in our bodies without having to take something, from from the outside? And, again, I'm not saying that's wrong to do that. I'm just saying, is there chemical reactions that we haven't explored or let happen in our bodies because we've been so suppressed in life per se? Right? And and and consequently, you know, when we let that happen, when that happens in our bodies, I think I think, there's a whole new world that opens up, you know, that we've never explored before, that we've never even experienced before. Like I said, we've been so much in create in in in survival, you know, we haven't really gotten into the era of creativity, which is what was what we really want. We wanna get we want to feel the vast creativity of our persons and and that that stimulation of life that goes on. So, I I think that we we imagine sometimes, you know, we we will project outside of ourselves a life that exists because we're not we're not living a life that we really need to be living right now. Alright? Some people said to me they'll say, oh, I can't wait to go to heaven. I said, okay. Well, why why can't we create heaven and her on earth? Why do we have to die to go there? It's kinda the same thing. Why do we have why do we have to take something? Why do we have to to, you know, explore or think of the idea of something that maybe there's another world for us to go to when we haven't experienced the world that's in us right now? You know, how do we know when we're not taking these drugs, that we're experiencing something that's already going on in us that that that has been suppressed and we haven't gotten to experience yet. So It definitely so so it's basically the squeeze what I hear is it squeeze the orange. We're if life is an orange, we're trying to squeeze the orange as soon as we can to get every drop of life out of our own eggs. I'm with that a 100%. I agree. Right? Yeah. But it's just a matter any idea what is really possible in our bodies yet. Yep. You know? We because we haven't tapped into it yet. Yeah. So, believe me, I'm with that approach 100%. I think that's orange squeeze thing. Yeah. I'm you wanna juice the orange. Get every drop of life that you can. If your genetic if your genetic maximum is 90, well, getting exactly to 90. If your genetic maximum is one thirty, getting to one thirty. So many people like, oh, my so and so lived to 95 or and I'm thinking maximum human lifespan is one twenty two. You you can you can go farther. Right? So Yep. My question is more of, you know, is there more to reality in terms of, a broader picture of immortality that goes beyond our physical existence? I don't know what the answer is. Yeah. Yeah. I mean No. It's true. I mean, we don't we don't really know. And we're not gonna know. That's why living, unlimited life spans are so important. Yep. Because we need time, you know, and simple terms. We need we need you know, this this this box that we've allowed ourselves to be put into these, you know, minute amounts of time on earth. You know, we need time to really know who we are and explore. I mean, there's so many unknowns. Right? And that's what's part of the exciting part about it all, is that we don't know all these things, but but, you know, there's a unit we're a universe in itself, you know, as human beings. And, I'm excited about the exploration of that. Whatever comes out of that, I know it's gonna be, you know, amazing for us, you know, as human beings. So are you planning on signing up for cryopreservation too? Is that on your to do list in a worst case scenario? You know you know, I haven't decided that yet. I'm I I do think, like, do think I think that, you know, I'm like I'm like California robust. You know? For real. There is no plan b. It's plan a for 12. Yeah. You know, I I I tend to think that way, and, you know, I I I like that. I think when you have a plan b, you end up finding yourself making making, you know, ways to create that and Yeah. And, you open the door, and it's like a relationship. Right? You you if you're not fully invested, then you're gonna be be off to the side and everything else. So Yeah. So I I get that, you know, Bernie is a cryopreserved, but what I worry about is, you know, how many generations of my offspring or friends or whomever will care enough to keep the funding going, to keep me cryopreserved. You know? And then so for example, like, my daughter, maybe her she's got a hundred years of lifespan. Right? Maybe I'll meet her meet I'll probably meet her kids. Right? And then their kids. So I'll be a great grandfather. So now I've got three generations. You know? Maybe I've got a hundred and fifty years or a hundred and seventy five years of people who actually met me and know me. They know great grandpa. To care enough to wanna fund me, keep me alive. Imagine my great grandkids would say, I met great grandpa. Yeah. I'm gonna pay that bill every month to keep him in that, you know, in that tank. Even if a hundred and fifty years from now, maybe cryo preservation, nobody's been revived yet. Right? So Yeah. But then what happens a hundred and fifty years from now and my great great great grandkids haven't met me yet, and they've got bills to pay. And they say to their spouse or partner, and they say, why are we paying the bills for this person we've never met? Like and that's the end, and now I'm stuck, and then I'm thawed and for real gone. And they're in a crunch and they have to figure out what they're gonna pay next. It's not like they don't like you, but they have to go, oh, well, we don't we don't really know them. You know? We gotta pay the light bill. You know? But, you know, there are pres and I this is why I'm so, grateful for Bill Falloon. You know, he's thought ahead of that. He actually has bought land, as you probably know, in Texas, a big spot, large spot to keep that going. He has he's funded 40 young cryonicists to come to RadFest, okay, with the idea of keeping, you know, it going and and keeping this heritage going is having somebody there who's gonna take care of the next generation and they pass it to the next generation. So there has been thought given to that, but these are factors you're talking about that are real too. Right? And so, you know, comes back again to the best thing to stay alive. Make sure your grandkids, you know, do what they do and and we you know, you see any generation? You see any great anybody we've lost that say some great, mover of human life? Right? So often, when we lose them, we really lose the momentum of what they were doing. You know? And that's why it's another important thing that, you know, you and I and and all this stay alive is because, no one's gonna take over, but we're gonna take over from the depth we that we you know, they'll do what they do. But but I think I I said I said to everybody recently, I'm not I'm not gonna leave this mess to another generation. You know? I'm staying I'm staying alive, you know, and make sure make sure this gets fulfilled in my own right and not be a pioneer with his arrow on his back. True. True. I yeah. I appreciate that. The good news is that longevity has exploded over the past ten or fifteen years. I mean, I remember when Aubrey would go around to conferences. You know, he even came when I was a grad student in 2010. And when he was talking about longevity and immortality and all the things, people people were, like, shunning him. This is like taboo. You shouldn't talk about it. Here we are fifteen years later, and it's, like, normal. And I know. Floating. Right? So I don't I I think it's too late. I think people the the the ship has sailed, and it's Yeah. You know, the movement is growing. You know? 100%. So let let's talk a bit about your, personal approach. Like Mhmm. So diet, exercise. I know you mentioned pickleball, but, like, how often you exercise or what your diet consists of or supplements or you mentioned, you know, ozone therapy and TPE. But, like, what's your overall personal health and longevity approach? Okay. Well, the basis is the basis, is, my mindset. Okay? It's, you know, the all out mindset and, and and feeling the the spirit of immortality flow let it flow in my body and that energy, I call it that. And communicating that and and, stirring up people around me to have that collaboration with. I think I think it's important, like like we are, to be able to be with people. You can like minded people you can have this conversation with. Stirs up the body electric, stirs up the resolve and the resilience. Along with that, I I follow, the paleo. I I I eat fundamentally, doctor Rose's, doctor Michael Rose's concept of paleo. And, I find that, you you know, very beneficial for me. I've tried different programs of that level. I'm not saying do paleo or anything else. I'm saying it's personalized, and this works really good for me. I'm able to balance my weight, good. I'm able to feel energetically through the day. You know, I I get up at six. I'll pop up out of bed at six, you know, most times, unless I'm up real late. I'm laughing at myself because what I do sometimes. But, so, but I feel, you know, good energy, that way. The diet is important, obviously. But the big thing too as far as we're taking of, exercise, I do longevity exercise, and I think some people get confused to that a little bit. They think they'll pounding their body. You know? I have my my son's, staying with me right now for a period of time, and and, he's in transition right now, and he's 53. Great guy. But he's in the weight room going, you know, boom. You hear him. You hear him making all the noises. He's lifting the waist. I try to tell him. I said, Cass, I said, look. You're you're, you know, you're 53 now, and you're you're gonna tear up your tissues after a while, your joints, by doing it that way. I tried to tell him a little bit, but, you know, I don't I don't push it on him, but I said, introduce things to him because I said, longevity medicine. He's into longevity now. Is is, exercise is different. I said, you don't tear your joints up. You don't pound them all the time. You don't run down hills necessarily where you put 10 times the impact on your joints. There's other ways of putting impact in your joints to build to build dense bone density than that. You know? But I do and Pasco Dave Pasco, I've been seeing him. He does likes to jump on a on a trampoline all the time, you know, and I do that every morning. And and I do, I first think, stretching every breathing every morning. I go out and and do do some really, extraordinary breathing exercise that people laugh at. It's funny. But but all day long, I'm moving my body. I'm not sitting in a in front of a computer. And this is the thing. If you have a computer job, you say, oh, I can't do that. Yes. You can. You can sit, be on the computer, you can stand up, you can stretch while you're talking, you do many, many things, you know, moving your body, you know, you know, there's a lot of exercise you can do just with your body, but you should be moving all the time. I I'll do probably a a a series of probably minimum of twelve, fifteen different exercises every day. Alright? Everything from the trampoline to the to the breathing, to walking around, to jump to jumping up and down, to getting in my vibrator plate, to going into the sauna, to going to, my, surgeon bed, to and I I I rotate these things in between my work. And I get a lot of work done still. It's proven that you can do if if you take these breaks, you actually get just as much or more work done, and you're not burning your body out by the end of the day. So that's, you know I I I made a list of all the things I did the other day because people let me people wanna know. They were, like, shocked, you know, of of what I do. I don't do every I had I have, like, you know, probably 30 different protocols. Protocols. I don't do them all in one day. I rotate them. But I'm doing I move my body like that. I don't just get up and, you know, watch the refrigerator. I'll I'll I'll get up, you know, and stretch before I walk the gym or I'll do something. And yeah. So it makes a big difference. So that's one reason, the u your YouTube channel could be you could be showing all these things, your own personalized approach, all the things you're doing in a day. Even Dave, I've encouraged Dave. I'm like, man, just put put just put a a camera in your garage when you're doing your workouts, and you don't even have to edit. I think people will watch you for, like, two hours just doing whatever you do. Yeah. You know? So People were mesmerized here when I when I started showing up everything I I did. You know? They couldn't believe it. They knew I did a lot of things all the time, but even at people limit, they didn't know I did it all all the stuff that I was doing. You know? Yeah. I I wouldn't say they don't believe it. It's just good to see. You know? Because you're 77. You know? That you're 77. You don't look or sound at all. 77. And you're doing all of these things with the energy and vigor, I think it's it's a huge thing for people to see and follow and and, excite them and encourage. You know? So Exactly. Exactly. Supplements? Do you take supplements? Yeah. Yeah. I take supplements. I take them based on my blood work. You know? What I need, I rotate them, and I take a big pretty big variety of supplements. I probably take, not like some in that area, but I probably take, you know, I I don't really count because I some days I'll take, I'm I'm I'm one routine where I'll take maybe 20, and the next day I'll maybe take, next week maybe forty. And I rotate them and go back depending upon what, you know, my my doctor is staying and what, I'm particularly wanting to achieve at that time. So I'd say though on the average, probably 30 a day. Are there specific examples of supplements for specific biomarkers or things you're trying to improve, that you can give examples? Yeah. Yeah. Like, I take, you know, I found recently, I've been taking c fifteen. I'm sure you're familiar with that. Yep. Yeah. I've been taking that for about a month now. I really like that. I don't know what your experience is with it. Some people have no experience, some people have others. Yeah. So the thing is so, I know that it's there are studies showing that it can reproduce some of the pro longevity pathways that are impacted by things like calorie restriction and and other longevity interventions. You know, so levels of c 15 and blood will be up in some of those interventions. And then you've got you've got the keto crowd who are like, it's it's found in butter. It's found in dairy. Eat lots of butter and dairy, and you'll get lots of c 15. So that is one side of the story. The other side of the story is that the gut microbiome can make, propionate, which is a three carbon fatty acid. And then that three carbon fatty acid can be incorporated into a 12 carbon fatty acid, thereby increasing c 15 in blood. So, I've looked into the published literature for, is c 15 plasma levels of c 15? Is that associated with, say, a younger epigenetic age? And there's no evidence for that. There's no published evidence for that. But when c 15 is attached to cholesterol, which is called the cholesterol ester, that is associated with a younger epigenetic age. And this isn't using you know, there's so many epigenetic clocks that I'm sure Matt Cableon can talk about at RadFest. And then some of them are just garbage. It's just the company's marketing. You know? Hey. Take my test. But for things like PhenoAge and GrimAge, these are gold standard epigenetic clocks with a a lot of research behind them. Anyway, cholesterol esters containing c 15, you know, c 15 bound to cholesterol is associated with a younger epigenetic age using those two gold standard clocks. So I'm more in favor of that. The question though is, is that a butter and dairy story? So now you have more c 15. You have more of that in the cholesterol. Or is that a gut microbiome story where high fiber diets, more c fifteen, and now you have more c 15 on your cholesterol? So I look at it from that point of view. So so most people when they supplement, it's like, I want my taurine levels to be high. And I'm sure Brian Brian Kennedy will talk about the taurine story because his group published the taurine extends lifespan. Mhmm. Most people here, like, taurine extends lifespan, and they're like, ominous. I'm gonna supplement with taurine and potentially increase my lifespan. That's only one half of the equation. You know, we assume that if you increase something by diet, you'll get an increase in blood, But the other half of that equation is degradation. Because if your body's gonna get it and then degrade it, like, omega three can be degraded, you know, because of inflammation. So you may be taking a lot of it, and it may be degraded, and your plasma levels are low. So Mhmm. I I prefer looking at plasma levels rather than just taking it as a supplement and hoping that it increases my plasma levels. I'm looking at the plasma levels and then trying to optimize. Yeah. It makes sense. Yeah. Yep. Mhmm. Oh, c fifteen's a good one. So what other are there other supplements that Oh, yeah. Yeah. You know, I, of course, do, b's and, you know, d, e, vitamin c. I'm I'm trying different ones that, the, astaxanthin. You know? Yep. I alternate some of these different ones of that nature, and I like doing, curcumin, I twenty six. I don't know if you're familiar with that. No. I Egg immunologist type, they take a they blend this powdered, white egg white in particular and mix it with curcumin and some other things. It's it's very powerful for inflammation. And and then I take, I like to take granular vitamin c, and, then I have, oh, I mentioned curcumin, turmeric, combinations, the omegas, I'd like, carnosine, and, Yeah. I I I I like I said, I mix all these up at different times. I I I think that what what I've what I've experienced in that is that when you're, and, of course, I go by what lot of my blood work is, but I also like to alternate them. Sometimes I'll just go every other day on some of these, and then I'll skip sometimes on the weekends doing anything at all and just eat really good. And so I mix it up that way, and my body seems to respond. Sometimes, I don't know if you get this, but I'll wake up in the morning, especially when and I feel like, you know, my body's I don't wanna take anything today like that. So I'll follow that, and then I'll feel really good energetically, then I'll come back and do, you know, again. So I find, you know, really good results that way for me. Like So I'm on almost no supplements. You know? I'm trying to but I I I very carefully track my diet. So I track diet every day, and then I look at correlations with diet with the biomarkers to really try to get towards personalization in terms of how much vitamin k, how much vitamin c. You know? So, so I'm only taking, like, vitamin d because Boston but in Austin, I won't be taking vitamin d. Sun. Sunlight. Yeah. I'm taking, like, a B complex for homocysteine, which I can't seem to do, make a dent with, with diet. But that's it. Riboflavin, you know Have you tried that? Oh, I'm sorry. Yeah. When you say, homocysteine, have you ever tried the, life extensions homocysteine product? Yeah. So company. Tried everything. And, I've used, life extensions, blood tests and supplements in the past. So, yeah, I'm highly experienced with that. But for whatever reason, you know, I've gone through all of their so homocysteine can be reduced by a bunch of different biochemical pathways. I've actually made videos on the YouTube channel going through all of them and high doses in all of them to try to bring mine down. But, even that so so it's like, you know, when you get towards personalization, you know, people can make recommendations. Oh, your homocysteine's high? Take these supplements. But then does it actually move the needle and bring whatever you're trying to improve, you know, in the right direction? So, that's part of what I do too is trying to figure out the actual recipe to to move stuff in the right direction. So for me, the b twelve methyl b twelve, methylfolate does seem to make a dent, a small dent on homocysteine, but I'm still trying to figure that out figure that out after, like, 40 blood tests on homocysteine. So so, yeah, I'm on the very minimal supplements for now with the hope that fifty years from now, you know, if I do need a supplement, I'd expect that that would be the most efficacious time rather than I've been taking it for fifty years. And then it's like, oh, man. What do I do now? Nothing seems to work. I'm already taking these supplements. What do I do? Right? So That makes sense. Yeah. That makes sense. So so, I've actually take a lot less than I did. So I kinda have the same senses of that a little bit that I started, you know, cutting down and trying to take more more precision or precise ones. Like, I like I like the Synelic Activator. I don't know if you've, that Life attention has. Just three tablets once a week, you know, and I can I can feel remind when I first took that, it was it was I was out hiking just before I went hiking, and I felt this like, you know, my my girlfriend, Lana, was like, I mean, she's where where I was usually, I like, I'd be somewhere in the middle of pack and and hiking? And I was I found myself way out in front and and asking those guys to get catch up with me. So but but, I think it it it had a very powerful effect in in releasing getting out the senescence cells. Right? That's a key thing. Yeah. And, in fact, speaking of that, you know, doctor, do do you know doctor, Rafael Gonzalez? You remember? No. Okay. Well, he'll be at RAFF speaking this year. So he's got a stem cell program now. And right it's it's, it's, pretty high end cost right now, but they're moving to drive it down by the end of the year. They'll have it about a tenth of the price that can actually remove senescent cells out of the body remarkably, you know, for building the immune system, for people who say have cancer. Anybody can use it, but it's pretty remarkable. He's gonna be speaking on that. But that's a, yeah, a real key thing, I think, to get the senescent cells out. I I I noticed my skin's better from it, etcetera. Yeah. No. Senescent cells are a big deal for sure. I agree a 100%. The only thing is, there may be getting rid of all of them may not be optimal for health because so senescent cells Oh, that's true. Yeah. There's there's a published paper showing that senescent cells can act as an antiviral, mechanism. So Mhmm. That may be part of the response where the the cells are infected. They go senescent, and then it's like an immune signal. So if you get rid of all of them, I don't know that that would be good. But so I guess stem cells, is that something you've, experimented with and Yeah. I've had I've had stem cells, treatment a couple of them, placenta stem cells that axosomes, a couple times. And, yeah, I, I had very good responses on a placenta stem cells overall. I don't have an ache in any of my joints. You know? And, also, I did, when I was doing, I I think you're familiar with OsteoStrong, their program. Okay. So it's a, system. They have one here in town. They have one they're they're a franchise that's moving quite rapidly. It's four different computerized, exercises you do to build bone density. Alright? And to strengthen your your tendons, because as you mature, you have a tendency to get more loose joints. So I went in there. It's it's just enough. I I always check these things out in the next level like you probably do. But but so so I'm going in there and they tell me, oh, you know, you're gonna, bone bone density and go okay. And you're going you're going to, find if you have any loose joints or pain in joints. Most likely, those would go away. I said, okay. We'll see. Right? So so, you know, because I was, you know, we had a people unlimited here and they're in town, they gave me a free demonstration thing, a free month to try. And so, anyway, I stayed in there. And after three months, I kept I had this ski injury that had been, going on, I had about ten years ago, and I could never get rid of it. Get I could put me whenever it didn't hurt just walking normally. But if I rode my bike or anything, it was starting to hurt. So after three months, that completely went away. Okay? And haven't had an issue on it yet. I now I play pickleball, play basketball, you know, no pain at all. And I had that and but that was from the doing this particular, exercise that strengthened those tendons in that joint. And then, my bone density was 20% better. Mhmm. So yeah. What what was the ex what was the exercise? What what was the what was the exercise? Like, what, specific Okay. So they have four different machines. Okay? It takes about ten minutes to get through them. Okay? They're one is a, you hit you hit these trigger points that's supposed to be the point where it where it triggers the bone the bone growth, the bone density growth. So one is like a bench press. You're pressing like this. It's all computerized. The other one's a pull down that you do, and then a wheelbarrow where you're lifting up. Okay? And then a then a leg press. Those four. Alright? And it's amazing, though. It's amazing. You hit you hit these trigger points when you're doing them, and and, but then you're you you notice your strength after I've been here about a year now. My strength has increased about 30% or 40% from doing that. But, and it's just fast. Fifteen fifteen minutes, you're done. Nice. So that's a part of my approach. Those movements are a part of my approach. So that's good news, you know, keeping the bone so I track bone density too. You know? So it goes away. Pain in any of my joints. Nice. You know? So that's why it's nice. Right? I mean, I have friends. I played football too in in college. So I had back injury, and then they took me a long time ago. But all these friends that have they're they're either in wheelchairs, joint pain all over. Most of my friends all have joint pain. They can't do they can't they can't, you know, play sports most of the time, especially especially when they're tour, you know, around my age. It's like when I was talking to Dave Pascoe, and I was like, I can't believe you're 62. I get the same feeling when I'm talking to you. I'm like, there's no way you're 77. There's no way. So, yeah. Alright. So skin, are there you know? So that's a big one. I think when I think so so it's funny because, you know, anytime anytime I post a video on biomarkers or a a video about me somewhere, it pops up online, they're like, yeah. Your biomarkers may be twenty years younger, but you look 50. Your skin looks 50 or 52, whatever. So, are you doing anything specifically for skin or anything? Well, you know, I, Yeah. It's funny, man. But, I I I do oils. You know? I do olive oil and those type of things I think are and and, I do, I think some of the key things I do is that, I don't, I I interested enough, okay, all my life being here in Arizona, I've gotten out in the sun. But I but but I also been cautious about not burning, but I do even at times when, it, you know well, I'll put it this way. I I I sunbathe very short periods of time. Okay? The conditions you're skinned in. Now if you guys too too long, you're gonna burn, you're gonna, you know, you but, I went to my, get got a check with, my, dermatologist not too long ago, and she said, oh my god. You were born here in Arizona? I said, yes. You're you're may have amazing skin for somebody being born here in Arizona. Yeah. What I practiced, and I learned this quite a time back, is just sunning short periods of time. And it's like it conditions your skin. And and then you can even be out longer, you know, because you've conditioned your skin and you're not gonna burn. And so I think that's one of the contributing factors. I practiced, I forget his name now. It was way back. It was, like, fifteen years ago till he he brought brought the method going out. And this is pretty pretty prevalent now. You know, five to ten, fifteen minutes in the sun. You know? And but not overdoing. And so it, nourishes your skin. You know? And, yeah. Then I also skin brush and and and infrared sauna, infrared light, that kind of thing. So wait. So starting with the, the skin, sun exposure, it's at most fifteen minutes, full body exposure. Yeah. At most it's not usually, it's just ten minutes, but at most fifteen minutes. That's right. Full body exposure. I actually go out in the backyard. I take my clothes completely off. So front front end full body thing. I hope it's not a photographer. I hope it's not the press is looking taking pictures of me. Yeah. Most I think most so, back when I was, tanning, you know, in the summers here in Boston, I was going for up to an hour, and I started to notice, like, you know, the age spots and the Yeah. Bleaching of the skin. So I was like, I gotta cut that down. But after diving into the literature, it's it's in the ballpark of what you're talking about where at most fifteen minutes, no more, you know, the You don't want to have it like that. Yeah. People people overdo it. They think, oh, they got to get these great tans. Reality is just in ten minutes a day or three times a week, you still get a a a light tan enough to you know? And but your skin is is, your skin gets strong. Yep. Alright. So but you mentioned olive oil. Is that dietary or you is that something Dietary. Dietary. So no no special creams or lotions or anything like that? Put, once a while, coconut oil Mhmm. On my skin. But, I have I have, you know, medium with with the dermatologist scribes. I'm not oily. I'm average. I'm I'm I'm having an average type, so I don't have to worry about early skin or or too dry. But I think that's probably true from I do different good oils and olive oil and I stay away from, you know, harsh, soaps or anything like that. I don't use any, you know, Dove or any of these type of soaps. I use all natural soaps and etcetera. That makes it because you nothing that nothing that dries my skin or or or, causes, you know, redness or Is the coconut oil when you're tanning, or is that without sunscreen, without any I don't use sunscreen or or not yeah. You don't put anything on your skin when you You got it. Minutes. No. That's just when I'm, in between. Like, I'll be come out of the shower or something, but coconut oil on me or or, some other natural oil. And then prescription meds, are you taking, like, rapamycin or, anything, you know, thyroid or anything, you know, stuff? Thyroid. I'm taking thyroid. I'm taking, l l d low dose naltrexone. What's that for? Is that is that a corticosteroid? No. Low low dose naltrexone. Low dose netoxone is a, actually, it was, created, for, a, schizophrenics, type situation. But for this, though, it's a longevity. I learned it back. Remember David Katkic, I'm sure. The name. Yeah. But I think he died. David Katkic was one of the, amazing longevity, you know, pioneers. And, we really see a couple years ago, we lost him. We honored him at RAF Fest, but he was in a wheelchair. He had an injury, young in his life, about 35. And so but, he introduced him. I I was over at his one of his events, and they had a woman over there that introduced low docetrexone dostatrexone for, you know, inflammation and and cancer prevention. And so I've been taking that now for, five years. I I noticed right off the bat when I started taking it, it used low dose, three milligrams. It, really, I I could feel my my joints get smoother. I use that term, more fluid. You know? And, so, I talked to a compounding pharmacy, about it at the time, and the the guy who, actually, this was a pharmacy in Florida, and he was in a wheelchair, okay, at at, one time. And he started taking the LDN and got him out of the wheelchair, you know. And, he still he still isn't completely you know, still has issues in his body, but he was able to move around and and and be more fluid. He had many good examples of people like this. I did some re so there's a lot of research, done in LDN too. You can look it up. But but, anyway, it felt it it I had great reactions on it, great responses on it. So that's what I do. Interesting. I'm gonna have to look into that. I haven't studied it yet. Look at it and tell me what you think. I'd do look at it. We'll do. So alright. So thyroid, dutrexone, are there other prescription meds that you're taking? No. Oh, nice. Okay. Good. Good. Good. Good. Yeah. I don't know. I'd say my my blood pressure is, like, like, one seventeen, one sixteen over 70. Nice. All the time, my my cholesterol's, my cholesterol runs runs about two zero four, something like that. But I have good a good HDL, so I have a good balance of that. And, so So how closely do do you pay attention to your biomarker values? Like HDL is 50 to 60. What do you know the numbers off? Yeah. Yeah. My h d my HDL last at last was 65. Nice. Other cardiovascular APL b? Like, do you track APL b? Cystatin c, do you track Yeah. They're all, yeah, they're all good. They're all really good. I I have, like I say, low low, information markers, are all low. And, yeah. And and So CRP point. Like HS HS CRP? Yeah. CRP. What was it last I checked? It was 4.7. Does that sound I think it's No. That's that would be high. So Okay. What was it then? I'm sorry. Yeah. I'm trying to think what it was. Oh, no worries. No worries. But that that could be on another time. We can, check out the blood test. Look at we'll go there go there deeper. Yeah. Even better. So, like, with Dave, he plotted all of his data, and then we can see year to year change. Right? So I know, you know, we talked about before, you know, the rejuvenation Olympics and the pace of aging, you know, but that's a single blood test. Or you need three tests in two two years to get on the but there are seven hundred days. So it's three days of data representative of seven hundred days in two years. Right? So so looking at all the blood tests year to year to year to year, now you can look at rate of change. Okay. CRP is a measure of inflammation. If you have 20 blood tests over twenty or thirty years or whatever, ten years, you can see where your data is and see. Is it increasing? Is it flat? Is it decreasing? And that's a real rate of change because you have longitudinal data. Right? So, if you if you have data long term, you know, we can go through all of that and, and see if we can identify I'm sure your holistic doctor or I hope your holistic doctor would be doing something like that rather than focusing on, okay. We just did this test. You're in range. You're out of range. What does the historical data show? You know? Because I I'm sure, you know, you think about even if you just have the reference range, if you're point 2.4, point six, point eight, and the upper limit is one, still in range, but that trend is going maybe in the wrong direction. Right? Yeah. Yeah. Understood. Trying to catch that sooner rather than later. Yeah. Well, you're amazing you're amazing that way. You're you're you've got one of the best, just from hearing you, you got one of the best, you know, setups and programs that I've heard. Yeah. Well Way way to go. Next well, next year at RadFest, I can share share all of that. Yeah. We'd love for you to do that. Yeah. That'd be beautiful. So what do you think is underrated in aging and longevity research? Like, what should the crowd besides the spark, besides getting the masses to care more about longevity and to activate people's inner drive, to wanna live longer in infinite lifespans, What what do you see as under understudied, undervalued, what people should be studying more in antiaging and living longer? Well, two things. One, is movement. You know, longevity movement. It's a big factor, I think. I think too many people are are just beating themselves up over thing and doing doing, you know, different, I'll say, exercises or lack of exercise. But mostly even the ones that are doing the exercise sometimes are are, you know, overdoing it on some level. Long you know, longevity exercise is is is about really taking care of your body and not, you know, bearing up strength, but not hurting it at the same time in simple terms. So I think a lot of people are not aren't as educated in that as possible as as they could be. Also, mindset. I mean, it it it so a minute Aubrey and I were talking about this the other day, and doctor Rose, he said he said, really? Doctor Rose puts it very, Michael Rose puts it very, candidly. He says that he says, if you're not embracing embracing physical mortality, you know, not not being able to really embrace it, he said, you're you're you're fooling yourself. You're telling your body, you're really telling your body, when you say your leg can lift to a 120, for example, okay. I mean, that's it. Go go. But at the same at the same time, you know, you you said you you really should be telling your body that you're on like, you can live unlimited lifespan and then just go for it all the way. You're you're you're setting up a whole different mechanism. So I think that I I sometimes hear people, you know, chase chase chase the biomarkers and the supplements. Okay. That's that's all good. But but then they discount their their mindset and what they're thinking and and their whole feeling. So many of them are really deeply in anxiety state. You know? I think a big factor of my health is my my ability to relax. You know, my ability to feel peace in my body at the same time to to have a to have a certain drive of life and a spirit of life, but I don't mix that up with survival. You know what I mean? Yeah. Alright. Wait. So a couple things. I'm I agree 100% on the longevity movements. Yeah. You know, it's I even think too, you know, and this is gonna sound, you know, I don't know what the term is for it. But, you know, in the in the in the guy mindset, it's in the testosterone mindset, it's get in the gym, lift a lot of weight, get big giant muscles. Right? And, you know, and more is better. Keep getting bigger. Keep getting stronger. Right? So but I'm, and I was in that mindset for a long time. Like, I grew up on the body. It all works. It all works. Yeah. But How big are how big are your guns? Right? How big are your guns? I I got but I'm a little guy. I'm a little pretty good. Those are pretty good, Michael. But I'm a hundred and forty pounds, though, so I'm just lean. But I I have a little bit. But but, I've been as high as a hundred and seventy, hundred and seventy five pounds with a lot more muscle. But I think you're making a very good point that is dramatically underrated. It doesn't have to be 10 sets of leg leg, you know, squats or deadlifts or tens, a 100 pull ups a day. Like 100%. Yeah. It how many there is there is some you know, do you need one or two sets of really challenging your muscles so that that you have strength and bone density without overtaxing the system. I think this is a huge point. I'm I'm with that a 100%. You know? And and then so when you think about too, exercise is well known to increase average, but not not maximum lifespan. Like, if exercise was the panacea for longevity, you'd expect to see in, you know, marathon runners and and Olympic athletes getting to one twenty. And I got when I got started in this, I was like, I wanna be fit like bodybuilders. Like, how can you die if you're fit and you're fit in, you know, and all of that. Right? And they die even younger. Right? Because too much muscle. Right? 100%. That's right. That's right. So there's something about fitness that's great for health span, but terrible for, super longevity. Right? Mhmm. Even the even the Olympic athletes, I think they only live, like, five years longer on average. This to me is like, how can that be? Only five years. Right? So what Over training. Over training. Overtraining. I'm with you a 100%. So what is that dose? Right? How much of that strength building exercise do we need in conjunction with the movement? Right? Like you said, like like, and it doesn't have to be yoga, but just maximum range of motion and maximum flexibility, you can bend down to to the floor and pick something up and not tweak your back. Right? Exactly. So I I'm with you a 100% there. Also, Michael Rose, one of my favorite scientists of all time, I'm a huge fan, and mindset. I agree 100%. But on the mindset, you know, approach so just as a limitation. So Jacqueline. Right? He would say things like, I can't die. It would be bad for my image. And that worked great until he hit, like, 90. And then I'm sure you know you see when you saw him at 90, he looked like a decrepit. No disrespect to Jack. He's a huge icon. I have great respect. You know, I you know? No. But he did. He looked he looked very decrepit. And his mindset was ironclad his whole life. Right? So, how do you He burned he burned himself up. That could be a big part of it. Yeah. For sure. He burned himself up. Trying to keep up to that image. You know? Yeah. And that's the whole thing. We can't live up to images. We have to there's a flow that, that you get in touch with in your body that that you get in a rhythm, you know, with with your movement. And and and it's like a kinda like I use the term almost like a ballet. You know? You're you're dancing yourself through life rather rather than pounding yourself through life. You know? And and, it's a whole different dynamics. But, you know, evolutionarily speaking, as men, like you said, you know, we're taught and and and part of that big muscle building thing is that the female sees you and you and you're a good breeder. Right? We don't understand that concept. We were pounding it out thing. You know, do you wanna just be known as a good breeder? Is that it? And and, you know, the most beautiful bodies really are the bodies that are are trim, you know, you know, have good tone, you know, you know, the the the muscle thing is just all attraction for evolutionary, you know, propagation of species. You know? But we got that set in our minds that way. So I too, we all went through that, building the big muscle. But I was fortunate, when I had that football injury, I had a scholarship in football in in college, but I got injured. And that was a blessing because I didn't go on and do get, you know, hurt myself worse, you know, and so, but I had that mindset, too, oh, maybe the football player, get the girl, I love the game anyway, you know, but now it's like, wow, you know, it's like, you're, we're dancing our way through life, it's a ballet, a movement. It's a it's a strategic movement that we're that we're getting more rhythm with our bodies and what and what what nourishes us, what what feels good to you, you know, what what not not pounding your body, but but taking it to, you know, you have to push. I use the word push. You have to be able to to, do things, that you're gonna say you're gonna exercise or a bike ride or whatever you're gonna do. You can take yourself to an edge, but you're not taking yourself over the edge. It's a it's a it's a practice. It's a practice after a while. Right? Yeah. Because we're used to it even as males taking ourselves over the edge. Who's gonna win that race? Who's gonna who's gonna, you know, charge up that hill even if you break a bone? You know? Going down the freeway now, I'm the same way. I I I stay completely out of these packs of cars. You know? And and I'll still go to the same speed. I'll get right where they wanna get, but I stay out of it because who who wants to injure themselves? I mean, we're we're longevity enthusiasts. You you have an injury or bad injury, it's gonna set you back. Who knows then what you'll come from or kill yourself? You know? And the cars are still one of the most dangerous things we do in this world, driving a car. You know? And and, so, anyway, I'm thinking these terms all the time. How how can but now it's automatic for me. Like, staying out staying out of the, the pack. Staying out of the staying out of the group consciousness of what we've what we think has been healthy. Getting in touch getting in touch with that that real flow of your own body. Fantastic. Alright. One last question. So let's assume that aging has been conquered. Death no longer exists unless or if people choose it choose it voluntarily rather than involuntarily. Right? So if when that day comes, let's say that day was tomorrow. What what would you do? What would what how would your life be different? Like, what would be what other interest would, you know, would you have besides because aging is That's a wonderful, I I can I can feel that feeling right now? Right? That's a wonderful feeling to have. Wow. Well, man, for me, I'd I'd I'd feel a total rejoicing of being able to just have the burden lifted, of that of that tyranny of death. And I think and and and a new creativity. I'm excited already beginning to move into that arena to where I've I've just, man, do all the things and and be able to love and and and enjoy life like never before without that tyranny, without that burden on our shoulders. You know, everything from, you know, you know, space exploration to deeper exploration and relationships and intimacy and communication, all those things. I mean, what a joyous world. That's that's really that's really the world that that that's the heaven on earth, you know, being free of that tyranny of death in our bodies, the the death being put underfoot. So at at first first, probably, a hundred years, I'd just be rejoicing. Great stuff. I agree a 100%. Everything every with everything you just said, space exploration would be on my path too, but the the New worlds. New worlds. And Yeah. You know, we found in that we find this new world here in ourselves of that creativity and wanting to find I'll find all new new all these new experiences without fear and anxiety. When you think of, space, a space fearing civilization, they have to be longevity. Like Yes. They or have to be long lived because Yeah. You know, if you're gonna travel light years away, like, to get to that point, it it may take a while. You have to you have to have the technology to do that in the first place. So to develop that technology, to you've gotta live long enough to to imagine if you are on a spaceship and you are going to a new world. What if your spaceship breaks down, but you you aren't smart enough to know how your spaceship works? So you have to live long enough to educate yourself to do all those things. Alright. Now you're in the new world. Do you know about farming and agriculture? So it's like you need several lifetimes of being a mechanic, aerospace engineer, all of the lifetimes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's exciting, really. So well, thank you so much. I'm gonna have to grow myself down the point, but this has been a very, fascinating and very fantastic interview. I really appreciate it. Yes. Thanks, James. You're you're you're amazing, really. Same. I I have enough, you know, superlatives for you. So alright. Cheers, James. Have a good so much. Okay. Bye. Bye bye. Bye.