For blood test number two in 2025, when using doctor Morgan Levine's biological age calculator, PhenoAge, we saw that my biological age was twenty two years younger than the chronological. So what might be contributing to these data? So let's start off with prescription meds, and for those who are familiar with the channel, this won't be a surprise. I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in my early twenties. So I've been taking Levothyroxine for about half my life. For this test, it was a hundred and thirty seven and a half micrograms per day. Note that this story will be a bit different for the blood test number three in 2025 video, as I was recently able to reduce my Levothyroxine dose and increase final or include, Cytomel which is t three. What that does to biomarkers, we'll find out in just a few days as I'm blood testing for the third time in 2025. Alright. So next up are supplements, and the, there were only two for this test. The first is vitamin d. So I took two thousand I use per day for all 42 of the 42 that correspond to this blood test. So what does that mean? What is the forty two day period? Well, it started immediately after blood test number one which was on February 4, and it lasted through the day before blood test number two on March 17. So that's forty two days in between blood tests. And note that I currently live in Boston so for mostly the non summer months, eight to nine months out of the year, I've been supplementing with vitamin d. But that story will change too as after June, I'm moving to Austin, Texas. So I'm planning on getting full body sun exposure for the majority of the year as opposed to a minority of the year. Alright. So then the next supplement is nicotinic acid, and I've been doing that to raise NAD because mine has a propensity to be on the lower side. My range without NAD precursors is in the 20 30 micromolar range with an average around 25 micromolar. Now, I found that very low dose nicotinic acid increases my N A D. For this test, for seven days before testing N A D, I supplemented with a 102 of nicotinic acid per day. Now, note that I'm not taking a forty two day average which I do for most all other bio biomarkers. And that's because N. E. D. Is a metabolite whose levels change relatively quickly in response to dietary change or supplementation. So a seven day average is pretty good in terms of being correlated with N. E. D. Changes over a very short period of time. Now rather than just assuming that nicotinic acid will increase my N. E. D. Above baseline, I've been measuring. So on the same day as this test on March 18, I sent blood to Jinfinity for N. E. D. Analysis, and if you wanna measure your own N. E. D. Levels, there's a discount link in the video's description. So for this test, N. E. D. Levels were 43 micro molar in response to a hundred milligrams per day. About a hundred milligrams per day of nicotinic acid. Now, that's not as high as my highest. Any d NED levels in the sixties, 67 micro molar but that leads to terrible flushing at a much higher nicotinic acid dose. Six hundred milligrams per day. So for now, I'm gonna stick with a hundred milligrams of nicotinic acid per day. And in an upcoming video, there may be something else, another dietary nutrient that can impact N A D. So stay tuned for that story coming up in an upcoming video. Alright. So that's it for supplements. No geo protectors or cenolytics, purported cenolytics at least for now. Which then brings us to diet. What diet composition corresponds to test number two in 2025? And that's what we'll see here. This is the full list. This is the average daily dietary intake for that forty two day period that corresponds to test number two in twenty twenty five. I know that I weigh all of my food, and then I log it into Cronometer. So, these data for the list in terms of how much food are foods that are on list is as close to accurate as one can get as I'm using a food scale. So the list is ranked in grams with two exceptions. Green tea which is an ounces, which is a staple. I'm drinking that every day. And if you wanna use what I use, there's a discount link in the video's description. And then the second on this list that is not ranked in terms of grams is cookies and cookie dough. So that's 52 calories per day not grams. And I didn't eat 52 calories of cookies every day. That's one day of cookies over a forty two day average. And I'll have more on that story in the cheat meal section of video. Alright. So then, for every test I do experiments by changing things in the diet or potentially even adding supplements. Not for this test but for the next test, there'll be a couple supplements added in addition to the two that I just mentioned. But I'm always trying to optimize weak spots without blowing up the overall approach. As we can see my biomarker data, most of it is relatively useful. So what experiments that I do for this test? So the first is trying to reduce candida I G G which has been higher than the reference range for nine consecutive tests. And I do have some symptoms of that. Well, a couple of my toes look like they've got a fungal infection. I've got something going on in my eyelid, some eczema that could be related to Candida. I'm not sure. So I reduced foods that contain the fiber arabinoxylan. Now, growth of Candida, Candida grows on glucose but it can also grow on fiber which is arabinoxylan. So to test that hypothesis, I reduced arabinoxylan containing foods which in my diet come from flaxseeds and corn. So for this test, for average daily flax seed intake was three gram three grams per day. Whereas, it was 13 grams per day for test number one. And for corn, I reduced it by about half. From 76 to about 38 grams per day. But remember, this is a forty two day average. For twenty nine days before the test, I completely cut these foods out. So zero, intake of flax seeds and corn for twenty nine days before testing. Now, note that Candida can also grow on sugar. So to test that, I increased fat intake and reduced net carbs. And where I increased my fat from was whole food, not seed oils or anything else. And from almost exclusively from walnuts. So for test number one, average walnut walnut intake was 10 grams per day, and I increased that to 45 grams per day. And I should mention that higher fat in my case, didn't have major negative impact on the biomarkers. So I'm planning on sticking where, total fat was for upcoming, biomarker test. Now, whether that will help me enable to optimize weak spots, we'll find out. But the overall structure for this test is pretty good, so I'm planning on sticking with this going forward. Alright. So I also reduced beet intake and the rationale behind that is is including beets for their nitrates which can help with blood pressure and vasodilation. Is that overkill when considering my abundant collard green intake which also contain nitrates. So, we can see that I average for this test more than 300 grams of collard greens. So, I'm getting a good dose of daily nitrates. So, is also getting nitrates from beets. For test number one, it was two hundred sixty five grams per day. Is that overkill? So to test that, I reduced beets from again, as I said, two hundred sixty five grams per day to eleven grams per day. And I should mention, I haven't noticed any negative impacts on blood pressure which I'm now measuring every day first thing as soon as I wake up in the morning. Now, beets, and I'm pro beets. Don't get me wrong. Beets also contain a significant amount of sucrose, and fructose, and oxalate. So, to test the hypothesis if reducing beets could be good for my biomarkers, even though they have a strong net positive correlative score with biomarkers, I dramatically reduced them and the majority of biomarkers didn't get worse. So I'm gonna keep them relatively low for now. I'm open to including them back in at for later test to see if they may improve, certain weak spots if they develop. Alright. So I also made two smaller changes. One is I cut onion intake from fourteen to four grams per day, and the primary rationale there is only because it gives me pretty bad gas. Onions do contain inulin which is a prebiotic which is purportedly good for the gut gut microbiome. And I say purportedly because in very high doses, it can negatively impact liver function. That's probably not what's happening in my case. No impact on on liver function at very low doses but bad gas. So to balance that equation, I doubled kimchi intake and kimchi has probiotics whether that can make a positive impact on gut health is debatable. I don't yet have my iolo metabolomic results to look at gut bacteria specific metabolites to see if these changes move the needle in the right direction. Alright. So that brings us back to the cookies and cookie dough story. So when it comes to cheat meals and I measured it and I mentioned this in a video with Chris Mann Loomis. So if you missed that, I'll link the specific portion of that video in the right corner. So in terms of cheat meals, I can't go completely cold turkey. In the past, that's led to a binge and I'm trying to avoid any binges as that's the antithesis of sticking to a calorie restricted and potentially pro longevity approach. Now, for prior to about four years ago, I had a problem with eating junk on say, Fridays and Saturdays. Eating almost nothing for a few days after that, and then repeating the cycle. Sort of a binge purge cycle with without actually purging but you know, by fasting after eating a lot of junk. So I've been able to avoid that for about four years until this test. So on the first day, and again I mentioned this full story in detail, again with Chris, Matt, and Loomis. It's on it's the video in the right corner. So immediately after blood testing, I had my pretty standard junk which is peanut butter mixed with chocolate, homemade Reese's peanut butter cups and with some grape jam. It was delicious. On day two, I started off with some pre made cookies that I made the day before with extra chocolate chips, and note that I stay even though I do include cheat meals after the blood test, I try to stay eucalyptus. So I'm not trying to go from 23 or 2,400 or 2,200 calories to something much larger. It's not a complete cheat day but it's cheat meals. So, I had some cookies and cookie dough on the list while sticking to my eucalypt, or my relatively low calorie intake. And then, after I ate those cookies, I couldn't stop. So, that led to a 5,700 calorie day. I've, you know, I cracked, you know, I ate more peanut butter, more chocolate, more grape jelly. So it ended up being 5,700 calories per day. Fortunately, after the last test that didn't happen, and I'm trying to minimize that occurrence. Hopefully, I can now start a new four year streak at least where this doesn't happen again. As it's it wasn't fun to eat, you know, granted 5,700 calories is fun, but then cutting calories over three or four days after that is not fun. Alright. So, in terms of junk calories, cookie dough is almost 2,200. Chocolate chips about 900. The grape jam or jelly about 600. So about 3,700 calories came from junk, and when dividing that by the total amount of calories consumed for this test, that was 4% junk of all calories. So the diet was 96% clean for this test. Now, that's one way to look at it. The other way is that I had basically a forty day wash out before testing. So, whether it's I didn't reach that threshold of going over junk calories to negatively impact the biomarkers forty days away. I'm not sure. But usually, the junk calories are less than 1% at most one to 2% of total calories. Alright. So this list is ranked in grams. What about top contributors coming from calories? And that's what we'll see here. This is the top 10 foods for average daily calorie intake for that forty two forty two day period that went from test one to test number two. And note that this list is generated with chronometer. If you want to track your own diet using chronometer, discount link in the video's description. So atop the list for the first time, bumping out sardines which had been atop the list for many, many tests are walnuts. And note that I I'm not trying to blow up the system here. So, you know, we can see that eight of the top 10 foods that are on this list were also the same for test number one. And if you missed the test number one diet composition video, I linked to it in the right corner. So walnuts made the top 10 and so did salmon, wild caught salmon. And what left the top 10 were beets and yogurt. Alright. So, what about macronutrient composition? So, we've gone through foods. What about macros and even microbes? Micros not microbes. So average daily calorie intake was twenty one sixty seven per day, and this is relatively high as this is my highest calorie intake over the past eight tests where I had a low of twenty seventy six calories per day. So I've been slowly increasing calories, and and we'll see why I haven't gone lower, and that story involves body weight. So, body weight declines after fifty to sixty years in both men and women, and I'm gonna use, the plot using, BMI which is essentially a body weight story. Even though BMI is weight and kilograms divided by height in meters squared and height, there is a small decrease in height over time. The changes in body weight are far larger. So, BMI plotted in the y axis against age on the x. And we can see that b m I and correspondingly body weight peaks midlife and then declines for the remainder of life. So about half of the lifespan b m I and correspondingly body weight declines. So the goal is to be weight stable and a major factor underlying the age related decline for body weight maybe cancer cachexia or undiagnosed cancer which can contribute to basically, atrophy of fat and muscle, for the remainder of the lifespan after midlife. Now, I've also been tracking body weight in addition to everything else since 2018. And we can see that here from August 2018 through March 2025. And note that each dot corresponds to the average monthly body weight as it's easier to visualize by looking at around thirty day averages rather than, you know, all of the days for that about twenty one hundred day period. So starting in about January 2021, we can see that I've been able to consistently reduce body weight over time, and that's almost exclusively from calorie restriction. But, the first thing to think is, am I just on that downward trend for body weight over time as shown in the image below? So, in the image below, this is unintentional weight loss and this is important to, an important distinction to make because unintentional weight loss and somewhat quickly can be indicative again of under sorry, undiagnosed cancer and or cancer cachexia. Now, in my case, this isn't unintentional weight loss. This is intentional weight loss as I've been slowly reducing calorie intake over that about four year period. Now, I mentioned that the goal is to be weight stable. So for about six or seven tests, that was true but then body weight started to increase. And then after that relatively small peak in late twenty twenty four, we can see that it's been decreasing. So I'm trying to stay weight stable that's why I'm not currently at twenty seventy six. My lowest calorie intake over this span. Why it's currently at or was for this test 21 67. That's why it's at twenty one sixty seven and why I haven't kept it relatively low. Now, for the next test, just try to stay weight stable, I've actually increased it by a bit more to 2,200, around 2,200. As I'm trying to stay around one forty and not get leaner as below one forty I've noticed starts to mess with in workout performance, and I'm not trying to lose any muscle or any strength or any functional ability because I'm just too light and too lean. Alright. So next up for macronutrients is protein intake, which average protein intake for this test was a 101 grams per day, which is about 19% of total calories. Next up is fat intake. So we can see that for this test, average daily fat intake was a 106 grams per day, and for, and that's 44% of total calories. And for perspective, for test number one, it was in my usual range which I've been sticking to based on correlations with around 25 to 30 biomarkers of 89 grams per day. However, as I mentioned earlier, 106 grams per day for total fat isn't the highest fat level that I've had since 2015. Since since I started tracking both diet and biomarkers, because going way too high for fat may start to move biomarkers in the wrong direction including glucose paradoxically. But one zero six as I mentioned, 106 grams per day seems to be a good number to hit based on the full spectrum biomarkers at least for now. In terms of where the majority of that fat came from, it came from omega six. And again, that's almost exclusive exclusively from walnuts. Now, there's a bit of this omega six phobia all over the interwebs. And we can see that for test number one, my average was about sixteen grams per day which is where which is where it's been for many many tests as going higher in my data maybe bad for biomarkers based on their correlation. So I stayed around sixteen grams per day. So we can see that I close to doubled my omega six intake. Again, from walnuts, whole food. This isn't from seed oils or anything else. I close the double the omega six, intake and that didn't have any negative impact on biomarkers. So, I think we can put at least based on my data, I can put some of that omega six phobia to rest at least up to about twenty nine grams per day. Would that be even worse if I went higher? I don't know. I'm not gonna do the experiment to find out. For now, at most twenty nine grams per day of omega six coming almost exclusively from nuts and seeds is where I plan to stay. In terms of other fats, monounsaturated, omega three, and saturated. That too is shown here. So if you're interested in that, check it out. Next up is carb intake. This is the carb intake that corresponds to test number two. So, total carbs are 242 grams per day, that n But note that net carbs equals total carbs minus fiber. Average daily fiber intake was 68 grams per day. So when subtracting that from total carbs, we get a net carbs of a 174 grams per day. When multiplied by four calories per gram, that equals 32% net carbs that correspond to test number two. Now, note that fiber also contributes calories as a fraction of total fiber about 20% is fermented by gut bacteria into short chain fatty acids. So for this test, about a 111 calories can be added to total fat or 5% of total calories coming from fiber can be added to total fat as they're converted. Again, fiber soluble fire being being converted into short chain fatty acids. Now, note that for the previous test, test number one, the contribution from fiber was 7.2%. So I reduced fiber too. It wasn't just a small fat fat increase but it was also a small fiber cut. And this has been generally good again for the biomarkers, but also, it may be TMI, but I've been battling an internal hemorrhoid for about half my life. And that dramatically improved with the shift to going a bit higher fat. So I'm planning on continuing again, higher fat going forward. So now, we can see net macros for this test. We're 49% fat, 32% net carbs, and about 19% protein. Now, within carbs, I also track sugars, but more specifically fructose intake. As the diet contains a lot of fructose containing fruits and vegetables. So, total fructose for this test was 53. That's by adding fructose divided by sucrose divided by two as sucrose is half fructose. 53 may seem like a lot but that's far from my highest which is a 122 since I started tracking in 2015. So, fifty three may seem like a lot but that's on the lower side of my fructose intake range since 2015. Alright. Next up are micronutrients, vitamins and minerals. And the vitamins may be hard to see so I'd encourage going full screen if you haven't already. As And as I mentioned in, many times in these videos, videos in this series for diet composition, for those who are interested in trying to optimize biomarkers, one of the first steps is always to it to to try to get full RDA coverage. So covering the RDA for all vitamins and minerals. Now, how high one should go or not above the RDA in terms of optimizing biomarkers that comes by looking at correlations, and that's the approach that I've used since 2015 to get me to this twenty two year younger biological age. Note that all of my tests are not 22 younger. It was in the ball that ballpark for test number one. And this has been a rare event but I've been able to get better over time. And I think one reason is because I follow correlations with biomarkers which I post on Patreon. So if you're interested in that, check it out. Now, one example of those correlations that I've been following is vitamin k. And you can see that it's about 25 times higher than what's been, considered as an adequate intake which is about ninety micrograms for men. And the only reason that I've gone that high for vitamin k is by following its correlations with a panel of 25 to 30 standard biomarkers that include liver, kidney, immune cells, metabolic health, and so on. If you've ever wondered what's optimal for biomarkers, then I have a new Patreon tier dedicated just to that. These aren't the reference ranges. This is biomarker data, 29 biomarkers, 45 published references, currently more than two hours of content that focus on how each of these biomarkers change during aging and their associations with all cause mortality risk to derive optimal ranges that may be important for health and potentially longevity. So, if you're interested in that, check it out. And if you're interested in more about my attempts to buy hack aging, check us out on Patreon. Where besides looking at monthly averages or forty two day averages for diet data, I post daily diet data on Patreon. In addition to many other things in other tiers. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself that helps support the channel including, ultalabtest.com which is where I get the majority of my blood test. The clearly filtered water filter, I use that every day. At home metabolomics, testing that at every test in addition to the standard blood chemistry markers or microbiome composition, I'm still working on fixing that. NAD testing with Infinity, epigenetic testing, at home blood testing with Syphox Health which includes DNA the DNA methylation test GrimAge which I'll have more of more about in an upcoming video, green tea, dye tracking with corn meter, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the conquer aging or dye trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.