Everyone. Today's guest is doctor Li Chang, who is a professor in the department of firm pharmacology at Peking University in Beijing, China. Today, doctor Chang will present his lab's findings for the impact of immunoglobulin g on extending lifespan and on obesity. So welcome, Lee, and let's get into the presentation. K. Thank you, Mike, for the invitation. Let me share my screen. I think it's really important for to have this opportunity to share scientific findings with the public. And by the way, Mike, I really like the the the Sloan IO IO T shirt. Conquer aging. That's our goal. Yeah. To make everyone live longer and healthier. Let's talk about aging and obesity from a perspective of IGG. I'm trying to use IGG to put these two together. I believe most of us know what is aging and obesity. And, right now, this is the maybe the first time in human history that people that are 65 year old are more than two under five years old. That means that our our human society going to have a a aging future. Also, that this is an obese world. And right now, they are they are over a billion people, overweight are obese. And in The US, that's even worse. US, less than one third of people have normal weight. So these two are urgent, public health crisis now. So, indeed, the aging and obesity are so similar to each other in terms of their comorbidities, such as cancer, cardiovascular disease, neurodegeneration, and, liver disease, so on and so forth so forth. In another way, age and obesity overlap with, with each other by the hallmarks, like chronic inflammation, oxidative stress, sinuses. So these two are so similar to each other. It's harder to to not believe these are not closely connected. That's our research focus on. I try to understand whether they have a common mechanism. So how the known famous longevity pathways, they are all critical for metabolic regulation. And the current anti aging interventions all involve changing, metabolism. So there's a we we view this from we view agent from a metabolic metabolic perspective. So our question is actually quite simple. We try to understand why do we become obese when we age? Because this question is not very common. Like, for myself, I can eat whatever I want in my twenties. But after 30, I have to be so careful to watch what I eat just to keep in shape. Also, aging and obesity develop so many same comorbidities. Do these com comorbidities have the common mechanisms? Therefore, we can have a therapy for mod chronic diseases. That's also our goal. So we start from here, and, this is a famous experiment that, initially in nineteen fifties that researchers connect an aged rat with a young rat, and they found that something's really striking that, these aged mice that after sharing their circulation with the young young mouse, they become younger. So the people are so fascinated by some thing called the longevity factor in our circulation. So people are being dealt in this for decades trying to identify longevity factors. Interestingly, in this experiment, on the other hand, that, people also notice that, this young rat actually ate faster after sharing the circulation with this aged rat. So, therefore, let indicate that there is something in the circulation also drives aging. That's, aging factor. Also, you know, circulate in the circulation. So whether it's a longevity factor or aging factor, that's people are keep trying to identify and and, answer answer the question. So for us, we our lab used to work on metabolism. I've been working at Columbia over ten years running a lab focused on a deep and, metabolic diseases. So we did a simple experiment, did this, gene expression profiling across, you know, different tissues using mouse models. That's the that's the very very common in in in research. That we found that, so this 80 degrees of the genes are accumulated over 80. That's how we, expect an interest in that, they are, across across different tissues. That is the highest agent related genes are all in adipose tissues. This one, we call it the epididymal fat, is equal to to the belly fat in humans. The the second highest one is this, is the subcutaneous fat. The third one is the brown fat. They all accumulated the highest agent released the genes indicating that a that a a deep tissue is is an tissue that are prone to aging. Something also interesting that this aging release changes also happens at the earliest time point in adipose tissue than in any other tissues, indicating that a depo is the driver of aging. We also, have a study in collaboration with doctor Lee Sun from Duke NUS at Singapore. We introduced a dynamic way to analyze, gene, changes during aging. We found that that, the during aging, what are you what caused the metabolic, decline is not the absolute gene expression level. Instead, it's the response. So during aging, the genes involved in the in the metabolic regulation, to stimuli is is impaired. Therefore, because the overall decreased, metabolic function. So we we call this the impaired metabolic elasticity. Interestingly, in this, main metabolic tissues, like in the muscle, liver, fat, adipo tissue has the worst impairment in metabolic elasticity. Therefore, we further believe to focus on adipo tissue to identify the the trigger that, called adipose tissue agent. We started from some really simple experiment. We, again, we use the mice. We we use the mice to focus on their adipose tissue to compare the different change, the different, protein change over over, at different age. We first did that is the metabolic, the mass spec. Try to try to try to measure, all the all the protein omic changes. And we found a data in a deep tissue over Egypt. The highest, the highest changes, actually are all the proteins are related to immunoglobulins. And these proteins are all at the highest, abundancy. So look at this this, we call it the western blot that, is showing the protein abundance. You can push it at the at the end of this eight weeks, very young age of mice, they have a really low antibodies, IgG, in their effect. Well, when they are about one year and a half, it's it's, like, early aging time, you know, to humans that they accumulate so much IgG. And this, accumulation happened really early in life. At 26 at about half year old of aging in mice equal to about 30 years old in humans. But the IgG start to accumulate in in in fact, in in mouse fat. And, further, please know that that you may see that, okay, this IgG is from is, come from circulation because in our blood, there are so much antibodies there to protect our body from from path, pathogens. Yes. Antibodies do do increase during aging. Like in mice, it increase a several several fold, but not as high as the adipose tissue. A depot tissue is far more sensitive in terms of IgG accumulation during aging. Also, if this IgG leaks from circulation, we may expect the same level of IgG in different tissues, but instead, indeed, it's not. Look at the IgG levels across different tissues, like in fat, liver, muscle, kidney, the brain, and heart. A deep hole tissue have the highest IgG both in high BHG and light chain. That indicating that a deep tissue have a special mechanism to enrich IgG, over other tissues. You know, you may also appreciate that, in this time cost in given the tissues right now. A depots T cells that accumulate the IgG earlier than other tissue. Other tissues also have IgG accumulation in late aging, but they start they start at a lower, at a later time time point and also at a, accumulate at a lower levels. So a depot tissue is really the the key to to connect aging and the metabolism. And we people are trying to develop the more anti aging interventions. So far, the calorie restriction is the most efficient way for aging intervention intervention across different species. In this famous experiment at a did a by a scientist from Wisconsin Madison researchers that, they put monkeys under calorie restriction over twenty years. And then they found really interesting. The monkeys under calorie restriction over their lifetime do look much better on the age. I look at it deferred. So they they claim that a calorie restriction can increase higher span. So we also adopt a calorie restriction to see if IgG is an agent with this the factor. Does it change by, in during calorie restriction? There's something really surprising to us happened here. We found that when we put the mice under calorie restriction, data, it specifically decreased IgG without affecting IgA or IgM or other antibody asotypes. Meaning that IgG is specifically regulated by this, by color restriction. So basically, in a plasma, IgG would drop to decreased over 50%, and it was even more pronounced in a depot system by color restriction. So further make us believe there is a connection of immunoglobulin and the agent. So what I what I is the IgG? Is is this is the most abundant antibody in our body, accounted for over 80% of our total antibodies. It also have the longest half life over three weeks. And now these, these are all the major ITG asset types here. ITG have this, as the IDG recognizing, recognizing domain called f a b and also have this constant fragment called the f c fragment here. So they say the to recognize antigen, they say that to activate data is is downstream receptors. So we all know that, antibody, are for immune protection. So the more, the better. So it's a so to test that, we just, as a, purified purified antibody, total antibody from young and lean mice, healthy mice, just to inject the antibodies, IgG, to another healthy mice, just to increase the the amount of antibody to mimic what happened in aging. Then we noticed that that after IgG, after we simply boost the IgG levels, it'll impair the body's response to insulin. We call it the insulin insulin sensitivity insulin tolerance test. This is, something we we already measure our body's response to insulin. So we give a bolus of insulin to to humans or to to mice. We measure how quick the glucose drop. So out of the given IgG, it had delayed the drop of blood glucose. So something happened bad in in the body. We also noticed that, with this IgG treatment, it accumulated a deep old tissue. And, also, it increased a protein called f four eighty. This protein is the marker for macrophage, which is the scavenger immune cells in our body. So IgG increase macrophage. That made us speculate the data. IgG may also cause inflammation in a deeper tissue. So we are again, we did a transcom atomic analysis of a deeper tissue after IgG treatment. We noticed that there are so many pathways are activated by IgG treatment. Most of them are inflammation related, like a like a, inflammatory response, neutrophil. So that tell us that IgG change in a deep hole tissue and also in the whole body metabolism. It's clear I mean, insulin sensitivity. So how does the IgD cause, this, impairment of metabolic function and adipose tissue function? And we know that adipose tissue also undergo fibrosis. That means we have too much collagen deposited in the tissue. That will make the tissue rigid. Then it will it will worsen inflammation and also, impair insulin sensitivity. We also noticed that adipose tissue fibrosis also take place in age, during aging. This is the the serious red staining for this collagen. It's a beautiful red color and also under polarized light. It's can see fluorescent very beautiful under microscope. So it's with this prevalent fibrosis in a deep tissue. However, when we checked another a mouse, a mouse model, we call the b now mice. These mice have a d, deficient of b cells. Therefore, they cannot produce IgG. These mice are, protected from a deep hole tissue in aging. They have much less cells rather stemming and polarized polarized lighter imaging here. So the letter tells us that IHG might be related to tissue fibrosis. So we know fibrosis is is driven by a a major pathway that the TGF beta, signaling that the the downstream will smile. Smell minus one of the minus, three. So in these cell now mice, without IgG here, we see much less smelter two and smelter three phosphory phosphorylation, meaning they have a lower activity here, meaning they have lower in, fibrosis. So now in this B cell null mice, now we give them IgG back. We restore IgG levels. What what happened? With this IgG accumulation, again, in a depot tissue, we see huge upregulation of f four eighty, which is the macrophage marker, meaning a depository information had increased. Also, we increased the somatostatinib phosphorylation indicating that we also activate the fibrotic pathways in a depository tissue by IgG. So long story short, the method method number is, figured out with found that it immediately through macrophage. Either they, beginning, we started to target a fibroblast to induce fibrosis. Then it turned out that we we were wrong. So it require macrophage. IgG can activate the macrophage. I macrophage then produce a multi g f beta that activate the the fibroblast to make a to call it tissue fibrosis. Then the next question is, so what regulate the edge commission during aging? I showed you that it's unlikely it's a PCR. We haven't touched this, more carefully, in in details later. And now so we we look at, we look at another mechanism to regulate the ITP. That is recycling. So ITP usually is uptaken by the cell, then it's it's in it's a small vesicles called endosomes. But even even some of the matures, the pH lower. It's become more acidic. It's something very interesting happened now. And at this acidic environment, IgG, it handled from its receptor to another protein called FcRn. So then the FcRn bind the IgG at this lower pH, then transport IgG back to the plasma membrane, release at a neutral pH. In this way, IgG is recycled. Therefore, IgG can have this super long half life. It's the longest, in all antibodies. And people also know that the recycling rate is about 1.5 fold as the production by b cells. Therefore, IgG level is a determiner by its recycling receptor, FCRN. So we know macrophage is critical for Hg recycling. Therefore, we're not caught. We we just a blade specifically, in macrophage of of this f c f c g r t, which is the gene encoding IFCRN. So after we abolish IgG recycling in macrophage, we we shorten IgG half life. That's, I do expect. This model works good. Let's see what happens. So this macrophage cannot call it a mice that, they have no phenotype at a young age. They have a normal I g g. However, during aging, they prevent the IgG accumulation during aging. So in the in the age of the mice, they have a lower IgG, then they have a they have a much lower activation of a somatic two and a somatic three. I mean, they have much lower fibrotic, fibrogenic, pathways. So look at their TCO fibrosis. They have very closely people with TCO with much less fibrosis. So in the kidney data, that once we prevent the activation, we can prevent a fibrosis fibrosis in aging. Then what happened to other parameters? So So we know that during aging that our metabolic metabolic rate decrease. So in this, mice with with the prevention of IgG accumulation, they can maintain higher level of oxygen consumption, meaning they can have a higher level of metabolic rate. They are protected from obesity. And, also, in aging, we have we we we develop insulin resistance that, lead to the type two diabetes. In this mice, at 15 old, these mice are still very healthy. They are very insulin sensitive. They can clear glucose much more efficient from their blood. Also, once we keep the mice, let let the natural dye, we notice that, indeed, they actually have a prolonged lifespan over total person percentage. So this top percentage is is pretty significant in in mice. So to to put it together that preventing IgG accumulation extends both health span and the lifespan. So this story being published, about one year ago in cell metabolism. So we found that the IIT accumulated, since the early aging, very early, equal to about a 30 year old in humans, preferably adipose tissue. In there, it's active macrophage, called adipose tissue pathogenic remodeling, and then impairment. Once we prevent the aggregation, we can increase the lifespan and lifespan. We are so happy to see that, about two months ago, that there the study come out from from a cell that they use a state of the art technology, data, bio comprehensive analysis across different species. They reproduced our finding that IgG is the aging factor that caused senescence. They also found the reproduce our findings that once we intervene at accumulation, we can improve aging. So we are so happy to see that our findings are reproduced. Now let's come to the second part. The first part, I show you IgG in aging. Now what's its connection in obesity? As I mentioned to you before that the aging and obesity are so similar to each other, especially adipose tissue. That they have the same hallmarks, including inflammation, fibrosis, insulin resistance, compromised adipogenesis, and the semesters. They all lead to metabolic decline. So we ask, is the IT also a driving force for obesity? So so in this case, we we use the McDonald's food to push mice to become obese. We call it high fat diet. In this case, the the IgG accumulated in adipose tissue again, and, also, there's no increase in IgA and IgM. This in accumulation of IgG in aging and in obesity in adipose tissue is very specific to IgG, but not other antibodies. This accumulation in adipose tissue is also way higher than its increase in the plasma, Meaning that a deposition is a has suck all the I IGG accumulate IGG from the circulation. It's not not just a a a leakage. The increase the IGG into the other archetypes of of, IGG IGG one to to a three as implying that it's a matter be a polyclonal response rather than a monoclonal response. So what caused the ID accumulation here? At the beginning, we thought of because it might be b cell. Because we know, in each and then obesity, the antibody produced the b cells can infiltrate a deposed tissue. They already called the inflammation. So we use the this BCR normies, which has no IgG production. We give the we give the some pure purified IgG. Let's see what happened. Something very surprising, to us, I noticed that, this, this exogenous IgG specifically goes to adipose tissue. This, the belly fat, subcutaneous fat, but not much to other tissues. So this, antibody are isolated purified from another mouse. Not it's generated by the by by b cells because these cells these mice have no b cells, meaning that the IT accumulate a yin a deep post tissue in a b cell independent away. Also, we know that, that a microgrid is critical for IT recycling. As as I mentioned that to you before. So when we say, okay. This might be little microgrid infiltration. Then we did the compare the time cost to see how fast the HD accumulate in a deeper tissue in comparison to to macrophage infiltration. We use the I four eighty as the marker. So we know that macrophage actually, infiltrating a depot tissue at a much later stage after obesity is established. However, IgG accumulated in a deep level tissue in a much earlier time point. I think even two weeks, when we put the mice on high fat diet. So meaning that IgG has another another mechanism to enrich near a depot system. So long story short, we we we we did a a series of condition of mice. We showed that that is depending on their recycling by different cells. So for function wise, so once we prevent the allergy accumulation, when we induce obesity, there's no allergy recognition in in adipose tissue. Then these mice were protected from therapy induced obesity. They also protected from insulin resistance that come along with obesity. So these mice are super metabolic healthy. They are they are free of obesity and insulin resistance. So what underline this this, this metabolic, protection? So in adipo tissue, the very fundamental function is adipogenesis. That's adipocyte formation. We already need adipocyte, new adipocyte formation and turnover. So, this determine a depoated remodeling metabolic function, hypertrophy, and inflammation. So this pathway from a pre adipocyte to adipocyte is a tightly regulated by by different hormone hormonal signal, especially insulin signaling. So, we checked whether IgG has an effect on a deep set of formation. So we we did this in visual. I see the adipocyte progenitor cells, then differentiate them into adipocyte in the presence of IgG. So, again, we were very surprised to see this finding that IgG itself can inhibit adipocyte formation. Here, we we use the red o to stay lipid droplet in in the in the cells, the the red the beautiful beautiful red color here. So IgG treatment, strongly reduce the lipid accumulation. Now you may see that maybe some contamination in the in the in the in the and the, IgG solution. So we we boil the IgG. We denature IgG and leave all this maybe some other small chemicals still remain intact in the in the solution. Let's see what happened. After boiling, the the denature IgG lost their ability to inhibit adipocyte formation. And so for the pathway analysis, we found that IgG treatment indeed impaired insulin signaling in during a particular formation, which is essential for for a deeper genesis. So insulin. So we are very familiar with insulin. There are there are the dozen of people inject the insulin every day. So once they inject the insulin, it activate its receptor called insulin receptor to turn on all the downstream downstream consequence. We did a computational modeling. We, we know we found, that, IgG, this this, purple molecule is IgG. This green one is the insulin receptor combined combined with the insulin receptor and at the same position of insulin binding. This is unbelievable to us. We did not believe it. So it seems if this is true that, meaning that insulin and IG can compete with each other to bind with the insulin receptor. So we didn't believe the combination modeling, so we did the experiment to to test it. Then we did the binding. We did find that that insulin bind with its receptor at a high affinity, but in the presence of IgG, the it's binding. It's impaired. It's it's dropped, dropped several fold. That did tell us that insulin insulin and I did compete with each other to bind with the insulin receptor. We still didn't believe what what what do we see here. We fur we further tested. So we use the, we use another approach that we put a small tail on insulin receptor that it can mark the protein interacting with it. So we call it this this, called a turbo anti technology. Now whether this we we saw that, there's a label that insulin receptor can mark IgG, meaning that they they do the impact. So we did the we did the further further careful analysis. We identify a domain called the aminesulin receptor, which is called the immunoglobulin lactoma one. It's a domain function for interacting with the protein, have the similar domain. Immunoglobulin is the protein have the is the have the the very best candidate have this, this immunoglobulin domains. Right? So after we delete this domain, IGLT one, we call that I r dot one, we abolish the detection, of IgG and the insulin receptor. This is a this experiment tell us convince us that IgG and the insulin receptor, the do impact. And after the IGG IRT one dummy of IR here. From the textbook, we know that antibody need to to bind with antigen to function, to activate its downstream downstream receptor as gamma receptors. So this is the classical activation. So we also say, okay. Let's remove this antigen recognizing domain and see whether it can still function. So we use this constant domain of IgG. We create a adiposec. Again, we inhibit adipogenesis by through inhibit the insulin receptor. This tell us that, IgG impede the IR activation, not through its antigen binding, but through this it's FC domain. This actually is consistent with our computational modeling in which we found that it's through a smaller region on the epidemic called c h three to compete with insulin. Last, we want to see okay. Now we know that the IgG underlying both aging and obesity because the metabolic dysfunction and the inflammation, then can we tap the IgG pathways to rectify, or improve metabolic function? There are multiple ways to intervene IgG. The one famous way or popular way is to deplete the b cells through antibody. Then the body the entire body cannot have enough antibody to protect us. So if we throw we found us through another way we could target a receptor receptor, FcRn. In this case, we use the antigenicillin oligo. We treated the h of the h of the mice with this antigenicillin oligo. We can, we can decrease their body weight. We can increase, improve their insulin sensitivity. We can also decrease their fibrotic genes in their adipose system and increase their genes involved in lipid oxidation, the lipid utilization. We also checked that there are brown fat in which this fat is very unique in mice that can is functioning not about storing fat. It's rather for burning fat. This fat actually under under a process called whitening, become white, lost their fat fat burning ability during aging. Well, by abolishing IgG accumulation, we can make this we can inhibit their whitening, make this fat much healthier. As a result, these mice have a higher oxygen consumption at a when they when in their age. So we we also repeat the same, same experiment in in obese mice. We we can also, improve the metabolic function, meaning that this is also a common, therapeutic strategy to tackle both aging and obesity. So to put all this together, we propose that, that the IgG is sit in the center, of a depot system pathogenic remodeling that, involve all these major players, like adipocyte, fibroblast, macrophage, b cells, all connected by IGG. So it is, integrative pathogenic factor. From the big pictures that IgG is accumulation is both happening in aging and home and, and obesity can connect with all these common hallmarks involved in, including impaired adrenal disease, inflammation, insulin resistant, fibrosis, and senescence. So all these functions are distinct from the, our classical view of the immune protection function of IgG. So, therefore, with, we claim that this is the noncadonic function of IgG in aging and obesity. It's also not a function, so it's antigen recognition. Rather, it's through it's a it's a f c fragment. So it's also it's a function in a different map through a different mechanism. As the, at the end, I want to, try to, convey this message to you that we believe aging have a metabolic origin. So we know that our, the lifespan determine is determined by many aspect. So many people are interested in identifying aging hallmarks in very late state stage of life, then try to intervene with hallmarks to extend the lifespan. Indeed, the metabolic decline started much earlier. So, like, in humans, after 30 years old, when IgG start to accumulate, then a metabolic decline start to, already start. This metabolic decline, the the key could determine a higher spike. And for this decline, we believe or we identify that IITA, a community of people with a is a driving force. Therefore so I I propose to you that that, so from a metabolic perspective, so we should study aging and intervene aging from a much earlier time point. So I want to thank all the people contributing to this study so that my life at Columbia and also at Peking University. Also my collaborators, from, from Columbia and also from other institute and our founding from NIH and also the the China China funding resources. I will thank you for your attention. Thanks, Lee. That was great. I look forward to your questions, Mike. Yeah. So that was fantastic. So I have a whole bunch of questions, comments, suggestions, and all that. So, just to put so okay. First, the superlatives. Right? I think that your data and the MA the MA study that just came out too in November, This is the early days that I think the majority even even for the lay public, but even for the academic community researchers, either are underrating the IGG story in health span and longevity or just don't simply know. And I think your your labs work and the Moss study, their work, is gonna be the centerpiece for maybe decades of the field having to catch up and further expand this story as a big player in aging and longevity. So with that in mind, just to put your data into purse for a further perspective. So when you think about blood circulating the circulating milieu. Right? So you've got red blood cells, which are the most abundant cell type. About 45% of the blood is red blood cells. Then you have the white blood cells, which are about 1%. And then you have the remaining 54%, which are the circulating, proteins, metabolites, lipoproteins, etcetera. So to put your the IGG data in perspective, IgG levels in blood are about a thousand milligrams per deciliter. So yet so this is one of the biggest trees in the blood force for for people who may not know, and I'm sure you do, obviously. Glucose, for example, in youth is eighty eighty milligrams per deciliter. So we have IGG at a thousand, and a thousand may be, even an average or the median value milligrams per deciliter. You have glucose at 80. Already, it's one of the biggest trees because it's 12 times higher than glucose. Okay. So now total cholesterol. Total cholesterol, let's say, 200 milligrams per deciliter. IgG in just the average or median values without assuming aging or obesity. A thousand versus 200 is a fivefold higher amount of IgG just than the normal state. So in terms of its it being one of the biggest trees in the forest and not talked about in terms of glucose or lipoproteins, which are the dominant theme in health and health span, I think you're onto something fantastic that people are gonna be studying for decades. And and and so, anyway, that that's what I what are what are your thoughts about, IDG is one of the biggest trees in the forest? So, Mike, I really appreciate your your comments and your points. I fully agree with you. So this, actually, amount, as you mentioned, is the biggest tree in the forest. It's so high, sky high. And, it's actually very interesting story that, that, at the beginning, when we did the mass spec, try to identify how the protein change in a depot serial neuron agent. We did not get it from the result. Then we went to talk to the the people who run the MySpec for us. The people are so nice, they're so helpful. They told us that they filter the the most abundant property at background. I said, no. No. No. The present there, if they change so much, it must be for some reason. So I guess that might be the reason why people didn't notice it. I, in in the last several decades. And, there are there are many started started publishing the top tier journals. They did a a bunch of, the analyzed plasma from different species from humans and a team of president there. So I think out of there too abundant there. So Yeah. To your point, almost all of the well, actually, all of the proteomic studies that I've seen in terms of aging and disease, like you said, they remove albumin in the globulins because there's such a dominant tree in terms of concentration in the forest that that you don't see any of the smaller abundant proteins like cystatin c or t n f alpha g d f 15, etcetera. But yet, how are you throwing away the biggest trees in the forest? This is probably where the biggest part of the story is. Yes. Yes. So that's there for I would see that it is so interesting to us that aging is, is is a is a way of doing aging. And then then we also know ITD, very old topic, but they are all at a very very early age to study, to put them together. Definitely. Yeah. Alright. So then the other thought that thoughts one of the thoughts is that so I think there may be a prequel to your story. Right? So there's I think there may be a story underlying your story. And what I mean by that is, I don't sure. There there probably is some overreaction by the immune system by b b cells, plasma cells, macrophages, etcetera, in producing IgG during aging. So you ablate that, and you get improvements in metabolic health reduction, increases in median lifespan. So there may be some overreaction of the immune system that's going on, but what's the trigger for the increase in IGG at all? Right? So when you consider that that the gut can become more leaky, right, whether it's microbial products or actually microbes themselves translocating into the blood, couldn't it be possible that IGG becomes elevated in response to the some amount of microbial leak to neutralize some of those microbial, pathogens that are now in the blood? But because there's that that cycle doesn't ever really resolve during aging and only gets worse, IgG levels continue to increase. Now the another aspect of that story is that could it be possible that IgG is following some of these microbes into adipose tissue. There is some published data that, at least in the intestine, mesenteric fat can act as a sink for microbes to prevent them from going elsewhere systemically. So have you thought about looking at either the blood microbial burden, whether it's whole genome sequencing to look at all of the microbes that could be there in young versus older mice? And then even in, adipose tissue, have you considered looking at to see made adipose tissue old versus young has a higher burden of microbial products or microbial DNA, that may be a part of this an earlier part of this story? So, Micah, so you raised a crucial question that has intrigued me have intrigued me, you know, past many years. Why does IGG increase in aging and in obesity? So I let me put it in this way that, so when we age, so we may get exposed to more and more pathogens, like a micro microbes. So this may enter our circulation, which some of some of tissue, like a typical tissue. It's highly possible. And, also, the metastatic effect, as you said, is this, is is like a filter from the nutrient and, also hormones or blood from the from the gut. So at the you need to accumulate the this, bacterias. So it's highly possible that this is a cause of IgG increase. There is a pattern there are other other possibilities. So, so the the increase of of the pathology cable, we our body keep a kilometer with the more antibodies to deal with the more pathology. So that's as a defense mechanism. So next time our body see it, we have something ready in the body to to defend us, but, they have to accumulate keep accumulating that that increase. The second is that, overtime, there might might be some change in the modifications on antibodies on IgGs. All the IgG have this glycosylation that is, essential for its protein stability, for its function. So, there is there are also some beautiful studies showing that the the glycosylation may also change antibody function, makes them from immune protective to proinflammatory. So I speculated that over over time in aging, the the glycosylation of hydrogen also change. That's another, reason. There's a third one I speculated is the the macro environment in our tissue. So there's some something changes there, like immune cells, all the the some some matrix proteins that can trap antibody there. So that's why that's, why IGG prefer to go to a depot to to stay there. So, all of this, I have no definite answer for this. So I'm but they are all the key questions. I look forward to more expert to work on it, figure this out. So, I have more, to suggest along that story, and that's actually a great answer. You say you didn't really answer, but I think that's a great answer because the idea that the, immunoglobulin function declines during aging and our b cells, plasma cells, etcetera, potentially increase IgG expression to compensate for that. Right? If you have some less functional, you make more. Okay. So then you could say, what's the evolutionary advantage of having the, the IgG interact with the insulin receptor leading to an increase in blood glucose. Right? So glu an increase in blood glucose makes the, osmolarity of plasma higher, which is osmotic stress. Osmotic stress is a well known antimicrobial strategy. It causes the bacteria to basically burst. So this could be and I know I'm still on the microbial burden story, but this would be my understanding of, you know, okay. More IgG, less efficient at killing or or, you know, coding microbes and helping to kill them off. And then there's the further compensation with, interaction with the insulin receptor, higher glucose, osmotic stress kill off the bacteria. Now the other additional part that I that I have there is, I'm sure you're familiar or maybe not. I don't know. But, fat cells can produce antimicrobial peptides like cathelicidin. So I wonder if the IgG going to fat and being specifically I I agree that I I I mean, I think it's definitely, you you mentioned that that, you know, maybe specifically localized the fat for certain reasons. But as another reason, if I think it could be possible that just like the insulin receptor, maybe there's an evolutionary advantage where IgG accumulated fat tissue produces more acathlocyanin, more antimicrobial peptides because immune system function is down. So now we've got these other potential pathways to potentially reduce our microbial burden, but the consequence of that is higher glucose, worse cellular function, aging cells, more fat cells, more pro inflammatory products, immunosenescence, inflammation. Right? But at least we're staying alive. So what are your thoughts on those additional So so, Mike, you are a real expert on this. I I I like the answer. You already answered the the majority of the question. So I, agree with you that the evolution is a is a is a is a part of the the explanation. So like in the world, the very few animals have this opportunity to live long to vary to to to age and also to have a extra food to become obese. So our body, all the animals, you you were alluded to to try to, to have this immune immune protection. So over the over time, in modern society, the human can live longer and more food. So this is actually I feel it's like a trade off of immune protection. So our body, didn't evolve having to evolve machinery to resolve to to handle too many antibodies. So all this selection pressure is all try to have more antibody for more immune protection. So that's that's a that's in addition to your explanations. And, also for this, I'm also trying to understand why I try to inhibit a behave like a native inhibitor of insulin receptor, from a physiological perspective. So putting in this way. So when we culture, we can add some some drug or remove some drug. We can make it absolutely no insult. That's easy. But in humans, under physiological conditions, this never happens without the insulin. There's always insulin present in our bodies. Insulin signal is always so sensitive. Even a small amount can activate the consequence. But in our body, at a certain time, we need to shut off insulin signal. So if there is no it's no shutoff of maximum, so that insulin signal will be linear to be to decrease, but still there to function. So I speculate that IgG actually present in the in the circulation, a function as a buffer system to create a threshold for insulin. So when insulin is below this threshold no. Okay. Boom. It's it's shut off. The body, I need to now it's to to produce more glucose, to induce lipolysis. So so that's to to have this, a switch, a settled for that. Also, you also actually bring this up. I I like to extend a little bit. So there is a serum called lipid spillover. So when our fat, adipose tissue, cannot handle or store so much fat in our body, the fat is going to go to be stored in other tissues, like in the liver, called fatty liver, lacking in the muscle or other tissues. It's called leaky spillover. That's called a lot of issues here. So I want to say that there is also an IgG spillover here. IGG first go to a go to a depot tissue to store there, and then when a depot tissue cannot store that much, they start to accumulate in other tissue. In this way, actually, a depot cigar sacrifice itself, protect other organs. So I I'm I also I'm eager to see that other people will have this to check a I digit function in other tissue, like in the muscle, in the brain. And, also, I would also like to speculate. Like, this is like a discussion. I don't wanna have the clear answer for this because this is our also by the early time to discover ITG as a aging factor. We don't really know much about it. So all of these data discussion and my speculation, I'd like to share with you and the audience. You know? So since ITG accumulated so such high level in adipo tissue. And, also, in adult humans, so adipo tissue can be the biggest tissue in our body. And for you, that's not a problem. But but for many other people, adipo, a people can be over 50% of their body conversation sometimes. So imagine that so high IgG levels, so much fat, so fat that maybe maybe still Substantial amount of antibody in our body. So, therefore, dipole tissue can maybe function like a a a reservoir of antibodies. It can regulate the whole body and, I did homeostasis. I think that's definitely true, but I think, that there's a part of the story that's missing that other studies have suggested, you know, that, fat can produce caphycidin, which is antimicrobial. And I wonder if, you know, you get the IGG accumulation in fat. Now you get a big burst of caphilocybin. And in support of that, caphilocybin, which is antimicrobial, is higher in people with a higher BMI, obese BMI. I can send you send you that paper. So, that would support but whether IgG accumulation in adipose tissue precedes that, I don't nobody's nobody studied that. Right? So Yeah. So alright. So the next thing is okay. We know that, from your study, the calorie restriction so IGG was lower in calorie restricted mice. And then in the Ma paper, parabiosis reduced IGG to relatively youthful levels. And I think too, they looked at exercise training. IGG was lower. So these are three well, calorie restriction and exercise training are easily you know, most people can do that, whereas parabiosis may be for advanced stage. But do you know of any other therapies or therapeutics that could potentially help keep IGG low over time? What are your what are your thoughts on that? So, Mike, this is a million dollar questions. And so in addition to this, this is three with you just brought up. There is also, in the clinic, the people are developing FCR antibodies, try to treat auto anti try to treat autoimmune disease that way to keep high level low. So that, I, would predict that this this, approach would be also be applicable for, treating aging and, obesity associated disease. That's my prediction. And, but this, this, treatment do have we have to be very cautious about it because we do our body need a certain level of antibodies. So this antibody, the electro develop, the stronger, the more mostly efficient ones, this one really decrease our body, immune protection. So we have to be really careful with this, this, treatment. Yeah. So that gets into the age related changes for IgG. Right? So I I know that there were a few human subjects in your study, and you did see that increase in I think it was plasma that IgG levels increased. I did a deep dive into all the studies that I could find for how IGG levels like, large epidemiological studies, just looking at how does IGG change during aging. And there are just very few studies, you know, in the hundreds, not thousands to even more. So so, honestly, I don't know then aside from these various small studies how IgG levels change during aging. I presume it increases, but I think do you I think it's possible. I'd like to hear your thoughts where clearly it's low in youth. It probably peaks at midlife. And then as the immune system declines towards the end of life, there may be some, you know, inverse u where it actually starts to decline towards the end of life, and then increasing susceptibility to death. So do you think it's possible that IgG levels decline towards the very end, you know, last decade or two of life, or do you think it's just a continuous increase? And, Mike, so this we have to distinguish the IHG in the circulation and in tissue. So I believe in tissue, it it pass it may happen as you just described. It may drop in very old, very, older subjects. But, here, we, I really need to clarify this. So all the IgG measurement is mainly for circulating antibodies, not in the tissue. The tissue is not easy to matter. But, to us, we feel that the the IGG in the tissue counts and not in the circulation. So, IGG accumulated in tissue is in a much more sensitive way and much earlier. So we should we should look at a IITs on IGT instead of circulating IGT here. I would say that that is a better indicator, more accurate indicator. Could you have higher levels of, I mean, probably you wanna measure in adipose tissue, right, since that's the biggest reservoir for IgG? Mhmm. So wouldn't it be proportional where high blood IgG will be proportional to high, body fat? You know? Or is there a situation where you could have low body fat, but high low body fat, low visceral fat, but high blood IgG? Wouldn't they be proportional? What's in the blood should be proportion proportional to what's in fat? I thought about this. And so, like, like, in different tissues, they have a single level of IgG in the circulation, but they have a very different level of TCO IgG levels. And, also, like, in in the very in in later stage of life, I heard people well, body fat are loose. They may have higher IgG in in their fat. And some people, whether they may be obese, they have more fat. These people can be very healthy. These people are highly, speculated that they, they have a they have a less IgG in their adipo tissue. And, also, you you just mentioned that exercise, calorie restriction, the parabiosis can also change IgG levels. Meaning, IgG level in a deep tissue can change quite efficiently. It's not, I would say, a constant. So we we there should be some way to manipulate IgG, and, it's not necessary in this proportion of way. To fat. Okay. Gotcha there. So, in terms of the high fat diet, so you saw a big spike in IGG, high fat diet. So I'm guessing the high fat diet was, the purified, you know, just the standard purified, no it cellulose as the fermentable fiber. Right? So when you think about it within that context, a high fat diet, even though it's obesogenic, it's in part obesogenic because it lacks soluble fiber. It lacks fermentable fiber. So I wonder if you take, the purified purified, chow, even though it's not chow, chow is, you know, corn, wheat, and oak based. But so if you take the purified diet and add soluble fiber back in, I wonder if you see a reduction in IGG in the high fat diet fed mice. What are your thoughts? It's actually this is a interesting interesting idea. It's it's it's highly possible. I would say that the higher fiber would have a would change or the change or benefit, metabolic them on the the immune function that, it may lower IHG. But but without seeing seeing the data, I'm not definitely having that that's definitely the answer. And then more research for the. 100%. But it would have to be soluble fiber, not more cellulose. More cellulose won't do anything because it's not fermented by gut bacteria. You know? So if you put them on the high fat or mesogenic diet and you give them soluble fiber, you know, pick pick your soluble fiber, inulin, pectin. You know? I can go down the list. Resistant starch. Would that make an impact on I mean, for sure, it would probably improve metabolic health. That's well known in soluble fiber supplementation in high fat diet studies. But would it bring down IgG? As far as I know, nobody nobody's done that study. Yeah. You're gonna need people include include IgG in their in their measurements for this. Yeah. Like I said, you guys are on the cutting edge. Most labs probably won't do that for a long time. So, you know, alright. So IGG is a broad class. Right? You've got IGG against candida, against CMV. I mean, we can go down the list. Right? So is that pattern different in aged mice than it is in humans? And are there or, you know, which ones are specific are they all globally increasing, or is it specific IgGs to specific microbes that are increasing? For that, so we don't wanna know. We haven't compared, this, IG antigen specificity yet. So I think there must be a difference in human mice, but but bear in mind that we find that the IGG function in through this FC fragment, not as through this antigen recognition or through the IVAB domain. So so we argue that I not through IGG, IGG specificity, but it's simply the amount of IGG. So so the global, probably the most important, not necessarily the specific components of the IGG class. But couldn't it be possible that there are specific, you know, like, maybe it's IGG for candida is way up, but then the others are no change. And if you know that and then you go after potentially where the source of where that can you know, if it is with candida in mice, I don't know. I'm just speculating it could be anything. But couldn't you then target alright. We know that it IgG spiked against candida in mice. If we're gonna give some therapy to get rid of the candida, does the systemic IgG come down in metabolic health? Right? So it goes back to that prequel idea. It it it it it's it's possible. It's highly possible. But but I I have to keep reminding you and the audience that so in the past many years, people believe look at IGG that they must function through through specific IGG. But, I think that's the way people maybe also missed this this point. Yeah. Actually, not a necessary function in in in this, in this, canonical way. So I I in my very end of slide, I put it there that, we claim that this is the noncononic function of IGG. Well, I said so I think what you're saying is it's not so much important to look at the individual IgG against CMV, candida, whatever. It's the global it's the total amount of the IgG from all of it that that is the most important. Yeah. Imagine that all the so we we we did that experiment. So we we isolate the IgG from another young healthy mice. They don't have this, specific antigen to, like, CMW or whatever. But just the increased amount that you yeah. Another healthy mice that caused the other other issues. Very simple. Wait. Wait. Wait. You took IgG from healthy mice and transplanted it into Another healthy mice. Wait. What if you transplanted those healthy IgG into the old mice? Have you done that experiment? So if we increase just increase the boost of the amount of the level of the IgG. So we we already have this, issues of inflammation and the metabolic dysfunction. So that's the therefore, we didn't try to transfer young antibody to old and and aged mice. So I would say that it will just make it worse if we we further increase the h g levels. Yeah. Okay. So current studies, are there current studies that you guys are doing and then future studies that you'd like to share ahead of time? Yes. A little bit. So we know that, we we from, you know, this this very unexpected surprising finding to us. We are expanding to establish this, noncon economic function of IgG in aging and obesity associated comorbidities. We just told to, like, a pre, letter to just to tell you that so we have some very striking findings that I did also call the other issues. It's it's it's it's coming up. Nice. Well, I'm looking forward to it, and, hopefully, we can have you back in on the channel at some point to update us after the paper is published. So once again, thanks, Lee, and, hopefully, we'll see you again soon. Thank you so much, Michael. This is, you you you are really doing a great job, and then have this very unique platform to to share the the the to connect the scientific research community with with the public. That's that's critical. I I really have no idea. Like