Hey, everyone. Today's guest is Tony Ruggia, but you may know him better as I am longevity on YouTube. Recently, Tony pitched a brilliant hypothesis that, the major cause of death in a centenarian who lived to a 117 years old may not be really related to cardiovascular disease, cancer, etcetera, age related diseases, but instead motor unit loss and correspondingly respiratory failure. So today, if you missed that video, good the good news is Tony is gonna present some of that data, and I'll link to the Tony's video in the right corner. So if you missed it, you can check it out. But with that, welcome, Tony, and let's see what you got. Okay. Thank you for inviting me, Mike. So let's get right into it. Her name, the mystery woman, she lived to a 117. Her name was Maria Reneas Moreira, as you can see on the slide here on her screen. Nineteen o seven twenty twenty four. A team of scientists studied her for the last, I think, fifteen months of her life for her last breath. They measured everything on her, DNA, blood, microbiome, proteins, biological age, epigenetics, and much more. She had she had perfect biomarkers except for LDL. We'll get that in a second. But my question was, if she was so perfect, if everything was so perfect about about this woman, why did she die in 01/17? Why not one twenty? Why not 01/25? Why not January? So I'm giving you my hypothesis of why this is why this happens. So now I'm gonna share I'm gonna speak to her to you about her biomarkers first before I continue. So we're gonna go to her lipid profile. You see this on the screen, Mike? The lipid profile? Yep. Yep. Yep. Look on the left side. You could see her cholesterol. Everything is perfect. Her VLDLC, everything is I'm not gonna go through all the numbers, but you could check yourself. Like, I'll give you samples. HDLTG ratio is point 18. It's below point 25. Everything is perfect on the left side. Now let's go to the right side, and you can see that this is her lipid profile in a circle here, and now you she by the way, glycoprotein a and b, which is inflammatory biomarkers were also perfect. But in here, it's yellow. One is yellow, glycoprotein b, but it's still not bad. It's right it's right at the recommended value, but everything else is green. K. Everything else. HDL, except the one red part here where you see the LDL C, low density lipoprotein cholesterol, where it was high. The number her number is not in the study, but I heard the lead scientist in one of the interviews, he said that it was one twenty nine somewhere on there. But to me, I don't consider I don't consider that harmful because everything else was so perfect with her. She has like a dream profile. This is just my opinion. I don't believe the l LDL C caused her any harm because everything else was protecting her. Now let me go to the next one here. Take a look at her mitochondria. The letters on the bottom, the SOX, s o s x, and the other one, that's just a measurement test. I think that's just a measurement test, so don't get confused with that. But look she's in orange, by the way, and look look at her mitochondria. Look at how much stronger it is compared to the controls. Her mitochondria in in both tests is stronger than 25 year olds. That she's a 117. Look look how much stronger it is. Look how much higher. Look. I mean, she has better mitochondria than people in their twenties. I'm I'm shocked at this at a 117 years old. I can't believe this. The woman didn't didn't jog, didn't do anything. She just has this. And let's go to the next one, her microbiome. The control group was four hundred and forty five dollars twenty two to one zero five. And here, she was a 116 years old. She's in orange. And you could see her microbiome is up to par with all of them, all control group, but look at the shaded embryo, the bifidobacteria. Now that's the it's a shaded. You see how much higher it is? She ate a lot of of what in the study, it says this. Plus, the lead scientist said it in an interview. She ate so much yogurt. It was incredible. You couldn't believe how much yogurt she ate. That's why her bifidobacteria was so high. And, you know, bifidobacteria is is protected for your immune system. It helps you carry nutrients to all your organs. It protects your gut. It's it's one of the most powerful bacterias in your microbiome, and she had plenty of that more than anybody in this in the control group. And as you can see from the screen here, let's go to the next one. Let's look at her biological age. Her biological she was a 116. You see, she's in blue there. Like, all three with urine, saliva, she's a 116 plus a little. In one of the tests, the HANUM test, she was 83 years old. I mean, look at this. And the all that she was was the BULP test, where she was about 108, a 170 107.9. So she was younger biologically in all the tests. Even the Levine test, she was 89 years old. In the test, she was 98. I mean, she was young biologically all across the board. Let's go to the next one. Now take a look at our DNA. This is concerning the biological age test also. The one represents the highest these are the met ventilation patterns. Look at her. She's in the orange here. They were as strong as 20 year olds. Look at the one is the highest. She was up in the top. Look at the first the first row. The one right next to her is 23 years old. She's older than 16, and she's right there with with the 20 she had the I mean, she had the methylation patterns of a young person. Oh, on all three in all three rows, she was on top. Usually, when when you get old like that, it goes down. You'll be way down the line, because she was at the very top almost. That's that's a that's a methylation pattern. Now let me go to the this is the part I wanna speak about, the telomere. On the left side, you see Maria's telomere lent was around eight kilobases. That's the short out of anyone tested in that in that entire group. She has shorted us, the the on the left side, the red square with the orange dot, she was way down there. In other words, that dot represents our age. So it's nothing special about her telomeres. On the right side, her telomeres showed her true age. She was look. You look at the bottom of the aging years. It matches exactly her age, about a 116, 117 years. She was way, way above everyone else. But what the researchers said what this study said that tell me is didn't didn't didn't make her didn't make her die. That was the cause of her death. It was like more like a clock. That measured time past that was not the killer. She she didn't die of any telomere disease, cancer or disease. That's what so we have to I mean, I'm I'm saying the telomeres didn't kill her because the evidence didn't show this. Now let's go to the next one. Her longevity genes. On the left side is all her longevity genes. She was protected by a lot of longevity genes for cognitive protection, cardiovascular, circulatory protection, genome maintenance, DNA repair, immune system, metabolic, mitochondrial efficiency, inflammation, you name it, muscle, microbiome, detoxification, FOXO three a, cert one three six, quotho, APOE. She was and she had many others, but there's one there's one I wanna speak about. It's called the timeless gene. You can see in the left, I put in the blue square, she was they also found a variant. She had a variant of the timeless gene. The timeless gene was discovered in. It has to do with the their circadian rhythm, but then they discovered it in humans also. But not only is for circadian rhythm, it keeps your DNA from tearing apart whenever it divides. It's like like I've I wrote on the screen here. It's like a guardian angel sitting on your genome just as they protect your DNA. That's why she had such good metabolic patterns. It has to be one of the reasons. K. Now I wanna I wanna before Mike, can I stop this here? Yeah. Sure. Because I'm gonna stop I'm gonna stop sharing the screen for a second so I could talk. Alright? Yeah. Yeah. For sure. K. Now I wanna transition. I just showed you how perfect she was biologically, internally, But they didn't mention it in the study, but they mentioned it in the interview that she had sarcopenia. And they were given a protein powder for sarcopenia. Protein powder doesn't help sarcopenia if you're 60 years old, let alone put you to 17. Sarcopenia is a systemic disease. It's systemic. It doesn't happen in just one it starts slowly in certain muscles, but then it spreads as the years go on. She was a 117. It spreads to every single muscle. I'm talking about your eye muscles, every muscle, from little to the biggest, it spreads. It's systemic. Your diaphragm is a muscle. Your diaphragm is what helps contract and expand your lungs. Without your diaphragm, your lungs don't work. Your diaphragm is what pushes up and down. That's what makes you breathe. Now let's use some common sense here. She has sarcopenia. She had to have sarcopenia also in her diaphragm, which there is a neighbor's. It's called respiratory sarcopenia. Many people are not aware of this. Respiratory sarcopenia is the weakening of the of the diaphragm. So what causes respiratory what what causes? First of all, now I wanna transition into motor units. The diaphragm is controlled by phrenic motor units, not regular motor units, but they are the same. That's just phrenic, p h r e n I c, phrenic motor units. They are located in the c three, c four, cervical three, cervical three, so five of your spine. That's where they located. The signal from the brain and the motor cortex to the brain stem goes to them. They that signal is relayed to the diaphragm to make a contract. That's if all your motor units are there. Now now I wanna get into the other screen. I wanna show you what happens. Before I continue, I wanna show you and by the way, what I'm showing you here is not my opinion. I took this from research, and I'm I personally made a graph from the research I took. So I'm gonna share the screen one more time. You see the screen on you see the the chart the chart right? Okay. You can see when we're born we're born by the way, before I continue, the diaphragm is made up of 55% about 55% slow twitch type 21% type two a motor units, and 24% type two x motor units. That's what the diaphragm consists of, just so you know. And in aging, the first to go is always the type two x. They are always the first to go, and it's part of the aging process. There's not much we can do about it. We can slow it down, but we can't stop it or reverse it. Anyway, let me get into the graph here. When we're born, we have a 100% of our motor units. As we age into our life, you know, research says that hallmarks of aging exist from the day we're born. Telemetrician starts then. Epigenetic drift starts early age. But have you ever noticed from the day you're born to about 20, 25, we get stronger? If by the way, I'm not talking about people that, have a disease. I'm talking about normal people that are healthy. They get stronger as they age till the age of 25 even though some of the hallmarks are present. So, again, this is my opinion because all your motor units in there, especially the fast ones, they are protective against these hallmarks. So about the age of twenty twenty five is from the research I found, we start losing our fast motor units around the third decade of life, early third decade of life, which is under 25 20 to 25. Then it gradually you don't feel this as you age, but you notice it physically because you slow down a little bit. You in your mind, you say I'm just as fast, but when you time yourself to not as fast, you're not as stronger. Usain Bolt can tell you this. I mean, the best athletes power athletes will tell you, they don't get stronger as they age. They get weaker. Fast motor units are the reason For the power. You lose power before you lose strength, before you lose mass. Power is the first one to go. Now look at the look at the screen here from 20 to 40. Gradual loss, you don't feel nothing. Even by the eight fifty, you're losing it. In the you're 40, you start feeling a little pains here and there. You're a little weaker. You're a little slower. Your sprint is not as fast. Your jump is not as good. Athletes retire in their late thirties for a reason. By the time you're 60, you may have about 80% left. Now these are not perfect numbers. You may have a few percentages more or a few percentages left. That's where you are. But by by 60 is when it starts to accelerate. No matter who you are, no matter what sport you played, no matter what supplement, what diet you did, it all starts at 60 years old around I don't know about around there. Again, not exactly. It could start at 58. It could start at 62. But it starts here. Boom. It's seventy seventy one years old according to Piasecki. At 71 years old, you lost 40% of your motor use, all your motor units. At 75, you're down to 50% of all your motor units. By all the rage, he didn't say the exact age, but I am deducing 90 even 90 years old, 95, even a 100, you're down to about 10% or less, 8%, 9%. Now because you slow down so much, you lose motor units. The the less you move, the more you lose. So I calculated that it's one seventeen. She had to be down to 3% up on motor units. That and this is not a this is a logical explanation. This this is not something I'm just speculating because if we're down to about 10% by ninety, ninety five, or 100, at one seventeen, you're not moving. You're gonna go down to that low. So now I wanna get back to the diaphragm. That means motor units, again, in my opinion, is the upstream, the catalyst, the beginning of sarcopenia. People think you get sarcopenia when you get old. Sarcopenia, everyone in the world gets it. Sarcopenia means loss of mass, loss of strength. Everyone in the world starts losing its universal uniformly. In your 30, you start losing muscle mass and muscle strength. Therefore, you don't have sarcopenia, but you have pre sarcopenia, a small percentage. Your some people maintain it longer. Some people maintain it less depending on their training. But, again, this is my opinion that everyone has the symptoms of sarcopenia. Everyone. It's just that by the time you're 75, you hit that magic cliff, fall off a cliff. That's when you're frail. Frailty sets in. No matter what you did in your life, even the best power lifters. Yes. Some of them go into the eighties lifting, but they're not anywhere near what they want. It shows. By the time they're 90 I I don't have to tell you. You can look it up yourself. So now let's transition into the diaphragm. That means she lost her motor units of the diaphragm. That means she had very few motor units of the diaphragm. Forget about the fast ones. She couldn't cough because type two x is what makes you take deep breaths, cough, sneeze. So if she had an infection, if she she couldn't bring that up, That's one thing. But let's go to the breathing of the diaphragm itself. Why did she die in her sleep? Why didn't she die when she was awake? Why she didn't die when she was speaking to the nurse or eating or watching TV or just sitting up on the bed or just whatever. She was just breathing. How come she didn't die then? Again, this is my hypothesis. I could be wrong. I could be wrong. She died in her sleep. I believe she died in REM phase of her sleep, Rapid eye movement phase, and I'm gonna explain why I believe she died and why she died peacefully also. Breathe. When when you breathe, there are first, let me explain when you're awake. You have voluntary and automatic breathing. Automatic means you don't even think about it. You you your body just breathe on its own. Right? You don't think your body just breathe. Voluntary is when you wanna sing, scream, talk, whatever. And you're doing you're making a move with your mouth. That's called voluntary breathing. Your motor cortex, your cerebral cortex is helps you with the breathing, with the voluntary breathing. Also, other muscles help you with your breathing, not just the diaphragm. You got the intercostal muscles in your between your ribs that help, your neck muscles, your shoulder muscles. They all chip in to help when you're awake. That's why you may not die when you're when you're awake. They're the muscles helping you. Now what happens when you sleep? When you go to sleep, your muscles are still awake. When you hit REM, that's the dream state, your body goes into what's called REM atonia, a t o n I a. In other words, you're paralyzed. It paralyzes your body because it doesn't want you to act out your dreams. If you're in a dream dreaming that you're throwing punches, you're not gonna throw punches while you're sleeping. Or if you're running, you're not gonna just get up and start running. That's why your body's your body's frozen. It's it's it's the toenails and it's part of life state except for your heart, your eyes, rapid eye movement, your eyes are moving, your heart, your eyes, and yours truly, your diaphragm. So when you sleep in an REM, the only thing making you breathe is your diaphragm. The helper muscles are paralyzed. Okay? So here's the catch. This is why I believe she died in her sleep. The signal's already weak. She's already 17 years old. Her signal her her fibrin rates are already weak. Guess the c three, c four, c five. More more than Nora is there. She only has a few left. There wasn't that many there left. She's 2%. Even if you give her 5%, which she didn't have 5% because she was in a wheelchair, she could not move. They were feeding her. They were bathing her, so she could not move. So it's that's proof that she had no more units left. That's proof right there. That means when you sleep it and the diaphragm doesn't have those upper muscles, what happens? Carbon dioxide goes up, oxygen goes down, boom. You take your last breath. And why is it that she died peacefully? Because she was paralyzed. She was paralyzed. There was not there is no if the most paralyzed, she's not gonna scream. She's not gonna choke. She's not gonna do anything. She's just paralyzed. But what happens? Take the last breath, and soon thereafter, your heart stops. And it didn't stop because of cardiovascular issues. That's why they didn't find the experts could not find the reason why she died. And these these team of scientists are not stupid. They have twenty, thirty PhDs. They were measuring everything on her, everything, every biomarker. They found nothing. They said we have no clue. We have he said it publicly. We have no clue why she died. And this is, again, this is my opinion. I could be wrong. Maybe if you would have mentioned her diaphragm, they would have seen that she had no motor units left there. And I believe that the diaphragm is very important. I believe that it's to me again, I I spoke to you earlier, Mike, that Eugene she's proof that Eugene's do not set the maximum lifespan. She had all the longevity genes, perfect biomarkers, cardiovascular system, perfect, mitochondria, perfect. What else she had here? Blood. Biological age, younger. She died peacefully in her sleep, and they have no clue how she did it. I mean, how how it happens. No clue. I mean, that that's think about this. And these they watched it at the last minute, but they didn't measure the motor units. They didn't measure the neuromuscular system. She had sarcopenia. She had this. They know she had this. She couldn't move. She was in a wheelchair, and that's why I believe she died. That's what I take about others from and this is not my guess. I'm using evidence here. I'm using logical evidence. I could be wrong. I'm hypothesizing. But I believe that motor unit loss may be the reason why we have the maximum lifespan ceiling. And if we could you could see the I'm still sharing the the diagram, Mike. Yep. You see the diagram? Yep. I believe that if we reach 75, because I made another video, at 75 years old, this coincides with the seventy five year cliff that everybody experiences, on a road, around that area, that no matter how healthy people are, they fall off the cliff here. They're helped, everyone. Even if it's a couple years later, they'll be getting to get our meds or they get weaker or they their body starts aching. They get diseases. Most people have a disease at this age. I believe we quickly push this back a little to, like, maybe forty percent. Thirty percent. By the way, systemic wide, not just when you go to the gym and you do curls and bench press and pull ups and squats. I'm talking about training the neuromuscular system from head to toe. If you could slow down the loss of motor use by 10%, including in your diaphragm, you may prolong I'm not saying it's gonna happen. Everything has to be fit more. There's more factors here. But if you do everything right, but you don't fix this part here, you're not going past one fifteen, one twenty. One made it allegedly to one twenty two, but she also was like a wheelchair bound. So that's just my opinion. That's what I that's what my channel is about. That's what I work on to try to slow the seventy five year mark here, delay it. And that's what I have to say. Brilliant. I think my I'm gonna share the screen. I'm gonna share the screen. So yeah. That was brilliant, Tony. I think you're spot on. I agree a 100%. So let me, I've got some data to share that supports what supports your hypothesis. So yeah. So I think I've got some data, especially with ALS that links with your hypothesis of respiratory failure, being a leading cause of death at super longevity. So hey. Hey. Let me know this. Let me let me go through. So I know this. Oh my god. I didn't know this. Yeah. So respiratory failure is the top cause of death in the neurodegenerative disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. For those who don't know, this is Stephen Hawking who's probably the most famous, person to be diagnosed with ALS. And he somehow lived fifty five years with an ALS diagnosis, which for most people who don't know don't know, ALS is a very quick disease. I mean, after a few years, it's, it's a death sentence. Five years. Normally, it's normally, it's five years. Five years. Yeah. Well, I'll let you talk. I'll let you tell him what ALS is. Go ahead. Yeah. Sorry. So that he lived fifty five years, there's it's a promising it's promising news for all of us, especially in delaying neurodegenerative disease and respiratory failure as a cause of that. So in terms of causes of death in ALS, that's what's shown here. As far as I know, this is the largest study that exists on that. This is about twenty four thousand people who were diagnosed with ALS in in terms of top causes of death. So people diagnosed with ALS don't die from cancer, type two diabetes, a heart, having a heart attack, cardiac arrest, or major cardiovascular disease. You can see the top hit is respiratory failure. I didn't know this. I had no idea. So so now I wanna pitch this premise and piggyback onto it. Real quick, Mike. Real quick. What is ALS? Can you explain it really quick? Yeah. So it's a neurodegenerative disease. It essentially it it's a loss of it's an accelerated loss of motor unit motor units. So where your muscles become atrophic sarcopenic, you can't use them anymore because you lose the connection. You lose muscle. So, alright. So what I'm gonna pitch here too is that even without an ALS diagnosis, if we escape, just like you've been saying, if we escape all major diseases, neurodegeneration and respiratory failure, just like an ALS, is a likely cause of death. So why would I think that's true? So to illustrate that, let's take a look at which biomarkers are linked with neurodegeneration. And one of those is neurofilament light chain or NFL. I'm gonna refer to it as, NFL, which is a biomarker of axonal injury, which precedes neurodegeneration. And we'll see that here. So this is a simple picture of a neuron. And when there is injury to the axon, neurofilaments are released, and then we can detect them in the blood. So neurofilament light chain is one of those biomarkers of axonal injury, again, which precedes neurodegeneration. So why this is important is because serum levels of NFL are two times higher in ALS patients, which is what we'll see here. So on the y axis, we've got circulating levels of NFL. And then in controls, which had an average age relatively young, 68 years old, and ALS patients, 58 years old. And we can see that the average levels of NFL circulating levels in ALS patients were about 40 picograms per mil, which is approximately double in the healthy controls around 20 picograms per mil. But what I also wanna highlight is take a look at the upper limit for the highest levels of NFL in the ALS patients, somewhere around a 110 picograms per mil. So remember these numbers, twenty, forty, and one ten controls ALS average, ALS at the highest. And the reason those numbers are important, because as I mentioned now for the second time, even if even without an ALS diagnosis, if we escape all the major diseases, neurodegeneration and respiratory failure being that likely cause of death. So why is that? Well, CRM NFL isn't just increased two fold higher in the ALS patients. It increases during aging, and that's what we'll see here. And I'm gonna use two studies. I'm gonna use two studies to illustrate this point. And I have a video coming, so people who may have already seen the video are also gonna see this again. So apologies for that. But these are extremely important topics that I think we should be getting out there. So and these aren't the only two studies that exist on serum levels of NFL during aging. There are many others, but these are just two that are representative. So on the y axis, serum levels of NFL plot against age. And we can see that the median values, that yellow trend line increases the NFL increases during aging such that in youth at the upper limit is very you know, even at the highest levels in youth, and these are in healthy people, it's only about eight picograms per mil, very low. And then average values of 65 year olds still very low, not even close to average values in ALS. Serum NFL level is only about 10. But then we start to get closer to that at the highest level in the 65 year olds as their average value or based on extrapolation of the average value would be around 25. Still not in the range of where we see for ALS, but here's where it gets interesting. You know, the name of my channel and your channel similarly is conquer aging or die trying, not live to 65 and die. Right? It's live as long as possible, superlongevity if we can. So this isn't a linear model. This is a, you know, the spline curve, but they did have a linear model here. And what that means is that we can predict the NFL level for someone a 100 years old if we know the linear regression equation, which is what they provided in the paper. So if we know age and sex, male or female, one being male, zero being female, and plug those numbers in, we can get a reasonable estimation of what NFL levels are at a 100 or even older. Now I should mention that the regression equation is trained within the twenty to sixty five year age range. So extrapolating beyond that is a bit of speculation, and the regression equation may not be perfect for that situation, but it still can give us some, approximation of what we would expect to see for NFL levels at very high older ages. So when plugging in the numbers for a 106 year old, now look at NFL. 40 picograms per mil. The average value at ALS is now the average value for a 106 year old who may not have ALS. Now let's take it in even a step further. Let's say we get beyond the human longevity limit, 122. We achieve super longevity. You know? As you're you're always saying, these longevity gurus who are saying, I'm gonna live to one fifty and so and so. They're not thinking about this, but they should be because if we get they got your yes. If if they get to one forty eight, by plugging the numbers in for one forty eight into the regression equation and one for male, now NFL predicted NFL is a 110 picograms per mil. This is the highest value in an ALS patient that I showed for the study before. So if we're gonna achieve super longevity, we may have neurodegeneration to the same level of ALS without having ALS. Alright. So this one study. Are there other studies that support this? So study number two, same setup. NFL plotted against age. Now the age range goes up to 85 years. Same trend. NFL increases during aging. And average values in the 85 year olds are higher than where they were in the younger study up to 65 now at twenty five picograms per mil. So someone could say, alright. 25 isn't 40, but then I would say, well, 85 isn't a 122. I wanna know what's the predicted NFL for for someone who lives to older than a 100 years. So, fortunately, this paper also included regression a linear regression equation. And if we know age, we can predict NFL. And here too, I have to give the caveat that the regression equation is gonna be most accurate or closest to accurate up to 85 because that's what their data was trained on. So there is some speculation and extrapolation. Gotcha. Gotcha. Yes. I have to say I have to say that for everybody. Of course. Of course. Yep. So when we plug the numbers in Same thing. Same thing. NFL levels at a 104, very close to the other study, 40 people. Yeah. The average value for ALS found at a hundred and four years. And if we push that further at a hundred and thirty five years, the highest NFL value found in ALS would be found in someone without ALS of a 110 picograms per mil. So the person Mike, could you repeat for a sec? So a person could have no diseases Yep. But have this. 100%. So it was you could do everything right. You could you could do everything right. You they they created a pill where where everything is perfect. All your biomarkers are perfect, but you still have this. Yes. And I think there are two ways that this goes. Right? So on the one hand, you may have people who are super fit, who resist, who are slowing the motor unit loss during aging, but then they're not paying attention to CBD, cancer, type two diabetes, and maybe they die before they do everything right. You need to do everything right. Yes. For those of us in this community, right, we're all focused on CBD, cancer, all the things. And maybe we're not taking care of that motor units and neurodegeneration biomarkers. And in addition to I agree. What else can we do to slow it? So I agree with you. This you just messed me up with this. You just mess you blew my mind to this. By the way, it gets it gets a little better. I have a little bit more with this. Yeah. And I have a longer video, but this is a part part of it. So so I just showed the what is, but what can we do about it in addition to exercise. Right? So part of that story in your chaos training is probably a great approach because you're constantly you know, the nerve the nervous system is constantly constantly firing, giving it the stimulus to stay younger and healthy. But, you know, my passion obviously too is not just exercise, but biomarkers. So we can measure NFL, but you can see it's a very expensive test. I think very few people are gonna measure this a few times per year. It it's too expensive. But there are other biomarkers that are associated with NFL that I am currently measuring that may be as good as a measurement of NFL levels. And if we know some of the biochemistry underlying neurodegeneration in addition to exercise, maybe there are things we can do. And we talked about this, and I'll put it, you know, for later in the video for people who who who who are interested. You know, the things the supplements that may be able to help with the motor neuron motor neuron health, reduce oxidative stress in in the motor neurons, you know, things that can potentially improve motor neuron health and function in addition to exercise to slow motor motor neuron unit loss. So one biomarker group that may be related to neurodegeneration are diacylglycerides. So in this study, they found that the diacylglyceride so triglycerides are a glycerol backbone and three fatty acids. Diglycerides are glycerol backbone and two fatty acids. So very structurally similar to a triglyceride. This triglyceride, which contains oleic acid, eighteen one eighteen one, so two fatty acids of oleic acid in with NFL levels on the x axis, and this is in ALS patients, we can see that there was a significant correlation between the two. In other words, higher levels of this triglyceride were significantly associated with higher levels of this biomarker of neurodegeneration and vice versa. Low levels of the diglyceride, low levels of neurodegeneration. Now one one metabolite really doesn't mean anything for me. There was a group of them. A group of diglycerides here, there were seven of them that were significantly higher. You can see significantly higher based on their adjusted p value in the ALS patients versus controls. Okay. How much higher? For that, we go to the log f c. This is the log twofold change. And on its surface, you know, 4.17 fold may look like four times higher. But, no, this is a, base two log twofold change. So with that That's a logarithm. That's a logarithm. Algorithm. Yes. What this means is that that triglyceride, eighteen one eighteen one wasn't fourfold higher. It was 18 times higher in ALS versus controls. And for the diglyceride that was the lowest f c, it was six times higher. So these diglycerides, these seven diglycerides, which can be measured, four of them I I have a kit that I'm measuring. I've measured now 20 times. Four of these diglycerides can be measured. They were six to 18 times higher in ALS patients and controls. Now does that mean if we track them and potentially keep them low, that we can keep NFL low levels low and slow neurodegeneration and preserve motor neuron it's hard for me to say that. MNUs during aging? I don't know. There's no published data. I'm not gonna wait around for the published studies to do those experiments, but I'm making this yeah. So I'm gonna make it Okay. Very good. Good. I'll I'll let you So I have more in a in a longer video, but that's, yeah. I just wanted to share the ALS. Die di diglycerides, di means two and tri means three. The diglycerides what did you say it was? Oleic acid? This one. Yeah. Eighteen one eighteen one is oleic acid. Now oleic acid, which is olive oil, you would think that it that this doesn't mean that olive oil is unhealthy. That's not at all what this says. There are many mechanisms where diglycerides basically form, you know, oleic acid bound to them. You and you can have different fatty acids. You could have diglycerides with BPA, DHA. I I wouldn't jump to the idea that oleic acid is bad to eat. That's not at all. But for whatever reason, having oleic acid in diglyceride form is associated with NFL levels. Higher they convert? How do they convert? How does this happen? I don't know the mechanisms that diglyceride I I don't eat I don't I don't eat any oleic acid. I don't I don't I don't consume it. I don't put it in another of my foods. But the body can make it, though. In you know, the Oh, the body can make it. Yeah. So the essential fatty acids would be, like, you know, omega three, omega six. Oleic acid, our body can make I take that. I take a lot of that. Three thousand a day of that. Yep. But the question is why would our body be making more of it? Is that a protective thing against, NFL neurodegeneration? Because it could be upregulated to protect against neurodegeneration. Ask you this. Let me ask you this point. If you can slow the increase of NFL, keep it down. How does that help? How do I say this? Motor units depend on movements, on powerful movements. That's their food. You understand? It's not the diet. The diet, I guess, helps the structure, but to activate them, to keep them young, they depend on on on moving. 100%. Depending on on depending on which motor unit it is. Yep. So all I'm saying is that even though this is a good idea, you still have to train. Yes. I would never say just be calorie restricted, live in a cage, don't Right. Exercise the train. Exercise the foundation, but it's the it's the raw materials. Right? So just like the people who die of No. I got you. Yes. I understand. I don't know what the I don't know what the recipe is for the raw materials, but if we're lacking any You said it right. See, people watch my channel. They think all I care about is the pest. No. I watch my diet. I'm so I'm so picky about what I eat. I watch everything. I just don't measure everything, but you have to do everything right. You can't you have to do everything right. Everything. It's not some people just lucky and they reach a 100, but I don't think I'm that lucky. I don't think I have those kind of genes. So I have to do everything right. And that's just an opinion. I mean, I it's not just training. You're perfect. Sleep, supplements. I you need to do it all. Yep. You know? Like Brian Johnson, he does it all. I I I know he he does a lot, but he's got the gist of it. You need to do everything. Yeah. You know? Good stuff. Good stuff, Tony. I you just messaged me. You just blew my mind with this with this. I know. I I I I'm gonna research this when I when I when I leave you later. I'm gonna I'm gonna go right into this. This because I know I know about ALS. We all suffer from ALS, a slow a slow motion ALS. That's what the loss of motor units is. Yep. That I didn't know this guy had had a what's his name? The guy at the middle of the wheelchair? Stephen Hawking. Stephen Hawkins? He lasted fifty five years? Five years. Yeah. And I looked That has to be a record. That has to be a record. Yeah. I looked. I was like, okay. What what was he doing? Because there's gotta be what was his magic recipe? I mean, you know, what are they feeding him? What supplements? What is it? Blood blood check. What This is very important. Yeah. This is very important. We have we have to find out what they gave him. Yeah. No. Because if he lived fifty five years Yeah. And we are we are normal people without the disease, we may be able to use this. Yes. 100%. He may be he may be the proof of something. And this is what you came up with from this is what you you discovered after researching him? But there's more. But, well, Hawking is just the example of ALS because most people probably don't know you know, maybe they don't know he had ALS or, you you know I didn't know. I didn't know he had ALS. But I didn't know this. Yeah. Yeah. But, the the biomarkers, you know, that's my interest. That's my passion. Tracking the biomarkers in addition to the exercise. Right? You know, it's this is this is the tip of the iceberg. This is the tip of the iceberg. There are other biomarkers, for example, statin c, you know, the kidney, and I put it in quotes, kidney function biomarkers, statin c, higher levels sense do you know do you know statin c correlates with a n t antetproBNP? And, yeah, a marker of heart failure. Yeah. And NFL. So it's not Woah. I did that now. See, I didn't know this. Yeah. I got a I got more. There there's a I didn't know this part. Yeah. So there are other biomarkers, and I've got a couple others in mind, not just diglycerides that are they involved? So, again, with the diglycerides, we don't know if that's correlation or cause. We don't know if it's compensatory or it's a marker of an actual thing where higher diglycerides is somehow involved in higher neurodegeneration or it's upregulated to try to protect. We don't know. But by looking at as many of my you know, my passion. If we're looking at as many of these biomarkers in the biochemistry of youth and low degenerate, degenerative status, maybe we can further delay it in addition to exercise. That's that's my You see my what what I when I research in the motor unit, I don't it's not a theory. People say motor unit theory. Motor units is not a theory. It is the cause. It is causal. It it it happens in everyone. It's not like I'm I'm theorizing. No. Every single person in the world slows down. You everyone slows down, and it's because of the mode the gradual loss of motor units. It is causal. See, that's why I consider it I consider the loss of fast motor units the primary I don't wanna say it. You know? Because it happens before everything else. It hap in a normal person, in an average person, normal healthy person, the first thing that happens to you without you knowing it, there is nothing else. You you don't get telomere attrition. You don't get telomere disease before loss of fast motor units. Fast like I said in my study, fast motor units supersedes all of it. All of it. The loss of fast motor units is the beginning. Maybe I'm wrong. I'm hypothesizing. Is there something else before motor units? I couldn't find anything. Couldn't find anything. So I think I find Yep. So I think for skeletal muscle, for heart function, I think you're spot on, but I think there's also a window of organs that may not be maybe indirectly affected, but may Indirectly. Yes. Yeah. So for example No. No. No. Because poor kidney function poor kidney function can impact an accelerated loss of motor neurons. Right? So there may be things that that are, you know, adjacent talking about okay. See see, let let me reverse this for that. People bring this argument with me. Right? That's not what I'm talking about. I'm not talking about somebody that has a disease. I'm talking about if you're 20 years old worldwide, I don't care what race you are, I don't care what you are, and you are healthy, not because you have kidney. Sure. There are many things that cause neuron losses, many things that cause this. Yeah. But I'm talking about in a healthy person, you start losing fast twitch motor units even if you are super healthy. You understand? If we're healthy? So I I think at some point, there are the people who are writing papers like hallmarks of aging, they're gonna include the moto m n u story, and I hope that they cite you for that because you're I I think I think I think that deserves a place. I think it's it's a bigger hallmark of aging than all all of them. Yeah. Because if you can fix all the hallmarks of aging, you won't fix motor unit loss. You could fix all the hallmarks of aging, and you will not fix that signal. It's neurogenic. It's not cellular. It's not molecular. You could fix the structure, but you cannot fix the power of that signal. That comes with experience your movement experience. How do I explain this? In other words, that's why you cannot put a new motor unit in a in a person. You cannot implant a new motor unit in a in a body because the person's experience has to be connected to that motor unit. The axon that they lost, you're gonna have to reconnect it. Someone with three feet long. How How are you gonna know the route it took? You know, the axons that go down, they don't have a specific route. Nobody knows where they where they where they go around. So how are you gonna connect it to the experience, the movement experience the man the man lived from the day he was born? That's how your motor units are created. That's how they What do you think movement. What do you think about surgery at some point where, you know, there is a physical you know, where a reconnection of the denervated, motor neurons to muscle. You mean the motor neurons are still there? So, you know, so so let's say you've got, an MNU and it's attached to muscle. And then with aging or disease pathology, it becomes denervated. Right? So surgery being able to reattach. I mean, you would have to catch No. It it it reattaches right now. Well, yes. Innovation, denervation, but one that's you know, for someone who's in a 115 years old and they've lost the ability to reinnervate surgery advancing to the point of I don't believe I don't believe I don't believe you can. I don't believe that you could take because even if you put you you mean the the one that's been already, you put it back together? Yeah. Surgically. But but the but what I said earlier, excitatory synapse is pruned. The excitatory synapse that controls that motor neuron is gone. So you would you would need to regenerate It's not the motor neuron. It's not the motor neuron. It's the whole upstream. Yeah. It's there are, like, a 100 different parts that degenerate with it. So just by you putting the motor this is why I try to tell you. Just because you put the new motor neuron back even if you put a new one there, what what happened to how are you gonna fix the excitatory synapse in the ventral horn that sends the signal across from the upper motor neuron to the lower motor neuron? How are you gonna you're gonna have to regenerate that also, and it doesn't exist. There's no you don't know where it was, what it is, because it uses transporters, sends the signal across the synapse. Three action potentials are created for a muscle contraction, not one. There's three action potentials. I you know what act action potentials are? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. It's it's an electrical signal. One is created by your upper motor neuron, which travels to your ventral horn. Then when it travels across the ventral horn into the lower motor neuron, another another action potential is created there. Then when it goes to the neuromuscular junction across the synaptic cleft via acetylcholine transporter onto the septalema, which is the the skin of the muscle fiber, that another action potential is created. There are so I mean, I could get into this. There are so many things. It's not just the motor unit. That's what makes it so to me, it's like a gut structure. That's how intricate this is. I'm gonna make a video on this. Putting a motor putting motor neuron is just minute. It's it's it's it's it's nothing. It's nothing. You you have to put everything back. They don't right now, there's no such it doesn't the, how do you say? The science doesn't exist. Computational power doesn't exist for this. That's just my opinion, you know, because the motor neuron is not the controller. The the the the mind, the the signal, the excitatory synapses is what makes the sense it's gone. It's thrown away. What if we could I'm not stopping. What if we could regenerate the areas in the brain where the signal loss happens? Okay. You regenerate the signal. Okay? Let's say you regenerate it. Now it goes down. Now you gotta regenerate the the the in the ventral horn. The ventral horn is where you have, like, 60 ventral horns in your spine. Each one controls each side controls different different parts of your body. Inside those ventral horns is glutamate, the the neurotransmitter glutamate, And the NMJ is acetylcholine. Acetylcholine brings a signal across from from NMJ to muscle fiber. But in the ventral horn, it's the glutamate that brings the signal over across from the upper motor neuron to the lower motor neuron. The glutamate, the glu the GLUT ones, they're the transporters. It's like a thousand little a thousand little trucks, whatever you wanna call it, submarines that bring it to the other side. 800 of them are gone. You have 200 left. So the signal is weaker. Get it to the other side because the excitatory is actually forget it. The whole the whole section is cut off. It's for pruning. The whole excitatory synapse is pruned. You can't grow it back. Genetically, you can't grow it back. It's neurogenic. It's not cellular. That's the problem. That's what I'm trying to tell people. They need to start concentrating on this part. Yeah. I have ways I'm new based on this. There is ways to slow to slow the process down. There is ways, and I found a drug. I actually found a drug that can actually help with this, and no one I mean, no one in the science field, nobody in the longevity field ever mentioned it or is even talking about it. This drug I'm making a video on this. It says prescription drug. It's a prescription drug. It's I'm not gonna give it away, but if you take too much of it, it can hurt you. If you pulse it, it doesn't hurt you. It does the opposite. It helps you. And I will get into that, and that's the only thing I found besides the training, this drug. Because what happens is that a little flag is planted. I forgot what's what the name of those proteins are called. C c one q. I forgot the name. Oplent. C oplent? C one q. It, like, plants a flag on on the excitatory center. It plants a flag there, and the microglia microglia, the flag is a signal. The microglia goes and prunes it, eats it up. I found a way to stop that's black to be the implant today, like, come and get me. So the microglia will not go there and eat it up. I found something that may work. I'm not sure yet. Oh, wait. That opens up another can of worms because c one q is complement. That's a complement protein, which is Yes. Complement protein. Activated protein. Yeah. That that's the activated immune system, and microglia are a part of the activated immune system. Now Yes. I don't think it is. C one q is is is what you said. Yeah. Compliment protein. Yeah. So hang on. I don't think the immune system gets activated for no reason. This then potentially highlights maybe the neurons, at the NMJ are infected. Maybe they're carrying microbes, and the c one q and the microglia are clearing it because we're trying to keep it out of the brain. And now No. They're clearing it. They're clearing it because it's dead. It's dead. It's dead material. You didn't use it. So the the excitatory synapse and the type two x connection is gone. It's dead. So it's dead dead material floating around, and it gets it gets signaled, come and get it. Get rid of it. And how do they get rid of it? With the microglia. The microglia goes there like a pack man, eats it up. Yes. I found something. I literally but you have to exercise the specific exercise I spoke to you about. Regular resistance training won't do it and this specific drug. And I don't wanna give it away. It's prescription drug, and I started taking it. I started taking it. Not much, just a little. No. I don't wanna give it away, man. I don't wanna give it away. I I'm not gonna lie. I started taking it. Let me let me little. And let me tell you something. I could actually feel it's not placebo. I know my body. That it is not 100% not placebo. I could actually feel the difference, man. I could and I will I will I will share this with you, may maybe in in a video. Maybe in another in a future video, I will share this this the the experience and and and the testing I'm doing with it to see what it's doing because, I'm taking bloods. By the way by the way, I've been invited to, Saw that. Yeah. Yeah. I pay attention to everything you do. You're the first person. Nineteenth. January 19. January for six hours. They're gonna test everything. Power speed. Is it a research? Is it a research study? Are they gonna No. It's it's it's it's a it's a longevity clinic. I don't know if they're gonna do for research. Fine. I'm glad to do it. You know? I no problem. Yeah. But, I'm I started training now for it. I wanna do good in that test. But the my biomarkers, I have one problem. I'm not gonna lie. I have the same problem she had. My LDL is one thirty. Yeah. So that kid so What's my LDL? Yep. What's the LDL? So she didn't have technically optimal 65 to one twenty, my reading of the literature, and I've got strict optimal ranges relative to reference range, but she didn't have CBD. You could make the argument that looking deeper into LDL. So LDL, a fraction of LDL is lipoprotein a. Lipoprotein a is not commonly measured on a lipid panel. You have to actually have the test measured. And the reason that's important Mine is high. Mine is high. Oh oh, so then and mine is high too, unfortunately. So, lipoprotein It's genetic. But what they say is genetic. I don't know how to put it. It can be I've been able to cut it in about half, but it's still very high. But wait. Hang on, Tony. I lowered it by 30%. I lowered it by 30%. It it can't be lowered. But what I'm saying is if all of maybe Maria's in in Maria's case, all of hers was LDL. But if more of it it more of it than not is lipoprotein a, lipoprotein a is six to seven times more atherogenic than LDL. So They didn't measure it. Yes. They didn't measure it. Yes. So but she didn't have CBD. So in her case, probably not a problem. But if yours is mostly LDL, very low VLDL, very low lipoprotein a I have my I have everything else is perfect. 64 triglycerides. My CRP is 0.4. I mean, everything else is low. Yep. My, HDL is 68, 69. Yep. So but but my LDL is high. It's in my family. It's in my family. Same. Have you measured have you measured the, the, you know, the ultrasound or gotten a CAT scan or, you know Who measured my LDL? You know, so coronary artery calcification or the They they are going to do all this. They are going to do all this. Yeah. They're going to do all this. Yeah. They're gonna they're gonna do ultra ultra scan for all my organs. Cool. They just send me an email. I mean, I can send it to you and show you what they what they're gonna measure. Bob, you missed listed it on your page. Yeah. But I I I missed some of them. Oh. I'm I I missed some of the things they're gonna measure. But you just wrote me again. I asked him, can you explain to me what you're measuring? He said, v a v a l. So they I they're measuring power, jumping power, reaction jumping reaction power. They're measuring everything. DEXA scan Yep. Body fat percentage. I mean, you name it. They're measuring it all. I have to make two videos for them, and I will. They don't even have to worry about that. I will if they allow me to film the functional test, they allow me to videotape them, I will do it. Yeah. I will do it. Well, even still, you'll have to report, and I'm sure we'll see video upon video. And then you're gonna say how much younger you are, which you're gonna come up as negative. Nah. My biomarkers are good except for my cholesterol. Like I said, that that but but as far as I know, the rest of my body, the last test I took, I had my my t t what do you call that? Thyroid. Thyroid, my kidney, everything was perfect. Cool. My liver, everything was perfect. Just that because I have it in my family. That's why I'm really careful. I I I watch what I eat because of the LDL in my family. Yeah. You know? But I have a lot I have a lot of people in my family that live to a 100. Parents? So what the hell? No. No. My my my her sisters, my grandparents, they live to a 100. Nice. That's a 100. You know? So I don't know. I I really don't know. They didn't measure the the biomarkers. They were in the mountains of Italy. Yeah. Nice. Well well, I appreciate, Tony. I appreciate you coming on. Thank you. Thank you very much. Hope we do this again one day. Yeah. For sure. Pleasure. Thank you. Okay? You're a good man. Thank you very much. Yeah. Alright. Have a good day, man. Alright? Yeah. Thank you. Bye. Bye.