DHEA sulfate declines during aging and that's what we'll see here. On the y axis, we've got circulating levels of DHEA sulfate and on the x axis, that's plotted against age. Now average values for men in their twenties are around eight micromolar which is about 300 micrograms per deciliter. And then afterwards, we can see that age related decline for DHEA sulfate. So why is this metabolite? Why is DHEA sulfate important? So DHEA sulfate impacts many age related outcomes, many of which are shown here. So DHEA sulfate is anti osteoporotic so it impacts bone health, obesity, diabetes, cancer, heart disease, the immune system, and the one that I'm most interested in neuromodulation, in particular neuroprotection. Now with that in mind, in my data over 22 tests, DHEA sulfate is unfortunately a weak spot and that's what we'll see here. So this is 22 tests from 2022 to 2025 for circulating levels of DHEA sulfate. And then we can see that my average is a hundred and twenty five micrograms per deciliter or three point four micromolar. Now, if we plot that on the chart on the left, on the data on the left, that's where it would pop up which is relatively low for my chronological age and actually relatively low for any chronological age and far from youthful. Now, the name of this channel is conquer aging or diatrying not have age expected biomarker values. So with that in mind, can I move DHEA sulfate towards youth? Now, I can already hear some of you saying, why don't you just supplement with DHEA and that should raise your DHEA sulfate? But does that fix the problem? Now, sure, maybe taking DHEA as a supplement, maybe that does address some of the age related outcomes that DHEA sulfate may impact. But if I haven't addressed the underlying mechanism for why it's low in the first place, maybe I'm not getting the maximum impact and I'm in I'm interested in the maximum impact. So with that in mind, how can I move or how can I potentially move DHEA sulfate values towards you? So DHEA sulfate is derived from cholesterol. So starting from cholesterol, that's converted by two enzymatic steps into DHEA and then DHEA is sulfated into DHEA sulfate. So So this seems pretty straightforward. If I increase plasma levels of cholesterol, can I increase DHEA sulfate? Seems pretty straightforward. But note that cholesterol is a broad term. Does this apply to HDL, VLDL, lipoprotein a, LDL, and note that IDL, Intermediate Density Lipoprotein isn't on the list but that's a very minor fraction of total cholesterol. Now, during those 22 tests for measuring DHEA Sulfate, I've also measured plasma levels of cholesterol. So I can look at correlations between the two DHEA sulfate which each of these lipoproteins. So maybe one of them or some of them are associated with higher or even lower, DHEA sulfate. So with that in mind, correlations with DHEA Sulfate for lipoproteins HDL and I'm only going to focus on the p values here. So, greater than 0.05 is not statistically significant. HDL's correlation with DHEA Sulfate is not statistically significant as its p value is 0.12. Similarly, VLDL's p value is 0.63, not significant. And, like, Lipoprotein A's p value for its correlation with DHEA Sulfate also not significant as it's 0.28 but know for lipoprotein a, I only have data for 10 tests. I'm planning on measuring that more often going forward including the the next test coming up in a couple weeks. But, nonetheless, none of these three lipoproteins are significantly correlated with DHEA sulfate. But what about LDL? And actually here, we can see a significant positive correlation for LDL with DHEA sulfate. So first on the y axis, we've got DHEA sulfate and that's plotted against LDL on the x. And then we can see that significant positive correlation and note the correlation coefficient here, the lowercase r, is 0.74. That's considered a strong correlation because anything greater than 0.7 is considered strong. So this is a significant correlation for LDL with DHEA sulfate. In other words, when my LDL has been relatively higher, that's significantly correlated with higher DHEA sulfate. And conversely, when my LDL has been lower, that's significantly correlated with DHEA sulfate towards the lower end of my range. But there's more to this story because if I just simply increase LDL to increase DHEA sulfate, I'll potentially also increase ApoB which is a marker of heart disease risk. So, I'll potentially increase my cardiovascular disease risk if I try to increase LDL too high with the goal of increasing DHEA sulfate. But this may not be the mechanism for why DHEA sulfate declines during aging or is relatively age expected in my data. That's potentially because when LDL is low in youth and that's at a time when DHEA Sulfate is high, which is what we'll see here with average LDL values on the y axis plotted against age on the x. And here, we can see that in youth, so in 18 year olds, average LDL values are around 85 for men in green and women, it's about 93. Average values for women are around 93. So in youth, in 18 year olds, LDL is relatively low but d DHEA Sulfate is relatively high. So if this was a low cholesterol, low DHEA Sulfate story as we potentially see in my case, that's not what the published data for how LDL looks in youth at a time when DHEA sulfate is at its highest. So just playing this out a bit further, LDL then peaks in midlife for both men in green, again, men in green, and women in red. And during that time, that's not at a time when DHEA sulfate is at its highest level. So higher LDL may be higher DHEA sulfate. In fact, DHEA sulfate is even lower than an 18 year olds. And, playing this out further, LDL then declines towards end of life and if we extrapolated that out past eighty eight years, it further declines and that's at a time when DHEA sulfate is at its lowest. So, when considering that LDL is low in youth at a time when DHEA sulfate is high, this argues against this idea of raising LDL to raise DHEA sulfate. But, there's also another reason why DHEA synthesis from cholesterol may not be the limiting factor. And that's because DHEA sulfate isn't just formed from DHEA. DHEA is also used to make testosterone. So if DHEA is low and correspondingly DHEA sulfate will be low, I'd also expect testosterone to be low. Now, I haven't measured testosterone at every test but we can evaluate if testosterone is also relatively low during those tests when I measured DHEA sulfate at the same time. So, I did that for four tests from October 2023 through May 2024. So, during that eight month period, I tested four times and during that time, DHEA sulfate was again around age expected, not youthful But testosterone was higher than expected based on chronological age and this isn't an abnormality. My testosterone data is generally around 900 nanograms per deciliter and I'm not on TRT. This is, on this is all natural testosterone. No exogenous agents. So these data argue against synthesis from cholesterol being a problem in my case which then raises a question, maybe DHEA sulfate isn't a question of reduced synthesis during aging. Maybe it's increased degradation. So, what can degrade DHEA sulfate? Gut bacteria is one potential one potential option because they contain genes that can degrade DHEA sulfate. One of them is shown here. And it's k zero one one three eight and this is an uncharacterized sulfatase. And then you can see the EC number three point one point six dash. Now, that may seem like a lot of just words and numbers nonsense but the the amount of this gene, this gut bacterial gene, which is a sulfate which removes sulfate groups, was compared in 67 year olds versus 97 year olds. And before getting into that data, let's just, identify which potential bacterial proteins are in this e c three point one point six because you can see you can see that there's a dash there. That means there are many proteins that can fall under this enzyme class. So, I looked that up and the following, genes or the following enzymes the following proteins correspond to this EC number. And, note, three point one point six point two is sterile sulfatase. So k zero one one three eight in, can encode a sterile sulfatase. So what reaction does that catalyze? Well, as we can see here, DHEA sulfate plus water, so this is hydrolysis, ends up in, or degrades DHEA sulfate into DHEA plus sulfate. In other words, three point one point six point two. This this gut bacterial gene or encodes the protein that degrades DHEA sulfate into plus sulfate. So it degrades DHEA sulfate. Now, with that in mind, older people who are 97 years old in this study had three times higher levels of this gut bacterial protein that could potentially degrade DHEA sulfate relative to 67 year olds. Now, having higher levels of genes, gut bacterial gene bacterial genes is one thing but what about the actual metabolites? That's the story of what is happening where the genes are a story of what can happen. So they actually looked at that in the study and note that the genes were significantly different. The p value and FDR were less than 0.05. So anyway, they also looked at the, metabolite levels. So DHEA sulfate levels, plasma levels for for 97 versus 67 year olds as shown there. And here, there was a 60% reduction for the 97 year olds relative to the 67 year olds for DHEA sulfate. So lower plasma levels of DHEA sulfate in conjunction with having three x higher levels of a gut bacterial gene that encodes a protein that can degrade DHEA sulfate. Now, I'm not saying this is causation. This is association but it suggests that gut bacteria could be a part of the story where they, their proteins are degrading DHEA sulfate at a greater prevalence during aging. So with that in mind, I haven't tracked my gut microbiome. I don't have that data, for Yeah. I've tracked it a few times. I've only tracked it three times, I think, in ten years. But, I have been tracking metabolites and some of those metabolites include gut bacterial metabolites that may provide insight into how I could potentially reduce or improve conditions in the gut to maximize systemic levels of DHEA sulfate. So our gut bacterial metabolites associated with DHEA sulfate. And, how I've been able to track gut bacteria metabolites or some is because I've been using at home metabolomics. I've now done this 18 times using iolo's kit which includes more than 600 metabolites including indoxyl sulfate. So if you want to use this kit on your own, there's a discount link in the video's description and I and I'll have more videos on, data from this kit, metabolites from this kit including kynurenine and tryptophan and it's linked with neurodegeneration coming up in a future video. So, in Doxyl sulfate is a gut bacterial metabolite for those who don't already know. And before going into that story, I'm gonna give away, you know, the the big picture which is that higher levels of this gut bacterial metabolite in Doxyl sulfate are significantly correlated with lower DHEA sulfate. That's coming in a minute but let's introduce how in Doxyl sulfate is a gut bacteria derived metabolite which is what we'll see here. So, starting off in the colon or large intestine and more specifically in the gut lumen, this is the inside of the tube, the inside of the large intestine. So proteins that escape digestion that, sorry, absorption into the small intestine and that make their way into the large intestine are then degraded into amino acids, in particular, one of them being tryptophan. Tryptophan is then converted by gut bacteria into indole. Indole then makes its way by the portal circulation to the liver, where the liver then sulfates it to produce the metabolite indoxyl sulfate. So from this, we can see that indoxyl sulfate is a gut bacteria derived metabolite. And then let's take a look at the data for higher levels of this gut bacteria derived metabolite being correlated with DHEA sulfate, which is what we'll see here. So on the y axis, we've got DHEA sulfate and this is plotted against circulating levels of endoxyl sulfate. And then, again, this is 18 tests. Metabolomic data for Endoxyl Sulfate, Venipuncture data for DHEA sulfate. So I measured them on the same day of testing. Here, we can see that significant inverse correlation. In other words, when my plasma levels of Endoxyl Sulfate, this gut bacteria metabolite are at their highest, that significantly correlated with my lowest DHEA sulfate. And on the other hand, when my plasma levels of this gut bacteria metabolite were at their lowest, that was significantly correlated with my highest levels of DHEA sulfate which then raises the question, if I can decrease my circulating levels of this gut bacteria metabolite to less than one micro mode which would be a low a new low for me, can I push DHEA sulfate more consistently to its highest level somewhere around a 140? Now, note that I was able to get to a 140, for one data point data in black but this is an infrequent and rare occurrence as my average is around one twenty five. Now, one forty is still not 300 but it's moving in the right direction. And, if the best that I can do is resist age related change going forward, that's a small win. Now, granted, it's not complete rejuvenation and going completely towards youth but this is one step in the chain and I plan on investing investigating this indefinitely for the next decades. So, hopefully, I can take more steps to help push it closer to youthful values relative to age expected. But, also, this is just one metabolite and actually, endoxyl sulfate was one of the top, and strongest correlations for either lower DHEA sulfate or higher DHEA sulfate and there's a long list of metabolites that were significantly correlated with both positively and negatively. So if you're interested in seeing that full list, it's currently on Patreon in the correlations tier. But this is just an observation. So what? I see plasma levels of indoxysulfate correlated with DHEA sulfate, but how can I move the needle? How can I decrease levels of or can I decrease levels of indoxyl sulfate? So is diet associated with this gut bacterial metabolite? And rather than using studies in other people, because I track diet and I've done that since 2015, I can look at correlations from my diet with circulating levels of indoxyl sulfate. And there, we're gonna see or here, we're gonna see that coconut butter is inversely correlated with indoxyl sulfate. So this isn't coconut oil, this is coconut butter which is closer to the whole food. So on the waxes, we've got plasma levels of indoxysulfate and then on the x, we've got my average daily coconut butter intake. So for those who don't know, as I mentioned, I've tracked diets since 2015 every day with a food scale. I then enter that data into Cronometer which is a diet tracking app. I then take that data and put it into a spreadsheet. Now, for every blood test, say if there's fifty days in between blood tests because I'm tracking diet every day, I take the average dietary intake for that fifty day period and then line it up with the blood test results. So every blood test has a corresponding average dietary intake and then with enough data for blood tests, correspondingly tracked diet data, I can look at correlations. Now, this isn't causation but it does give me in insight into what may be be able to move the needle. So in this case, we can see that coconut butter is inversely, significantly inversely correlated within Doxyl Sulfate. So when coconut butter is at my lowest intakes, so less than around three grams per day, that's significantly correlated with my highest intakes of Indoxyl Sulfate. And on the other hand, when my coconut butter intakes had been around 22 per day, an average of 22 per day, that's significantly correlated with my lowest levels of indoxyl sulfate. So if the goal is to reduce indoxyl sulfate to potentially increase DHEA sulfate, what will happen if I push this out a bit further to 25 or more? And I have no data. As you can see, I have no data in the twenty five gram per day range. Now, with that in mind, my average coconut butter intake since the last test, which was on May 27, is currently 26 grams per day. So I'll be able to generate that data for the next test and we can directly test this hypothesis. But why don't I just look at correlations for coconut butter or other aspects of diet with DHEA sulfate? That would be the most straightforward way, wouldn't it? So I I do that and, again, those correlations are on the correlation tier on Patreon. There aren't very many strong correlations for whatever reason which potentially could suggest that diet isn't directly associated with DHEA sulfate. But, based on the hypothesis that I've presented here in this video, maybe this is a mediating it mediating effect through the through the gut where diet has to affect the gut and note has to affect the gut before it can impact DHEA sulfate. That's the road I'm gonna take whether or not it'll work. We'll find out. Now, with that in mind that the diet correlations with DHEA Sulfate directly, there aren't a lot of strong correlations there relative to the metabolomic data where I looked at endoxyl sulfate versus DHEA Sulfate. That's within the two to twenty two gram per day range for coconut butter. There too, I don't have data at 25 or more. Now, I should say coconut butter when looking at 27 standard clinical chemistry biomarkers so albumin, creatinine, blood urine nitrogen, lymphocytes, etcetera. Coconut butter has a net negative correlative score with 27 biomarkers. So I don't wanna go too high for coconut butter. With that in mind, my coconut butter range is around the higher end is about fifty grams per day. So twenty five grams per day is still relatively high but it's not anywhere close to my highest which may be bad for more biomarkers than not. Now, if you're interested in seeing the full correlation list for diet versus in Doxyl Sulfate, that too is on the correlation tier on Patreon. So if you're interested in that, check it out. So, to sum it all up, will increase in coconut butter increase sorry, decrease in Doxyl Sulfate and increase DHEA Sulfate? Test number five for metabolomics and all of the other tests that I do or that I've done this year scheduled for just a couple of weeks away for July 22. So stay tuned for that data in an upcoming video. If you've ever wondered what's optimal for biomarkers, well, I have a new Patreon tier dedicated just to that. It currently includes the 33 biomarkers that are shown here with more than two hours of video content, 48 published references, all of which is on this new Patreon tier. Now, note that these aren't the reference ranges, in fact, far from it, which is not intended to tell us what's optimal for aging and minimizing risk of disease and for potentially maximizing longevity. I've done all the legwork on that looking at as many studies as possible to collate this data or these data into one place. So, again, if you're interested in that, check it out. And, before you go, if you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where I post at least twice a day in five Patreon tiers. We've also got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself that helps support the channel including ultalabtest.com which is where I get the majority of my blood tests done including DHEA sulfate, the Clearly Filtered Water Filter, which I use every day, at home metabolomics, as I mentioned in the video, oral microbiome composition, NED testing with GINFINITY, epigenetic testing with True Diagnostic, Scifox Health for d the DNA methylation test GrimAge and other blood, blood biomarker tests, green tea, which I drink every day, diet tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got new merch including merch that I just posted today. Data is my North Star, which is 100% sure this is how I live. And then we've also got other merch, other new merch, including figuring stuff out as my drug and the conquer agent or diet trying channel logo. So if you're interested in all of that, there's a link in the video's description. Thanks for watching. Hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.