Last month, I blood tested for the fifth time in 2025. And note that this is test number 63 since 2015. So with that in mind, what's my biological age? That's what we'll see here. This is using doctor Morgan Levine's biological age calculator, PhenoAge. And if you have blood test data and you wanna calculate your own biological age using this test, there's a downloadable spreadsheet and a link from my website that's free. No email required. So check it out if you're interested. So when I enter these data, I get a biological age of 36 years, which is sixteen and a half years younger than my chronological. Now, a couple quick notes. First, this doesn't mean that I'm gonna live sixteen and a half years longer than the average average lifespan. When biological age using this test is younger relative to chronological age, that's associated with a significantly reduced risk of death for all causes. How much that translates into a lifespan extension or if it does, nobody knows. And if you want to see that data for how good or not that this biological age clock is, I gave it its own video so that link will be in the right corner. Now, note that I mentioned 63 tests in ten years. So an average of about six tests per year. Why am I testing so often? So, there's a lot of talk these days about pace of aging and speed of aging with people testing maybe once or twice per year. But is that truly representative of a pace of aging or a rate of aging? For example, if I'm a baseball player and I hit four home runs, which is a really good game, in one day, and then then hit no home runs for the rest of the year, am I the greatest home run hitter that year because I did it for one day? Ideally, we'd want to do it every day. Every day is a home run-in terms of baseball or blood test data. So with that in mind, I think it makes sense to test more often and then take the average of all those tests per year and then compare year to year average. That's a true pace of aging or a true rate of aging. So with that in mind, for more context, let's have a look at year to year change using this test as I have 42 blood tests for biological age since 2018. And that's what we'll see here. So, again, this is year to year change for biological age from twenty eighteen to twenty twenty five, 42 tests over that time span. So let's start with the most recent test, thirty six years, and note that that's my worst in 2025. So I I think too there's some cherry picking going on in the longevity community where some people will pick their best data and not show all of the data. So here you can see that although superficially sixteen and a half years younger is pretty good, It's not my best data, which was twenty to twenty two years younger for my first two tests in 2025. Now this isn't about cherry picking the best data and forgetting that the sixteen and a half year reduction for the last test exists. It's about tracking the average of all tests per year. So with that in mind, my current average in 2025 is thirty two point six years. And I have three more blood tests scheduled, so we'll see what that eight test average is by the end of the year. So how does thirty two point six years compare with earlier data? So when I first started tracking in 2018 to 2019, I note that I've been tracking blood tests since 2015, but I didn't include h s c r p, which is required for this test, until 2018. So from 2015 to 2018, I had no h s c r p, data, so I couldn't track biological age using this test. So starting in 2018 or 2018 and 2019, over three tests over that two year span, average biological age using this test was 34.3. So then, I had the thought, well, is three tests over a two year span representative of full year averages? Going back to the baseball player who hit home runs in three days, does that represent a full year average or a full two year average? So I think not. So I started testing more often. In 2020 and 2021, testing a total of 12 times, six times each in both of those years, and average biological age using this test was exactly 33.9 years for each of those two years. So even though the three tests may not be representative of a full two year average, in this case, it happened to be close to the 12 test average over the next two years. So it may not be like that for everyone. There may be more variability. But for me, data around thirty four years is where I started. And then I increased testing frequency in 2022 to seven times per year with an average, biological age using this test of thirty two point one years. And 2022, thus far, is my best year to date using this test. Over seven tests in 2023 got a bit worse. That's thirty two point nine years. Over eight tests, now that's where I increased the testing frequency to eight starting last year, and I intend on going eight tests going forward. I think that's a pretty good chunk of time in between tests. I don't wanna go more than that. I don't wanna go less than that. Eight tests in 2024, average biological age using this test was 33.1. So what can we say from the sum of these 42 tests over this seven plus year span? Well, we can see that I've resisted an age related biological age increase. And that's important because even if all biomarkers stay the same using this test, biological age increases by point nine years for every year of chronological age that passes. Which means that starting in 2018 and that 34 year biological age, my expected biological age using this test should be be around 40 in 2025, not my current average thirty two point six years. So what that indicates is that I've improved some of the biomarkers inherent in this test, and that's why I've been able to resist age related change over this seven year span. So in terms of the pace of aging, what we can see is that I've potentially slowed it at best. This isn't reversing aging and I'll have a little bit more on that, in a minute. But, for now, let's review another example for studying the pace or speed or rate of aging using RDW because RDW is the strongest contributor or contributes most to the prediction of biological age using this test. So here, we're gonna take a look at the red blood cell distribution width or RDW on the y axis plotted against age on the x. And for RDW versus age, I have 59 tests over the ten year span from 2015 to 2025. So for those who don't know what the RDW is, just for a quick intro into the RDW, it may seem like an obscure biomarker. I think most people when they get their blood test results, they don't even look at the RDW but it's a highly important biomarker, at least for biological age, using this test. So to illustrate what RDW actually represents, in the image there, we can see red blood cell volume, red blood cell size, and they're all approximately the same volume and same size. In that case, the variability in red blood cell volume is similar, so the variability will be low and, concordially, that's a low red blood cell distribution width. On the other hand, when there are a lot of different sizes and volumes for red blood cells as shown in that picture, that's a greater variability for red blood cell volume and correspondingly, that's a high RDW. Alright. So then that raises the question, what's optimal for RDW during aging? So based on all cause mortality risk and this is the official Lustgarten what's optimal for RDW lowest all cause mortality risk in a study of three point four million people was eleven point four to twelve point six. So let's put up some green lines to delineate that range. So the goal is to have all of one's data in that range. That's step one. Now, in terms of an increased all cause mortality risk, that was associated with RDW values that were greater than thirteen point seven. And, also, note in this study, again, of three point four million people, RD RDW values less than 11.4 was also significantly associated with an increased all cause mortality risk or risk of death for all causes, but this is a highly infrequent occurrence. It's very rare for people to have RDW values that low. Now, what we can see when I first started tracking RDW going back to 2015, we can see that most of my data was in was in the suboptimal range. So not high enough to be associated with all cause more an increased all cause mortality risk but also not low enough to be associated with a lower all cause mortality risk or lowest risk of death for all causes. And then we can see based on the significant inverse correlation between the RDW with age with that correlation coefficient being negative 0.65 and that p value being below 0.05, we can see that my RDW has declined during aging. And that's important because the RDW increases during aging. So it but there's more details than that though because it's easy to say, well, all of my data is now in that optimal range and inversely associated with age. So, you know, I can just wipe my hands, problem solve, forget about it. Right? But note the last five tests as indicated by that red arrow. RDW has moved in the wrong direction. So one's data can still be within the quote unquote optimal range or what I consider to be an optimal range and the data is still moving in the wrong direction. So it's important to look at all of one's data, not just one test, not five tests, but the whole net of the data and try to keep all of the data in the quote, unquote optimal range and resist age related changes whether they increase or decrease. So with that in mind, going forward, the plan is to keep RDW approximately flat indefinitely, no age related increase, and within that optimal zone. And if I can do that for RDW and all other biomarkers, so all other all other biomarkers representative of many organ systems, if I can keep them in that optimal range and resist age related change, are those organ systems really their chronological age or some much younger age, however young it may be, 10, 20, whatever it may be, by keeping their changes flat over time? That's my goal in order to flatten all cause mortality risk. So what about this issue of reversing aging? So I see that thrown around a lot too, and I would never claim that I've reversed aging. I think this is a misnomer for now. Someday, it'll be a real thing. But for now, at best, what we can say is that I've slowed the biomarker aging rate for RDW and many other biomarkers. Now, will that translate again into a increased health and lifespan? We'll find out. As far as I know, there are no published studies that have looked at it like this. So stay tuned for that story coming coming up over the next seventy plus years. Now, this is part one of this journey. For every blood test, I also show the full blood test report because PhenoAge, this biological age test, only includes nine biomarkers. And I'm measuring a whole bunch of other biomarkers because I don't wanna have weak spots by only looking at one biological age test. So So I'm looking at many other biomarkers of many other organ systems, and we'll cover that in in an upcoming video with the full blood test report. And, also, what may underlie this sixteen and a half year reduction for biological age relative to chronological age, including diet, supplements, and prescription meds. So stay tuned for those two videos coming up relatively soon. If you've ever wondered what's optimal for biomarkers, well, I have a new Patreon tier dedicated just to that. It currently includes these 33 biomarkers, more than two hours of video content, 48 published references. And, again, this isn't just showing you the reference rate as any LLM or your favorite AI chatbot can give you that. It's what may be optimal based on how each of these biomarkers changes during aging and their associations with all cause mortality risk, including RDW, which I already showed you the optimal range my optimal range 11.4 to 12.6. But if you want to see the actual data for each even age related changes and the all cause mortality risk, check it out in this new Patreon tier. And if you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where I post at least twice per day in five other Patreon tiers. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself that help support the channel, including ultalabtest.com, which is where I get the majority of my blood test done, the Clearly Filtered Water Filter, which I'm using every day, at home metabolomics for up to test nineteen, oral microbiome composition, NAD testing with genefinity, epigenetic testing with true diagnostic, also epigenetic testing with Siphox Health, which includes the best epigenetic clock of many epigenetic clocks, GrimAge, green tea, drink it every day, diet tracking with Cronomir, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website Buy Me a Coffee. We've also got merch, new merch, including Data is My North Star, which I've got on here, Figuring Stuff Out is My Drunk, and the Conquer Aging or Die Trying channel theme. So if you're interested in buying some merch and wearing the Conquer Aging or Die Trying brand, link in the video's description. Thanks for watching. Hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.