Hey, everyone. Today's guest is doctor Dawn Bowdish, who is a professor in the department of medicine and is the Canada research chair in aging and immunity at McMaster university. Doctor. Bowdish's lab focuses on many areas that impact optimal health and longevity, including interactions between the immune system, inflammation, respiratory health, gut barrier function, and the microbiome. So welcome, Dawn, and let's get into the presentation. Thank you so much for having me. This is gonna be so much fun. So today I'm gonna talk a little bit about our work on aging, the microbiome and immunity. And, this work started when I was giving a talk about one of my favorite biologists. I was giving a talk at my institution and I was talking about Eli Meshnikov, the guy on the left, who was the discoverer of the macrophage. And he was incredibly, forward looking and and actually hypothesized and made really careful observations about many things. But one of the things he was particularly interested was aging, partially because he'd always had poor health himself, and he was sort of looking future forward, and he was a little concerned about his health. Intriguingly, he was one of the first people to actually really characterize the microbes of the gut. And the thing that was so remarkable about his work is he would look at people or animals who died of sort of old age or sort of fulminant infections and he found that there were some similarities between those. Macrophages, including the macrophages that lined the inside of the gut, but also distal macrophages, he was particularly interested in the brain, seemed to have this phenotype where they couldn't ingest microbes anymore, and he called them sort of intoxicated. He knew from his experimental work that macrophages lost the stability when they were exposed to a lot of chronic inflammation or really big burst of inflammation like that occurred during an infection. So through careful observation of the gut and the colon and the microbes, he came up with this theory that with gut, the the microbes became, sorry, the gut became leaky with age, allowing maybe not bacteria but maybe bacterial products through. And those bacterial products would circulate maybe through the blood or the lymph and they'd reach all parts of the body and sort of over time, intoxify these macrophages. So I was giving this talk to my institute and I mentioned this, and I looked out in the audience and there was a colleague of mine who's an incredible microbiome expert, Mike Sorett, and another one who runs these our germ free facility, Elena Verdoux. And I thought, wouldn't it be amazing if we age germ free mice and saw if we could prove or disprove this theory? Because in theory, germ free mice should not have these leaky guts. They shouldn't have this inflammation and and they should be protected from some elements of aging. Now fast forward two years because, of course, it took two years to age the mice. And so this is, exactly what we sort of set out to look at. I'll summarize, the germ free mice themselves indeed didn't seem to have a lot of inflammation. But, of course, it's not really very practical to think about living with a life with no microbiome. So what if we looked at whether the differences between the young and the old microbiome contributed to healthy and unhealthy aging? So these are some types of plots of the composition of the microbiome in our young and old mice. On the left, sort of our normal mice that are in SPF conditions. And then on the right hand side, we took young and old germ free mice, and we colonized them with either the young or the old microbiota. So what you should take from this slide is that irrespective of the age of the recipient mouse, if they got the young microbiome, they sort of kept that microbiome. And if they got the old microbiome, they kept that microbiome. So it allowed us to study the intersection between the age of the microbiota and the age of the host. We published this, back in self host microbe, about five years ago now. So you can read all the details. I'm just gonna give you the highlights here. On the left, what we did is we grouped all the, mice and all the samples together based on the age of the microbiota, ignoring the age of the host. And what we were looking at is this gut permeability. And you can see that indeed the old microbiota did seem to cause the gut to become leakier than the young microbiota. But where things start to get actually quite interesting is when we start dissecting the age of the host and the age of the microbiota. If we had done these experiments just in young mice as most people would do, in fact, as I told the director of the center I was working at the time that I was setting up these experiments with age germ free mice, He, he told me I had more sense than money or more money than sense. But, you know, I'll argue what got me to take this, interview today. So, maybe it was all worth it. So had we only done these experiments with young mice, we would have come to the conclusion that the microbiome was the sole driver of that gut permeability. But there is a bit of an intersection here between the age of the host because although in this particular graph, it wasn't statistically significant, there was a slightly increase in the leakiness of the aged gut, and then the old microbiome just made it worse. Now in the second reanalysis of analysis of this data, here on the left, we grouped we ignored the age of the microbiota and just looked at the age of the host. And we saw that the if the hosts were older, they tend to have more inflammation when all this happened. Again, had we only looked at this in young mice, we would have come to the conclusion that the microbiome was the problem. Because if you look on the right, you see that when they get the old microbiota, they have more of this inflammation. But again, that sort of baseline is sort of higher f and in the old mice. So what I personally take from this is that there's an intersection between the age of us and sort of the physiological changes that probably happen with our gut with age and the age of the microbiota. And this link between the microbiota and inflammation is probably the most important part of my work because inflammation influences both how long and how well we live. And anything we can do to reduce that inflammatory load will probably have an outsized impact on our health. Now if you love macrophages, as I love macrophages, and you know one thing about macrophages, it's that they change their phenotype and function when they're sensing the inflammatory microenvironment. So here is a series of pretty pictures that one of my former PhD students made for me where we're looking at macrophages treated with different inflammatory mediators. Different gamma, l six, l four. And what you can take from this is that they're making pretty big changes based on what type of stimulus they get. So for example, in the interferon gamma, they have these huge big processes that they send out because they interpret this as being an infection that they need to conquer. In, the IL four group, you'll see two different phenotypes that what we call the fried egg phenotype where they sort of flatten out because they have this they interpret this as a parasite that they have to engulf and heal as well as the long spindly one. So the innate immune response and innate immune cells like macrophages are particularly and exquisitely sensitive to even very small changes in the inflammatory tone. Because the interpretation is that there is an infection happening and that they need to prepare for this. And when we think from an evolutionary perspective, it is so important that our innate immune cells have this heightened responsiveness to deal with infections because this is something that has to be turned on really quickly in order for us to survive. So perhaps it is not hugely surprising that innate immune cells like macrophages are particularly sensitive to, chronic inflammation. And we sort of visualize this here. So what you're looking at is called a a bacterial killing curve. So steep equals better. It means that the macrophages can kill the bacteria faster. And if you look on the left, we're looking at two different kinds of mice, wild type mice and mice that are deficient in the cytokine TNF, meaning that they never grow up with this chronic inflammation. They don't have this age associated inflammation. And what you see is that the young wild type or teen f knockout mice have a really steep slope there. They they kill, the bacteria very well and as one would expect. Now if we look at the right, we see that the old wild type mice are much slower or the macrophages rather are much slower at killing the bacteria. But if you look at those old TNF knockout mice, and again, these would be mice that have lived their whole life without any of that age associated inflammation, you can see that they're sort of interchangeable with the young mice. So if a macrophage doesn't have this chronic stimulus, by TNF, it is better prepared to deal with infections. And just as a way to bring this from mice to humans, this is one of my favorite graphs because it's so powerful. They're looking at in this study, they're the the research group is looking at 70 year olds, in Italy. And they're measuring three, serum measures of inflammation, the cytokines, I have six, TNF, and the acute phase protein CRP. And they're looking at all cause mortality. And what you can see is that if you are higher than age average for all three of those, you are way more likely to die in the study period than if you are lower than age average for all three of these, and it's a little bit of a stepwise gradient. And the reason I like this particular study is because they're looking at mortality from all causes. So could be, cancers or dementia or heart attacks or whatever. And it speaks to the fact that having excessive inflammation contributes to all aspects of physiology and, all elements of health and disease. Let's bring this back to our mice now. So if we look at, a few measures of sort of healthy and unhealthy aging in mice, On the left here, we've got a marker of, like, muscle strength. So it's called a grip strength test, and it basically measures how strong the mice are. Sarcopenia, it's often used to to look at age related decreases in muscle mass. So our wild type mice, the young ones are lovely and fit and strong, and the old ones start to lose that muscle capacity. Now again, now let's look at our TNF knockout mice that have grown up in the absence of all that inflammation and they maintain a lot of that muscle mass. In the middle, we're looking at the lungs. And if you look at young and old mice, you'll see that in the old mice, there's these pockets of inflammation that happen in the lung tissue completely absent in the old t and f knockout mice. And then if we look on the right hand side from, another paper we published, if you look at actually the bacterial load in the nose after a mouse is colonized, those macrophages can clean it up a lot better. So they're lower in the TNF knockout mice. And again, just showing how different elements of physiology are affected by chronic age associated inflammation. This is what 75 can look like. I know this is I am always comforted by the fact that the woman on the left didn't start working out till she was in her sixties. So I figured there's lots of time to get those abs. But, one of the things we know from various immunology studies is that if you're like the woman on the left fit, healthy, strong, you're less likely to have this chronic inflammation. And if you're on the woman on the right who's clearly unwell, having mobility issues, you're way more likely to be higher than that age average inflammation. So if the microbiome is truly a link to this chronic inflammation, then it could be something that we could target to help give us all the healthy vibrant life we want. Collectively, the data that we published in this first study helped us build this model that intestinal permeability, and, of course, our test stands must be permeable because we have to absorb food and nutrients, does allow translocation of bacterial products. We have germ free mice, we block that. These translocation of bacterial products interact with macrophages and other cell types to cause systemic inflammation. And I'll show you some data in a little bit showing that the systemic inflammation seems to have this, like, feed forward loop where it actually leads to this increased permeability and probably more tran translocation of bacterial products. And I really liked this model when we first built it because I think it helped us understand, sorry truth of the modern world is that life expectancy is not the same. And frankly, health expectancy is not the same for all of us. And there are major socioeconomic differences. For people who are lower socioeconomic class, we know that they actually, can have more of the systemic inflammation. This can be attributed to environmental factors, chronic stress, smoking, living in an unsafe place, working in an unsafe job. And that systemic inflammation is no doubt compounded by the fact that eating a diet that your microbiome loves being high in fiber and low in fat and sugar is really, really difficult. And we know that people in poor neighborhoods also have a higher incidence of chronic diseases. And so my vision when we built this model is that, you know, this the cycle spins a lot faster for some of us than others. It's a lovely model, but as it turns out, it's only half right. And I'll show you some of our more recent data showing, how we've had to readjust it. So I hope I've convinced you, and if I haven't, I hope you'll read our papers that the microbiome drives at least the elements of age associated inflammation that we looked at. But here's the newest data we have that shows that we're not, speaking. We're not we weren't entirely correct in developing this model. One of the favorite models of inflammation that we use in my lab is not the serum cytokines or CRP or things like that. The reasons for that are that they change a lot with the time of day. You tend to need really large population studies to look at them. We actually really like looking at the numbers of, circulating leukocytes, specifically monocytes, because they're slower to make, so they tend to it takes about two weeks to have a full cycle of myelopoiesis. So they tend to become sort of imprinted by the inflammatory microenvironment, but they also tend to last a little bit longer. So we have a little bit more resilience. I have this incredible lab manager who did a master's degree with me. And over the course of, the many years she was with me, she started to build these enormous datasets looking at the cellular inflammation in young middle aged and old mice. And she showed that actually this is this monocytic inflammation is a feature of females, not males. I had a former post doc who's now got her own lab in Aberdeen who was trying to move our study into humans. And so we had this, cohort of about a 100 some odd people, where she was looking at some of these sero markers of inflammation. And fortunately, she did come to this with the lens of looking at it between males and females. In general, all those epidemiological studies always say that t and f increases with age, and this is what our our cohort would look like if we put all the data together on the left. But when we break them down by sex, we actually see that it's a little bit more complex than that. The apparent increase in TNF at least seems to be mediated by the females and not the males. And in fact, she you know, each cytokine is slightly different and has its own kinetics. But in general, many of the, inflammatory cytokines that are routinely examined are driven by female changes, not male changes. And remember that in aging studies, the older you get, the more female biased we get because women live longer. So this could be sort of contributing to sort of us making interpretations about the entire population when in fact it was a female phenomena. One of the things she discovered is that actually men seem to be higher in this TNF throughout life and don't have an age associated increase, whereas females do seem to increase with time. And perhaps we shouldn't have been too surprised by this because one of, former PhD student now post doc with me had done an incredibly extensive examination of circulating immune cell numbers and phenotype in males and females by, reproductive cycle. So looking at the relationship between sex hormones. And she came to the surprising case that sex hormones had nothing to do with these differences, but, males seem to be more sort of predisposed towards a neutrophilic inflammation and females a monocytic inflammation. So some of those cellular markers of aging and immunity we were using really probably have to be tailored to to males or females specifically. So Candice want or doctor Quinn wanted to bring this full circle and bring it back to our gut permeability story. And so she she looked at the gut permeability between young and old male and female mice and found indeed this permeability we were looking at was a female phenomena. And when she looked at our old t TNF knockout mice, permeability did indeed decrease, but only in the female mice. She looked at zonulin, which is an imperfect, but a frequently used measure of intestinal permeability in humans and found that females seem to have a higher permeability over life, than males do. And when she looked at the serum LPS levels, which really are the most direct indicator of of bacterial permeability. Those do seem to increase but only females. So collectively, women seem to have leakier guts, they get leakier with age and they have in a t enough mediated way and this seems to allow more LPS in them. And I think, ultimately, why is this important? Well, we already know that men and women age differently. There's the phrase in geriatrics, which is, men die quicker, but women live sicker, because women can tend to live with this protracted period of ill health or frailty in old age and and men do not. And I just wanna visualize this, with some data by another former postdoc of mine who was looking at a very large study of, early childhood adversity. And that sort of tie in here is that we know that people who grow up in adverse circumstances tend to have this, increased risk of frailty, and also tend to be higher on the inflammation spectrum. So what he basically found is that the sexes deal with this differently. So if you look at the females, if you have one adverse experience, so that could be like abuse or death of a parent or, not being not being, very well cared for. There's sort of an additive effect about how frail you become. And in males, there's this weird feature where it looks like it doesn't matter in late late life. But what actually happens is the men die if they have if they're set up sort of poorly for life and they have a lot of the stress, which likely contributes to chronic inflammation. They die earlier and only the resilient end up, living on. So we really do need to think about aging from the lens of sex because the sexes just have these different experiences from birth to sort of death. Okay. So just before I finish off, I wanna point out with one other way that our our model was interestingly, counterintuitive and informative. So the aging microbiome I showed you in our mice drives inflammation, but we also actually have data that inflammation drives the microbial dysbiosis. Once upon a time, in the early days of microbiome work, people thought, okay, we're gonna look at the microbiomes, let's say between young or old or disease and healthy or whatever the case may be, and we're gonna find that one bad bug that's causing all this gut inflammation. Gotta get rid of that bad bug. Maybe as an immunologist, I'd say, let's immunize against that bad bug. We're gonna fix the gut. We're gonna make it less leaky. And, of course, that hasn't really panned out. Now we're starting to see that the data actually is more supportive it going in the other direction, that an inflamed gut drives a dysbiotic microbiome because inflammation is associated with changing redox potential, which makes some nutrients more available and some less. It also provides a certain degree of pressure from the immune system. So those microbes that are resistant to that can flourish while others will succumb. So it that looks like this chronic inflammation or this age associated inflammation might actually drive the dysbiosis that we observe. And in the experiments we did, again, we were using our wild type and our TNF knockout mice that were, that grew up without this chronic inflammation. The blue dots are the young microbiota and the orange dots are the old microbiota. In the wild type mice, they're different. In the TNF knockout mice, they're not. We also did a series of other experiments showing that, this chronic inflammation did seem to drive a lot of that those dysbiotic changes. So let's bring it back to the big picture level. I think it's intellectually really interesting to think about chicken and egg and who comes first when in truth, it's a bit of a cycle. But our mice are protected from many elements of the aging experience. For one thing, they all get the same diet. And we know that older adults have a lot of diet challenges with both getting good quality foods, but also, you know, so many aspects of of the aging process can mean that they don't eat as well. We also know that there are things like living conditions that are associated with, where you live actually influences what food you have, access to. There's all sorts of physiological changes in the gut, which seem to change the baseline for how the microbiome, drives this inflammation. So we have to keep in mind when we move these mouse studies to humans that we're working in a really complex socioeconomic, criteria that that also probably compounds or, contributes to the cycle of inflammation and microbial dysbiosis. So one of the things we're doing now is trying to dissect using our mouse model because, again, we can control for so much. We can control for the environment and the diet. They never have any drugs as an example. And trying to understand which features of the microbiota are associated with chronologic age and which are associated with the problematic parts of aging. So frailty and sarcopenia are the two examples I've highlighted here. And then dissecting those by, sex as well. So here we're looking at diversity measures as a in relation to frailty sarcopenia, etcetera, etcetera. And again, you see that some of these lines are going opposite directions for the males and females. And indeed we're finding that the aging female microbiota and the aging male microbiota are quite different. So to conclude, one of the things that, I've been spending a lot of time thinking and collaborating with others about is understanding how early life influences this entire aging trajectory. Because we know that early life experiences can have, well, physiological effects on the developing gut, but also psychological and socioeconomic issues. And the labs really now focusing on healthy and unhealthy aging and trying to understand which elements of the microbiota and inflammation and at which parts in the life course, influence the aging trajectory so that we can all age well as opposed to age poorly. So I'm so excited to answer questions. I would like to, acknowledge our my two collaborators, Elena Verdu, who runs the world's best aging germ free mouse facility. Mike Saret, my, colleague who does all the microbiome analysis, And in particular, the three people in my lab who are, driving our microbiome studies, Alice, Caldwell, master student, Erica, lab manager extraordinaire, and Catherine Andrea, an, medical student. I would be so delighted to discuss this with you. Yeah. Thanks thanks, Don. That was great. Yeah. I have a whole bunch of questions. So, yeah, we took it off full screen too. Alright. So I have so many. So so, just starting with the last stuff. So the, early life course directing your microbiome traject trajectory. Right? So I guess you could make the argument that, you know, some adversity in early life, whether that's socioeconomic or emotional, right, that sets you on a trajectory to eat a certain way, to exercise a certain way, to have a certain but for those who are who just poop, I I I don't wanna belittle that, you know, or put that aside, but assuming that you grew up just with a normal state. Right? So then it gets to the issue of, you know, how can we basically get off that cycle of of, you know, inflammation driving the microbiome, microbiome inflammation driving systemic inflammation. So I guess that would be a good place to start with, you know, what are your thoughts on optimizing the gut microbiome? Is this just a high fiber story and exercise which can acidify the culture? Or what are your thoughts? You know, it's interesting because a lot of microbiome science is really oversold. And, you know, all the data about probiotics and sort of healthy adults who aren't obviously recovering from, like, antibiotic induced diarrhea or something where there's a very clear indication where probiotics work. A lot of the data in healthy young adults says you're throwing your money away if you're you're doing probiotics. But, you know, having a high fiber, low fat, low sugar, Mediterranean type diet has nothing but good science behind it. Right? So I think in sort of youth, middle age, that's where you wanna focus as well because those healthy habits follow you into old age. Right? Now there is actually some data in older adults that's a little bit stronger that says that, you know, maybe you want to supplement with a probiotic. I think where it's kind of interesting is, like, which wins? Like, the good diet or, you know, do you have to sort of manipulate it? And I think, like, the probiotic discussion, because that's really the only thing we have other than diet in a real way. Although, you know, some people will say there's prebiotics and there's there's, you know, other things that you can have. The data for that right now, we have to remember we're just using microbes that are food stuff that basically take up space. Right? So they basically fill up the space so the bad bugs can't make you sick or whatever. Next gen probiotics that are in develop are way more interesting because those are microbes that look like they may, modify specific immune cells or they may produce specific metabolites that are really helpful. So I think that is where the future lies, and then we can start thinking about this. But, like, I think now, like, I always say people always say, oh, you know, they want my work in a pill. And you can't you can't cut corners. Right? Like, you you have to eat well. You have to exercise. You have to manage any chronic conditions you have. Like, there's no shortcuts. It wouldn't necessarily need to be in a pill. I mean, couldn't there be more personalized? So based on your genetics, you'll have a certain microbiome composition granted. You know? So I'm sure we all don't have the same microbiome. Genetics, host can genetics can influence that. Right? So personalization in terms of eating a certain way to have a certain microbiome to produce certain metabolites, reduce systemic inflammation. I'm kind of anti the probiotic as you mentioned, you know, in extreme cases where, you know, like, you just had antibiotic treatment. Maybe that works, but then what what's the balance between just eating your normal diet and letting your microbiome recover as opposed to with probiotics even make a dent? Mhmm. Yeah. I think I mean, I think you're right. And, you know, it's it's interesting because like food is a bizarrely emotional topic. Right? Because you hear a lot of like this tension between like, oh, red meat's bad, red meat's good. And, and it's culturally a lot different too. Right? Like, so, you know, the fibers that you might get in one culture might be very different from the fibers you get in another culture. Is one better or worse? Is that judgment statement of people? You know what I mean? So there's a lot of, like, you can't disentangle the food discussion from the society discussion in a certain way. And then, I mean, let's be honest, access is a huge issue. And, you know, I I work with a lot of older adults. You know, I talk to a lot of older adults. I do a lot of things in long term care. And one of the things I'm always kind of fascinated by is the way and the reasons our diet sometimes becomes less fiber rich as we get older. You know, if you've got rheumatoid arthritis and you, like, can't chop your vegetables, that changes the kind of food you're gonna eat. If you lose your partner and suddenly you're cooking for one, that changes the kind of food you eat. If you're recovering from cancer chemotherapy, that changes the kind of food you have the energy to make. So I think your personalized approach I don't think we're, like, there yet. And I also think it's kinda interesting too because people do pick foods that make them feel better. Right? So people will avoid foods where they feel bloated or gassy or they and so we already have a little bit of that in our nature. We we try to avoid things that make us feel bad and we eat the things that make us feel good. And I think one of the interesting questions is how much is that are we responding to our microbiota and giving them what, you know, they are sort of adapted to. And I, you know, I think the other really interesting question that people are doing in this field is the rewilding hypothesis. So there's this concept that maybe because of antibiotic use, we've lost some of those members of our microbiota that, you know, maybe maybe were beneficial, maybe they were neutral, maybe they're harmful. It's hard to know. But then there's also this idea that do we need to sort of provide the foods that, those microbes would would thrive and and recolonize with us. I think it's a really interesting question. I don't have the answers. It not just foods. I mean, you could make the argument that our environments are completely different than evolving out of the jungle. Right? So how can we make the built environment or portions of it closer to what we but, you know, I don't try I don't live in a sterile environment, and granted it's not like living in the jungle. But, you know, I think one could probably optimize the microbiome by you know? But then it gets even too. There are some people where high fiber doesn't work for them, and and not that so I'm pro fiber. Everybody that watches my channel knows I'm, like, eighty five grams of fiber per day, high soluble fiber, four hundred fifty grams of collard greens every day. I mean, I'm killing vegetables. So but there are people who do better, you know, on just lower fiber diets, and maybe that's so what are your thoughts about so for me, for I think nothing's more toxic than too many calories. So if you're avoiding ultra processed foods and you're eating real foods, granted, meat dominant just to play the other side of the fence, I asked, Naharika the same question. You know? So it's like, how could can gut health be gut health be optimized even on a relatively low fiber diet, but taking out all of the UPFs and and and junk. Right? Yeah. Well, I think it's definitely a really important question. And just to go back to something you said earlier too, like, I don't wanna romanticize the pre industrial diet because we were unhealthy then. If you dig up the skeletons of early humans, they were not healthy people at all. And we had a lot of huge parasite load and things like that. So I don't wanna, like, overly romanticize that because we are healthier now than we've ever been in our semi sterile but, obviously, we have the diseases of modernity being obesity and this sort of thing. So I definitely think and again, I think your question about fiber is an interesting one too because like you said, some people do not feel well on a high fiber diet. There are some people who really, really do not respond to that at all. So what's the right answer for them? And I think this early life connection is really quite interesting because, of course, your immune system comes to an equilibrium. Right? So your equilibrium and my equilibrium are pretty hard to shift. You know, if you were to take out if you were to look at all the antibodies in my gut versus all the antibodies in your gut, anyone who's misbehaved will have a few more antibodies stuck to them at some point. Any microbe that's, you know, caused a little bit of trouble at some point, and that will change, you know, that, how much of that microbe is present. If it goes down, somebody's gonna fill the niche. Right? And so the whole one of the things I don't think we, like, really understand is how long and how permanent. Because we have to give the immune system time to come to the equilibrium, make those cell those IgA antibodies decide who needs to be patrolled really carefully and who needs to be eliminated, you know, who can we live with, who's really problematic. And, you know, some of those people can't tolerate fiber, Maybe their immune system got a signal at some point that those fiber eating bacteria were in the wrong place at the wrong time, and now they have less of them because they're covered with IGA or, you know, whatever. Are systemic levels of IgA proportional to gut levels of IgA? Very rough. And it's one of those things at a population level versus at a personal level. So, like, you know, classic example, the field really got started on this when people were looking at like Crohn's disease to try when we had that bad bug idea, they thought, okay, well, let's take the blood from the people with Crohn's disease. And any IgA in that blood, is gonna tell us who the bad guy is. And then we'll find that bad bug and we'll get rid of the bad bug. And then people were like, actually, you know, what ends up in the blood is a very diluted part of what happens in the gut. And the gut's got its own IgA producing factories. And and so then people are like, okay. Okay. Okay. So we'll look at fecal IgA then. And then we'll figure out who's the misbehaving bug and who do we need to have the most against. And although that works in some diseases, it's really hard to know in health where we are at with that because, you know, it's quite dynamic and things go up and down with time. And, you know, a lot of times our immune system, especially with age, there's a lot of collateral damage. Right? So if you have some, like, diarrheal disease or something like that, you're gonna have a lot of microbes suddenly exposed to the immune system. Your immune system doesn't know who's the problem and who's a nice healthy commensal that makes you some lovely vitamins and develops some short term fatty acids for you. So you may end up having that pruning of sort of the good bugs in addition to that as well. So, like, life course studies of people over time, I think, would be absolutely crucial to answer the questions that you've just asked. Nice. Alright. What about, fecal calprotectin as a marker of gut inflammation? Is that something that should be on everybody's to do list? Yeah. I mean, it's, like, it's if you have a clinician, they'll say, we have the magic level. If If you get higher than that level, we have your problem. If you're lower than that level, don't have a problem. But then, like, researchers who do aging, we're always looking in the normal levels. Right? So we're trying to find all the people and say, like, on that bell curve, where do you sit and within the normal range, and does that have any indicator? And I can't pull up from memory a study that's done a really good test to see how reliable that is for a mark as a marker of healthy aging. Certainly, there does seems to be some correlation with the with the gut permeability. But, you know, I really after we've done these studies looking at sex differences, I question all these things. Because what if it's a great marker for one sex and a poor marker for another sex and the average tells us nothing? You know, that sort of thing really I think we have to delve into the sex differences to answer that. Eve for sure. Even without thinking about it on a population level and just putting that one time point within the broader context, just tracking year to year changes. Right? I mean, and then clearly, if your fecal calprotectin is, you know, five, whatever is nanograms per gram of poop or whatever the units are, and now it's 45, I mean, clearly, there's some increase, and you're going in the wrong direction. Right? So that could be, I guess, an option? I I hypothetically. Yeah. Yeah. Alright. So then taking it away from fecal calprotectin. So measuring so now I'm in the biomarkers. You know, I'm all about biomarkers. So so, TNF alpha and IL six are actually on my next plasma levels, my next blood test, and I'm actually gonna measure them every test going forward for many of the reasons you documented here, but they're also part of the SASP. So, so is that something we should all be measuring? Because that's big as you as your group has shown. Right? So high TNF microbial dysbiosis, and, you know, you'll have that the circular loop of, you know, the the vicious cycle. Right? So Mhmm. Yeah. I, part of the issue with a lot of clinical tests too is the resolution. Right? That is the big issue. So, you know, the big population studies that show that TNF is, you know, associated with if you're higher than eight, as average bad things happen, They're measuring differences in picograms. And so a lot of clinical tests do not have that degree of resolution. And so I think and again, you'd want hypothetically, if you're doing this, you'd you'd wanna go fairly regularly because there are actually diurnal variations too. Right? So there's night and day kind of variations or sex differences, obviously. So I think the challenge there would be getting to the resolution that would give you that data that we have from good observational studies, and that's where where we're not quite at with the clinical tests yet. Yeah. So that's a great point that, TNF alphas and picograms per I don't know. Is it mil or deci Yeah. Picograms are really like low, low, low, low. Very low. So go ahead. Go. So we have so many mechanisms to try to keep it out of our blood. You know, one of the things that's, like, an interesting intellectual thing, we love blood tests because we can get blood out of people. But from an immunology perspective, like, only 1% of your immune cells are ever in the blood. Right? So, like, I think your question about fecal calprotectin was a good one and an interesting one because at least that gives us a sense about other organs. Right? Because the digestive tract, it gives us a little bit of tissue immunity as opposed to the, blood based immunity. So I think, you know, we always have to try to keep that in mind that we can only sample things that don't hurt effectively. And so tissue levels are always gonna be a challenge for these things. Yeah. Definitely. And all we can do is look at biomarkers basically, essentially, of tissue function. But to the point about, TNF alpha being in picograms per deciliter, IgG, so I'm I'm all about looking at the biggest trees in the forest, which actually goes back to the probiotic story, you know, where can you even supplement with a dose big enough to make a dent in the trillions of bacteria when you're supplementing with billions. Right? So just to put it into perspective, IgG, is I think it's like, one gram per deciliter versus that. I mean, that's a thousand fold higher than TNF alpha. Right? That it's a bigger tree. So what are your thoughts on measuring, like, IgG or even complement? I I wouldn't know where to start, which complement proteins as markers of systemic microbial burden? Yeah. I think the specificity is important there. Right? Because we all have our individual set points for how much IgG or IgA or any of the antibodies are com that we have. And like there are some clinical things. There's, for example, MGUS, which is, myelog, gammopathy of undetermined significance where those antibody levels rise. I'm just MGUS. You can Google it. And, so clinically it becomes a problem if you leave that set point but we kind of The types of antibodies we have are all going up and down and up and down all the time. There's all this contracting and waning whenever we're exposed to something but the set point of the actual volume is is fairly consistent, as consistent as humans get. So I think for IGG, I would worry way like, I I I feel that knowing the specificity is more useful than the total numbers because you will sort of sit at your home. For example, if you just get a vaccination, the amount of that, there'll be a little bit of a rise as you're having the inflammatory response. But the proportion of the antibodies to the vaccine two weeks later will be higher. And then six months later, they'll be lower. And so, like, there's just this homeostatic set point of how much I g IGG we can carry in the serum. Yeah. It's like you're reading my mind. I so exactly on that point in terms of the specificity. So as I'm sure you know, maybe everybody else doesn't, but, antibody production in response to pathogens declines during aging. So Mhmm. The magnitude of the response in older adults will be blunted, making it harder to bite the, you know, infection off. So, which specific like, are there microbes that that we should be looking at? Like so I'm just trying to think ahead, and this kinda goes to the pneumonia and lung health issue too. But, you know, should we be, tracking specific? So it's maybe it's not the total IgG. Right? But specific IgGs to certain microbes, whether it's, bacterial, fungi, virus, and tracking those over time. Or, I mean, as a matter of looking at antibody titers against, you know, so so how would you what would you advise? Well, I think, actually, you brought up a point that I just wanna highlight because it's it's a very astute point and that gets lost in everything I do. I only look at the bacteria and that is a crime because the there's a lot more in the microbiota. There's archaea, there's viruses, there's fungi. And, and you quite astutely said is are there things we should be looking at, in that context? And indeed, there's a lot of interesting questions. You know, we think about reactivation of chronic viruses. They're all of us, we carry a ton of viruses that you've never heard of, because they don't, you know, cause a clinical problem. But would they be interesting biomarkers to see where we were at with our control and our cellular immunity? Quite possibly. Reactivation of some of those latent viruses is usually a sign of something going on, but are there subclinical reactivations that, that might be occurring? So I just wanted to before I answered your actual question, I just wanted to highlight that because I think it's a really important avenue for future research. And and just to emphasize, when it comes to microbiome work, we do what is easy as opposed to what is biologically relevant. So we look at microbes because we've got really good eight sixteen s sequencing to do microbial stuff, very challenging to do viral sort of virome stuff. And fungal stuff is a little bit more challenging too, and so it's done less. But that doesn't mean it's not more important. So I yeah. So my caveat is that there's entire classes of life we ignore because they're difficult to measure, and maybe that's where the secret is. So okay. So now that I've made that important caveat to show that I am thinking about, you know, these other classes of life, I think we just don't know what the bad bug is, you know, or if it's a class of bugs. And one of the things we did, a set of experiments we did that I thought was really cool as we were doing upper airway, sort of nasal line fluid and looking for people's, antibodies in there. And there's a sort of a commensal species that lives up there. And I thought, oh, wouldn't it be interesting if people who had lots of those antibodies, maybe they would have less of this commensal because their immune system would be clearing it out. Or maybe they have not very many of the antibodies in the vector. And we couldn't find any correlations. You know? So and that's because it's very hard to do these kind of experiments in that sort of detail. So I think we really, really, really need to get some biology before making those inferences and making some some biomarker tests. But I think your point about, like, all these different classes of live life and are the reactivations or outgrowth or things like that is a really important one. So in terms of optimizing lung health and then, or even, survival after lung infection. So pneumonia and respiratory diseases, probably most people don't know, but when you think of leading causes of death in centenarians, respiratory diseases and infection, including pneumonia, make the top five sometimes our number one in certain studies depending on where where the cohort is. So, let's say you're not you or somebody. I wouldn't wish this on anyone, but let's say you're a centenarian who's just been diagnosed with pneumonia, bacterial pneumonia just to keep it, right, on on brand. But, so what would, like, what would be the, I mean, is it should the I mean, you alright. Wait. So I guess I'm trying to prevent that case. Right? Yes. Because conventional medicine will treat you, you know, with antibiotics and and all the other stuff. But what's the best way so that we can push that window out even further? Mhmm. Mhmm. Yeah. I love this question. So I maybe I have to come back into a whole new PowerPoint presentation on preventing respiratory infections to older adults because this is truly my passion for both the acute infection, but also for the long term health consequences. So getting pneumonia in mid to late life is associated with accelerate dementia, loss of mobility and independence, things like that. It feels weird coming out of the COVID pandemic to still have to say infections are bad for you. You know? They really are both for the short and long term. So, I mean, the best thing to do is stay up to date with your vaccines. Most in now, my province of Ontario, we set a goal to get at least seventy percent of older adults vaccinated for influenza, or seventy percent of the population, sorry, and all older adults. We don't hit that. We have a recommendation that everyone should get a COVID vaccine for that reasons. We don't hit that. We are now looking at RSV recommendations. It will be years before we get to those targets. So the best thing you can do to be frank is to get vaccinated. But barring that, let's pretend you get even if you're vaccinated. Being vaccinated should still help moderate and reduce those long term health consequences. So what do you do then? And, you know, it was really interesting in the COVID pandemic because people wanted to attribute it all to having a bad immune response. You know, if you get COVID or you die of COVID, it's because your immune system is not working and stuff like that. A lot of studies we did looking at COVID vaccination in older adults, we found they actually had really robust responses to the mRNA vaccines far exceeding my hopes and dreams. I think the immune system is just one part of it. Like, there's the physiological changes with aging that also contribute. And asking the immune system to do all the heavy lifting is maybe asking too much. So lung health is a particularly challenging one because so much of lung health begins in utero and early life. So, that early life adversity that I I talked about got pretty good population data that says that the in utero environment actually influences the size of your lungs. And one of the best predictors of a healthy old age is your lung capacity. So if you start from a place of weakness, getting to a place of strength is an enormously difficult and perhaps in some cases, impossible task. Again, exercise. But like, you know, if someone I loved, you know, older adult I loved was had pneumonia, the things that I would want is awesome antibiotic stewardship to give them the right drug at the right time. I would hope that they'd already been vaccinated to help give them a little bit of a boost and to help minimize the effect of that. And then I'd hope that they had access to good rehabilitation afterwards. And that's, like, where the science is at, which is so depressing. But we're looking at a few, mouse model studies now where we're trying to repurpose old drugs to see if we can improve pneumonia outcomes in our old mice and then hopefully move those to taking months. So I have a couple of questions that branch out from that. So evolutionarily, would we have been infected every year? Like, it seems like Mhmm. Because of population density, right, the probability is it's a cycle, right, every winter. So and then the other question there is, so, obviously, chronically infected every year is a problem, you know, just accumulative microbial burden, let alone the acute. Right? But then also and I don't know if there's any published literature on this, and I I'm vaccinated. I got the COVID, three times not COVID, but the vaccine three times. But Mhmm. That I was getting it every year. So I've gotten the flu vaccine too, and then still gotten a respiratory infection, whether it's influenza or something else, RSV. I don't know. But I just, I've just raised the general question of, is chronic immune activation even in the the acute phase, granted it's preconditioning for seeing the actual pathogen. But evolutionarily, maybe we wouldn't have seen a pathogen for four, five, ten years. So is there a balance between how often one vaccinates Mhmm. And then even potentially vaccinating too often where you've got this chronic immune activation that that, I don't wanna say you can't recover from, but I can't imagine chronic immune activation every six months or however often the the doses are would be good long term. I love those questions so much about your lecture. And in fact, we have a paper in review right now addressing just this concern. Nice. Okay. So I'll try to you okay. You stop me if I start talking too much because this is like my favorite thing to talk about. If the floor is open, we can go forever. So, you know, it's it's no worries. So this was a really legit concern. And a lot of people had this idea that we get a flu shot once a year because it provides a year of protection. But here's the shocking thing. Flu, like good protection from the vaccine lasts about three months and then it sort of fades off. And by six months, it's most years not detectable. The reason you get a flu shot once a year is because there's one flu season a year in the Northern Hemisphere. And interestingly, more temp equatorial places where they don't have seasons, some countries actually have multiple vaccines a year because they need twelve months of protection, you get less than six. So, yeah, so you actually might need two flu shots to be protected that year. But, so the reason we get a flu shot a year is not because, like, there's, like, one year of protection. It's because flu season lasts about six months and you can get three months of good coverage and three months of, like, middling coverage. COVID is the same actually. So the reason you need multiple vaccines a year in in Canada, we're pretty generous with making sure that older adults have access to more than one vaccine a year is because again, you get three good months of protection and then you get three middling months, but the variance change so quickly. And there's, like, more than one COVID season a year. Like, there's two to four COVID seasons a year. So the concern people have brought up and you've just brought up is there is this sort of protracted recovery period that gets more protracted when you're older from infections. So older adults resolve the inflammatory response more slowly. And it's thought that that protracted period of resolution bumps us up a little bit on the inflammation spectrum and can sort of tip us over the edge to develop these other chronic inflammatory diseases. The data is not great, but that is a reasonable hypothesis with the model that we have now. Now intriguingly, vaccine responses don't lead to this sort of chronic inflammatory response. You have this really acute response when you're feeling really poorly and your arm hurts and you're, you know, maybe have the chills or whatever, but it really does resolve with no lasting benefit. So like if I were offered two COVID shots a year, I would take them and I wouldn't worry in the slightest, because you don't have this protracted long period of inflammation like you do with an infection. And I think, you know, a lot of times people think that the immune response to the infection and the vaccination are the same or the risks are the same and they're they're really quite different. Like, you really don't wanna get COVID. But if you like I said, if someone were to say, Don, you could have two vaccines a year, I'd be like, sign me up. That gives me six good months and six, you know, somewhat protected ones. Oh, it would be more than just two vaccines. Right? So two for influenza, two for COVID, two for RSV. I mean, we can work as an oh, for people I would actually RSV, the data's pretty good that you only need it every few years. It triggers like a cellular immunity as opposed to an antibody mediated effect. But, like, the other thing that people, like oh, again, so stop me if I go too crazy on here. But like people have this strange idea that a good vaccine lasts forever because a lot of our childhood vaccines, for various reasons, we only get during childhood. But even our childhood vaccines, most of them come in twos, threes, fours, and more. So it's not like you get, like, one shot and you're covered. But respiratory viruses like influenza and COVID, not so much RSV, evolve to take advantage of waning immunity. So whenever those antibody levels so you can get flu twice in a year with the same flu, the same variant, whatever. You can get COVID, obviously, multiple times as we've seen. You can get rhinoviruses exact same one you can get multiple times if the timing is such. So for all those viruses that can infect during the waning immunity period, no vaccine can protect you forever. It's just not possible with the current technologies and the way we build immunity now. And the reason why we don't get a childhood vaccine against influenza that protects us forever is because that's just not how the virus works. It's just not. Right. So how often so what's your just to make it, you know, relatable. Right? So, what was your vaccine schedule for the past year? Or or Yeah. Yeah. So, and again, like, we're Canadian, so we do things a little bit differently. So I would have definitely got a flu shot in the fall and I definitely got a COVID shot at around the same time. And, yeah, I can't remember how many COVID vaccines now, but I mean, I will get one yearly from now until the end of time. That's the official recommendation, that we have in my province. And it'll be at least once a year. And for older adults, it's twice a year. And for vulnerable populations, it's twice a year here. So until that changes and that's available, that's what I would do. And then how often are you getting, like, infected with something, respiratory virus? Like Well, I'm I've been pretty lucky. You know? But I also mask in worser a lot of the time, so that really helps with that as well. So knowing that lung function declines during aging, and that's another underrated factor that nobody's paying attention to almost nobody. So what are your thoughts on, like, spirometry and regular tracking? So even with exercise, sure. You may you may be at a higher you know, you shift to the higher slope, but that age related decline still may be the same as someone who's not regularly exercising. So what are your thoughts on regular, lung function testing, or what would be your best bet and option to track that over time to try to resist age related change? Oh, I love that question. The, because it goes back about two hundred some odd years. So the person who first invented the spirometer worked for an insurance agency, and he was trying to figure out what caused people what what who lived long and who didn't live long for insurance purposes. And it's been shown a time and time and time again, what we call FVC, forced vital capacity, is actually one of the best predictors of all cause mortality, better than the immune system, better than just about anything else if you look at everything. But measuring, lung function is both technically pretty challenging. Like, if you've ever done have you ever done a lung function test, a spirulometry? I have a FEV, you know? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But, like, you have to learn how to use it. Like, if you get one done as part of a clinical test or whatever, the person has to yell at you. Right? Like, breathe, breathe, breathe, breathe, you know? Because otherwise you get these really variable and they and there's actually, like, lots of studies showing that, you know, there's lots of, like, variation in who gives the test and who interprets the test and stuff like that. So, you know, someone who's properly trained is taught to do this in a very specific way so you get good data. So my my you know, I I would worry that someone who didn't have a really sophisticated understanding of how spirometry works might get into a bit of a panic if their test showed up a bit low, but that's because it's not, it's not as easy as you would think it it should be. So I think, you know, it's we all have sort of a set point. And like I said, lung volume seems to be influenced by early life and even in utero. So your movement for fixing that is challenging. There are actually some really cool epidemiology studies that sort of link inflammation and lung health, you know, which comes first. And it looks like the inflammation may proceed drops in that. And I think certainly clinically like one of the issues with getting people diagnosed with COPD emphysema and these things is they often don't like go and get tested until they're having problems. And by that point, you know, their quality of life might be impacted. There's just not a lot we can do about age related changes in lung function, right? Like until you hit that clinical like criteria of getting to like COPD or or maybe having undiagnosed asthma or something like that. Like there's not a lot unless you're really gonna commit to, you know, I mean, even committing to exercise, like there's only so much you can do to improve what you sort of started off with. So I think I worry that that one might be more nervous making than, you know, valuable. There are there are lung specific trainers that offer resistance that and I actually tried it and overtrain my lungs and actually depressed my FEV. But but this isn't a one time point. This is where I'm tracking it, you know, three times a week. Nine maximal exhalations per per session to try to, you know, get a good sense. Because as you mentioned, there's variability. You know, there can be 30% variability if if my mouth isn't properly positioned. So I'm trying to minimize that by taking a lot of tests. But so I I think the lung inspiratory training, where you're breathing against resistance can offer I I don't know what the maximal dose is for. If I start to see an age related decline, I'm gonna go back to it. But, yeah. So wait. FVC is where you're pushing out all of the air from your lungs. Sorry. Yes. I should have said f yeah. FVC is that's right. So that's sort of FEV one is sort of what is used mostly clinically, and people don't use FVC quite as much. But if you look, actually, there's a really lovely paper. I'll send you the link from a colleague of mine who was looking at, sort of various populations looking all cause mortality and finds that FVC tends to be tends to be the best sort of predictor of of longevity. And, you know, and you know this because you're you're doing all the hard work. Like, all the systems are intertwined. Right? You improve any one thing, you improve all the things. And that's the whole pillars of jera geroscience. Like, vision is that we have all these interconnected things that happen with age, but improving any one of those things ends up having this organismal improvement. And, you know, I'd be really, really interested in studies that we're looking at. Like, you know, if someone commits to, I don't know, their blood glucose, like really getting that under control, how does that influence like the aging lung or, you know, people who are, you know, really committed to strength training actually don't think of that as being super helpful for your lung, but there's a great immune effects, which then might have that on affects the lung. The gut too. I mean, I'm sure you know that there's a study at least that I know of that, soluble fiber supplementation improves survival in mice after influenza infection. Right? So gut the gut lung access too. Yeah. And there's some the biology behind the lung and the gut is super duper fascinating. Earlier, I made the comment about about, like, how only 1% of your immune cells are in your blood. Well, most of them are in your gut. Like, that's where if you if you wanted to draw a picture of the immune system, that's where you what you should really draw because just the incredible amount of capacity it takes to maintain the gut microbiota and the integrity of the gut requires so much work. And so there's some cool studies in influenza basically saying, like, a lot of times, like, clinically, if someone's really ill for for any respiratory infection, but influenza definitely being one of them, they have diarrhea. So why do they have diarrhea? Well, it's because all those immune cells that need to be in the gut have to hightail it to the lung to help deal with that. And so now you have this period this point of vulnerability in the gut as well. So I think that whole gut lung health access is super interesting. Alright. So taking it back to the monocytes. So in in terms of, so monocyte function. Right? So I'm guessing even neutrophil function declines during aging too. Is an increase so both of those increase during aging, large epidemiological studies. I've got one four hundred thousand in mind, 400,000 people. So is the increase in neutrophils and monocytes, is that a basically a biomarker of reduced function so that the immune system is just making more? I think, you know, I think the best, sort of explanation about this although it's I mean, I'll tell you what I think is the most consistent with the data we have is that your hematopoietic stem cells in your bone marrow are constantly trying to sense any sort of inflammation because it almost always interprets that as being from an infection. If it truly was an infection, you don't need to make like b cells and t cells and lymphocytes because it's gonna take like five to ten days for them to become specific to that microbe and stuff like that. What do you need? You need to make neutrophils and monocytes to head over. And ideally, they're gonna sort everything out before you even have to have an adaptive immune response. So the first cells that are made in the first hematopoietic stem cells that are engaged during an infection or an acute inflammatory effect are neutrophils and monocytes. So my interpretation of this sort of what we call myeloid skewing, with age is that that increased level of inflammation or maybe some of the LPS in the gut, those hematopoietic stem cells are saying, you're sick, you're sick, you're sick, you're sick. So what am I gonna make? I'm gonna make neutrophils and monocytes and I'm gonna suppress the lymphocytes because you're sick, you're sick, you're sick, you're sick. And over time, that ratio starts to build for the monocytes and the neutrophils. And one of the things that, I feel that we're the story is becoming clearer and clearer at least in our most models is that one of the last things that happens in maturation of monocytes is building the off switches for inflammation. You know, that's sort of one of the things I have. So there's this whole saying, you can have things quick, cheap, or well done. You can pick two of the three, but you can't have all three. The cost is the same in the context of this. So you have to pick between cheap and well done or or quick and well done. If you're pulling these out, you're sick, you're sick, you're sick, you're sick, you're sick, and you're pulling these out of the bone marrow early, then you're sort of speeding along or bypassing that last quality control step. So a lot of these, like, monocytes and neutrophils from older adults will have constituent of production of, like, reactive oxygen species or inflammatory cytokines because they haven't quite got all the off switches in place. You know? So they're good at turning things on, but they're not so good at turning things off. And they're sort of like this, like, leaky inflammation or leaky antimicrobial activity. So my interpretation of our data and others is that this misinterpretation or perhaps correct interpretation because, you know, those stem cells are doing exactly what they're meant to do in infection. They're seeing cytokines and turning stuff on. They're seeing bacterial products, and they're doing exactly what they're meant to do. But in the context of aging, that leads us to this bias towards having these myeloid cells that ultimately, are access to requirements and are, you know, are are not very good at turning off. We actually do a plus pathogens paper, I think, in 2015, which I thought was kind of it was a cool paper. So we had our young and old mice, and we saw that the old mice actually recruited way more monocytes to this site of infection. So we did a depletion experiment. We brought them down to young levels, and the mice had a better survival rate. So too much of a good thing is a bad thing in the context of aging. And so reducing that, by reducing sort of the inflammatory tone, I think, would be only good. So a part of what are your thoughts on the idea that a a big part or a part, how big of a part, I don't know, of aging is, or the inflammation that comes with aging is that overreaction of the immune system, whether it's too many, you know, neutrophils, monocytes? And then why? Why why would the immune system overreact like that? How does it where's the where's the disconnect? Mhmm. I think, you know, the it is sometimes having too many neutrophils and mosses are definitely bad for you. So as an example, there's a study I particularly love where they looked at young men who died of h one n one in like the two thousand nine, two thousand ten pandemic. And, you know, young people were dying of this and young men often die more of or men die more of respiratory infections than women. And a lot of that seems to be attributed to having too much of the cellular inflammation. You know, again, they seem to pull more of these cells in and it seems to be really problematic. So why I mean, there's no intelligent design in the immune system. I would say immune system is not your friend. It will kill you given given the chance. Right? Like most of us will die of, some sort of chronic inflammatory condition or, you know, the immune system will do some terrible autoimmunity thing. Like, the immune system is not like a perfect machine that we've accidentally that we can push into perfection. It's blind and it's dumb. So for whatever reason, men seem to pull in more of these cells and that leads to more tissue damage. And then as you get older, you probably can't recover from that very well. And, you know, other infections seem to be a bit more female biased and, or pregnancy biased or, and again, just the types of cells and things we bring in seem to cause more damage than good. And that's why we die of infectious disease. You know, if if we had the if we had the answers, we'd never we'd never have to worry about them. So the the pregnancy, have you have you seen how neutrophils and, monocytes, lymphocytes change during pregnancy? I think there's a big spike at least in the first trimester for neutrophils and monocytes. So there's a huge immune reaction, right, to to being pregnant. So Mhmm. It's something miraculous. Actually, I have, during my PhD, I was working on these antimicrobial peptides that skyrocket during pregnancy. For a few weeks, I sat outside a pregnancy clinic and collected all the urine from the pregnant women to to get this, these peptides from. And then unfortunately, I realized that, even though they have more per volume, they pee so much that their volumes are like this. So we ended up going back to, like, just the young female grad students because women had twice as much of these peptides in their urine than, men and then pregnant women had tenfold more. Well, you know, the the theories, there's lots of good theories about the all the massive numbers of immune cells that change with age. So the thymus does some interesting things. The, you have to tolerate the generation of a new organ, the placenta. Like, think how crazy that is. Like, in tolerance, like, when you're born and even in utero, you go through this entire process of becoming tolerized to your own organs so you don't attack them. And then you grow a new one. Like, how crazy is that? So you have to have a an immune system that's going to tolerate the generation of new tissues that you haven't had before. And then a fetus, which is, like, genetically different than you. And the thing that's so crazy about this, you tolerate this fetus during pregnancy. You can't necessarily get an organ transplant from one of your kids as an adult because you're no longer tolerant to their body, right? Like the thought experiment of the immunology of pregnancy boggles the mind. So there's that. And then, of course, there's, a lot of the physiological changes. So for example, increased vascularization and gut permeability. So the gut actually grows when you get pregnant to help you absorb more energy for the growing baby. And in our mice, when we do pregnancy studies, it, like, doubles its size. I've never done an autopsy of a human, so I don't know how much bigger it gets, but it gets bigger. So, again, gut is where most of your immune cells are. Gut gets bigger. You're probably gonna have this expansion of all these immune cells during the context of pregnancy that will contract later. So the a lot of probably the sex differences that I've described in aging are probably in part due to adaptations to the female body to do to adapt during the pregnancy. So maybe the fact that women seem to have leakier guts throughout the life course is because we are just genetically made to have leakier guts because the expectation is it will need to expand and have more, nutrient absorption. Perhaps we rely more on monocytic inflammation than neutrophilic inflammation because monocytes can get into the placenta and differentiate in a way that's really protective and neutrophils are not associated with that quite the same way. So, you know, we don't know, but presumably some degree of the sex differences in immunity and aging and things like that are adaptations. One could also argue that women get more autoimmune conditions in late life because we, some of our regulatory processes are such that we allow, we are more permissive to allowing autoimmune cells to generate. And so maybe that's why we get more auto immunity in late life and we're permissive for that so that we don't overreact to things during the context of pregnancy when we have a foreign being in our body. It's remarkable. I mean, that's like tolerance. Right? It's like you're with more autoimmune conditions, it's basically some level of tolerance and that tolerance can potentially allow for well, not potentially a longer lifespan relative to men. Right? So Mhmm. There was some of the future of this, anti TNF therapies, like, I think it's Humira is one therapy. Should centenarians who have high TNF, you know, be prescribed this? I don't I haven't seen any studies. No. There are some really interesting studies showing that people with rheumatoid arthritis who get on the anti TNFs do seem to have this decrease in all cause mortality, but it's a little bit confounded because like when the drugs first came, a lot of like, in The US, we have insurance companies. Only people who would have insurance coverage would have access to them first and that is a socioeconomic thing. So, you know, you have to sort of keep access questions in mind when you interpret a lot of these studies. But, you know, I will say there are quite a few not quite a few, but there are some examples of, like, immune modifying things at high dose, which are like chemotherapeutics and like, you know, really serious drugs. At lower doses, we use them as immunomodulators. So like methotrexate, and there's a couple other drugs like that. So and then there's also other things like baby aspirins to prevent stroke, those sorts of things. Ozempic, metformin, all seem to have this sort of health and longevity increase. And again, when we think about the pillars of geroscience movement, like, if you fix one thing, everything seems to get a little bit better. Like, which is the cheapest and easy of those strings to pull at to help immune health in old age? And I think the jury is still out, but I think it's a really exciting time to investigate that. Yeah. So if someone did have high TNF and knowing all the negative consequences that come with that, right, wouldn't one part of the strategy? I'd say, yeah. Probably right. So then okay. Wait. So then TNF, alpha knockout mice, did you look at lifespan or health span in comparison with Sort of. So health span, yeah, life span not. So I'm not rich. So a life span study requires, like, more money than I have to do the mice. So we use them at, twenty months. So health span, yes. Because if we're gonna use them at twenty months, we have to keep them alive to twenty months. And, we monitor for, like, health conditions and stuff like that. And it's kind of like a financial tragedy if a mouse dies before that twenty month time period. So in that health span aspect, we do see that the we have to call fewer TNF knockout female mice, than wild type mice because they don't develop the same degree of health issues. So the female knockout mice seem I can't say they live longer, but more of them make it to sort of, like, mouse life. You know what I mean? And if you ask me to make, like, a informed guess just by looking all these mice and knowing the mice as I do, I would say they're definitely gonna live longer. But the males, it's kind of a different story. Like, the male mice, you know, how that men die quicker, but women live sicker. The female mice really do we do see more frailty develop and it's sort of this protracted. They can live with this frailty index for mice. So we can actually, like, pick out the healthy agers not versus the not so healthy agers. And like the female mice definitely, the wild types do can live with a protracted period of of moderate frailty. The male mice, they go along, they go along, they die. The male TNF not, they go along, they go along, they die. So, so the I don't think it's life extending in the males. No. Does that the same thing in humans is the million dollar question. Right? Because and I think there, you know, there are datasets out there that we could probe. Like, again, looking at people who take these drugs for the various diseases and conditions, we do know that actually they seem to work better in men than women. All of these in women may be more likely to have rheumatological conditions. I think the gut stuff, Crohn's, and IBD are sort of more similar between the sexes. We do know anti TNF therapy seems to work a lot better for a lot longer in some of these conditions than men than women. So presumably, the TNF is really important in men. And why these don't work quite as well or women have more side effects or things like that are probably right down to the biology of how we use cytokine. And I I don't know what the answer is. I mean, if you ask me to gamble, if you said, Don, your TNF is really high, let let me give you a low dose anti TNF inhibitor. I would probably be pretty receptive to that discussion based on what I know, but, you know, it is an important cytokine for infections. Right? So if you go on anti TNF, you might have you you have to get usually, you have to get a TB test. You have to get a you know, it is really important for monitoring and suppressing chronic inflammation. So risk benefit, hard to say. Yeah. That raises the other side of the coin, which is how low is too low for having circulating TNF. So if you're not taking any exogenous agents and, you know, you have naturally low levels and you're able to maintain that over time, Is is there a too low for TNF in that case? Does it doesn't seem to be, but probably because it's the induction that's important. Right? So a lot of, like, our sensing of immune cytokines like you and I will have our different baseline levels, and that'll be due to sex and age and you being super duper healthy and me being slightly less committed to conquering aging. I don't know. Maybe similar. Maybe similar. No. But, we'll have different so a lot of sensing when we get sick is actually the degree of magnitude and the speed of the change. So that's why, you know, I don't think there would be a too low below unless you were like, you know, like so suppressed you couldn't mount a response. And in that way, you know, the epidemiology say hypothetically, we could do this thought experiment now where we gave a whole bunch of centenarians low dose anti t n f inhibition. We might be surprised by the findings because they might not be able to have that really rapid induction when it comes to infection. So maybe it wouldn't be as helpful as we think because we'd be sort of mopping up any of that TNF and the context of infection. Or alternatively, we titrate it. So it's like just brings us down to, like, a low, low, low, but we still we don't have enough of that antibody in our blood to stop that response we need to have in the context of infection. I mean, it's a really interesting thought experiment. Yeah. It's a tricky one. Alright. So, the perils of being born in the fall, right? So older adults are more likely to die in the fall and winter months versus the summer months. So is that a vitamin D sunlight, you know, so you can red light near infrared light. Is that the story? Should older adults be preconditioning with cold plunges to get rid of or so what how how how should we be? Yeah. I mean, the, the, my show The Perils Will Be Born on Thal is more about like like the, early life, sort of, why being born falls more prominent, but I'm not gonna give it away in case I decide to go big with this and I get on, I don't know, Jimmy Fallon one day. But the, the Yeah. Old people die mostly during infectious disease and those sorts of complications. And like for example, heart attacks increase post influenza RSV and a few other things too. So even if heart attacks often increase in the fall and winter as well because they're secondary to some of these infections. So those seasonal things in death do really tend to be mostly attributable to, infectious disease. And, of course, like, if you live in a cold place like I do where there's, like, snow and slush, falls are a big issue in in the winter as well. That can lead to a lot of hospitalizations, and that can start that whole slippery slope, which is, you know, so worrisome, for older adults as well. So then how can they minimize that risk? I mean, aside from vaccination, what what things can they do, you know, in those Yeah. Well, I really am inspired by your masking with your daughter with n ninety five. And one of the things I often say is, like, sniffles in a kid can be, you know, deadly in grandma and grandpa. So I wish people we had more of a culture of not bringing illnesses to our older adults in our lives. So I think there's that. Masking, I think, is a great thing. But I the data for vitamin d is it, you know, it's it's it would be lovely if that was the final answer, but the data is really quite lackluster about what it does with regard to infectious disease. Bone strengthening, obviously, super important. You know? I think, you know, get bone health for those falls, which are so precipitous. We associated with that decline, I think are are really important. I I yeah. I don't know if the cold plunges it's a bit of a hard sell for me. But, you know, actually, you know, one of the things that I think we don't talk about enough is social interaction though. Like, loneliness is, like, so stressful that we can measure inflammation in lonely people. Like, isn't that crazy? And so one of the things that I think we don't, you know, oftentimes we think about our like health as just being our physical contained within our body, but actually having deep meaningful relationships. A lot of those super centenarians, you know, in the epidemiology, they often say like strong social networks, multi generational networks. Right? So if your peers are less healthy and they can't go play golf or do whatever you used to do, having a younger person in your life who can still hang out with and do those things is so important. So maybe that's something we don't talk about enough is how important the social aspect of aging is. Definitely. I only with a caveat though. Right? Because I'm the type where I like to be deep in in my work. And if there are others around who are doing nonsense, it's a huge distraction. So in that case, the social in in that case, it's like, leave me alone. Let me do my thing. But then at the other end, there's gotta be some of that. You know, I I told I agree a 100%. I'm not trying to be a hermit. So Yeah. Yeah. Alright. So what are your thoughts on, there were a couple of papers that just came out on isolating hematopoietic stem cells from older adults, like isolating the most youthful ones and then, growing them up and then reinserting them. And there was a small increase in median lifespan, no increase in maximum lifespan. Mhmm. So what are your thoughts on that as a therapy potentially going, forward? Yeah. I mean, all cellular therapies are a little bit risky. Right? So that's the only caveat. Like, getting these I mean, cancer immunotherapies have completely changed the game, but they're incredibly costly and challenging and things like that. And I think one of the things that's super interesting about these, like, clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential and these sort of conditions in which some of the hematopoietic stem cells are better adapted to the aging microenvironment than other stem cells. And so it's Darwinian evolution in that bone marrow, and those who are adapted better win and survive and produce progeny. So how strong how much we can out compete the ones that are adapted to the aging microenvironment, maybe in a not so beneficial way without changing the aging microenvironment. Right? So the reason so for example, we've done a couple studies now on, tect two mutations, which are associated with this clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential, which is effectively, when some of these step cells become, better adapted to the aging microenvironment and they love to produce myeloid cells. When they produce more myeloid cells, then they stop producing lymphoid cells, they produce more myeloid cells. We we show that they love inflammation. You know, if there's a little inflammation in your mouse, they will take off and do really well. We even showed in people with rheumatoid arthritis when they go in their anti TNF, they get sort of suppressed because now they're not so, adapted to the environment. So I think the challenge with studies like that is if you take coat ones, you grow them up, and you wanna put them back in, but they're still less fit for that environment than the bad ones, which have, you know, mutated and taken on all these properties to give them this survival advantage. It may be very, very challenging to to reverse that. Yeah. It it just gets me thinking that keeping our blood as youthful as possible for as long as possible Mhmm. Is the only way to go. Like, that's Mhmm. Can't think of a better way. Every therapy I mean, the age niche, like you said, I mean, it it seems like you can give some kind of therapeutic. It you know, parabiosis, there's all this big buzz, but even then, it's, you've got it anyway, it it's the age niche, you know, that you, control. That's the billion dollar question. Yeah. And, you know, I I was just teaching, the fourth year immunology class, and we're trying to do a little thought experiment. Like, what is immune aging and what is remodeling? Because throughout life, every single thing you've ever encountered and your immune systems respond to means that even if you could live forever without aging, like, imagine this, where you and I somehow we find the cure to aging and we live for two hundred years. We're still gonna have our immune system constantly remodeled because now we're you know, we still have all those immune experiences. And so disentangling changes that come with time and aging, if you see if you can see what I mean by the difference there, just like the number of exposures and the different things that would happen with time versus the things that happen as a negative aspect of aging is very hard to disentangle. Like, there there's a lot of features of the aging immune system that are actually great. You know, like, we, older adults don't get all those childhood infections, 50s, these slap face disease and stuff like that. Right? Because they've sort of adapted, remodeled, and they're no longer vulnerable to that. They're also super good at pulling up memory responses. One of the first studies I did as a new professor was during the 2009, 2010, influenza pandemic. And we were gonna go into long term care homes, and we were gonna, you know, figure out who was sick with influenza. And so none of them got sick because they'd seen something similar, you know, sixty five years prior, or seventy five years prior. So, you know, some aspects of that aging that we would, be if I were to take your blood and mine, we sort of attribute them aging are very beneficial effects of immune experience. So just like getting older, you know, you have more life experiences to draw from. You also have more immune experiences to draw from. And And I don't think we have an answer about which things are chronological time versus biological aging. The germ free your germ free mouse, experiment, you know, so no microbiome in an extended median lifespan, which then goes to this issue of of age versus, I mean, not necessarily immune aging, but infectious, you know, triggers. Exactly. So so what did germ free mice die from? I mean, clearly, it's not infection. Right? Yeah. So we, we did do a couple little autopsies to try to get a set. And this is the thing I find. And again, this is an impression because we didn't do a proper study to totally powered mostly because if they die a natural death, that isn't a financial disaster for me. So we try to make sure we use them before that happens. So my sample size is only the mice that died before we were gonna use them when they got old or we thought they were gonna die. And so we did a couple of little necropsies to sort of try to understand what they were dying of. And the thing that came back, which I thought was so interesting was kidney and liver failure. And I wonder if that's not because kidney and liver you know, there's the integrity of epithelial barriers. You hit sort of a hay flickly limit where you can only divide yourself so many times. And so even in a sterile world where your immune system is extremely youthful, because not only did they not have any germs, they also didn't have very many exposures, right? So their immune system really was very young. Can you stop can you somehow prevent your little telomeres from from shortening and your organs from losing that integrity? Like, so there's some element of the physiology of age in those mice that we still couldn't totally reverse even though we reversed immune aging and exposures. Wouldn't it suggest that there are beneficial factors from, like, the microbiome that the kidney and liver need that will age them faster towards pathology if they don't get those? Maybe. Maybe. Or maybe there's a set rate that we can't influence. You know, like there's the there's two sides that like, maybe they would just kidneys and livers just have a half life of whatever it is or a or an absolute maximum life. And we could may maybe, hypothetically, we could remove all the other causes of death, and that would be what we die at at the very end. You know? I don't I don't know. I don't know. I I hear you, but I don't wanna accept that because Yeah. Go. You you carry on. I'm following with interest. So so short chain fatty acids. Right? If you gave germ free mice, if you put it in the water, and then it prove it you know, if they didn't die from kidney disease, well, now we know that SCFAs are part of that story. Right? But maybe liver you'd still have liver, so you've gotta find the other, you know, gut microbial metabolites, that could, you know, possibly impact the liver. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I I like, all things are possible. Right? I carry on with your quest. Alright. Well, thanks, Don. That was great. I could go on forever. I have so many questions and so many tangents to go down, but, hopefully, we'll have you back on the channel. And, if people wanna support your work, you know, they can go to McMaster or, you know, at the beginning of your presentation, you had all your socials. I'll link to all of that too in the video's description. So thanks again, Dawn, and I hope to see you again soon. You absolutely will. Thanks so much. It was so much fun.