For blood test number four in 2025, when using doctor Morgan Levine's biological age calculator, PhenoAge, we saw that my biological age was seventeen years younger than the chronological. And if you missed that video, it'll be in the right corner. Also, in the right corner will be the video after that, which went into full detail for not just the nine biomarkers that are on this biological age test, but all of the biomarkers that I measured with a full analysis. Both of those will be in the right corner. Also note that test number three in 2025 also had a seventeen year younger biological age relative to my chronological. So this result is consistent at least for two tests in a row. So what might be contributing to these data, specifically to test number four in 2025? So let's start off with prescription meds. And for those who don't know, I was diagnosed with hypothyroidism in my twenties in my mid twenties, so I had been taking Levothyroxine for most of my life. That changed relatively recently when I was able to convince my doctor to reduce my t four dose and add t three into the approach. Now, I we also made a further tweak to that approach on May 15. So twelve days before testing, blood test number four was on May 27. Twelve days before testing, we reduced t four from 88 to 75 and we increased t three or cytomel from fifteen to twenty micrograms per day. Now, I wish I could say that I optimize my thyroid hormones just by supplements and diet but after many tests, it it just wasn't to be. So, for this one, I've got to wave the white flag and accept that my thyroid is just not going to produce enough t four or t three and the conversion is bad. So I've got to take it supplementally for the rest of my life. Next up are supplements. And the first is a staple and for those who are familiar with the channel, this shouldn't be a surprise for nine months out of the year. I had been taking supplemental vitamin D two thousand I use per day and you can see I took it for all thirty five days for this thirty five day period from test three to test four and that period specifically, was on August 22 so that's immediately after test number three and it lasted until the day before test number four on May 26. Now, I should say that this has been a staple in the approach for about fifteen years taking vitamin d, for most of the year, nine months out of the year in the non summer months which I'm not able to get full body sun exposure or regular full body sun exposure. That recently changed because I moved to Texas. And just being in Texas for two and a half weeks, I've gotten more days of full body sun exposure than I had probably in two years in Boston. So vitamin D is out for now and in test number six, not test number five, I'm gonna give my body a couple more weeks to, make vitamin D from the sun. For test number six, I'm gonna start tracking 25 hydroxy d to see the impact of sunlight relative to taking supplemental vitamin d on circulating levels. Alright. Then next up, I had been taking two nicotinic acid for many tests. But as you can see there, zero. I took no nicotinic acid for the seven day period before testing on May 27. Now, the reason why I supplement with nicotinic acid is because my NAD levels, my blood intracellular NAD levels, had been on the lower side for many tests. So it's only through low dose supplementation of nicotinic acid that gets me away from very low levels and into a reasonable range. Now, I should say a reasonable range because I have a couple of recent videos where NAD levels that are on the higher side of my range, so greater than 30 micromolar, that's associated with worse biomarkers of mitochondrial function, lysophosphatidylcholines, and higher levels of diglycerides, not triglycerides, diglycerides, which are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So for for those two reasons and one more which I'll go into in-depth in a minute, I removed nicotinic acid before testing n a d levels. And to measure n a d, I sent blood to Ginfinity on the same day as this test so May 27, all the other stuff by venipuncture and then also on May 27, finger prick for NAD. So I sent that to Ginfinity for NAD analysis and on that day, you can see NAD levels were in in the red, so flagged as red, as low at 19 micromolar. So why did I remove nicotinic acid? I mentioned two reasons but there was a third that may be even more important. And that's because niacin intake, in my case, which includes supplemental nicotinic acid, is inversely associated with lymphocytes and that's what we'll see here. So this is 56 blood tests from 2015 to 2025. On the y axis, we've got lymphocytes and on the x axis, we've got my average daily niacinetic. Now, note, I've been tracking diet with a food scale every day with very rare exception. I mean, this is like three hundred and sixty four days, three hundred sixty four and a half days out of 365. I'm food scaling everything. If I do randomly go out to eat and choose to eat somewhere, I'll ballpark the calories but this is such an infrequent event. We're talking less than once per year. Almost exclusively everything is tracked by food scale. I then enter that data into a diet tracking app, Cronometer. I then pull that data into a spreadsheet. So then I can take my average dietary intake from one test to another. So if there's a fifty day period in between tests, I take the average dietary intake for those fifty days and then that lines up with the latter blood test. Now, every blood test has a corresponding dietary intake and I can look at correlations. Now, that's not causation. There are a lot of factors that can impact biomarkers, but it helps give me insight into which, macro, micro, or foods can potentially move biomarker biomarkers towards youth and lowest risk of death for all causes. So, here, we can see that there's a significant inverse correlation between my average daily niacin intake with lymphocytes. In other words, when my niacin intakes are at their highest up to 350 and note that the RDA is fifteen milligrams per day. So to get above 50, I have to use supplemental nicotinic acid. So I've used supplemental nicotinic acid to get up to three hundred and fifty milligrams per day. Based on this plot though, it may be bad for lymphocytes and I have to say may. Again, I'm not saying causation. This is just a correlation. But note that there may be an outlier driving this correlation. So what happens to the data if I remove it? Well, we can see that the correlation actually strengthens by a little bit as the correlation coefficient gets more negative. So for negative correlations, getting closer to negative one would be a stronger correlation and that's what we see here. And the p value further reduced below where it was at zero point, you know, four zeros and a four to four zeros and a one. But then this raises the question, what's optimal for lymphocytes? So I've heard some say that you're generally healthy, you're relatively lean and fit, so maybe 1,500 lymphocytes is optimal in your case. Maybe nicotinic acid being a part of that story helps get you to your healthiest state. So what's optimal for lymphocytes based on the published literature? And to adjust that, I have a new Patreon tier dedicated specifically to what's optimal for biomarkers, not the reference range, which you can get from any l l LLN. What may be optimal based on how each of these biomarkers changes during aging and their association in the largest published studies that I can find with all cause mortality risk. So I've collected all of these data for these 33 biomarkers into one place with more than two hours of video content, 48 published references, which includes lymphocytes. So if you're interested in that, check it out. So in terms of what's optimal for lymphocytes, I'm gonna give away some of that story. And here, we're looking at all cause mortality risk or the hazard ratio for all cause mortality, risk of death for all causes plotted against the lymphocyte count. In terms of what's significant, we put up a red line at a hazard ratio of one. So when the dash black lines are completely above one, in this case, we have a significant association. And then we can see that lowest risk of death for all causes is associated in this study of more than a 100 thousand people with lymphocytes around two thousand, Somewhere around nineteen hundred to twenty one hundred, lowest risk of death for all causes for the people in this study. But then, as lymphocyte levels decreased less than 2,000 to be exact, that was significantly, associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. So my data with at least for the plot for niacin versus lymphocytes, that declining trend is moving in the wrong direction in terms of all cause mortality risk. Note that I've had values close to 2,000 and that's almost exclusively without supplemental nicotinic acid. So to test this correlation, I removed nicotinic acid from the approach. NAD levels went down, which may be a problem. So I'm I'm working on ways that, or I'm thinking about ways to increase that going forward. One of them may be just nicotinamide on its own, not NMN, not NR granted. NMN and NR use nicotinamide as the primary way to increase NAD, but they're way more expensive than just supplemental nicotinamide. Can nicotinamide increase NAD and not mess up other biomarkers as nicotinic acid, at least in my case, may? So, anyway, I've had lymphocyte values around 2,000 and that's without supplemental nicotinic acid. So to test that, I had to remove nicotinic acid to see if lymphocytes would increase and they actually moved to my best result over the past four tests. Whether whether again, that's causation, I don't know, but that's part of the equation. Alright. So, I also supplemented with one this is a one supplement. This isn't three separate pills but it's a combined supplement with a thousand micrograms of methyl b twelve, four hundred micrograms of methylfolate, and one point five milligrams of b six. And I did that for all thirty five days in this test to try to keep my homocysteine relatively low. Now, it actually moved in the wrong direction despite relative high relatively high doses for each of these three micronutrients from nine to ten point seven micromolar and both of those those data are too high based on the published literature. My target is five. So this is one of my biggest weak spots. Homocysteine is one of my biggest weak spots and And I should mention for those who are skeptical skeptical about homocysteine being an important biomarker, it can induce cell senescence at least in vitro for endothelial cells and neurons. So just that in mind is enough information for me to try to keep it relatively youthful around five micromolar. Now, I also minimize supplementation for an important micronutrient that may be a part an important part of the homocysteine equation using b twelve and folate which is b two or riboflavin. Now, for seven days before testing and note that I've indicated seven days before testing not 35 because NAD and homocysteine are metabolites. Metabolite levels change change very quickly within days. So I'm not sure that a full thirty five day average let's say, I took the supplement for the first thirty days and nothing for the last five days. That average may be high but not taking it for the last five days may have the biggest impact on the metabolite. So with that in mind, I only I'm only looking at nicotinic acid granted it was zero for seven days before testing and riboflavin, for the seven day period before testing homocysteine because those metabolites and, again, metabolite levels change relatively quickly relative to cells or h b a one c as other examples. So although my riboflavin intake was relatively high for those seven days, fifty seven milligrams per day, the RDA is around one milligram. So this is like a 50 x higher level relative to the RDA. I only took one four hundred milligram pill during that seven day period. So six days no riboflav in one day with a four hundred microgram pill milligram pill. Now of of all of the days in that test, a testing period, thirty five days, I only took that four hundred milligram pill for fourteen days. So I inconsistently took a relatively high dose, a megadose of riboflavin. So that may be a part of the story for why homocysteine wasn't closer to nine micro molar relative to 11 micro molar. So why why did I do that? Why did I sporadically take, vitamin b two? Wary of taking mega doses of supplements. In the short term, maybe they have efficacy but what are the long term risks of mega dosing supplements? I'm not trying to find out by accident. So, with that in mind, I recently came up with a new approach to get relatively lower doses of riboflavin in my diet. Now, for my shopping online, the lowest dose that I could get was four hundred milligrams. So what I did was I got pure riboflavin in supplement form in a pill in the capsule. I then opened it up, took about a hundred milligrams of that. My food scale sensitivity goes down to about a a hundred milligrams and I should say about because when you start getting to a hundred milligrams which is which is its limit of detection, it could be a 100, it could be a 125. Nonetheless, I took that amount. I suspended it in about 900 of water which is close to the solubility limit of riboflavin in water. And then I take an aliquot of that every day to get around six to ten milligrams of riboflavin per day which is a far lower dose and closer to physiological than the four hundred milligram dose per day. So I'll have more on that story and I may actually make a video showing me making my own riboflavin stock solution. So stay tuned for that in a future video or in an update for blood test number five. Alright. So that's it. No other geroprotectors or cenolytics. And that's not it for the video. We've got a long ways to go on that, so buckle up. So what that's it for the supplements. What diet composition corresponds to this blood test? And that's what we'll see here. This is the average daily dietary intake for that thirty five day period that went from exactly after test number three immediately after test number three through the day before test number four. And this list is ranked in grams with three exceptions. Green tea, which is an ounces, which I drink every day, and if you wanna use what I use, which is organic loose leaf green tea sourced from Japan, there's a discount link in the video's description. And then two others that I'll go into more detail in the cheat meal section of the video are Reese's peanut butter cups and ice cream which are ranked in calories. So just to reiterate because there's always a couple of people or one or two people who will say, You ate 43 calories of Reese's peanut butter cups every day. No, I didn't. This is one day with Reese's and nothing else after that. This is one day with a lot of ice cream or relatively high amount of ice cream and nothing after that. So, the average then comes out to relatively high 44 calories per day for Reese's and 33 calories per day for, ice cream, but there was nothing for thirty three days with with respect to those two foods. So, did I do any experiments for this test? So, I'm always trying to improve biomarker weak spots including homocysteine, DHEA, sulfate, and a few others without messing up the rest of the biomarkers which are youthful or close to youthful. So, what experiments did I do for this test? So, first, you can see that I increased strawberries from its previous intake for test number three by about 200 grams per day. So, why did I increase strawberries? So, after test number three and actually after every blood test, I calculate correlations with diet and then I look at the net correlative score with 27 standard clinical chemistry biomarkers. And then, I see if the overall score is positive, neutral, or negative. If it's positive, it suggests that I should eat more of that food or keep it relatively high. If it's zero, eat close to average intake and if it's less than zero, then I aim for below average intake. So after test number three, strawberries had a plus five net correlative score with those 27 biomarkers. So with that in mind, what happens if I increase it further two hundred grams per day? Well, after test number four, after these results came in and I calculated correlations, now it's net correlative score is plus seven. So, for those who are fruitophobic, who think that all sugar is bad, in my case, maybe not. The correlation suggests otherwise. I also increased red bell pepper by about 40 grams per day and I did that specifically for its correlation, an inverse correlation with homocysteine and that was following test number three. Now, rather than just having a correlation and saying, This is what moves the needle, I did the experiment. If this is a real effect, if that correlation was real, where red bell pepper could somehow impact homocysteine, if I increase intake, and granted 40 grams may not be enough, but if I increase intake, will homocysteine move in the right direction? And it didn't. So, accordingly, after test number four, the correlation for red bell pepper, RBP, with homocysteine weakened by a bit and that's how I've used again, that's how I've used the correlation based approach to try to move biomarkers in the right direction. If a correlation suggests that a given food or nutrient macro micronutrient can move the needle. I'll either increase it or decrease it and then does that biomarker improve or not or improve or not. Now, granted, that's not just over one or two tests. I'm constantly moving the needle trying to collect enough data for all these biomarkers to discover that personalized recipe for me that may be best for optimizing not just biomarkers but health and potentially longevity. Alright. For the third experiment, I also removed alfalfa sprouts, which is kind of sad because I really like them. They add flavor and texture to the daily cooked mix that I eat, but they were also inversely correlated with lymphocytes. It that in conjunction with nicotinic acid. So I can't say if lymphocytes improve because of taking nicotinic acid out and or taking out alfalfa sprouts. But that's a part of the equation. And I'll keep them out for at least a few more blood tests to see if I can get lymphocytes back closer to 1,900 or closer to 2,000. Sorry. Alright. So, I also increased olive intake from a previous intake of five grams per day and this is generally where my olive intake has been relatively low, a few grams per day, up to 36. So, why did I do that? Well, which is optimal, olives or olive oil? And I I'm planning on making a video on this in the near future, sooner rather than later. But I think we've all been bamboozled. Now, sure, olive oil has a wealth of published evidence behind it in terms of it being associated with improved health outcomes and a reduced risk of death for all causes. I'm not gonna dispute that. But the appropriate control in those studies is olive intake. What would happen if people ate an equivalent amount of olives as a control group in parallel with people who were consuming, say, 200 calories from olives? Or maybe it's even just a 100 calories from olive oil versus a 100 calories from olives. Now, imagine if I said to you that strawberry sugar is the healthiest sugar among sugars, don't eat strawberries. And everybody believed it and nobody ate strawberries anymore. It seems like nobody eats olives anymore. Now, a weak a weakness there is that olives have a high sodium content. So, that's one reason why it's at thirty six grams per day, and granted most days are about 50, per day. If it wasn't for the sodium content, I'd go even higher. But to test this idea of, can olives make a dent on biomarkers, I've included them at a higher amount in my data and I'm going to continue to do that for a few more tests to collect a lot more data and relatively higher levels of olive to see if they move the needle or not. Alright. So, I also reduced walnut intake and this was a big cut and I'll explain a little bit more in the fat, total fat section, the macronutrients section of the video. So, previously, for test number three, average walnut intake was 55 grams per day And for this test, it was only 3.5 grams per day. And I did that because walnuts, following test number three, had a net correlative score with those 27 biomarkers of zero. So, that suggests that they don't really move the needle either in high amounts or low amounts, so I took them out to get those calories to use for other stuff including olives. Alright. So, now we're on to the cheat meals. And, I already showed you that, two of them, right? So, Reese's Peanut Butter Cups. So, immediately after blood testing, cheat meal. Now, I'm not saying everybody should do this. This is what works for me. If you have a system that works for you, I'd encourage you to go for it. If my if learning from my example is helpful, then I'd say try it. But for me, what works best for a long term dietary and calorie adherence as I'm trying to keep my calories relatively low, is having cheat meals immediately after blood testing for a couple of days, maybe three days, and then it that satiates me to the point where I don't want to think about junk or eating junk until the next blood test. And this approach has worked with one exception where I had a binge 5,700 calories. If you missed it, there's a video on the channel. It's worked for the past four years. So, again, if it works for you, if you have a system that works for you, I'd say, Stick with it but this is what works for me. So, immediately after blood testing, that's a whole bag about 1,500 calories of Reese's Mini peanut butter cups. And then, on the second day, it wasn't a whole Carville ice cream cake, but a big portion of it. So most of that Carville ice cream cake. Now, I should mention too that on these cheat days, in in my case, it's essential that I eat some other non junk related foods. So the whole day isn't 2,300 calories of of junk because when I eat junk, in my case, it's less satiating than when I eat my normal diet. So with that, I actually have to use some willpower to say to myself, don't overeat, don't overeat, and really stick to it. Whereas, for most of the most of the time with my diet, I don't have to willpower through it at all because I'm satiated. The diet is high volume and it satiates me. So on my cheat meal days, I have to pay extra careful attention to stick to my calorie goals. If it's a workout day, somewhere around 23 or 2,400 calories even with the junk, even with less satiety, And if it's a non workout day, somewhere around 21 or 2,200 calories. Now, there was a third day of junk for this, following this blood test and it was sugar. So just free processed sugar which I added to ground cocoa beans and dates. So, basically, like homemade chocolate. Now, again, that's not one, you know, that's not three grams of sugar every day for thirty five days. That's one day with around 90 grams of sugar and then nothing after that. So, three cheat days, thirty two days after that until testing, no cheating at all, completely strict, completely co completely clean. Alright. So, in terms of junk calories, the Reese's around 1,500, the ice cream around 1,100, and the sugar around 400. And in total, that's around 3,100 calories from junk for this that correspond to this test. Now in terms of total calories consumed during this thirty five day period, and, again, I know that because I weigh all of my food and track it in that diet tracking app Cronometer, it was 3.8% or 4% of all calories coming from junk. Now, in contrast, the average American diet, at least based on a study in 2017 and 2018, consumes 57% of their diet from ultra processed foods. So for this test, with a 17 year younger biological age, it was only four percent and I've had tests as low as one or 2%. I I tried not to go above around 4% though. That's my upper limit. I don't know. I can't say if I go to 7% or 8%. I don't know what effect that'll have on the biomarkers but I'm not trying to mess up biomarkers, you know, just for the urge of eating a little bit more junk. This is more than enough junk for me. Alright. So this list is ranked in grams. What about ranking foods in terms of calories? And that's what we'll see here. These are the top 10 foods for average daily calorie intake over that thirty five day period that corresponds to test number four. And note that this list is generated by Cronometer. If you want to track your own diet with with Cronometer, there's a discount link in the video description. So, atop the list in terms of calories are strawberries. Now, for the past two tests, it was walnuts. So now, walnuts are out of the top top spot for calorie intake in terms of foods. And without going through everything on the list, if you're interested, I'd encourage you to do that. Nine of the the 10 foods that are on this list were exactly the same as test number three. Again, I'm not trying to blow up the system at this point as most of the biomarkers are pretty good. Just trying to make small tweaks to try to improve the weak spots without messing up everything else. So in terms of what came in, what went into the top 10, what entered the top 10 were still cut oats, which I included in a daily cook mix. I don't eat the oats every day. It's every few days. I actually rotate it with other whole grains and and chickpeas, and what left the top 10 list were walnuts. Alright. What about macronutrients? How do they correspond to this test? So, average daily calorie intake was twenty two ninety six. And, that's my highest average daily calorie intake since August 2022. And that's over 20, 23 tests. And, that's what we'll see here. This is my average daily calorie intake over 62 tests from 2015 to 2025. Now, early on, I wasn't doing a I wasn't able to do a very good job of controlling calorie intake. As you can see for about a five year period where for every blood test, note that each dot corresponds to the average daily dietary intake that corresponds to a blood test. So for the first five years of tracking, we can see that I basically got worse with calorie intake for every test. But then, I was able to find that recipe that works for me which is calorie restriction. And I should say, I didn't cut, you know, if you look at the top there, 2,800 to 2,100, I didn't cut that overnight and that was actually my problem in the past. You know, there there too in the late in in in the pop, you know, in the broscience, however you phrase it, cut 500 calories per day, you lose a pound a week. Yeah, that'll work if I've got 50 pounds of weight to lose a year. But if I'm already relatively lean and I cut 500 calories per day, I'm just gonna end up binging it back on and I think that's where most people fail is too extreme of the calorie cut. Even a 100 calories per day is a pretty big cut. So what I did, what worked for me is very small cuts sequentially, test over test over test, 30 calories per day. So so if average calorie intake was 2,800, twenty seven seventy for the next test, twenty seven forty. Play that out now over four years, I got to 2,100. Then you can see calorie intake has slowly started to increase over those tests, since mid last year. It culminating with the most recent test around 2,300 being basically the the tip of that spear. So why have I increased calories starting from mid last year? So body weight declines after fifty to sixty years, and I covered that in in an earlier video if you missed it. I'll link to it in the right corner. So clearly, I'm trying to avoid that as a big part of that is not just losing muscle, but also losing fat. And the major reason for that is cancer incidence increases during aging. Cancer cachexia, which is the loss of muscle and fat is a phenotype of cancer or it's, you know, go they the two can go hand in hand. So body weight declines after midlife. So I'm trying to avoid that. Obviously, I'm trying to avoid cancer, but I'm also trying to stay weight stable after, you know, from 50 to indefinitely, however long I'm gonna live. So with that in mind, knowing that calorie intake, as we saw, has increased for many tests since mid last year, am I gaining weight? So I'm also tracking body weight every day, first thing in the morning after using the bathroom. So now we're gonna see my average body weight that corresponds to each test. So here too, if there's a fifty day period in between tests because I have all of the body weight data, I can take my average body weight that corresponds to each test. And that's what we can see here. So each dot is the average body weight that corresponds to each test. And this is over those same 62 tests over the past ten years. So note that I've got two periods of intentional weight loss and that's important to measure mention because as I mentioned, body weight declines after fifty to sixty years. So if someone's lost weight within, say, a six month period and it's unexplained weight loss and they haven't changed anything in their their approach, that could be a warning sign that some underlying pathological, situation whether it's cancer or something else is going on. In my case, this was intentional weight loss. I intentionally cut calories while keeping my activity levels relatively constant with the goal of getting leaner. Alright. So, now, I put a cut off at a 140 pounds. So why that cut off at a 140 pounds? And note that this journey started around one sixty. So that's about a 20 pound weight loss. So during that 20 pound weight loss, my goal is to optimize muscle mass and get as lean as possible and that's always been my goal without losing any strength or function. Now, I wish I could say that that was a 100% true. My workouts are standardized so I know exactly where I am in terms of strength for all movements that I've done for the standardized workout for the past, say, five to seven years. I I did and have lost a bit of strength. For example, my current pull ups are at 10 whereas they were 12 for about five years in a row. Now, I'm not just laying down in the fight against aging. I'm planning on getting that back. I mean, I did 10 today but I just moved to Austin, you know, three weeks ago and my workout routine has all been all messed up. So, I'm not waving the white flag. I'm confident that I can get it back to 12 or even 13 which I've done in the past two on the channel despite losing 20 pounds. So when you lose 20 pounds, the assumption is you lose some muscle but you lose a lot of fat, you lose some muscle and it's harder to, you know, not lose strength but I have lost a small amount of strength. Overhead press used to be one ten, now it's a 100 pounds. So would I trade losing 20 pounds for a 10 pound overhead press, less overhead press? I think I would take that trade off if I can't get this, you know, get the strength back. So in terms of that cutoff below one forty, I started started to notice it being even harder to fight that strength related decline. And I'm, again, I'm not trying to lose any function while being as lean as physically possible. So, for a few tests, I I was able to maintain body weight at around a hundred and forty pounds. You can see a flat that flat green line. But then, notice the body weight started to decline. So, I thought, okay, I'm gonna increase calories to resist that. Even calorie restricted mice, 40% calorie restricted mice, succumb to this, declining body weight towards the end of life but they're given the amount of food that they're able to consume. So, for the the the major story is I'm trying to avoid cancer as we all are, I'm sure. But I'm also trying to stay weight stable. And if I can if I have anything to say about it and if that involves increasing calories to stay weight stable, that's what I'm gonna do. So that's why over the past few tests, I've been increasing calorie intake to try to stay weight stable. And with that in mind, my body weight is currently, since the last test, May 27, a hundred thirty nine point nine pounds. So I'm right at that one forty line and and calorie intake is still average calorie intake is still around 2,300 calories as shown there. Alright. So let's dig deeper and let's go back to the macronutrients section of the video and investigate protein intake. So for this test, test number four, it was 96 and a half grams per day, 17% of total calories. What about fat intake? So, average daily fat intake for this test was 91 grams per day, which is 36% of total calories. Now, note that for test number three, average total fat intake was higher, purposely higher, at a 111 grams per day. And I cut that 20 gram, fat intake by 20 grams for a couple of reasons. First, in my data, for whatever reason, higher total fat is significantly correlated with higher glucose and recently my HbA1c was 5.4, 5.4% for three or four tests in a row. So, high glucose is gonna lead to high HbA1c. If total fat if if that correlation is a part of the equation, if I cut total fat, that should help bring HbA1c down, but it didn't. So and here too, I wanna stress for the for the for the bro science where people say, you you cut fat intake and increase carbs, doesn't that increase glucose? Well, that's generally true because most people are eating so much ultra processed food that, for them, an increase in carbs is coming from refined carbs. It's not coming from whole food. In my case, it's almost exclusively a whole food based diet. So I generally don't see and actually, the the correlation suggests otherwise where higher fat is actually maybe actually worse from my from my biomarkers including higher glucose relative to eating higher carbs. Now, that said, I'm not a high carb type. I'm not a dietary ideologue where it has to be high carb. I follow the data. I'm open to going higher fat. So for test number five, I'm currently around a 100 grams per day trying to find that happy medium that optimizes more biomarkers than not. Another reason why I reduced fat intake is because I've recently started tracking Cystatin C, not just the as a biomarker of kidney function but also because it's in involved in the GrimAge algorithm which is the best epigenetic clock for for evaluating all cause mortality risk at least when comparing epigenetic clocks. What how that compares against blood based biomarker clocks? I'm not sure because it hasn't been published. So I needed to collect data to see if Cystatin C could improve at relatively lower fat intakes. So that's another reason why I cut fat intake from a hundred eleven and ninety one grams. Note that Cystatin C did not get better with that cut. So I'm still trying to figure that figure out that recipe after five recent Cystatin C tests. Also note that that 20 gram cut from test three to test four did not make a dent on PhenoAge. So whether my fat intake was 91 or a 111 grams per day, still seventeen years younger using PhenoAge. In terms of where the fat reduction came from, almost exclusively from Omega six, including that walnut cut. Previously, it was 33, so for this for this test, it was 15 grams per day. And if you're interested in the rest of the fat breakdown, monounsaturated, Omega three and saturated, I've I've included that data there. Alright. Next up is carb intake. And, this is the average daily carb intake that corresponds to test number four. So, starting with total carbs, 314 grams per day, but note that net carbs equals total carbs minus fiber. Fiber intake for this test was 83 grams per day and when subtracting that from total carbs, we get a net carbs of about 233 grams per day. We can then calculate the percentage of calories coming from net carbs by multiplying by four calories per gram. And then, also note So I was gonna go into the net macros but we've got to remember that a fraction about 20% of total fiber is soluble fiber which means that it's not inert. Insoluble fiber generally binds to water and we just poop it out. We don't metabolize it at all. But soluble fiber in contrast is fermented by gut bacteria into short chain fatty acids which we use or our intestinal cells and if they make it into our, our system, if they make it into plasma, can be used systemically to make energy. So about a 161 calories coming from soluble fiber can be added to total fat because soluble fibers fermented by gut bacteria into short chain fatty acids, in other words, fat. So that 7% can be added to total fat and now we can calculate net macros that correspond to this test. About 43% total fat, 41% net carbs and about 17% protein. Now, also note that I've also indicated total sugar amount as shown there. Now, I don't track total sugar specifically in terms of their correlations with biomarkers because there are many sugars, glucose, galactose, maltose, lactose, we can go down the list. But, specifically, I'm tracking total fructose including fructose, obviously, and sucrose which is half fructose. So when dividing sucrose by two and adding that to fructose, I get a total fructose of 63 grams for this test. Now, I've mentioned this in other videos that may seem like a lot but my highest fructose intake for any test since 2015 over those 62 tests is approximately double that. So this is progress albeit not perfection. Alright. What about micronutrients? So I won't spend a lot of time on micronutrients. I'll just post them. And if you're interested in seeing what my values are, you'll have this as a reference. And it may be hard to see the vitamins. I wanted to get them all on one page, so I'd encourage going full screen if you haven't already. And then mineral levels. So for anyone starting on this journey of trying to discover their own personalized recipe for optimal optimum nutrition with the goal of optimizing biomarkers, potentially maximizing health, minimizing disease risk, and optimizing longevity, the the first place to start is full RDA coverage. Doing that for a few tests and then calculating correlations to see which of these micronutrients may you may need to go higher than to really move the needle. And that's what I've done over these 62 tests over the past ten years and I will continue to do. So if you look down my list, you'll see that many of these micronutrients are a lot higher than the RDA and that's because I'm following their correlations, their correlations with that 27 standard biomarker panel. And if you're interested in seeing those correlations, they're on Patreon. So if you're interested in seeing more about my attempts to buy a hack aging, check us out there where rather than just looking at every couple of month dietary averages, I post my daily diet. I also post at least once once per day in other Patreon tiers. So, if you're interested in that, check it out. We've also got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself that helps support the channel including altolabtest.com, which is where I get the majority of my blood test done, the Clearly Filtered Water Filter, I use it every day, at home metabolomics, oral microbiome composition, NAD testing with Infinity, epigenetic testing with TrueDiagnostic, at at home blood testing with Cyphox Health, which includes GrimAge, green tea, which, again, I'm drinking that every day, diet tracking with cornimeter, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got new merch including data is my north star, which is essentially how I live, And we've also got the figuring out stuff is my drug which I've got on here and the channel theme. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Agent or Die Trying brand, that link will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.