I really wanna understand what are the genetic underpinnings of lifespan. And one way we can do that is we can genotype all the mice, and we can do genome wide association study. This, you know, we're gonna map loci in the genome that are associated with lifespan. And a mouse has, 19 autosomes and an x x y chromosomes, and a mitochondria. The the height of the peak here is showing me the strength of association of a particular point on a chromosome with lifespan. And the higher the peak, the more the the stronger the association with lifespan. So there's this really high peak here on chromosome 18. I'll come back to we can also calculate how much of the variability and lifespan is explained by different factors. You remember that lifespan is a really noisy trait. It's it was even for the 40% CR mice, there were short lived mice and long lived mice and a lot of variants. And it turns out that diet explains about 7% of that variance. And then after accounting for diet, body weight, which we talked about a lot, that comes in at around 1%. Chromosome 18, just all by itself, explains four and a half percent of variation in body weight. And the rest of the genetic background, all this stuff out here that really, you know, we can't sift out. There must be dozen, you know, dozens of loci that are affecting lifespan. Together, the genetics is explaining about 20%. So if you're a mouse, if you're a DO mouse living in these happy conditions, this is the breakdown. There's a whole other lecture to explain why it's more complicated in humans. But diet has an effect. It's a huge effect, but it just it's dwarfed by genetics. Interesting. That chromosome 18 locus is not only a lifespan. We call them quantitative trait loci. It's not only associated with lifespan. It's associated with RDW. Weird. We have a working hypothesis right now that this locus on chromosome 18 affects something that's closely related to RDW, which affects lifespan. So we have a causal hypothesis and some ongoing studies that I hope will resolve this eventually.