I think one of the more interesting ones that I take is d and q, dasatinib phosphoricin. K? And so, tomorrow, in fact, I will take the dose with my wife. And we do this once every two months. We take fifty milligrams of dasatinib and a thousand milligrams of, quercetin. And, dasatinib, for those who don't know, is a, drug that's used in the treatment of a certain cancer, and I don't know which one it is. So, you know, it's passed, the safety test, at least for a kind of cancer, in humans. It's also being tested by, James Kirkland at the Mayo Clinic. He's running a whole series of tests on dasatinib plus quercetin. And I asked him a couple years ago, you know, when we would see the results of this work, and he said, oh, five, seven years. And we discussed this a few minutes ago. I don't wait for five to seven year studies to wait. So we just do it. And, yeah, the the target is senescent cells. And, you know, you're keen on measurements, and, I have measurements of my senescent cell burden, and it's very, very low, and it stays down there. And does this make a difference? I don't know, but it doesn't cost me anything to do this. And I really believe that it does work. Certainly, the indications are. But the more interesting therapy that I use for dasatinib is based on a comment by James Kirkland a couple of years ago at the conference in Copenhagen. And he reported that they were doing a study, with sheep where they were giving them a shampoo of tesatinib and quercetin. And the hope was that this would extend the wool bearing life of the sheep. Apparently, sheep bear good wool for maybe three years, and then they're put down as the euphemism goes because the wool quality is is not so good. And they're hoping that this treatment will get maybe an extra year or two out of the quality of sheep. So, I looked around my body for wool, and I couldn't find any, but I've got a thinning toupee here. And, you know, it's there's a little bit it's got color at the back here still. And so for the last, well, about three months now, I've been using a shampoo of bitosatinib plus quercetin, mixed into a, you know, shampoo that I bought. And, I do that a couple of times a week, and who knows what will happen. But I have a friend in London who's been doing this for a year and a half, and there seems to be evidence of new hair growth at the back of her head. Yeah. Do do you have have you and her have you guys left it on your head? Do you or you just use it as a shampoo, wash it off? I'd imagine if you leave it on so that it can permeate the the skin. I leave it on for five minutes before I rinse them off. Yeah. And I put it on my eyebrows and, you know, all over my head. And these bald areas at the front that used to have hair, I put it here too. How about skin? I mean, I don't know if you've seen the recent paper where senescent cells and skin if you transplant senescence cells into young skin, it there was, an increase in, in the aged phenotype in the young animals. So senescent cells in the skin are potentially bad. So I wonder if d plus q could you know, maybe maybe you're rubbing it on your on your skin too. Well, on that spot, yeah, but let me just pull something else up. Got a couple of tubes here. So this black one, I was part of the beta test for a product called OneSkin, which is a peptide based skin cream. And the thing that was interesting about it this is their currently version of it. They got the logo on it. So on as I say, this this was unmarked. That's a souvenir from the beta test. So I use one skin on my skin. It's a peptide based skin cream, and it has the characteristic that the peptide will penetrate the outer dermis and go underneath and kill senescent cells. Mhmm. Now I did it for about three months on the beta test, and I used to have, you know, those age marks, the brown marks that people get, and I had them around here. And they disappeared in those three months. And, so I continue to use it, but I actually didn't use it for a period of about six months, and those dark spots did not reappear. So, you know, I continue to use it. They have two or three versions. They have one for the eyes to try and reduce the amount of bagginess. It's a, more concentrated version of the of the face cream.