What's optimal for resting heart rate? To adjust that, let's take a look at this meta analysis of 46 studies that included more than 1,200,000 people. On the y axis, we've got all cause mortality risk or risk of death for all causes plotted against resting heart rate in beats per minute. And what we can see is that a resting heart rate of 45 beats per minute was significantly associated with lowest risk of death for all causes. And then as resting heart rate increased by 10 beats per minute, that was significantly associated with a nine percent increased risk of death for all causes. So someone that had a 55 resting heart rate had a nine percent higher risk of death for all causes when compared with someone who had a resting heart rate of 45. Similarly, someone who has a resting heart rate of 65 would have an eighteen percent higher risk of death for all causes relative to 45. And this association continues as the resting heart rate increases. All cause mortality risk correspondingly also increases. But this is just an association. What about causation? So one medication that reduces heart rate is known as ivabradine. And ivabradine reduces heart rate, which is what we'll see here with heart rate on the y axis plotted against age and days, and this is a study done in mice. So what we can see is that ivabradine treated mice had a lower heart rate at almost all time points throughout the duration of their lifespan when compared with the heart rate measured in controls. And we can see that it was a significant decrease of 14%. So a 14% lower heart rate for the duration of their lifespan. A significantly significantly lower heart rate that p value being less than 0.01. But does reducing heart rate impact lifespan? And that's what we'll see here. With survival plotted on the y axis, plotted against age on the x. And this study included a 150 mice, all of them being males which is unfortunate because whether these effects or this effect will translate to female mice is unclear. As a side note, that 150 number for mice is important because some lifespan studies actually include very small amounts of mice, say 10 per group. This is gen generally underpowered to see a significant effect. And if there is a significant effect, is that representative of big population based averages? Whereas, when lifespan studies as in this study, 75 mice per group or in Gary Churchill study which used more than a 150 mice per group, you know, the calorie restriction and fasting study. And if you missed that, I'll link to it in the right corner. Or interventions testing program ITP studies where they use frequently at least 50 mice per group. This is the way to do lifespan study. So this is a good lifespan study because it includes a lot of mice. So in terms of median lifespan, we put up a black line at point five survival. This is the time when half of the mice have died and half are still alive. And for the control lifespan, we can see that that was nine and a median of nine hundred and six days and this is long lived for the control strain. And this is good news because some lifespan studies will have a control strain of of mice that lives less than nine hundred days. Say seven hundred and fifty days and then they'll give the intervention whatever the drug or supplement of interest is and then the intervention group will live nine hundred days. But for c 57 black six mice, which is what was used in the study, median lifespan should be around nine hundred days. So if your intervention has short lived mice or or or if your study has short lived mice and the intervention gets them to nine hundred days, have you really extended lifespan or have you corrected some environmental defect that was shortening the lifespan of these mice? So that's a side note. Anyway, long lived mice for the control strain in this study, which is good news. And then for the ivabradine treated mice, they had a median lifespan of nine hundred and sixty two days which was a significant six percent longer median lifespan. Now, six percent may not seem like a big deal but if we're trying to translate that into human terms, if these results would translate, we we really don't know. Six percent on an eighty year average lifespan would be about a five year average lifespan extension. So living from 80 to 85. So this is a pretty big chunk, you know, pretty big lifespan increase. Now, also note that the lifespan increase in the ivabradine treated mice was greater than nine hundred fifty days. And by definition, this is a robust lifespan extension or the robust median lifespan extension based on the nine hundred day rule. And if you missed that video, I'll link to it in the right corner. So what we can see from this study is that decreasing heart rate throughout the lifespan increases lifespan at least in mice. But then the bigger question is, will reducing heart rate or keeping it relatively low, 45 beats per minute or lower, and whether we get there by leanness, the combination of leanness and fitness or prescription meds and or supplements, will that increase human lifespan? That's the bet I'm making or that's the bet I'm taking. I've reduced my resting heart rate from 51 beats per minute to a currently less than 44 beats per minute over the past six years. Whether that translates into a five year increased average lifespan, we'll see. If you've ever wondered what's optimal for biomarkers rather than just getting the reference ranges, well, I've got a new Patreon tier that you may be interested in. This tier currently has more than two hours of content that covers what's optimal, not the reference ranges, what's optimal based on more than 45 published papers with data from all of those papers for these 29 biomarkers. So if you're interested in that, check it out. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where I post at least twice a day in these five Patreon tiers. And before you go, we've got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you you can use to test yourself that go to help support the channel, including ultalabtest.com, which is where I get the majority of my blood test done, the Clearly Filtered Water Filter, which is the water filter that I'm currently using, at home metabolomics, oral microbiome composition, NAD testing with Genfinity, epigenetic testing, at home blood testing with Syphox Health, which includes the epigenetic test GrimAge, which is associated with all cause mortality risk, green tea, diet tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch. So if you're interested in wearing the Conquer Aging or DIY Trying brand as I've got on here, that link and all the other links will be in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.