Hey everyone. Today's guest is Jin Xin Shi, who is the founder CEO and CSO of Jinfinity, a company that specializes in measuring and optimizing levels of NAD and other biomarkers of aging. Today, doctor Xi will present data on NAD, why it's important and how we can optimize it. So in full disclosure, Genfinity is an affiliate link on the channel. So if you use the link, I do receive a commission, but that said I've used Genfinity's NAD test 25 times and will continue using it. I test eight times a year using the, Genfinity's test. So I'm practicing what I preach. I'm actively using what's being promoted. So welcome, Jin, and let's get into the presentation. Thank you, Michael. It's my pleasure to be with you and your audience, this afternoon. My personal goal for the master five years is to be like this guy who has the perfect last name, Young. And he, he was 102 playing competitive tennis. I'm a tennis player, and I want to be able to play tennis, at 100 and beyond. So that's my personal goal, and I also want to help as many people as possible who have similar goals, and the question is how we can do it. At Infiniti, we have a program, a comprehensive program, a holistic program that, conduct a comprehensive testing and also personalized and precision actions. But today, I'm now gonna talk about, the whole program and we'll focus, on NAD, because NAD, as many of you know, is, one of the top, three, I would say, three or five molecules in NICE. I call NAD the supernova of NICE. That's because NAD is involved in the function of over 500 other enzymes. Without NAD, life is almost impossible. The most important function of NAD, as many of you know, is the production of cellular energy, ATP. ATP is produced primarily in the mitochondria, and it has to have the help of NAD. Without NAD, our cells cannot produce ATP, and we don't have the energy to run our cells and our body, and life cease to exist. In addition to, the production for ATP, NAD has so many other functions. It's involved in the function of every single cell in our body. It's involved, in, primarily muscle function, obviously, because, muscle cells need so much energy. And it is important for brain function, and brain is about 2% of our body weight, but it consumes more than 20 power 20% of the energy our body needs. And now many other organs and cellular processes, that really require NAD for the proper function. And we don't have enough time to go through, one by one, but let's just stop by saying that NAD is super important for the function for many different, tissues, organs, and the cells, obviously, our whole body. And, unfortunately, NAD levels, decline with age. Once we had, NAD test that allowed us to test tens of thousands of people, what the surprising finding is how fast and how early NAD levels decline. Thus, you can see on this chart, in teenagers, seventy five percent of them have NAD levels above 40 micromolar. Like, that's just the concentration unit. And even in teenagers, about twenty five percent of them are suboptimal or deficient in NAD. And then if we move to the later twenties, around the 30 years of age, about seventy five percent of them are already suboptimal or deficient in NAD. Then you move on, along the age, in our forties, fifties, and sixties, and beyond, NAD levels are only about 30%, to 50% of what we normally see in very young children. And, this decline in NAD levels is associated with many health issues and also with aging. And, so, fortunately, there are a number of potential strategies that one can consider to elevate NAD levels. I put them into four major categories. And it is degraded by a number of different enzymes, primarily CD 38 and was the enzymes involved in, dealing with repair. If you you can inhibit these enzymes, you can potentially slow down the degradation of NAD and increase NAD level. And theoretically, this is possible, but practically, it's actually very difficult. Some people continue to, to try, and I have not seen very good outcome. The second way is to increase the enzymes, that can synthesize, the NAD molecule, primarily, NEMPT and the NMAT. These are two, important enzymes in the NAD biosynthesis. And promoting enzymes certainly is a very important strategy. You can also just give people the NAD plus molecules through various route. NAD IV has been used for decades, to treat the various health conditions, primarily neurological conditions and certain infect infectious disease. And that's a possible, strategy, and and many people are pushing this strategy, on almost every con in every corner of the streets. And finally, NED precursors or the building blocks that our cells use to make NED, and they are a member of them, at least five, six of them. And I think, Michael, you have tried many of them, and we can we can talk about it. So, yeah, there are many potential strategies, to increase NAD levels or slow down the degradation of NAD. What's really important to me is you have to be able to test the levels, and that's true for NAD and it's also true for every other, biomarker of importance. So at Infiniti, I in my entire academic career, the strategy that I, want to, use is summarized in one word. It's called the TAO, t a o. You you test, you act, and you optimize. And I'll show you some examples what how this can be done and why it's important to do it. So a test, obviously, is the cornerstone. You have to be able to test the biomarkers of importance. Here, we're talking about the NAD. About five years ago, Gfinity was the first company that came up with, reliable, reproducible, easy to do, test, and you can be done at home. You you use the finger prick, to make a dried blood spots. And the invention, was the, one of the important component of the invention was the stabilizing buffer that can keep LED, stable. And we have now tested about fifty, sixty thousand individuals and in over six different countries. And you I think that you can see the, reproducibility of the test. We test a sample twice and you put them on the y and the, x axis, and the perfect test would, line up in the diagonal. As you can see here, the reproducibility is very good as measured by, r square value. That's probably too scientific for many people, but just taking my words, on average, two tests of the same sample divided by, 3.1%. And this is, you know, as good as any, of the FDA approved, test used in, clinical setting. And it it's it's very good. Let's just put it in this way. Now let me show you two examples why how we can use the tower strategy to optimize NAD. This is a gentleman, who test, his baseline. Initially, he was, highly deficient in energy level, as you can see, below 20 micromolar. And then he started taking, energy precursor known as NMN, nicotinamide mononucleotide. And at one hundred, milligram per day, nothing happened. He steadily increased level, at lower dose. Yeah. Level energy levels were going up a little bit, but, it did not reach the optimal range. And he went up all the way to two thousand milligrams of NMN. As you can see, with two thousand milligrams of NMN, he enriched, reached the top of the optimal range. And then he reduced his dosage, and we ended up at about fifteen hundred milligrams of NMN daily, for him to stay in the middle of the optimum range, which is around sixty five, seventy micromolar. This is the sweet spot that I think most people should aim for. That's what I have, you know, sixty five plus minus five micromolar for the last, four years or so. Most people who get a clear cut benefit from NAD optimization, would have NAD levels, definitely above 40, and most of them are in the sixties and seventies. So, you know, fifties, sixties, and seventies are really the, good levels that people should aim for, in my opinion, and based not just my opinion, based on the data that we have. And, you know, how what kind of benefits they can get at what energy levels of the supplementation. This is a very interesting case, and she was 68 years old, when we started, her energy optimization program. She was actually my babysitter, interested in me. And she was was very deficient at the beginning. And we identified the three, NAD supplements on the market at another time, and that was back in, '20, '21. And and then we switched to, it did this supplement did not work, and we switched her to a a a fourth supplement, as you can see, at a thousand milligram. This is an NMM based supplement. She her level went up over, 600% to around the one hundred sixty I think it was one hundred sixty eight micromolar. It's a way, way too high. Then we gradually reduce her dosage. And finally, we determined that she only needs about five hundred milligrams of NMN to get her into the middle range, the middle of the optimum range. And that's, what gives her, the best, benefits, health benefits. So, you know, for two individuals, one only needs five hundred milligrams, the other one needs fifteen hundred milligrams or more. Without a test, you're gonna be able to know how much each of these individuals needs. Testing really gives us the tool to get biomarkers optimized. So the, lady who, increased her energy level by over 600% was taking this, supplement, NETGE Infinity, was developing and and we have it on the market now. This is our first clinical trial. As you can see, with with these two baseline, the average is very similar in these individuals around the 28. And after two weeks, the NAD levels, increased by over a 100%. In the next two weeks, NAD levels continue to go up for a few individuals. But for most people, the net was already picked around the two week two weeks after supplementation. It does not take a huge amount of time to get an net was high or, optimized. You know, many many of our customers, you know, want to wait for months, six months, or longer to retest net energy levels. That's really a waste of time and money. We want to get the people optimized as quickly as possible. I cannot predict how much each person needs. The only way I can address the type of type of products and more importantly the dosage is through retesting. So retesting is the only way I had. I think no one else has any other strategy either. So retesting, after two to four weeks, so you know whether your NAD level is optimized, is not increasing enough, or is too high. On average, about seventy percent of the individuals need, a thousand milligrams of NMN to get the NAD levels into the optimum range. About twenty five percent, this more than a thousand milligrams, about 5%, this less than a thousand milligrams to get the NAD into the optimum zone. That's kind of a rule for some. That's the data we have. Now, another people are taking, pure NMM, products, from various vendors. That's pure NMM, work. That's the data in yellow. Red is the baseline and yellow is pure NMN and the green is the patented formulation we have called vitality boost. You can see that pure NMN does increase energy level, but it's not, it does not optimize energy for, you know, many individuals. And, clearly, the, vitality boost has a much higher, efficacy. These are actual data in a, in a clinic, in doctor Edwin Lee's clinic in, in Orlando. And this is actually data from another clinic, doctor Delaney's, clinic. He treats, patients with heart failure. Most of the patients are in their later seventies, eighties, and nineties. As you can see, even in this, you know, age of the population, the vitality boost can increase and optimize NAD level for, the vast majority of the patients. For the ones who are not optimized, with the initial dosage, you can increase the dosage and get them into the, the optimum zone. So testing and adjusting the dosage is really key, and everyone needs to do it if you want your NAD optimized. So NADIV is very popular, and it's being offered to, many people and many celebrities are taking NADIV. The question is, does it work? And it's a complicated question. I want to make it very clear. Now, NHDIV does have clinical efficacy for neurological conditions and infectious disease, for at least, you know, a number of individuals. I'm not denying net clinical efficacy for certain indications. Now, when it comes to longevity and awareness, you know, energy, you really needed to get a intracellular NAD up. And, this clinical trial that we did, and tried tried to answer another question. So you you have, before IV data in blue, after five sessions of IV data in orange, and I think we have 10 individuals here, you can see for these individuals, intracellular NAD levels did not change at all, after five sessions of NAD IV, each session, with seven fifty milligram of NAD plus. That's a pretty high, dosage by industry's standard. I don't have time to talk about why this is still we can discuss, if what people are interested in. And and then we put them on the all supplements, the vitality boost. You can see in but most of these individuals, their NAD levels went higher than 40 micromolar, and this one is, is increased but not optimized. And this one needs more than a thousand milligrams of NA that we, we did, and his level went up. So, oral supplements really work and can really efficiently increase, ingested in the NAD level. Subcutaneous injection with NAD is, becoming, quite popular as well. Does it work? Well, it's it actually sub q, subcutaneous injection injection for NAD actually increase NAD level, while NADIV does not. Okay? We can explain why. But the levels are usually not high enough, and that depends on how much you inject, how often you inject. In the individuals that we have testing, most of them are in the high, to, or in in the thirties, not high enough. Then what happens if we put them on on the supplement? That's in green. You can see it's all supplements are much more, effective than the sub q. And nicotinamide is another negative precursor that, that's very cheap, and some companies are marketing NAD supplements that contain nicotinamide. That's the work. This is a published data. On average, NAD levels went, or increased by about 10%, and we have done a clinical trial. Our data indicate that nicotinamide can increase NAD levels in about thirty percent of the participants by about thirty percent. If you multiply thirty percent by thirty percent, you get about ten percent. Very consistent with this published clinical trial. Right? As you can see, more important to know what percent of people had the benefit and how much they had. The bottom line is if you are taking about a thousand milligrams of, nicotinamide, your NAD levels, are more likely not optimized. If you like it, if you like the supplement, get your test to see where is your antibody level so you can decide whether you should stay or you should try a different product. Nelson, Michael, me I think you and I, we, we had many communications, and you have done experiments on yourself. We can discuss your data. And what I can what I want to tell you and your audience here is we now have, are accumulating enough data on niacin, especially, individuals who take a very high dose of niacin, a thousand milligrams, even two thousand milligrams of, niacin to reduce cholesterol level. We look niacin can reduce cholesterol levels, very effectively. But the cardiovascular benefit from niacin is more debatable. And this is not the time to debate on that issue, but, you know, we can we can talk about it. The supplies and funding is that when people take a very high dose of niacin, they're only the levels shoot through the roof, usually around the 150 micromolar or higher. And that's a way, way too high. Based on the multiple data we have, the optimum range for NAD is between forty and one hundred micromolar, and the sweet spot is fifty to seventy five micromolar. So a 150, micromolar is twice higher than, the level that I single people should shoot for. All right. That's a little debatable. You know, we can, we, in the worst optimum is war with, moving, target. And I often use the example for vitamin d and how net, you know, target has been moving for, you know, decades and decades. But I am I'm pretty comfortable, with the, what we are recommending in terms of optimum range for MAD. The the 150 is definitely not something you want. The recent paper, published about three months ago showed that people who take a high dose of niacin for cardiovascular benefits, they actually have increased concentration of two nicotinamide, metabolite, two py and four py. I'm sure you you know the paper. That that's a paper that's I I think it's very important. And increase the two py and four py and the terminal betabonides of nivotilamide, which is a betabonide of NAD, by the way, is kind of complicated, can increase vascular inflammation and cardiovascular risk. That's the major potential side effect of extremely high levels of NAD, and this NAD, from, niacin. And and it was because the terminal met metabolites were nicotinamide, two p y and four p y can increase vascular inflammation. People who take a high dose of nicotinamide probably should be a little more careful than, you know, with with high end. And, you know, that's another topic that that we can we we need more data and we can discuss. The bottom line is that anyone who has been taking high dose of niacin for various, health, purposes, should consider getting their NAD tested and probably get some vascular information biomarker, biomarkers measure as some can be highly, beneficial. And in the last few days, we are what we have a very important discovery that, is going to come out in my, in in my book on on LED. I'm I'm I'm gonna keep it out near for now, and and wait for my book to come out. And it's gonna be extremely important. I I think, anyone who is taking, Niacin, I'm very happy to work with you. Send, you know, send a message to my group or to me. I really want to do a study, in NDA and Niacin. We're we're gonna we're gonna provide, you know, close to a free NAD test. If you are taking, high dose of niacin, so we can accumulate, you know, sufficient data, to improve, and I think it's a major public health issue that we needed to, we we need to generate more data and and educate the public. And this is gonna be a a major, major story, and I consider them as my one of my major, contributions to to science, and that's how how big I think it is. Anyway, I'm trying to break about myself that I don't like, but I think it's a very important topic. I don't need to talk about him. Brian Johnson has been using our tests and supplements. I do want to, talk about a little bit about my my own data. I've been using NAD and biohacking for the last four or five years. I have been able to get a tremendous benefits, from cured asthma, allergies, sciatica, arthritis, back pain. Most importantly, you know, my my tennis game, has improved at least by, twenty five years. So remember when I I said my goal is to be able to play tennis in the one hundred and beyond. And I think I got twenty five years back. I'm getting much closer to the one hundred year mark. If we, use the tau principle, if we use the homestical approach, I'm I think, Michael, you would agree that we are on the way to, extend our health span and life span by at least twenty to thirty years based on well, using the currently available technologies. New technologies, new products are great. They they will only help even more. The main point that I want to make is even with the current knowledge and the tools, we can gain a extra twenty to thirty years of health span. By extending health span, by definition, we're gonna increase life span as well. And so this is really what I, I want to share, and I'll stop here, and we can, have a a conversation or discussion. Yeah. Thanks, Jin. That was great. Do you wanna take it off full screen? Yep. That's what I'm doing. Alright. So I have a lot of questions. So so so first, I think I hope I'm not overestimating, but I think your chronological age are aren't you 60 or 62? I am 62. We're almost 63. So no hair, no dye. Are you using dye in your hair? My my my hair is, I I have a needle needle dye. My my hair was, I got some gray hair from my, my twenties is a is is a genetic, and, I my but but my hair has actually improved over the, over the years. I have a family history. My my whole family is kind of, have, male hair, 10, white, gray, and at a very young age. Yeah. But still, you don't look 62. I wouldn't I think I I knew that just from the past, but if I looked at you for the first time, I would say 62. I would say something younger. So Yeah. So I, you know, I'm I and you can measure your biological age in use many, many different ways. Right? So I I think the the best about knowledge of age measurement for me is how many hours, of tennis I can play. I play four hours a time. I play twice a week, and I'm competing with, much younger people, than I am. You know, I'm not a great tennis player. I'm I I play tennis for, you know, for health benefits, not not to be, you know, competitive. And and they complain about being tired and pain and I you know, I I can play for four hours, without a stop. I recover within, an hour or two. So it's the endurance, recovery, and how much injury that you, may or may not get. And from all three fronts, I have gone back to my late thirties. I I I had to take a time and all to play tennis starting in my late thirties. Now I don't I I don't need to take anything. I actually don't need a warm up, and I I decided to, warm up for almost an hour before I can actually play. And I'm I'm not recommending, you know, no warm up, and it's not a better rec not a good recommendation, but I I don't have to have a a non warm up. That that's the best way I can measure how how well I'm doing or how well I'm not doing. So that's great. Four hours of tennis. You said two two days a week? Two days a week. Yeah. Yeah. That's fantastic. So, but then it so just to play a little bit of a skeptic. Right? So I'm sure NED is a part of that story, but also, I think you've gotten leaner over time. So could weight loss have been, you know or getting more fit be a component of your better endurance now than verse your thirties? Absolutely. I lost, depending on I the heaviest time in my life was a 165 pounds. I'm now between one hundred thirty and one hundred thirty five. Obviously, when you have a reduced weight, you, you you perform better. You, you, you do much better. And weight loss, you know, movement, I mean, sleep warnings are are important. But I think nutritional supplements are a important component. It's a part of the nutrient nutritional program. Right? You you you need to get it in right, macronutrients. I mean, you're you're you're much more expert on that than I am. But micronutrients are important, but micronutrients, people pay much less attention to micronutrients than micronutrients. And the most recent, change in my, lifestyle is the reduction in carbohydrates. You know, I'm I'm a Chinese. Eating rice is just a normal part of our, life. If you don't eat, eaten rice, you you you have not had manju or dinner, I mean, to a Chinese. Right? It's was extremely hot. But, about a year ago, my triglyceride never was inching up. And you look too much, and then I was went into a turnway. That's why I decided, well, I had to cut it down rice. I I'm complete I'm I'm 99%, completely out of the rice, but some sometimes my kids still put some in my in my bowl, as okay. You know, cutting carbohydrates has been a major part of my, my, longevity program. So has that been the major cause for the weight loss? It's just cutting rice, but, you know, cookies, cakes, pastries. It's it's one of the, it's one of the, ways to, cut, weight. I lost about 10 pounds by, reducing the rice. I I already I already reduced the weight before I, completely, eliminating rice. Alright. So just to play the technical card. Right? So Yeah. I'm sure that you saw a lot of health. You know, you listed all of the health improvements because of, you know, your relatively higher NAD. Are there times when you haven't taken NAD precursors for a couple of days and knowing how quick that NAD levels drop and I've experienced that myself? So what so then what would those factors what would those, you know, symptoms be after stopping it for a few days in your case? Yeah. So if you stop the supplement for one day, your energy level my energy level goes down by about 10%. So and, if I take a supplement, one dose of, the energy supplement, I within five minutes, I note I noticed a difference. The the difference is primarily in two areas. The first one is the cognitive function. I I I have clear more clear, you know, thinking. And and the second one is I I feel the surge of, energy. And, actually, for me, when I take the, the portal, for the first five minutes, I I'm kind of, you know, a little, sleepy. But after five minutes, the energy comes back. The brain functions better. So, you know, I I I shouldn't, well, my my slide was action right. So my I I said it's personal experience with optimization. I I actually told NED out. It's not just NED. I mean, we want to be very clear. I I optimize the the multiple parameters, but NED was the I think the most important single component of my longevity program. And it it I called it the first unnecessary step. It's not the only thing you have to do. Then, you know, we we agree and we want to make it very clear. Yeah. So I I'm still, still trying to figure out so I'm with you a 100%. I think NAD is obviously important to clients during aging. It's in the mitochondria. If you don't have optimal NAD levels, you're gonna have decreased mitochondrial function, less energy production, and that's a potential disaster for aging. Right? So but I'm still trying to, you know, so because I'm measuring NAD at every blood test, I'm doing biomarker versus biomarker analysis, you know, NAD versus, you know, albumin and glucose. And I don't see anything major. I mean, I do see higher NAD, lower LDL, which, okay, maybe a small decrease in cardiovascular disease risk. But even I'm even doing metabolomics where I'm looking at 600 metabolites, trying to get more insight into pathways, you know, as to what could be optimized. And there may be some value. I don't know if you've thought about this, but, you know, cortisol levels increase during aging, and the conversion of cortisol into cortisone requires NAD. So if NAD levels decline during aging, you'll have a buildup of cortisol because it can't be converted into cortisone. So I actually see that in my data. That's the strongest correlation that I have in my data. So Well, I so I I think that you are the wrong person to test the hypothesis. Why? Because you are pretty much optimized. Right. Oh, okay. Okay. So you you cannot identify benefits or coordinations when you are pretty much, optimized. Much much more difficult. Yep. You're you're not gonna be able to identify a coordination in Brian Johnson. We we we cannot identify a coordination in you because you you guys are too optimized. I'm not able to, well, I actually identified the coordination's clear cut, coordination. My liver enzyme ALT was clearly reduced from, marginally high, ALT, and I started around the 35 to 40 somewhere in that region. Now I'm over time, I reduced it to about 25, and now I'm around 20. My LTL improved a little bit as well, and you you many people see improvement in LDL. And now the the most improvement with optimized LED that we see is much better energy. If you already have tangible energy, you're unlikely going to see a dramatic or noticeable difference. We do have many many clients who can notice a difference in energy, after one dose. That that it doesn't happen in everyone, but it happens in many individuals. Those are individuals who have very deficient energy levels, they have a lot of health issues, and they notice a difference much, much more readily than someone who is in in in good shape. Okay? So in many people too, with with you, I think one thing you may you may you may find the difference is endurance and then recovery. That in in many of the estimate, it is it's much harder to increase their performance because they're already performing at a peak level. Yep. But we we see a much better recovery in many of the ethnic who work with us. So you you you they are areas, you will see a difference in areas that you clearly have the problem. When you don't have a problem, it's gonna be much harder, to find a a difference. Yeah. So along those lines, you know, so I try to stay away from subjective. Right? So I feel like this because that could be just anything. But in the case of, so my NED levels are, as I'm sure you know, are if I don't do anything, 20 to 25 micromolar, they're very, very low. And, so subjectively though, when I do get it above thirty, thirty five, I can see a difference in my workout. So my workout's kind of like your tennis. Yeah. I'm doing a standardized ninety minute workout weights, calisthenics, stretching the whole thing. It's an endurance, it's strength. So there came a point last year where I started to see deficits and everything is standardized. How many sets, how many reps, the same movements, I'm doing exactly the same workout because, you know, to be scientific, if I see any small change, I know something's wrong. So I started to see deficits and I was like, what the what's going on? And sure enough, as soon as I started so I've been obviously, I've been playing with, NMN and nicotinic acid and in and out of the approach, trying to figure out how much is optimal. But that may be a part of the story for me where it's gotta be above a certain amount or else I do start to see some amounts of, you know, deficits in performance. I don't see, unfortunately, improvements in recovery. I wish that were true. I also wish it were true that I saw sleep improvements. You know, I don't see that because I wake up in the middle of the night, and I was hoping that taking, you know, the precursors later in the day would help my sleep eliminate the, waking up in the middle of the night. Doesn't help with that, but it does I there may be some performance benefits in my case. Yeah. I I I I think, I I think you need to get your NAD into the, sixties and consistently stay near for a longer period of time. You're you're in in my opinion, you are doing too many experiments. You are changing too quickly in, relative to, to NAD. You are not you are not giving your body enough time to see the longer term benefits. That that would be my, my interpretation, and it's something that you you may want to try. And also, I mean, it's possible that you, you don't you don't need a, a lot of energy, but I I doubt it. And I think it's more, it's how you increase your energy level. I mean, clearly, you you try the nipotidic acid and niacin. I mean, you remember your your your biological age, your pace of aging actually increased. Yep. With with, with niacin. I mean, I don't think this, because your energy level is around the 60. I I don't think this is because of the higher energy level is related to the niacin, issue. That that that's my my interpretation. So I I asked him, we we we I I said it off air, but I also said the in air that the I I said I've been enough for you to try the the supplement that we have and and and see whether you can, stay on the the portal for three months. And let's see, you know, whether you notice any or measure you can measure any, any difference, differences once you can get a, a benefit. You you need you need to get it in right supplement. You need to get it in the right and right range. Fortunately, your NAD level goes up pretty easily. Yeah. That's that's that's a good news for you. We we have a small number of individuals who are extremely difficult to get the only the, increase, let alone optimize. Alright? There are some of those. And we can, help about ninety percent of individuals, but they are they are about, you know, five, ten percent that are just very, very difficult. We'll have to try many different approaches. With you, should be very simple. I'm sure we can get to your only to the, that let's keep it to around sixty, sixty five for three months if you are agreeable. And, I mean, I'm I'm using your audience to push you to do the experiment. I Wait. Wait. So I think there are layers I think there are layers to that. I I'm I'm open to the possibility of getting above 60 again. I've done that, I think, three times. It took two two grams of NMN on its own, got me to 60, I think, 67. And then, you know, the the nicotinic acid, it was, I think I took, six hundred milligrams. Six hundred milligrams. Yeah. I I I don't like net I don't like the nicotinic acid. Yeah. And there was a big flush. Right? So the big flush and and, you know, as you mentioned, the Donita Paste went crazy. You know, it went super high. But, not to say anything bad about the Dunedin PACE test, but it's an epigenetic approximation. And when I looked at my actual biomarkers, LDL wasn't crazy low. I mean, it was you know, that was the only deficit where it I dropped my LDL potentially a little bit too low. So there is some published data where LDL low effect of niacin. Yeah. Yeah. But but in terms of cardiovascular disease risk in, multivariate adjusted models, you know, accounting for, reverse causation, Actually, less than 65 for LDL may not be optimal. So a very high dose nicotinic acid reduced mine to less than 65. Yeah. You don't want it. So the, the war cause mortality for LDL is, to know is when LDL is between ninety and one hundred thirty in people above, age 50. I did a deep dive on that. It's in the 60 to five to 120 range. I can send you that paper. It's I think I yeah. I thought it was 90 to, to, I I I don't know what they're talking about. Same paper. It's somewhere there anyway. So you don't want your LTL to know. That's Yes. Yes. Exactly. So my issue though with NMN and using nicotinamide based products, there are two two issues. Right? And you mentioned one of them, which was, the, two p y and four p y, which vascular inform inflammation. Right? So if I'm taking high dose nicotinamide, nicotinamide riboside, nicotinamide, ribose, you know, right, so anything related to nicotinamide, there's the potential for an increase in two p y and four p y. So that's one strike in my in my, book. And then the other I mean, besides cost, I mean, I I'm I appreciate that you would send free product for a few months, but for most people, they can't. Right? And, you know, so, so that's the second. But then the third too is is, homocysteine. So there's published data that nicotinamide raises homocysteine more than nicotinic acid. And and in my case, my homocysteine is already about twice as high as it was in my youth. It's actually probably my one of my biggest weak spots, and that's without taking nicotinic acid, nicotinamide. So I didn't do the experiment to measure homocysteine. If my homocysteine goes to 15 and my NAD goes to 65, I don't know that I I don't know that I wanna do that, but the nicotinic acid story. So, for the my last test that I just did a a few weeks ago, it was a hundred and fifty milligrams of nicotinic acid per day, no flush, NAD 48, blood pressure looking great, a 115 over 65. No. If there was vascular inflammation, I'd expect blood pressure to go up. Right? Because you've got these metabolites that basically are, you know, inflaming your endothelium. I don't see that. Right? So you've got me thinking that maybe there's some combination of a relatively low dose of nicotinic acid, but then some small amount of nicotinamide where I don't get the big homocysteine boost that I might get from NMN or nicotinamide based products, and then I also don't get the, you know, the vascular information and the craziness of too high nicotinic acid. There may be a combination approach that I'm open to. I mean, I I I think that we, we, we we can try that, but but in terms of, homocysteine, we we have many people measure, homocysteine and NAD. We we don't see, a huge, increase in homocysteine in in most people, and that's a that that's a that's a potential. When you when you have, when when you have a increase in nivo tila mide, it's not just NMN. If it so pharmacists in increase, is through, nivo tila mide. So, NMN or nivo tila mide, anything that's increased in NAD, has the potential to increase, nivotilamide levels. But as long as you controlled within a reasonable range, it should not be a problem. In some individuals, homocysteine may be a issue. In in those individuals, you you you you have to find a way to, control homocysteine. And in my case, so I've taken, you know, both people say TMG, trimethylglycine. I've taken four grams per day, no dent. Yeah. And I have a whole I have the whole section of homocysteine on my channel where folate b six b twelve b twelve brings it down 10%, but that's not a dent. It's not a big dent. So I'm already struggling to try to resist age related changes. So I'm worried about blowing it up with too high for the, you know, the NAD precursors. Right? So Yeah. I mean, do you have a data net when your NAD goes up, your your homocysteine, goes up? I can take a look. I haven't looked at that, but I can definitely take a look at that. You know, we we we we don't we don't see, we don't see a a clear coordination. My my form assisting is fine. My MDD has been 65 for for for years. I mean, we'll have many individuals who they know I've been testing for for years, and we don't we don't see an increase in, homocysteine. Does does the so the, vitality boost has not just nicotinamide based, you know, NMN nicotinamide rivals, but then it's also got creatine, which can act as methyl donors. So could that be why you might not see an increase in homocysteine because cre creatine can donate its methyl group in the methylation pathway? That that might be. I I I don't know the answer to the question. I mean, that's that's, I I guess it's a potential benefit that I have not considered. Yeah. And then the babysitter so was the babysitter relatively young or older than that? She was she was 68. Oh, because if she was younger, I was gonna say, what's the reason that she had low NED, but that she's older and can't get age age expected? Well, actually, what we know is she, she's a Chinese, and Chinese, especially Vietnamese and Koreans, to a certain degree, Indians and then Chinese agents have about, I would say, 30 to 50% lower energy levels nationally than Caucasians. That is the genetic component and that is probably a play of niacin fortification in, in the food supply. That that's my two interpretations. Why energy levels are so different between, different countries. But it's probably mostly, mostly, genetic because, you know, we we see lower levels where, Chinese and Indians living in America as well. So the IV just shifting gears. The IV NAD story, I think, for most people, that'll be a surprise because it was for me. I didn't even consider that the NAD might be too big to get in the cells, and, obviously, based on your data, it didn't. But the subcutaneous data is even more interesting that, you know, you're basically injecting it into fat. So that suggests that the, fat cells are degrading the, NAD into components, and then that can increase in blood intracellular levels of NAD. Yep. Yeah. So the, the only DNA that you put into the bloodstream through IV, half every six hours. That has a very short, half life. And and once you are not giving enough dosage, seven seven hundred fifty milligrams, in a per session. And you at the most, in our clinical trial, we did five sessions within a period of ten days. Even that frequency, is not enough. So the I I think, basically, you are not giving, enough. And we we also have data on oral NAD plus supplement. And for some individuals, if you give oral NAD plus, it it may work. It doesn't work for most people, but it does work for few individuals. And when it works, you you need a a thousand milligrams a day through the oral route. And the sub q, it with no one has data, but I believe, you know, you are not putting in the bloodstream, you are putting into the sub q tenis, the degradation is much slow. So so so there's more time for the body to this for the cells to absorb the, to NED and then, the, metabolites. I it was surprising to me. I mean, I I had a no preconceived notions to what it works, what it that what it doesn't. If only the IV, works, you know, my business would've go through the roof. But, unfortunately, the data data has the data. And then a criticism that a lot of people try to say about the blood intracellular levels of NAD by increasing them is that it may not reflect tissue levels. So what are your thoughts on that disparity? It's a very legitimate criticism, and I can answer the question by by two different ways. The first one is we do have some, limited data on, muscle only the versus blood only the not a huge amount of data, and they, if if if a blood energy level is increased, the muscle energy level is also increased. It's not a perfect coordination, but but the trend is the, is the same. Next one. That's actual data. And the second one is I I know you don't like a subjective data, but we we have a subjective data on on thousands and thousands of individuals. You cannot ignore how people feel and how much benefits they get. I didn't have time to go through a lot of examples we we we had, including my best story is what I call the baby in the whale story. So we have a turkey, a Turkish boy, 18 old, he fell into a a wheel and got into a coma for six months. Nothing was working, and the doctor happened to be working with us and decided to give him, the nasal supplement. After a few days, He's he was moving, hands and legs after two weeks. The baby boy walked again. Fantastic. You can I mean, it's a isolating incidence, and you can call it a coincidence? I don't think it's a coincidence because they tried everything else, and then the only thing the only trend is, giving him the supplement. And we can we can explain. I did not know I got to the news. I did not know why. I I was surprised, like everyone else would be. And then when you really think about, and it is a neurotransmitter. Okay? Creating the neurotransmitter. You can increase the neuronal communication, but I think it worsen increase neuromuscular, communication. If you do that, you have a possibility to, wake up a a person in coma, you know, especially young young children. So we just have, you know, stories of the stories, not not as dramatic as this one, but pretty, incredible stories. So there is yep. Yeah. You you know, you know, to to me, well, we're everyone should be doing a m one for one experiment that you are I assume you are a proponent. I'm a proponent as well. You have your own health, in your own hand. If you are getting the benefit, whatever benefits that you are getting, what is the subjective or whatnot? And, you know, ideally, you want you want to have, measurable, data, biomarker data, and how your body feels is very important to me. I'm my how I play tennis game is is extremely important to me. I don't have asthma anymore. That that's important to me. My my sciatica, I I had a sciatica. I had back pain problems, you know, for many, many years. I couldn't stand up, when I set on the culture for for some time at the end of the day. Let all these problems are done. It's not, again, it's not entirely the main contributing factor to it. That you know, that's that's good enough for me. We have so many other people who are getting very similar benefits. I think we'll be they they know that that they're not getting the benefits. They're not gonna be doubters of anything, whether it's NAD or any drug or supplements and rightly so. That I think that's, it's okay. I believe the the the main problem in in the supplement industry is partly the quality of the products, but most importantly, the dosage. How how do you dose, doses right to get the benefit is the key. And that's where you you have to have, the right biomarkers and the right the right knowledge to, address based on the data and not just the data. It's how frankly, you have to consider how your body is responding. That, that that could be even more important than some, arbitrary biomarkers. I agree a 100%. It can't just be biomarkers and you feel terrible. That's not a great approach. The subjective is definitely a part of it. So so I'm trying so NAD can be increased by regular exercise training, calorie restriction. So then what are your thoughts on why for me, without doing anything, my any NAD levels are in the twenties or even can be lower. I know Brian, when he started, his levels were in the twenties, and we're talking about lean, relatively fit people. You know? What are your thoughts on why that would be? I mean, it you know? I I I I think there's a it's a false assumption that, diet and exercise can increase NAD. I'm I'm not I'm not gonna argue the literature because they are papers that show, you know, sauna and some exercise can increase in in the NPT levels. I'm sure. And I I will give people that, yeah, well, this let's assume that they can increase NAD. But what we know is the increase is so small, maybe 10%, and I'll give it 20%. The increase of energy by 20% is not going to make any difference in your in your health and in your performance. Okay? For the vast majority of people, we need to double it. We need to triple it. And exercise, diet, I'm not gonna do it. You you you you have to find some, way to increase the supply. I think for about ninety percent of the individuals, the supply of the precursors is the deficit that we have to correct. And for ten percent of the population, deficiency in the enzymes or absorption of the precursors, are likely, the contributing factor. But this clearly the building blocks. Without the building blocks, even if you increase in time, it's probably not going to do a lot of good. So so it's, if you really want to get in let let it explains why your immunity is still deficient, why Brian's immunity is still deficient. I have, I I actually had it in my next slide. We have a middleweight, boxing champion in his twenties. His energy level was 19 let me see. 19.1. Yeah. Sounds about right. Mine too sometimes. And a boxing, champion. Okay? Very young. Actually, what we have found is, SNEED, people who exercise more, they tend to have lower NAD levels than people who don't. That's why. Because even they exercise too much or they train too hard, they have they probably have increased inflammation. Inflammation is the is the main cause of reduced NAD levels. So, you know, when you are young, when you are, when you are fit, it doesn't mean that your NAD is, is optimal. It may not be causing any health issues, right now. But long term immunity deficiency is certainly not going to be, something you you you want. Definitely. So in my case, I don't think it's inflammation related because HSCRP it's for me, it's like three years in a row, 22 tests in a row below the detection limit point three milligrams per liter. And then for my most recent test, I don't have this data going all the way back for all of the NAT tests. I only did it this for one test so far, but IL six t and f alpha, as you know, for those who don't know, it's on the, you know, the, SaaS, the senescence associated secretory phenotype, which you also have test for. So I measured that IL six and t and f alpha, and they too were below the detection limit. So but that was with an NAD level of 48. I don't know what it is with an NAD level of 20. But just using CRP as an example, I'm still trying to figure out why I have naturally low levels. And an interesting part of the story that I wouldn't expect is I'm already on a very high fiber diet, you know, like eighty five or so grams per day. I've gone even higher. And there may be something about two in my case, literally too much. And I say too much because I'm already, like, triple the average American or or or, you know, for fiber intake. But my lowest NAD levels are when my fiber intakes have been at their very highest. So I don't know if there's something about the gut degrading precursors or the gut so what are your thoughts on the gut the gut's role on NAD homeostasis? So, microorganisms, they they have a given way of making, making NAD. So they can, contribute to, to the NAD level, in our body. I don't know how much. I don't I don't have the data, but there is a possibility that the microbiome can, have an impact on energy levels. No no one has any data as far as I know, and I know it's a possibility, but I don't know how much, and, whether there are ways to, increase energy levels through the microbiome, manipulation. It's something that can be, looked into. Something very interesting. I think in your case, obviously, your NED, the enzymes that make an NED is not deficient in you because we know if we if we give you, precursors, you make a bucket of NAD. Right? So now you got to be a deficiency in the, in the NAD, precursors. And why is it so? I don't know. And most of people are deficient anyways. I don't know any good ways to naturally increasing the supply of precursors. And, you know, niacin actually is, is relatively natural, not natural because niacin is fortified into, in into many foods in America. And and that's I think that's why, Americans are less deficient in, energy on population level. And they are needed precursors in, in some foods that people talk about. I I don't know, but certainly, it's probably not easy to eat enough food to increase your supply. That that's I'm pretty certain. I'm not sure what's in this, some food that contains very high levels of, NAD precursors that can increase NAD levels. Now trebletofen, I think you you probably did the experiment. Trebletofen is a negative precursor. I mean, it takes, you know, many, many chemical steps to make an LED, but it can be turned into an LED. It doesn't work very efficiently if I remember the data correctly. Yeah. It was worse than that in my case. So I generally don't have, digestive issues, but on I I was taking two grams of tryptophan per day, and not only did it didn't make a dent at all. You know? So I was taking, high dose niacin, and I took high dose niacin or nicotinic acid with tryptophan. There was no difference. Tryptophan didn't give me an extra boost, but on the morning of the blood test, I had the worst GI pain I've ever had. I think, like, sweating, and I never so once I stopped the tryptophan, it was fine. But, so in my case, I don't think it's a liver issue. Maybe it's a I don't know. I'm just speculating. But, so I'm actually looking at, correlations for gut microbial metabolites in blood with NAD levels, and nothing's popped up yet. But I I do wanna get to the root because, you know, if I can figure that out too, if I've addressed the underlying problem, maybe I've even made a bigger dent on slowing aging relative to just, you know, fixing the precursors. Yeah. I mean, there there are so many it's it's so complicated. There are so many issues. I I think we have a we we have very good solutions for for NAD. You I assume you you are very, you know, cost con countries and rightly so. I don't think that cost should be a issue because once the mass, adopts the solution, the cost will come down. And, you know, with every consumer product, there there are phases. Well, in the very early phase called the adoptor, you know, phase. Right? That's a tiny fraction with the population. Less than 1% of the population. Imagine, I think almost every the hundred percent of the adult population can benefit from a good NAD, precursor, supplement, make it just at a level for vitamin d or vitamin c. The call you will see a prestigious drop in pricing. So I I don't think that we should be, you know, high on the pricing question too much because let's let's go. We should be, worrying more about the scientific and medical questions and then let the, the market, get the the price, get the price down. A scientist. We're both the scientist, and our job is to figure out. We know energy is beneficial. The question is, who can who can benefit the most? What are the best ways to give people the, most of the benefit? And that those questions are still debatable. I don't think that the benefit of NED is the issue of debate. I I think that you we we probably would agree. Then the the the price, I think we should take it out. Let's figure out what are the best ways, to get in the, to get in the increase, where we should get the people's energy level to be, and, who needs it the most. In my opinion, almost everyone needs it. But certainly there are, certain segments of the population who will benefit more than others. And we know we have a lot of data on them. And then it's a question of education of the medical professionals, the general public. Once we can get more people to experience it, to get the benefits, then the market force will get the price down so it's more affordable by almost everyone. That that's something that I I'm I'm dedicating my you know, it's the best of my career to to do, well, a major part of my my my next phase. And it can be doable. We with time, the price will come down. Everyone who, who needs it, who can, get a benefit, should be able to afford it. And the government have, has to do step in. That's a great point. I hadn't even considered supply and demand and the price coming down. But You're welcome, Dan. I and that's why I I don't quote too much about the pricing because next, it's just the early phase. Yeah. So what are your thoughts on so there's an abundance of raising NAD, whether it's through NMN, NA, NR, whatever the whatever the precursor is on improving health span. But then there are debatable findings on lifespan, and even the lifespan, increases are are very modest, no effect on maximal. So what's how do you square that circle in terms of you're getting health span measures, but then why doesn't that translate into an increased lifespan? I I I don't I I don't think the experiments were done right. I mean, they were done in in mice. Mice, especially mice living in a sterile environment, and there's not enough variability, in the individuals. And they are inbred mice. Everyone has the same genetics, same environment, same very similar health status. If you do the outbred, mouse population, you are probably gonna see a major difference. So, anyways, let that's the first point. The second point is I am not extremely interested in lifespan. I'm more about health span. I want people to live healthier longer. By extending health span, I know we extend life span. And so measuring life span is not my my current goal. I'm more interested in measuring health span. I'm more interested in getting people the vitality, they they need. I'm more interested in preventing diseases and health conditions. Again, I want people to be able to play tennis or their favorite sport at 100 and beyond. That's my current goal. I think what is doable, and right now, we have the tools, and and let's let's achieve a better goal. If if you have a hand let's say a hundred years of health span, you know, life span is probably going to be a 110, maybe even a 120. That's how I extend the lifespan. Even I I think the debate is a lot of people are are focusing on the maximum lifespan, How people can really how long they can really live? That's a question that, this more philosophical question that, I don't want to devote my time to, be part of the debate, because, you know, that's not what I'm what I'm working on is not what I'm interested in. And if I can help people to get it to a 100 healthy, I'm totally happy, and I accomplished my mission. Let's let's get to another point, then we'll worry about increasing another twenty, thirty years. Do it step by step. That that's kind of my personal approach. I'm with you, Jin. I'm with you. I appreciate your approach. I you know, and your passion. It's great. I I think a lot of people in this space, you know, in the creator space in terms of companies, you know, creating your own company, some of them are just putting it out, you know, for product and don't really live it, but so I appreciate that passion. So alright. Shifting gears just, just a a couple more questions. So I think, granted, you have it in your testing queue, but the, those two SASP proteins, pro inflammatory proteins, IL six and TNF alpha. I I appreciate, you know, your heavy focus on NAD. But when considering that senescence senescence cells increase during aging and IL six TNF alpha increase during aging. And senescent cells are basically just dead cells putting out pro inflammatory products. For me, I see that as a huge selling point for what you're doing, where people could track their senescent cell markers or senescent cell protein markers over time to try to keep those levels low. So what are your thoughts on those two and the and the SASP and measuring that for people interested in optimizing? So we're we're actually measuring, four SASP proteins, I I l one beta. Yep. IO six, IO eight, and t n f alpha. They they are more important, and these they are also somewhat coordinated. And depending on the purpose, I I actually really like IO eight much better than anything else. IO eight is is a very good biomarker to detect health issues much more than ting f alpha and the l six. Many people, you know, you know, they are FDA approved the test for, for IO six. That's why, you know, people are measuring IO six more, but few people know about IO eight. And we see the increase of IO eight in people who have health issues is, you know, tenfold, a hundredfold. You you make no mistake when when when it goes up. So that so, if you have to choose one, I I would, include IO eight in our screening panel, and then if you want more, we can measure all four. We can measure over 200 other serum proteins, for research projects. But, you know, it's harder to measure so many, and everyone. And, you know, money again, money becomes the issue. Right? So let let next one. And the second point is we measure, the nuts it's it's another SARS, beta galactosidase, senescence, beta galactosidase. If you want to choose a single senescence biomarker, SA beta gal is the best one. And we have demonstrated in multiple studies that, beta gal is increase in people with various diseases, and it's, related to how, for example, cancer patients responded to therapy, is related to cancer patient survival. So we know, senescence associated beta gout is a very good, biomarker and probably related to senescence. I mean, we don't know, a 100% sure, but it's certainly related to senescence. I you know, I I focus more on on biomarkers that are changed in in people with certain health conditions and is is associate associating with health outcomes. You know, we can we can come up with, thousands, tens of thousands of meanings of things that we can measure. You know, I'm, you know, I'm the, I'm the omics guy. I mean, for those who don't know omics, omics, us, we mentioned, you know, systematically tens of thousands and millions of data point, like, everything related to proteins, everything related to, to DNA or expression, and we can measure world's nose. But I have three criteria to select, biomarker to measure. The relevance, to, clinical relevance, scientific evidence, that's one. And number two, you know, reproducible assets, and finally, actionability. It has to be actionable. Without any biomarker, biomarker network only fulfill two of the three criteria, I wouldn't be interested. It has to fulfill worst three criteria for me to spend my time, my energy, and to work on them. And we'll have many, many, of those. Then that's one that, most people don't know is, It's in LGBT protein, kosol. Yeah. I I very often know, getting people confused. That's going to be a unbelievable biomarker. The reason I'm not hot on the Clotho or Clotho trail is that it's inversely associated with, kidney function. So if kidney function is high well, or sorry. If kidney function is low, Clotho is low and and vice versa. High so good kidney function, high Clotho. Not so Not a 100%. Not a 100%. No. So the vast majority of people with, kidney, kidney problems do have deficient, causal level. Yep. But thirty, forty percent of them have good causal level. What you probably don't know, I mean, no one else knows, we have the data. Coastal level is extremely deficient in, large proportion of cancer patients. It's also deficient in Alzheimer's patients. It's COVID, especially post COVID can drop your coastal level precipitously. It happened to me. Mhmm. I think the corrosion is going to be, a very important biomarker. I what I really like about it is it's very responsive responsive to the changing health condition. Like, they need a bit of similar to to CRP, if you want. Yeah. Not identical, but similar. And that that's both good and bad. I mean, we're not changing too much for certain purposes is not good because you have to measure often. Right? But I like it because I'm interested in detecting, hidden health issues. So just to put it into the broader perspective, so, like, cystatin c. So these are low abundance proteins. Right? They're in, you know, milligrams per liter. Wait. Yeah. So cystatin c, it's in milligrams per liter. You've got t and alfalfa and and aisle six there in, you know, picogram or nanograms. Yeah. Yeah. So very low compared to the biggest trees in the forest, which are albumin, globulins, fibrinogen. So for me, it makes sense to go after the biggest fish in the in the protein pond. Right? And then maybe tracking Clotho after that, but you can make the rationale that, you know, cystatin C is an important biomarker of kidney function and biological age. So maybe Clotho is just as important. We, you know, we measure creatinine, we measure cystatin C, and we we measure both for kidney function because we we work with a lot of biohackers and they take a creatinine and then other people get confused. Okay, increase in creatinine is not an indication of your decline kidney function. Yes. Even nephrologists don't understand it. I you don't know how many nephrologists and, and doctor call me and and they they don't get it. I probably shouldn't say that in public, but but men no. Many people don't don't understand what these biomarkers truly mean. The creatinine is just a measurement of how much, your your your muscle cells are pumping out to creatinine. If you get more more muscle, and you're gonna have more creatinine and creatinine increases muscle cell mass, you are gonna get more creatinine. It doesn't mean that your kidney is not, function is declining. That's why we we we measure we estimate the EGFR, estimate the ruminant filtration rate by both QE, as in mean, and the C starting C. And ideally, you want to measure other mark kidney marks as well, but in the screening program, you you have to make the choices. Yeah. Yeah. A 100% agree with the only caveat that, creatinine levels do obviously increase in blood where, when kidney function is suboptimal. If your kidney function declines during aging, you're gonna get a accumulation. Obviously. But then the other side of that coin is muscle mass declines during aging, so you should have less creatinine in blood. But creatinine levels increase during aging in blood, which suggests worse kidney function Yeah. The even in the face of low low muscle mass. Yeah. Thanks for the, for the, for the correction. Yeah. If we if you are if you are not changing, if you are not, suddenly taking a creatine and your creatinine is increasing, then then maybe an indication of your kin kidney function. And in the biohacking community, many people started taking creatinine Yep. And then they see a jump in creatinine and then they they kinda freak out. That's that that's what I'm, I was trying to talk about. 100%. So, wait, I have I have a metabolite suggestion that, fulfills your three criteria. And so ergothioneine, have you heard of ergothioneine? Yeah. We are actually we have, we have a supplement, that we are working on. It's, very But blood but blood blood testing? We, yeah. We can, we can, we can include it. Yeah. So so as far as I know deficient, I I I assume. And No. I eat oh, I that could be true, but I eat mushrooms. I eat, like, you know, a 170 grams per day, and mushrooms are a rich source. But the clients during I'm sure you know, declines during aging and, you know, there are no commercially available tests. The metabolomic stuff doesn't exist. So that's a huge commercial, you know, you could fill that need if you guys offered it. And and, Good good to know. So what what what kind that that's how we we that's how we develop a test. Right? I I work with, thousands of, doctors, and they they have ideas. And, you know, no no one wants to go for the test. And as a scientific, company, that's kind of the things we do. That's how we develop the causal test, actually. We'll we'll we'll take a look, and we should be able to come up with a test. What if I have the supplements that, I'm testing, my wife is testing? We have a few friends testing. It's it's it's pretty good. Nice. Yeah. Well, I mean, you know, I'm an objective biomarkers guy. I wanna see the actual numbers rather than just subjective feel. Well well, we met we met you other biomarkers. We don't mention mention percent, but we measure other other biomarkers that we, that we have in our natural panel. And then they improve with the people that you know they're taking over five. Wow. Interesting. Yeah. So I have another metabolite, but maybe you won't be as hot on that because it's not something you supplement with and you wanna keep it low. And that's quinolinate. So Uh-huh. You know, so it's neurotoxic and, increases during aging. So, you know but as far as I know, it's not commercially available. We we are we are looking to the, testing toxins and microplastics, and we we we are interested. The problem I have is what do we do? I am working with two companies that, offer plasma freezes, and I'm not too excited about those kind of programs because of the cost. And, you know, I I I am cost conscious, but I'm not cost cost conscious with, a $100 or several months. Right? We cost 10,000, 20,000, a session. Then I become cost, conscious because it's very hard to get it down from 20,000 to, a few $100. Right? Yeah. Yeah. And plasma freezes is actually very effective in, reducing toxins, various toxins. But the technology is just too expensive and the cost cannot come down because it involves, clinical procedures, and it's complicated. I wish, you know, someone can come up with a way, to get rid of the toxins. So I have and it's it's the tau method, you know, test, act, optimize. If you know and just using quinoline, not microplastics. That may be where you have to absolutely have plasma exchange and clean it out. I'm, I'm not gonna speculate on that, but for something like quinoline eight using the your tau method, and basically that's a conquer aging or die trying approach too. That's what that's what I do here. Right? Test, act, optimize. If you have quinolinate levels and you're tracking them over and over and over in conjunction with diet, how much you exercise, what supplements you're taking, you can look at correlations in your own data and figure out that recipe to keep it low. Right? So, but it takes that test act optimized over and over and over. I see I see your point there. So it's a more, avoiding intake instead of eliminating from the body. Or figuring out or figuring out what's the recipe for your body to keep it low. Right? Not necessarily because quinoline is it's it's, you know, it's like it's gonna be a block in the NAD cycle, right, where you can't convert quinoline into the NAD. You got a couple of steps there. So if it's building up, then what's the recipe for keeping it low. Right? So but that takes a lot of testing to to figure that out. Yeah. I mean, you know, we we well, that that's kind of a synthetic I'm I'm interested in, and just like like you do. And and then there's so many things we can, we we can work on. That that's becomes the the problem. Which ones we should focus on? Which ones are going to offer the most benefit? And sometimes it can be, you know, tough choices. Definitely. Yeah. Alright. Well, thanks, Jinzhong Jinzhong. I'm sure we can go forever. Is there anything we didn't cover? I mean, Well, there are many many, many things that we did not cover, and I, but we covered the, hopefully, the most useful topics that can be helpful and useful to, to your audience. And, you know, we can sit here and talk about it for days. Yeah. For sure. Alright. Well, thanks, Jin. And, I'm looking forward to having you on the channel again at some point in the future, and, have a great day. Bye. Thank you. Alright. Ciao. Bye bye.