Airborne exposure to fine particulate matter, which is otherwise known as PM 2.5, negatively impacts hallmarks of aging. And that's what we'll see here. So starting in the middle from PM 2.5, we can see that it increases inflammation as evidenced by increases for pro inflammatory cytokines including TNF alpha, interleukin one beta, and IL six. Exposure airborne exposure to to p m 2.5 also increases oxidative stress as evidenced by increases in oxidative damage to lipids, DNA, and proteins but also inducing mitochondrial dysfunction. And an airborne exposure to p m 2.5 induces epigenetic modifications which can determine whether genes are turned on or off. So, with that in mind, what's optimal for PM 2.5 exposure? So, before jumping into that data, let's take a side step and properly define what exactly is PM 2.5 and that's what we'll see here. So, note that PM 2.5 are fine particles that have a diameter less than 2.5 micrometers or 2.5 microns. So, to put that into perspective, what exactly is a micrometer or a micron? If we divide one meter by a million parts that would be one micrometer. So, PM 2.5 would have a diameter of 2.5 micrometers and some of the particles that are included in this class include combustion particles, organic compounds, metals, and others, which I'll go into deeper detail in a minute. Let's put PM 2.5 into perspective by comparing it against other stuff. For example, PM 10 are particles that have a diameter of 10 micrometers and some of those particles would include dust, pollen, and mold. Going higher, we can see that the diameter of a human hair is about 25 to 30 times larger than PM 2.5 with a diameter of 50 to 70 micro micrometers. And then, fine beach sand has a diameter of 90 micrometers, so about 40 times larger than PM 2.5. Alright, so I mentioned some of the sources for PM 2.5 but what are other sources of PM 2.5? So there are primary sources and natural sources. So first, for primary sources, they include traffic pollution, industrial pollution, but also agricultural, including fertilizer use and crop burning. In terms of natural sources, they include volcanic eruptions, wildfires, and sandstorms. Alright. So, now that we've defined airborne fine particulate matter or PM 2.5, we can go back to that initial question of what's optimal for airborne PM 2.5 exposure and that's what we'll see here. This is a study of almost 61,000,000 people and as far as I've been able to find, this is the largest study ever published on this topic. On the y axis, we've got the hazard ratio or risk of death for all causes and then on the x, we've got annual average exposure airborne exposure to PM 2.5. And what we can see is that as PM 2.5 increases, that's significantly associated with a relatively higher risk of death for all causes. In terms of lowest risk, that's associated with PM 2.5 values that are less than five micrograms per cubic meter. So, in terms of what's optimal, that's my target. Indoor air quality with a PM 2.5 average for the full day for every day three hundred sixty five days in a year less than five micrograms per cubic meter. Now, note that we can track PM 2.5. And to do that, I'm using the Kingpin Air Quality Monitor generation two. And note that I'm not affiliated. I'm not sponsored. This is what I'm using. There are other products. I'm not here to say that they're they're the best, but this monitor includes several variables that I was interested in tracking, which is what's shown here, including p m 2.5 but also p m 10. So at some point, I could do a p m 10 video in terms of how that looks over time. It also includes c o two carbon dioxide measurements and that might not seem like a big deal but my house is pretty tightly sealed so if I don't properly vent c o two, it will accumulate in the house. And one reason why that's important is because there are a few studies, although there aren't many studies, where elevated concentration, room concentrations of carbon dioxide can negatively impact heart rate variability and resting heart rate. So I'm collecting data to see if that's true or not in my case so stay tuned for that at some point in a future video. So this air quality monitor also includes variables that I was tracking in Boston including temperature and humidity. Also, these variables can impact HRV and resting heart rate. Too hot and too cold and but also too humid can potentially impact h r v and resting heart rate at least in my in my data. It also includes a volatile organic compounds which are metabolites that are released into the air for example by cooking but also fragrances and laundry detergent anything that has a smell can be released into the air. And, last but not least, it also includes noise and decibels and granted, I'm least interested in tracking that as I I can hear differences. You know, we could hear differences whereas sensing carbon dioxide is is we can't do that. Right? In terms of the goal, the goal is to keep PM 2.5 less than five micrograms per cubic meter all day every day for a full year. So, what does that look like? Let's take a look at a couple days of examples of tracking PM 2.5 with the first day being September 12 through September 13 as shown here. On the y axis, we've got PM 2.5 and that's tracking from 06:30 at night on September 12 through 06:30 at night on September 13. And then, in terms of what's optimal, we put a green arrow at that p m 2.5 measurement of five micrograms per cubic meter. And then, for about a four hour period on this day, we can see that I was at or above that five microgram per cubic meter threshold. So, why did that happen? Well, when I turn the bathroom exhaust fan on, that it looks like it leads to a spike in PM 2.5 into the house and the reason I'm turning the bathroom exhaust fan on isn't just to get rid of humidity in the shower, it's to vent carbon dioxide and VOCs from the house. So my house is pretty tightly sealed and if I don't turn that fan on to vent to the external air, c o two and VOCs can accumulate in the house and we're considering that there is published data at least for c o two that it may negatively impact HRV and resting heart rate, I wanna keep c o two levels relatively low. Now, there is a potential upgrade for the bathroom exhaust fan, and that's an energy recovery ventilator, which is known as an ERV. But I I got a price call for this and it was $5,000. So I'm not sure it's worth the cost to have a few hours of PM 2.5 spike or potentially spike. This effect doesn't happen every day, although it happens consistently as we'll see. So for now, I'm sticking with the lower budget option of just replacing the bathroom exhaust fan and having a small spike for p m 2.5 relative to the $5,000 or potentially more e r v which, to be totally honest, I don't know if that would do anything in terms of p m 2.5. Maybe I'd have the same same issue. Now, when I turn the bathroom exhaust fan on, we can see that PM 2.5 quickly comes down back to almost zero and at other times when I turn the fan on, we can see that there's there were spikes albeit smaller spikes and when I turn the fan off, PM 2.5 comes down. So this is a pretty consistent effect where I'm venting c o two and VOCs to the outside but, for whatever reason, the there's an increase in fine particulate matter that's coming back through the fan into the house which is a drawback. Fortunately though, when the windows are closed, we can see that PM 2.5 in the house is almost completely non existent which helps bring the full day average too far below five. It's actually about less than two micrograms per cubic meter. Alright. So this is one day. So let's take a look at another example, September 14 through September 15 as shown here, and then we'll put up a green line at that five microgram per cubic meter threshold cutoff. Remember, I wanna try to stay below that every day for a full year. And then, we can see a couple of big spikes. In fact, the spikes here are larger than they were on the previous slide such that at one point, p m 2.5 went to higher than 10 micrograms per cubic meter. Now, when I turned the bathroom fan on at another point in the day, granted there was a smaller spike but still almost as large as what we saw on the previous day. And then with the bathroom exhaust fan off, we can see that p m 2.5 quickly came down. So this is clearly a bathroom exhaust fan story and I should mention, I haven't shown it here but the bathroom exhaust fan is doing a good job of venting c o two and VOCs to the outside air. So this isn't a net negative, You know, I'm getting a reduction in c o two and VOCs but, unfortunately, an increase in PM 2.5 on most days when I'm turning that bathroom exhaust fan on. Here too though, fortunately, when the window is closed, we can see that PM 2.5 in the house is almost non existent at most one microgram per cubic meter. So, this is great news because, again, it helps keep that full day average below that five microgram per cubic meter threshold. If If you've ever wondered what's optimal for biomarkers, well, I have a new Patreon tier dedicated specifically to that. It currently includes the 35 biomarkers shown here in more than two hours of video content, 52 published references, and note that these aren't the reference ranges which you can get from any LLM these days. It's what may be optimal based on how each of these biomarkers changes during aging and or their associations with risk of death for all causes. So if you're interested in that, check it out. And I also post at least twice per day in five different Patreon tiers. So if you're interested in checking out my attempts to slow aging, check us out there. We've also got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself that help support the channel including ultalabtest.com, which is where I get the majority of my blood tests done, the Clearly Filtered Water Filter, which I use every day, at home metabolomics from up to 20 tests, oral microbiome composition, any detesting with Ginfinity, epigenetic testing with true diagnostic, at home blood testing with Xiphox, which includes the best epigenetic clock of epigenetic clocks, GrimAge, green tea, which I drink every day, diet tracker with Cronometer, also using it every day, Or, if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch including Data is my North Star which I've got on here. Figuring Stuff Out is my drug, and the conquer agent or die trying channel logo. If you're interested in that, check it out. Link in the video description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.