So I looked into it in, strict carnivores in, like, cheetahs and tigers. Right? Because they're so there are animals in the wild who eat no fiber, which goes back to this idea of how and, you know, I'm just more interested in it from the academic point of view. Like, how could any animal exist without fiber? So, there's one study that I know of where they fed cheetahs whole rabbit or just meat, and eat feeding the whole rabbit actually led to an increase in fecal short chain fatty acids similar to fructooligosaccharides compared with only eating the meat. So they hypothesized that things like cartilage could be could act as a prebiotic, not less so, you know, the hair, bones, and skin. So I don't know. What what would you think? Or or the other thing, if you're having the whole one, I'm thinking that your microbiome is being transferred as well. It's it's almost like a fecal transfer. Alright. Yeah. So the other thing we are trying to see is, if you put mice together in cages, they eat each other's poops. Yeah. So you don't even actually have to do a fecal transfer. You can just take an aged mice. There have been studies that have done that, and they just put them in the cages of young mice. And because they eat the young, poop, you already start seeing a benefit in everything that we talked about. The fecal health is better. They're living longer. So that that ex answers the question that if you're having the whole rabbit, you're possibly transferring the whole microbiome as well in there. Interesting. Yeah. I'm assuming some of it is getting colonized rather than the meat on its own, whereas the meat can possibly give you some fatty acids. But Or worse if it's infected meat, e coli, or whatever, salmonella, whatever it may be. Right? Yep. Yep. Could could it also be that there are you know, so the pancreas secretes bicarbonate, which can affect the colonic pH. I mean, granted, maybe more upstream in the small intestine, but I'd imagine a large bolus would end up getting right. So could it be that for people who are eating no fiber and, again, just purely from an academic point of view question. Right? So could it be that maybe the pancreas would secrete less bicarbonate, may thereby shifting the balance to a more acidic I don't know. It it could be because the other thing, one of the other metabolites that we haven't touched upon is that your microbiome can convert all of these bile acids, the primary bile acids into secondary bile acids. The reason we haven't touched upon it that much is because we still don't completely understand the function of the secondary bile acids. But there's now some evidence that a few of them are actually anti inflammatory in nature. So if we go back to your inflammatory conditions, IBD being the one where we have the maximum amount of evidence, there is link between your liver bile acid production and how healthy your gut health is Because that's another metabolite that's not gained that much attention that our microbiome is actually even converting all of those bile acids that the liver is producing into beneficial secondary bile acids as well.