How would you know when HDL is indeed too high? So if you look at the all cause mortality data, it's a a j or a u shaped curve, actually, probably closer to a u shape. Whereas you mentioned, less than 40, higher risk. Then once you get above 70, also higher risk. So, apo a one tracks with the HDL story because apo a one is found almost exclusively on HDL. It can be freely floating in plasma, but if it's in blood, it's almost exclusively coming from HDL. And I I know that not just because of the, you know, published mechanism and and that it's, you know, found on HDL. But I've measured apo a one and HDL. I looked at the correlation over seven tests, and the correlation coefficient is greater than point nine. So I I actually stopped measuring 8.1 and just, I'm only focused on HDL. There's no need to measure them both. So if you look at the quote, unquote optimal range for HDL, 50 to 69 men and women, this is a study of, like, 12,000,000 people or more. I don't remember the exact actual number. It was greater than 10,000,000. But so okay. Let's bypass that. Let's look at APO a one. Well, in a small study, I think this study was about three hundred thousand people. All cause mortality risk for APO a one was lowest for one fifty to one eighty milligrams per deciliter. Alright. What about greater than one eighty? Well, although lowest risk was that one fifty to one eighty, all cause mortality risk went away at greater than one eighty. So you essentially lost the lower lowering of all cause mortality risk get values greater than one eighty. So in your case, I'd say that's the best case scenario. I don't think your HDL is gonna be associated with a higher all cause mortality risk when considering 8.1, but there's another factor to consider. So HDL high HDL, you know, cardio cardioprotective. So then why or in within what context with high HDL be potentially bad for health and or longevity? Well, when considering that, as you mentioned, alcohol can raise it and knowing that and I'm not saying you're an alcoholic by no means. I'm not saying that. I'm sure you're not. You have moderate alcohol intake. But, for people who are alcoholics, HDL is dramatically high. And within that context, they've got damage to liver enzymes. GGT is relatively high, AST, ALT. So could that be a part of your story where maybe you wouldn't die from cardiovascular disease, but maybe some liver related issues? Could you clean up your liver related issues with train you know, not blood testing the day before the a hard workout and now GGT is less than 12, AST, ALT closer to the, you know, low twenties? And then the HDL story doesn't become a liver health story. It's just okay. Well, it's maybe it's a bit too much wine where I'm losing the lowering of all cause mortality risk just being outside of that one eighty. So so that would be the context for that.