Hey, everyone. Today's guest is James Stroll, who is the creator and director of the Revolution Against Aging and Death or RadFest, which is a yearly conference that brings together scientists, physicians, biohackers, and longevity enthusiasts to share the latest advancements in life extension, age reversal, and antiaging research. This year's conference is coming up relatively soon in July, July 10, and James is here to tell us all about it, and we'll dive into other aging related topics. So with that, welcome, James, and let's get into the presentation. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you very much, Michael. It's great to be on your show here. Okay. We'll get right into it. You already said told everybody, July 10 at the Red Rock Resort in, Las Vegas. It's gonna be unprecedented, event because we're having unprecedented collaboration with, the Lev the LEED Foundation with, Aubrey de Grey. So I think, already that's been announced several times, but, maybe, people who don't know, he's gonna bring a whole new level of, you know, PhD information, and science, to the table, and we're really excited about that. In fact, I'm meeting him Saturday in Vegas for a prelaunch. We have a company there that wants to help, promote RadFest and has invited us there. You know, there this company is inviting several other, companies to be there with us. And so Aubrey and I will do a little, preview of RadFest there on Saturday, this coming Saturday. So, the birth of I I wanna talk a little bit, about the birth of RadFest because I think that's important for people who say don't, know too much about RadFest or how it really got started. I'm always asked that. It's a really, a new era of longevity. And we started, the idea or thinking about doing something of this nature in 2014. RadFest by the excuse me. The Coalition for Radical Life Extension, which produces RadFest, okay, is a nonprofit, organization, four zero one c three, and it was formed, as a global outreach initiative, with People Unlimited. People Unlimited is the organization that I also own here. It's it's a longevity community, here in Scottsdale, Arizona that's dedicated to educating and and inspiring people to live unlimited lifespans. So in 2014, we, started, you know, talking about, here at People Unlimited, we wanted to do an outreach to the community. And, several of our team members said, well, why don't we go out and, you know, reach out to some of the doctors and scientists that we're hearing now that are coming to the table? We're hearing more and more. And before that, we hadn't very little science that we were able to actually, be in connect connected with. So, I started reaching out to different individuals, and one of them was, Bill Andrews, who's now one of our major board members, doctor Bill Andrews, who who owns Sierra Sciences. And, so I reached out to him and, he immediately said, oh, you know, I love the idea of forming a coalition, for radical life extension, and I love the idea then launching it with some type of event. At that time, we didn't really have a total concept of how we want that event to look like, but he was excited about it. He started introducing me the short story is he started introducing me to other, people, in the network, other scientists and doctors who he thought would be interested too. He came here to People Unlimited and loved it. He said he said, wow. I thought I was in a desert out here by myself, and I meet all you guys. So so contrary to what some people may think, you know, scientists and doctors are people too. They need they need human contact, and and sometimes they feel very alone. In fact, after starting the Coalition for Radical Life Attention, having the first event of RadFest in 2016, I had several doctors and scientists come up to me and say, wow. You know, thank you for doing this because we felt like we were by ourselves out here. And now we feel more inspired. And some of them gave me, you know, little presence because they of gratitude, so that was very touching. And and really that's what I wanted to create was a a broad collaboration and and inspiration for not only the doctors, but for entrepreneurs, enthusiasts, you know, you know, scientists of all levels, and and create a a place where people could come and get inspired and and find collaborations and find funding, etcetera, etcetera. So in 2016, we had the inaugural event, which, we had a record breaking attendance for any event of its kind of over a thousand people, and 30 plus countries were represented. So we were really thrilled. Aubrey at the time, he was great. He was there. And, he came up to me at towards the middle of the event and said, Jim, I I I hoped you'd be able to do this, but I really didn't really, I kinda doubted it, so now I'm never gonna doubt you again. So so I think that's what kind of, you know, morphed into this now relationship we've got that we're doing, this RadFest here in in 2010, which is our tenth anniversary. It it the RadFest in 2016 immediately established a global longevity community. It was, like, spontaneous. It also attracted funding for longevity initiatives, drew an international press. We had a lot of press. We got a lot of, you know, good, press out there. Prior to that time, it was difficult, for us to really get good press. There's so much skepticism. But when these when the media came in and saw that, heard all these scientists and heard all these doctors, and saw all these great, you know, scientists, they began to, you know, get a little bit little bit more positive. And, so kinda it changed the dynamics, changed the, relationship there a lot. It also, enabled and accelerated collaboration between researchers, entrepreneurs, advocates, and the general public. Okay. So so we made history together then, and that was fantastic. The critical research that Aubrey de Grey has, curated, through his renowned longevity summit will now be featured at RadFest alongside the most advanced and and, relevant clinical practices for for impacting longevity today. So we're very excited about this. We think that, it's gonna be a, really, an event like no other we've ever had. And that's what we wanted. We we always wanna grow. We always wanna expand. We always wanna bring the best to the table. And I think it's important for me to, excuse me, point out this point that, we're not a commercial organization. We're a nonprofit. We're we don't we're not selling things. We don't, you know, we don't take percentages from companies. We have exhibitors come in, but we don't take percentages from them. They just they pay their fees. They sell their products. But we we don't take a percentage of anything because we think it's a conflict of interest for us. We want people to know that we're bringing the best to the table that we can bring all the time in health and wellness and any innovations we bring there. We're not getting some cut from it. Okay? So so there's not a conflict there for us. And but so the coalition, and now Longevity Escape Velocity Fund are joining together, and that's that's a real, beautiful thing for us. RadFest goals. Okay? We wanna galvanize and have done that already, but wanna continue to be impacted in that, the Radical Life Extension community. As you know, and I think, many of our listeners know, we've we've been kind of all out there doing our own thing sometimes. Nothing wrong with that. But we found out that by working together and having that, you know, spirit of camaraderie, we can all go, faster and move things faster, get greater support. And so that's still our our big initiative, and we've made some great success in that, but we that's still we're still moving for that, across the board. We also wanna create and have created a sea change within the longevity movement. And, we have a lot of people that we're very open on that level to collaborate with anybody. There's, other we don't we don't see anybody as competition. We don't care who they are, whether it's, a four m or any other company. I'm grateful for what Brian Johnson is doing. He came and spoke at RadFest. He actually told us. He said, look. He said, I thank them for coming. He said, well, I thank you because you guys were really the inspiration for for me to do what I'm doing today. So we appreciated that and that's the kind of response we get. And we're open, for to work with anybody on that level. RadFest blends with the best science and inspiration. This is the very important thing. Aubrey and I both talk about this. Aubrey was saying the other day, when he he was actually visiting here in Scottsdale that, he, you know, really wants people to get that the power of inspiration and science working together, creates a synchronicity that can take us all to a more powerful place in in our movement. The the the inspiration, the mindset, and embracing, the, all the innovations, a new science, and everything is coming forth. If you, in your mind, can embrace that, not just feel like it's something that is, say, you know, fluff or or not real or science fiction, the more we embrace that and our possibilities of of living unlimited lifespans, the stronger we're gonna get in our personal resolve, our resilience, our strength, our emotional strength, and that's so important. And then when you're doing any innovation, as any doctor would tell you, you're doing a supplement, it works better if your mindset is aligned with it. So that's something we focus on a lot too. Okay. We have this is our tenth launch, and, we have we're gonna have this year that's different, alright, that I I'm very excited about, is we're gonna have a longevity lounge clinic. It's it's a long it's called Rad RadFest Clinic. Alright? And we'll still have some exhibitors, but in this clinic, there's gonna be all the best that we can bring to the table, innovations, whether it's, EBU, therapeutic therapeutics plasma exchange, many other innovations. And people can come I wanted a place where people could come, do these innovations, experience getting even right there right there at RadFest at discounted prices, by the way, huge discounted prices where for for the most part, the discount they would get could pay for their ticket because, it's it's that it's that discounted, and they can do these great innovations there and begin to take a new path for their health that maybe in their air particular area they live in didn't have availability for. And so they'll be able to to do all those things and be able then to follow-up with the doctors that are there that are doing these innovations right there in this clinic. So they can sign up be beforehand. There this is already I think it will be going out next week, sign up forms, to everybody who's who's registered, and they can sign up for these ahead of time. There'll be such things as follistatin gene therapy, cancer detection, blood tests, exosomes. Doctor Kaufman is gonna be there. She's fantastic in in her exosome, administrations. Ebu and Ebu two with pulse light frequencies, on-site blood test panels, precision bone diagnostics. And this is a really special diagnostic, bone density. As it's advanced it's I think it's probably the most advanced, that's out there right now. It's it's sponsored by OsteoStrong, which is also a a company that has been on the forefront of helping create through their innovations, greater and stronger bone density and tissue density or or tendon, connections, for for greater strength of the joints, etcetera. Then there's a collection and cryopreservation of stem cells will be being done. I mentioned already therapeutic plasma exchange is very powerful. Skincare made from stem cells, biological a blood blood test, and numerous others. I mean, it's gonna be such an, amazing clinic. I mean, this is what we wanna see happen where people can come and do an application, get better right there at RadFest, and be able to follow-up on it. So RadFest speakers, let's talk about that a little bit. Got a few here that we got. We got Brian Kennedy from the, University of Singapore. I think everybody knows who in the in this arena, Brian Kennedy. I'm really happy to have him on board this year. He's he's a profound speaker. We got we got doctor Jose Salaso, from Time Life. He's he's we're talking about natural calocell therapy as a new frontier of immunization and longevity medicine. Then doctor Spring, she'll be talking on the enhancement of, of the approach of altering aging. So she's she's, really a very powerful speaker herself. We've got doctor Wei, who who rewrite the time equation, a nature inspired pres biopreservation, program. James Arrowood, the reality of cryonics from, from Alcor. He's a great speaker himself. And then, of course, Matt Caberline. Hey. He's doing all these great studies on dogs and and, been able to, you know, transfer that information to human beings. And so he'll have a lot of new information I'm excited to hear. So we got 60 more, RadFest speakers that amongst those guys, along program. We've got the main stage. We got the the also, the labs we're doing now. So some of these doctors will be speaking on the main stage for maybe fifteen, twenty minutes. Now we've got we we started this last year, longevity labs. And and these labs will, enable these doctors or anyone to go deeper into their subject. They'll get more time. And so people who wanna follow-up and say stem cells, etcetera, exosomes can go and hear more extensive work, or or presentations on that in these labs. The labs will not be going on the same time the base stage is going on. So that enables people to interact, better and and to attend these in a way that, becomes more of an open choice for them then. They don't have to worry about missing something as much. So okay. That's, Radfest. Radfest ten. Just be there and you're gonna be, really have your mind blown this year. And I'm I I can't wait myself and to meet everybody who's coming, and I I hope you're really gonna be able to be there, Michael. So this year, unfortunately, for me, I'm moving at the June. That's right. You told me. Yeah. Yeah. So next year, 100% gonna be there. I'm gonna forgive you for that then, and we'll see you next year.