Hey, everyone. Today's guest is Joseph Allen, who is a doctor of optometry, a fellow of the American Academy of Optometry, and a diplomat of the American Board of Optometry. He's also the creative voice of the YouTube channel Doctor Eye Health. Today, we'll discuss all things related to the eye and eye health and eye aging and how to potentially slow eye aging and optimize eye function. So with that, welcome, Joseph. Wow. Mike, thank you so much for the introduction, and just, thanks for, again, the opportunity. This is, always an honor, and I just I hope it reaches, many, many ears, and helps them with their eyes and vision. So thank you. Alright. So let's let's start off with developmental changes that happen in the eye. So postmaturity, because the eye goes through a wide range of potential conditions. Like, it isn't just eye aging. You know? It could be glaucoma or macular degeneration or astigmatism, myopia. There's so many conditions that can happen there happen during the aging process. So if you could just walk us through just the average changes to the eye and then how eye pathology would deviate in terms of these different conditions during you know, throughout the lifespan? Yeah. This is a really good question. I love how you kinda toss it up, you know, like, post maturity a little bit, because as we grow from a young age as a kid through our adolescence, the biggest issue around the eyes is mainly myopia or nearsightedness development. And at a really young age, maybe some cortical or brain issues related to vision. But once everybody hits around the age of, like, 24, 25, maybe finishing college or or getting more into their standard, career, the eye doesn't change too much until our forties. And what's the first thing that people experience is usually people notice, hey. I have a hard time reading up close a little bit. Right? They have a hard time seeing their phone now, or reading a book. They feel like this just takes a little longer for them to focus up close and then look in the distance. It just takes that extra second for for everything to become clear again. And then eventually people start needing reading glasses or in the eye care world, no one likes the b word, bifocal. But that is something called presbyopia, and that's the term basically saying you have older eyes. And pathologically, what's going on inside the eye actually relates to another condition down the road just to maybe fifteen, twenty years later. So what is happening in presbyopia is the lens inside of your eye. You're born with a crystalline lens. That lens, when you're a kid, is thin and it's clear, and it's also flexible because it is so thin. And so when you use your eye muscles inside the eye, there's a muscle called the ciliary body. And that muscle, when you flex it, it changes the shape of the lens and that changes the focusing of light to allow you to see up close. Right? And little kids can do this. They can go cross eyed, and they can see the tip of their nose because that lens is so thin and flexible. But by the time you're in your late thirties, mid forties, and and we have mathematical algorithms to calculate this, and it's very consistent. The lens has grown thicker with years of life. And by the time you're in your mid forties, the lens is so thick, it is no longer as flexible as it was when you were a kid. And so, at that stage around mid forties, I get a lot of people who come in and say that, you know, I'm just I'm having a hard time seeing up close, and that's because that lens is just not wanting to change shape. And so then we have to start talking about either reading glasses is an easy option for a lot of people. It's affordable. Then there are if you wear glasses more often, there's, of course, bifocals. There's the fancy ones called progressives or varifocals depending on where you live. Those are the ones without the line. And then, you also have multifocal contacts. There are some eye implants, that can be put into the eye if you wanna invest that type of money to have eye surgery. And then there are also eye drops now, medications that are prescription that either a few that have come out already and then a few that are in development that cause your pupils to constrict, and that allows you to have a better focus or depth of focus, or depth of field technically. But that allows them to see things up close without having to reach for reading glasses all the time. So that's probably yeah. Yeah. So quick interjection. Right? So, the age related oh, it's suppressed by open, just starting with that, That the lens is thickening. What's the underlying, mechanism that's going on there? And can it be completely slowed to where there's no age related like, does it happen will it happen literally to everyone? It's just a matter of time, and some people can push that window out, or it could happen even faster based on, you know, poor lifestyle, sedentary behavior, all of the, lifestyle poor lifestyle choices. Really good question. And thank you for that. The bottom reason of, like, why that occurs is not fully understood, but there's kinda two mechanisms that they know is kind of undergoing. We know that every year of life, you're gaining a new layer of cells within the lens. It's kinda like looking at an onion, and you can see individual layers. You can even look up pictures of, the lens, the crystal lens inside the eye, and you can see these individual layers that, again, you add those layers over time. So it's like rings on a tree. Eventually, the tree gets so thick, and it's no longer getting you know, the wind is no longer blowing it back and forth. The other component is as it's growing, there's a capsular bag that, we're getting really nuanced here, but there's a capsular bag around those lens fibers. And with more lens fibers, the pressure inside of the bag increases. And as there's more pressure, the oxidative stress Mhmm. And the proteins within the cell start to kind of they they become to harden. It's kinda like, thinking of geology and and the pressure and time of pushing on, like, tectonic plates and things like that. It it's kinda like forming a diamond. That pressure is causing a crystalline change of the the lens fibers. And so they they don't have any medications or so far, I've never seen any publications to really say that a dietary or lifestyle change will prevent this. However, there are, we can kinda dive into this, but I'm always very cautious about talking about eye exercises a little bit, because there's a lot of, I hate to say, pseudoscience around, eye exercises too. And and we can dive into that, as we as we kinda go along with our conversation, if we wanna dive into that. But the, there are some, findings that doing some flexibility exercises. Basically, you're you're forcing by looking at the distance and then focusing up close, looking at the distance back and forth. And doing that several times, you can kind of it's there's you're actually improving the coordination between the brain and the eye muscle. The muscle itself inside the eye ciliary body is smooth muscle, so you're not gonna be able to train and strengthen and make that muscle, hypertrophy. But just the process of doing that may make the lens fibers it may keep them more flexible for a time. And so you may extend instead of maybe like, oh, I'm getting needing reading glasses at 45. Maybe you'll need it at 50, or maybe you'll need it at 52. So it may extend a few years, but, eventually, you you will have this sum of experience of presbyopia, just at some point in life. So just as simple as, like, you've got something up close that may be hard to read. You put it away. Try to read it from far away and then move it closer again. Mhmm. Yeah. The, the the very classic, process is called pencil push ups. And so they'll have you do, looking at the the top of a pen, and then you hold that at arm's length, look beyond that, look at something really far away, look back at the tip of the pen, and then slowly bringing the pen toward your nose. And, eventually, the pen will start first start to go blurry. And then if you continue to bring it closer, eventually, that pen will eventually split and go into double, because that's at a point where your eye muscles are having a hard time maintaining, single vision. But usually blur occurs first, and you kinda push it. You find where that spot where it just turns blurry, and and you can, like, hold it there for a few seconds and then look back, push your arm further away again. And you can kind of make these you can either do a step jumps looking at you know, you're going from far away to the pen to a little bit closer to a little bit closer. But a lot of times doing it in a smooth fashion also helps control, more microscopic eye ocular movements. But you can kind of keep pushing yourself to see how close you can get and getting closer and closer to your nose and just doing those fluid motions. That's, I'll say, is the general description of, pencil push ups. The the reason why I'm very cautious about saying eye exercises is because, again, some people go off the deep end and say, oh, this is gonna reverse your need for glasses. No. Unfortunately, there's no scientific accuracy to that. There's also the risk for some individuals. There are some eye conditions where if you do pencil push ups or various vision therapy, is the proper is one of the terms that's used. Another one is called orthoptics. But it's possible to do eye muscle exercises and actually cause eye problems. You can if somebody you can act some people you can actually induce double vision permanently, and it's very difficult to fix. So I'm always waving a hand of caution before people start doing this. It's really important to, consult with an eye care provider, with an eye care provider who hopefully has training and advanced understanding in, vision therapy or orthoptics, yeah, just because there there is that risk. And I I've always been very hesitant. I'm like, I don't want people to do this too much or without supervision and end up causing a problem. Yeah. So alright. Without, but so then even just general recommendations for how often because with clearly, you don't wanna overtrain it, but then doing nothing too may may not be optimal. So, I mean Yeah. Would there be a minimum that, you know, potential ROI, you know, to make an impact? I I wish I had that, level of expertise or knowing if there's a, if there was a a, like, clinical evidence of telling me exactly how many times to do this or how frequent, but I personally don't know that off the top of my head that's something I'll have to dig in and do research on. Interestingly enough, my my girlfriend is a a very leading authority in in use doing those various eye muscle exercises. So I'll I'll maybe consult with her first. Good. But that's a very unique niche in the world of eye care and something that, I have yet to challenge myself with to understand even better, but that'll certainly be something I'm gonna be diving into within the year, for both YouTube as well as just for my own education. Nice. Same because it's it's new to me, so I'm gonna see what the publish literature shows there too. Yeah. And, of course, what I'll do is I'll try to circle back, and maybe you and I can do, like, even, like, a quick video or something for your YouTube channel just trying to dive into that one question. Fantastic. Yeah. Alright. So still staying on the mechanism, or mechanisms underlying, presbyopia. So when considering oxidative stress as a part of that story, so then most people automatically jump towards antioxidants. But I look at it from the other side, which is, you know, oxidative stress is a nature of aerobic existence. Right? It's a it's a it's a foundation of life. It's gonna happen no matter what. But can we reduce the rate? Alright. So what reduces the rate of oxidative stress production, calorie restriction, gold standard. You know, mitochondrial mitochondrial from animals that are calorie restricted have lower rates of oxidative stress production relative to, you know, fed ad lib. So assuming you're you're already on the lowest oxidative, you know, producing ROS, if you're already on that, then you should have your lowest levels of protein oxidative damage, potentially optimized metabolic health, and then many maybe minimizing, adverse changes to the eye over time. Right? But can we can we get more specific? Are are there and, actually, I don't know if that's true. I haven't looked into the published literature. That would just be the hypothesis, that, calorie restricted animals may delay eye eye related pathology. I don't know if that's true. I'm gonna have to go back and look myself. But do you have any insight? Have you looked into that? Is there any, info before I go to PubMed and do the legwork? Yeah. Wow. I'm really I'm happy just not, of what you're bringing up, but, like, your thought process behind it because I think it's really good. Just in general, when you think, okay, oxidative stress within the eye. So I kinda elucidated to is that the right word? But I thought I kinda mentioned it earlier that presbyopia is kind of the early beginnings of another process that happens fifteen, twenty years later down the down the road with the eye, and that's development of cataracts. And cataracts is when those crystalline changes inside the lens begin to truly change and becomes visible to not only the doctor. The doctor can look inside and see cataracts forming, but they became become these crystalline changes impede your eyesight of light passing through the lens and getting to the back of the eye. So then you start having blurred vision, more glare, halos around lights, and eventually reduced vision. So that happens later on with cataract formation. So oxidative stress plays this role throughout life and and affects this aging of the lens. Now it's funny that you mentioned people automatically kinda reach for, oh, I'll just take more antioxidants, and maybe that will help. They know that for people who are malnourished, who are low on vitamin c because vitamin c content of the aqueous humor, that's the clear liquid that develops inside the eye and actually surrounds the lens because there's no blood flow to the lens. So you have aqueous humor, and vitamin c content is extremely high in the aqueous humor. And that's mainly helping to fight the oxidative stress that goes on within the lens. And they find that people who are taking even supplements of vitamin c doesn't really make a difference to the the rate of cataract formation. So, unless you're deficient in vitamin c or unless you're malnourished, taking supplements of vitamin c is probably not gonna significantly affect your your rate of cataract formation. There's a few small studies out there that will say, hey. It's it's associated with a less cataract development, but it's not very strong, and it's it's just not as consistent in the literature. So the other thought that you mentioned, like, hey. Maybe calorie restriction. There is some publications behind this. And there's it doesn't not just in relation to things like cataract formation, but to other eye diseases, mainly that with, like, glaucoma and potentially, other metabolic conditions in the body, related to more like blood sugar control, as things like diabetes play significant roles, or to potential damage inside the eye. In fact, a huge portion of eye care education when you go to become an eye doctor is all about understanding, recognizing diabetic retinopathy and other, complications due to diabetes. Just to kinda give an extra tie in back to the lens that we're discussing, people who do have elevated levels of glucose, especially in cases of diabetes. So when you have elevated levels of sugars, especially chronically, it it creates what's called a sorbitol there's a sorbitol pathway. So your glucose ends up creating a sugar alcohol, which ends up causing not only swelling of the retinal tissue in the back of the eye, but causes but it causes the lens inside the eye to swell. And so patients who are diabetic, they may not even know that they're diabetic. Maybe their family doctor has missed it or they haven't seen their family doctor, haven't had their their blood sugars checked. I've had patients come in and their glasses prescription has changed three diopters in just a few months. Like, they don't need glasses, and all of a sudden, they need glasses, and it's a that's a huge jump. And the the where when you learn through school and your training to recognize that and be like, hey. There's a good chance you're probably diabetic because the lens has swollen with the sugar alcohol, and now it changes your your refractive status. And so that's, that's just another insight into perhaps, yeah, maybe calorie restriction, looking into doing intermittent fasting, fasting states have has had some there's a lot of different research into its benefits for the eyes, both in animals and and some in humans. So I I was thinking about titrating it even where so, you know, even if you've got normal levels of blood glucose, you know, on the lower side of the range would be best, assuming lower glucose, less glycation. But then even just using something like, h b a one c, glycated hemoglobin. Right? So, you know, to be considered prediabetic is 5.7, and values in youth are closer to five than they are to 5.7. But they slowly increase during aging. So, you know, if your if your h b a one c is five, then it's five one, five two over a period of years, you're slowly on that trajectory for, you know, insulin resistance over time, elevated blood glucose, and increased potential rate of glycation in the eye. So it makes me wonder, you know, what is the lower limit of not just glucose, but, like, things markers like h b a one c, and then looking at year to year change and trying to keep, not artificially, but, you know, diet and lifestyle. What's the overall recipe? You know, how much exercise? How much how much actual protein, fat, carbs? You know, a prescription nutrition approach to keep your markers of glycation from from increasing during aging, potentially optimizing eye health and minimizing, you know, pathological conditions. Yeah. That's a really good question. I've never seen any publications looking at that minute of detail. But if if you can if you need some more insight, yeah, we can put our heads together and try to see what would a trial or something like that look like. Along those lines too, when considering blood flow is a part of the eye health equation, you know, could it be that, you know, just, not capillators, capill you know, capillary or or blood flow to the small capillaries. It's I I don't know why I can't say the word all of a sudden, but capillarization. Right? So where, you know, the could that be, reduced during aging, less blood flow to the eye, and maybe even the brain? And, that could that be contributing to some of the eye related changes during aging? So there's a lot of things that occur, obviously, with the eye with aging. And we're there's many eye conditions. I would say the vast majority of of, like, retinal disease. Even the optic nerve is somewhat like, optic nerve is really until, like, a condition like glaucoma. It does have to do with blood flow and basically metabolic when I say blood flow, it's not only just we need oxygen. And oxygen is really important inside the eye. So you do need proper blood flow, but you also need the metabolites to get to those tissues because the retinal tissue in the back of the eye is one of the most highly metabolic tissues in the entire body. There's a high metabolic demand. So, for sure, as we get older, we do see higher rates of various eye diseases like glaucoma, macular degeneration, risk for arterial venous occlusions, arterial occlusions. So, basically, occlusive disease or or people think of, oh, having a stroke, either in the brain or having a heart attack in the heart. You can have a stroke in the eye as well, whether it be on a single branch of an artery inside the eye, or it can occur to the entire optic nerve head and the entire eye loses blood flow. Also, blood flow relates to ocular perfusion pressure, which has to do with how the aqueous humor and pressure inside the eye affects, not only blood flow to things like the optic nerve, but potentially pressure that's pushing on the nerve that contributes to faster cell death of the ganglion cells that contributes to glaucoma. So there's there's a lot. What what do you wanna dive onto? So does blood pressure factor into that pressure equation, like higher blood pressure being a worse part? Yeah. So blood pressure does have a role with, not as much of pressure inside the eye development. So what I'm saying is that the aqueous humor leading to intraocular pressure or our readings for IOP, having elevated blood pressure doesn't necessarily cause increased levels of aqueous fluid development. But the there is a role in having low blood pressure, Like, especially for people who are on medications for high blood pressure, especially if they take it at nighttime right before bed, their blood pressure while they're sleeping may drop really low. And then there's, in fact, a a problem with too much pressure and not allowing, basically, you don't allow blood pressure. The the pressure behind the eye ends up pushing it, so you don't get enough blood flow into the eyeball. So a lot of times, that's a a bigger concern for people with, what's called normal tension glaucoma. And so, if patients have normal eye pressures, they still are developing glaucoma, it's getting worse, and we are concerned that they're on blood pressure medications or they have very low blood pressure, we usually have to talk to their cardiologist or whoever's managing that to try to titrate their medications, especially at nighttime before bed. So that but that would be almost in a reverse causation kind of phase where you've got people who are you know, they're they're taking medications for high blood high blood pressure, hypertension. Right? So I'm looking at from the other side where you've got relatively youthful levels of blood pressure. That would be, you know, a a minimized risk on the eye, wouldn't it? Whereas, you know, you've got someone who's got low blood pressure and probably other comorbid conditions. So in that case, maybe the heart isn't strong enough to pump even against a relatively low blood pressure because of these other conditions, thereby also contributed to some pathology in the eye. I don't know. Yeah. You know, the big thing with as far as, you know, like, blood pressure is concerned, the biggest things that we see inside the eye is people who have high blood pressure. And and it's I think it's highly underdiagnosed, because we there is hypertensive retinopathy, and it's, again, it's very underdiagnosed. I've read some studies. It reports it's up to, like, sixteen percent of people, and most eye doctors agree it's, like, probably closer to fifty percent of people who are over the age of, like, 45. It's just most eye doctors, we see it and it's considered somewhat normal. And so I think a lot of doctors just don't report it. But the high blood pressure can affect and cause damage to the blood vessels within the eye. And so during an eye exam, it's not uncommon to look inside and just see that the arteries are narrowing. Eventually, the narrowing can turn into a kinking, kind of like you'd imagine a water hose in the summer starting to kink off. And further down the road, you can start to see hemorrhaging or bleeding inside the eye from, either leakage from these blood vessels getting damaged. And then in extreme cases when someone's blood pressure is very elevated, you can even see swelling of the optic nerve itself. So we do have to watch for high blood pressure on its own, which, again, most people don't feel or sense. The other issue is blood pressure, uncontrolled contributes and exacerbates so many other conditions, whether it be diabetic retinopathy. There's some association with macular retinopathy or or retinal disease, but even more so, and just your risk for developing against strokes or some sort of occlusive event within the eye. So, optimal metabolic health, keeping glucose on the lower side of the range, avoiding age related increase, glycated hemoglobin, same story, keeping blood pressure from its age related increase. So another variable maybe would be, cholesterol, cholesterol accumulation, and as a part of the, you know, atherosclerosis story probably being a negative factor on eye health. So how would cholesterol tie in? Yeah. 100%. And then you got it right on the head. It definitely is more of the tie into a atherosclerotic disease, basically affecting the vessel walls of the eye, whether it be due to direct plaque formation because there are times where we'll catch full cholesterol plaques or calcium plaques, one of the two, will be stuck inside of the eyeball. We call them Hollenhorst plaques. So because, again, you're you're just family, GP doctor. They they can't look at your arm through your skin and be able to say, hey. I can see your arteries are damaged through your skin, but the eyeball is a clear window. So, you can actually look inside and see the blood vessels in in vivo. And so there's times where you see a cholesterol plaque stuck in there. Otherwise, high high levels of cholesterol also associated with, damage to the retinal ganglion cells, which are, for listeners out there, your photoreceptors that most of us learned about in, like, high school biology, those are the receptors for the light energy, right, your rods and cones. But when those rods and cones get excited, they have to send that signal through think of it like an electrical cord. It has to send that signal down this cord, and those are your retinal ganglion cells. And they have to send those all the way to your optic nerve, and then it travels to your optic nerve. There's millions of these nerves five sending information to your brain. And the the problem is that they find that with elevated levels of cholesterol, you also have higher accumulation of various plaques, even amyloid beta plaques, associated with Alzheimer's disease accumulate within the retinal ganglion cells. And that that's associated, of course, with damaging to risk of conditions like glaucoma and other aging conditions. There's also some association of higher cholesterol, leading to problems or risk of macular degeneration, which is a highly very much dependent on not only metabolic disease, but, how your body deals with inflammation inside the the cells of the back of the eye. And so, we see an accumulation of various types of phospholipids or or fat cells, that deposit in the back of the eye, and cholesterol also plays a role with that. So if you have you seen people that have no presbyopia? I mean, they resist age related change, eighty eighty, 90, 100 years old, and perfect 20 20 vision and have you know? Does that even exist? So they they technically still have presbyopia, but they still have good vision because of other mechanisms of the eye. Either because they naturally have one eye that's maybe a little bit more farsighted, one eye that's more nearsighted, and so their brain actually shifts from right eye to the left eye depending on their task that they're doing. They also as we get older this is a brilliant process of of the eye. When we're young kids, our pupils are generally pretty big because our sympathetic nervous system controls our pupils. And so pupils and kids are huge. But as we get older, our parasympathetic system tends to take over, and so then the pupil size gets smaller and smaller. So people who are in their, like, seventies, eighties, nineties, their pupils, they get really, really bead small. And as you get a smaller pupil, your depth again, your depth of focus, or your depth of field improves. And so you, people tend to have a little bit easier time seeing up close. However, you need more light because, when your people get smaller, less light is getting into the eye, so they often have to crank up the the brightness in the room. And so that's actually a good tip for anybody who, maybe you're just at that cusp. You're in your forties or even fifties or in your, like, a dark, environment, either at home or certainly if you're at, like, a restaurant and it's, like, romantic hours, you see the lights dim down, you know, pull out some light. And lighting will not only help get that light into the eye, but it'll also constrict your pupil size, make it smaller, and give you a little bit better range to focus on something up close. Oh, interesting. Alright. Wait. So the you you mentioned sympathetic and parrot sympathetic nervous system with respect to the pupil. But Mhmm. The balance that balance between the two actually shifts towards more sympathetic because so sympathetic nervous system is the fight or flight, and that's you know, it's gonna lead to decreases for things like heart rate variability, whereas the parasympathetic or lower heart rate variability, which declines during aging. So increased sympathetic nervous system activity, lower heart rate variability. So during aging, heart rate variability declines during aging in part because of an overactivation of sympathetic nervous system and an inability to activate the parasympathetic. So it's interesting how that would be opposite for the eye, though. It seems like more sympathetic nervous system activity would be better for the pupil to, I guess, perceive more of the world, or am I misinterpreting that? So there is two two muscles in the iris, and this basically allows for, different movements. So whether or not you, generally, if you're in a rest and digest, you're in parasympathetic, your pupils are gonna be smaller, and in brighter situations. But when you are in a sympathetic mode, like, let's say, you're in a fight or flight, like a bear is about to attack you, then, yes, your sympathetic tone will change. Basically, one of the muscles in the iris will relax, the other one's gonna constrict, and then the pupils get really big. And so it it is interesting that you mentioned that with regards to aging. But, typically, just in most of the parasympathetic modes, we are gonna be in in a smaller meiotic pupil stage. Interesting. Yeah. It's I I wasn't even aware that the eye you know? Alright. So that's an interesting story. Alright. So then, homocysteine. Right? So homocysteine can also damage the eye. So, you know That's interest I I was very happy. I know you you you asked about that earlier. And homocysteine, quite fascinating. So people don't know homocysteine, amino acid used for producing various proteins in the body, various certain vitamin deficiencies. Right? Vitamin b six, vitamin b twelve, and then folic acid all play roles in basically breaking down homocysteine. Yep. And so if somebody's deficient in one of those, like, vitamin b twelve, we tend to have we don't absorb as well as we get older, and so, that may play a role in this. But when there is elevated levels of homocysteine, and I tried to dig into it, tried to better understand what what publications find that that is related to various eye diseases, It it looks like there is some association with not only atherosclerotic or vessel or vascular diseases within the eye, but then again with conditions like glaucoma, mainly because of higher levels of oxidative stress and potentially inflammation in those tissues. I couldn't find any real definite, strong associations with it. It sounds like there may be some, but it's still a little bit aloof in the industry. And it's interesting that you even asked that before because I was like, you know, I've read a few things mentioning homocysteine, but I haven't heard other doctors or researchers in the eye care space really discussing it too heavily. And so it was interesting for me just to dive down that role hole a little bit. So, I may have to continue trying to research into it and asking other other doctors I know if if if they have concerns, if they read much on it. It it may be just, you know, just too new ish. I mean, it is involved in vascular health, and vascular health is a part of the eye health story. So, yeah, it could be just there's not an abundance of literature on it yet. I'm just trying to think of biomarkers that I can look at. I mean, granted, we've got the end product, which is, you know, vision. Right? And and Mhmm. So these are new these are new. I mean, the one one point two five magnification. I had twenty twenty vision. I could see everything perfectly fine no no matter what the distance. But then over about the past month, it was like I tried to read the serial number on the bottom of a modem, and I was like, I can't. I'd have to I was taking pictures of it and then zooming in. So my mom left her glasses here, and, they're, you know, the same same prescription. And I was like, alright. I'm gonna put it on. It was like magic. So now I'm trying to think how my you know, what led to the process of of it happening in the first place? '20 again, 2020 vision my whole life. And then I've gotta really you know, knowing that glaucoma is now down the road, I've gotta slow this as much as I physically can or or it could be down the road. Right? So Yeah. Yeah. So do you do you know if anything runs in the family, like, if glaucoma or any other eye condition runs as a respect? Not not that I know, but maybe they didn't live long enough. Right? I mean, if if, I'm living thirty years longer than everybody else, then, you know, I'm gonna end up with all the condition conditions that they didn't. So my dad my dad wears glasses. His magnification's a lot stronger. My mom is wearing a a weaker prescription, but, yeah, it was a shock that so I'm obsessed now with what can I do to slow this? You know, what's the mechanism what mechanism can I study other than, you know, are my eyes more blurry now? Do I have to Mhmm. You know, increase the magnification on on the glasses? Yeah. So there's so many changes that occur inside the eye. The two biggest things, again, presbyopia is that starting to develop. Another component to the presbyopia story is the, again, that development of cataracts. And as the crystals inside the lens start to change, also the refractive power of the lens begins to change. So it's no longer just your ability to to be able to flex the lens to focus up close, but we start to see a shift in the need for glasses at that same time. So you actually lose a little bit of nearsightedness, and people gradually become more farsighted or needing plus powers in their glasses. And part of that is, again, just has to do with the the crystalline change, refractive power of, those lens of the cells inside the lens. So that can explain why maybe you feel like, you know, your glasses' prescription's changing in those in those later years where it might have been stable in your twenties and thirties and and maybe early forties. But then yeah. In your mid forties up to, like, sixties, you you see this gradual shift in glasses power change. Gotcha. What's fascinating is that once people have cataract surgery and they remove the cataract, they remove the natural crystal lens from the eye, and they put a new plastic synthetic lens inside the eye, they account for your glasses prescription with that calculation. They can put basically the power of your glasses into the implant. And once that happens, it's very rare for us to see a significant change in glasses prescription, unless there's some other pathology like retinal swelling or something going on in the back of the eye, which I think is just fascinating and goes to show that most of what's going on in the eye, in terms of glasses power, is purely physics. It's really just how light is focused by the cornea, the front surface of the eye, and then the lens inside the eye, and how that translates to the axial length of the eyeball. And, unfortunately I guess, I don't know. I don't wanna say unfortunately, but, the cool thing about the eye is that one millimeter of change in axial length of the eyeball equates to about three diopters of a glasses change, which is just incredible to me how precise the focusing power of of, like, glasses, contact lenses, and everything really needs to be to give you, really sharp vision. So is it inevitable that the eye related changes are gonna get worse over time, or the best we can do is just slow it down? I mean, I'm already doing you know, when when people think about and I've seen you making videos, so many videos, eye vitamins and, you know, lutein, zeaxanthin, and fish oil. All of these things have been staples in my diet, and I'm not talking about small components. I'm eating, you know, 80 grams of sardines every day for years, you know, 300 grams of, collard greens. So I've got plenty of lutein and zeaxanthin. I mean, I've got vitamin Yeah. Megadose You're crushing it, man. That's amazing. And for years, right, beta carotene carotenoids are a staple in my diet. So it's like, I I'm checking my blood pressure, you know, five days a week or so to make sure that that's, you know, as low as it possibly can be, not hypotensive. But so, anyway, so it's like, I should have I should minimize risk to changes in the eye. So it's like, what am I missing? What's the equation for you know, it's easy to go to the gym and strengthen my muscles, but and, you know, some eye exercises, as you mentioned, can help. But, it seems like the eye is almost resistant. It's just this, almost like a clock, right, where, you know, no matter all of the healthy things you're doing, there are gonna be eye related changes over time. Hearing is in this in the same boat. Right? But what what insights would you have to add to an already healthy diet, an already healthy approach, relatively lean, metabolically healthy. What can we add to that to try to slow this down further, or can we? Yeah. I think the simple answer is it is very much a clock, and I don't think you're gonna be able to stop the refractive changes that are occurring inside the eye. Again, part of that is because it all has to do with the lens. And if the lens doesn't have a direct blood supply, you're real you're basically relying on trying to get as much nutrients to that lens as you can, but there seems to be some limiting factors we don't fully understand, or maybe we just don't have really good control over at this time. But the good news, at least for all that you're doing because I think for anybody who is listening and they're they're doing everything that they've kind of been told to do or or have been studied and they know, hey. I'm physically active. I'm eating incredibly healthy, taking some supplements. Really, what you're doing is protecting the delicate tissue in the back of the eye, the retina, and keeping that functioning at the highest level, which is amazing because refractive wise glasses, you know, they're unfortunate that you you kinda have to rely on them. But, thankfully, they're pretty easy and pretty cheap, honestly, in the grand scheme of things. But if you have a retinal disease, if you have retinal damage, we'd have no real fix for that. So that that's really the the beauty of it because, I I think right now, not only are you optimizing your visual function because you're eating so well, your various supplements are taking care of yourself, your visual function is technically better than it probably would be if you were eating, you know, more of a standard American diet, the sad diet as people often say, and if you weren't working out. So you're you're functioning at a higher level, and you're protecting your your retinal cells from higher levels of oxidative stress, inflammation, blue light, a lot of things like that. And so your chances of getting macular degeneration, your chances of having, potentially glaucoma or some other devastating, potentially vision loss, eye disease leading to permanent vision loss is dramatically decreased. And so the it sounds to me like you're doing the vast majority of things that are super healthy for metabolically what's going on in the back of the eye, which I wish more people did. I think you're in that. You're like myself. You're like, we're we're in this small percentage of people who kind of are following along the research and and are trying to live, trying to walk the walk as well as talk the talk sort of thing. I think the one other thing I'll I'll kinda add to this, is just because I I specialize a little bit more in ocular surface disease as well. A lot of people patients with dry eye right now, and part of this has to do with all the computer screen use, but a lot of other factors. Dry eyes, very complicated. But, people don't clean their eyelids enough. The way, like, a dentist will say people don't brush like, imagine a dentist saying that nobody brushes their teeth. Right? Almost nobody brushes their eyelash. It actually cleans their eyelids and eyelashes. If anything, people shower and they try to avoid cleaning the eyelids because they don't want water or soap to get in the eyes because it it burns. But we find a lot of microorganisms. In fact, you'd you'd appreciate this, but there's a microbiome of the eyelids and eyelashes. And, there can be overgrowth of some microorganisms, which, lead to either changes to the lipases and, oils that come out of the oil glands of the eyelids. They change the osmolarity of the tear film, and then there ends up being chronic inflammation of the eyelids and the glands around the eyelids. And that can end up causing not only dry eye disease, but that can contribute to lash loss, misdirection of your lashes, eventually complications of the and scarring to the anterior surface of the eye, makes a lot of other surgical procedures a lot more difficult. And I think just a if people get in the habit of just cleaning their eyelids once a day, in fact, they there's many different brands of eyelid cleansing wipes now and even some foaming cleansers if people prefer that route. But there's ways that are there's basically soaps or detergents that are eye friendly, and they don't cause stinging irritation. And, they're very effective. And so, I I think that's a great thing people could start adding to their daily routine. Interesting. Right? So it won't so I've had experience with that too. Unfortunate experience with that too. So something about, I had, like, some kind of eczema over my right eyelid. And even preceding that, when I went to the eye doctor, I don't know, two years ago, you know, they they said, oh, you have some blepharitis. And, they said, oh, but don't worry. Everybody's got blepharitis. So I didn't think anything of it. Oh, it's a common thing. And they they recommended those wipes too. So I'm gonna do more digging on that now. That this might be you know, I'm gonna probably integrate that into the approach. But I I don't know if one is related to the other where the blepharitis may be related to the eczema that I had on the eyelid versus, you know, which one you know, cause cause versus effect. But I worry about some of the wipes where, you know, you mentioned it being microbiome friendly. You know? Granted, maybe they get rid of the demodex mites, but, is it optimized for my, you know, for the specific streptococcus or whatever other micro you know, whether it's fungi that could be there as commensals. I worry about that even. So, you know, for example, like, skin pH is is, five, but it can vary depending on the site. Right? The palms, armpits, groin, bottoms, you know, feet. So I just don't know long term. It it it's like analysis paralysis by analysis for me with that with the eyelids. I don't wanna make it better in the short term, but worse in the long term. I love talking with people like yourself because that's exactly the question that my myself and and several other colleagues in the eye care space. We have those conversations, because we know that a lot of people as we as we watch people get older and they just haven't cleaned their eyelids, we do see higher rates of not only, like, Demodex. Demodex dramatically increases with age. For people who don't know that, that's a it's a little mite that loves to live not only in in various sebaceous glands on the face, but they love the eyelash follicles. The the question of, like, what what's the micro what is the true microbiome of the eyelids? Where's, because if you're killing a bunch of them, are you killing the right ones? Are you just killing them all? Like, where's the level of homeostasis? And I wish we had more information at this time, but we I just don't think we do. But we do know that people who regularly clean their eyelids, we just see less disease, tend typically less irritation. There is the question of what are you using to clean the eyelids? What are you using to clean the eyelashes? Right? For years, decades and decades. In fact, a lot of my school books even from, ten years ago in fact, I know reprints still say it. They'll say just use baby shampoo because it's cheap and it doesn't cause irritation. Well, it turns out that there's several studies now comparing baby shampoo to using some of these other products, and they find that some of the ingredients in baby shampoo actually causes damage to the mucus producing cells of the eye, as well as causing damage to some of the oil producing cells of the eye. So there may actually be causing more problems by cleaning the eyelids, especially with some cleansers. Even tea tree oil. Some people are really allergic to tea tree oil. Most of the eyelid wipes in the market are less than 1% of the active ingredient terpiniferol, but, that's still maybe, an issue. Manuka honey is also used as a substitute as well as okra. Those those, also have some benefits. So, I wish I had a definite answer, and a better study to to quote, but at least right now, I think the biggest thing is that most people just don't especially for contact lens wearers. I'll add that. I think for people who are just regular glasses wear, it's still a good habit to clean the eyelids. But for people who are contact lens wearers of any kind because they're touching their eyelids so much more often, like, rates of Demodex are over ninety percent of people who wear contact lenses. Compared to just the general population, depending on the age, can be twenty to forty percent. But people who wear contact lenses is much, much higher. So I think if you're a contact lens wearer, we need to get into the habit of regular cleaning the eyelids along with just their other regular contact lens hygiene care. So I think the the take home there too is I think you, clean eyelid your eyelids daily, or is that true or or no? I I do know. Yeah. As I've dug more into the research, I've gotten to the habit of this, especially because I'm somebody who suffered from dry eye since I was in high school. I I've mainly done a lot of lifestyle things to get my dry eye under control. And, I try to encourage patients who are willing to to put in the hard work to help get their lives their dry eye under control, just through lifestyle methods. It's possible. It's just very, very difficult. And in some stages, depending on someone's case, what type of confounding variables go along with dry eye, it may not be possible to fully be not reliant on medications, or procedures. But, for my habits, what I do is I do use eyelid wipes, every day, at least once a day. And then I also when I do need to use artificial tears, I do use preservative free ones. I try to use something that has hyaluronic acid into it. For many years, I've done warm compresses, sometimes at least once a day, if not twice a day, and that's for at least five to ten minutes. The other component is a lot of just diet. There is some good, kind of interesting research on microbiome and its relation to dry eye development, as well as taking some supplementations, including lutein, zeaxanthin, vitamin d, curcuminoids. There's some other good benefits in the research and as well as omega threes. The debate on omega threes and dry eyes is still still pretty heated. But the, I've I've done a lot of my own lifestyle to help improve my own dry eye symptoms. And it takes a long time, but it's something that does help. So dry eye is the condition where the tiered tiered ducts don't function properly, or do I have that backwards where No. So it's not the tiered ducts don't work properly, but the the true definition really is about the you can have not like, one, you can some people just don't make enough tears. Right? And so we call that aqueous deficient dry eye, and that can be in a case if somebody has, like, an autoimmune related, Sjogren's disease where their lacrimal glands start to atrophy or just doesn't work anymore. And so they're literally not producing enough tears, and so the surface of the eye becomes not lubricated. The other component other part of it is that your tear film can evaporate too quickly, and a huge component of that is the meibomian glands. You have oil glands in your eyelids. There's about 25 to 40 of them, on the lower and top eyelids. And every time you blink, a little bit of this oil is supposed to secrete, and it coats and mixes with your tear film and prevents it from evaporating into the air. And so for some people, the meibomian glands have been damaged, and this can be for many factors. But, the these glands don't work anymore, and so your tear film starts to evaporate into the air. And your tear film is not just water. A lot of people think of that. They're like, oh, that's tears. It's water. No. No. No. Your tears are a mixture of not just h two o, but have proteins. They have electrolytes. It has, various antibodies, enzymes. And that's why, you know, as a kid, if you cry or even as adult, if you cry and you taste your tears, they taste salty. Right? There's electrolytes in those tears. And so if your tears evaporate, the salt content of the tears stays behind. And so your amount of what we call tear film osmolarity starts to go up. And as their higher amount of salt content, that can cause inflammatory and, damage to the surface cells of the eye. And that kicks in the inflammatory response, which also comes back and basically, your body wants to, like, heal that damaged spot, but it ends up causing more tear film instability, which turns into this vicious cycle where it's really hard to cure dry eye once the inflammatory cascade has begun, especially if they haven't removed the instigator of the dry eye. Right? If somebody's dry eye is because they're staring at a computer screen, they're not blinking as much, or it's a dietary factor, or it's an autoimmune factor. It does so there's a lot of different things that kind of add on to it. So you can have a mixture of these two. You could, of course, not be producing enough tears. You could also be having your tears evaporate too quickly, and most people do fall somewhere in the middle of the tube. So does dry eye so spontaneous tearing, is that a part of the dry eye phenotype? It can be. Thanks for asking that. So sometimes, if somebody is listening to this and they're like, my I don't have dry eye. My eyes aren't dry. They're wet all the time. Right? They're just watering. Sometimes constant watering of the eyes is actually a clogging of a tear duct, right, the drainage canals, by your nose. It could be that it's clogged. And when somebody comes in and they tell me my eyes are tearing all the time, it's like a waterfall from the moment I wake up all day long, and it's always on the right side, then I'm usually suspicious that, okay. You have a blocked tear duct. Let's we can just do a dilation irrigation procedure. It's very simple. We basically just try to flush everything down the tube, put some hydraulic pressure on one side, basically just unclog it, and that fixes the problem. The other side of things is that spontaneous tearing can be because your eye is dry and your body has nerves nerve receptors on the eye to detect, hey. There's dryness. There's now desiccation and damage occurring on the surface of the eye. We need more tears. It tries to fix the problem itself. So it just says, hey. Give me more tears. So it starts flushing. Kinda like if you have an eyelash in your eye, what does your body do? You can feel a foreign body there. It makes more tears to try to flush it out. The, the problem is that with chronic dry eye or chronic irritation to the eye from contact lenses or something else, there can be chronic damage to the nociceptors, both the kind of the the receptors that notify that mechanical stress or or damage to the surface of the eye, like pain, becomes diminished. But there's also tear receptors, called triplemate receptors. This basically monitors temperature. So anytime somebody even in just a normal room, if there's a waft of air that's hitting the surface of your eye, it's like a small temperature change lower. And so your your body's receptors are very delicate, constantly analyzing the temperature of, like, the surface of the eye. And as soon as there's a decrease in temperature, your body says, okay. Make more tears. It's very regulate. It's, like, super tightly regulated, and that's a really interesting area of eye care research right now. And a lot of pharmaceuticals are trying to come up with ways of, like, triggering these receptors to help produce more tears or help with the healing of the eye. Because that's the other component is, if somebody's surface of their eye is damaged and not getting the right signals, the epithelium, these these safe nerve receptors that send the signal to the brain to make more tears, they also send signals the other way to tell the eye to heal. And so if there's chronic damage, to these receptors, then the eye doesn't heal correctly. And so that's another component of dry eye, but also, other neuropathic pain, neurotrophic keratitis. There's all these other conditions that can occur on the eye. So although, like, say, a WAF change temperature change could be a part of the eye making more fluid and you get a leak Mhmm. That it's only in one eye, could that is but that, you know, not notwithstanding could be just, a potential signal that something's going on, whether it's a blocked tear duct or, block you know? So I my left eye is is, almost on a daily basis, you know, and it's been going on like that for a long time. And I've got floaters in that same eye, and that's where the eczema was. You know? So it's like Oh, it's not not a happy left eye, man. Yeah. I don't know what I can do there. And I tried the heat. I've tried the compresses. They're just not comfortable, and I don't feel like they do anything. Yeah. They I mean, they're doing the warm compresses. There is some, there there is actually quite a few publications showing that it has some benefit for the tear film. Unfortunately, in some studies, it's it's kind of variable. And for most people, it's just it takes an extra ten minutes out of your day, and people have a hard time finding for that. There's also a lot of debate if the heat gets hot enough and if it gets deep enough to where the oil glands actually have a significant effect there. And and so there are different procedures in the clinic that are more efficacious for getting those glands to be heated up and and have that effect. The, I think for the tearing, especially for anybody like yourself or for anybody who's got this tearing on one side, it's usually a hint that something is going on. Right? If it's an if it's, like, allergies, you'd imagine unless you put an allergen directly into one eye, that's gonna be more systemic. That should be both eyes that are watering. If if it's dry eye in general, it's often both eyes, but not always the same. You can have other things going on unilaterally. So it's definitely worthwhile to go to the doctor, but be sure, telling the eye doctor that it's is it constant on one side all the time? Is it just kinda intermittently it comes and goes? You know, it could be anything from a foreign body, something changing on the conjunctiva, the inside of the eyelids. It could have to do with the eyelids. It could have to do with evaporation. So there could be a lot of things going on there. The other things like the eczema you pointed out, eczema could be related to to somewhat to blepharitis, but there's also some other, could be anything from GI. Like, I'd love to hear your thoughts too, your thoughts on, like, the gut microbiome, GI upset. I have many patients and even some family members. If they eat some foods that they're very sensitive to, whether it be gluten, whether it be, soy products, it'll cause their eczema of their eyelids to swell up, and become more prominent. And so it's not always related to the eyes. It could be something else systemic going on with eczema. And then floaters. We can talk about floaters too if you'd like. Yeah. I could I could hill another hour or two. I don't know. You know, maybe we do a few more questions for now. I I don't wanna take too much of your time. You know what I mean? So, so so many roads to go down and alright. But so wait. So just focusing on the gut eye axis. Right? So Mhmm. You know, for me, optimizing the gut is relatively easy. I mean, it's you know? And I know What do you do? Well, so a very high fiber diet. And then I'm sure that there's always the carnivore and keto crowd that'll say, you don't need fiber. If someone's so person does better on five without fiber. And I'm like, if that works for you, great. Go for it. But on a population based average, you know, so soluble fiber is fermented by gut bacteria into short chain fatty acids, which improve, you know, the, tight junctions, you know, in between the epithelial cells, which minimize leak into the blood to activate pro inflammatory pathways. So soluble fiber is a huge part of that story. Is that the only story? Does it have to be for everyone? I'm not married to that to that ideology. Whereas, you know, some people, the keto crowd may be married and the vegans may be married. I'm I'm married to an ideology that works at the individual level. So, yeah, very high five. It, man. Very well said. Yeah. Cool. But that may only be a part of the story. Right? So, you know, which fiber from which foods? You know, so for example, if I go too high on broccoli, I've got GI upset, and that can manifest in other ways, you know, where I just feel fatigued. And, so so maybe it's not too much fiber coming from broccoli, whatever the fiber spectrum is there, different from, like, whole grains or different in nuts. So even that, there's an individuality, you know, where certain people may do better on certain foods and specific fibers and then even the dose. Right? So whereas I'm at, like, eighty five grams of total fiber per day, not from supplements, whole foods only to get there. You know, maybe others do better on 40 or maybe it's, you know, whatever the number may be. So, but then how that translates to the eye is a humongous mystery for me. I haven't studied it. There are people that were, you know, at Tufts that study portions of it, whether it's through, you know, the gut eye coming you know, metabolites in the gut that can travel up the vagus both positively and negatively, you know, where you've got some metabolites that may be be good for eye eye health and the opposite where some, you know, quote, unquote, dysbiotic bacteria make, you know, bad metabolites that can damage the eye, you know, without going into, you know, the names. But, that for me is a complicated story that I haven't studied much other than the superficial, you know, short chain fatty acids and soluble fiber and the polyphenols may be a part of that story too. But, I think that's, honestly, the some of the biggest parts of that story all has to do again with fiber content. It has to do with gut dysbiosis, you know, right, breaking down of the cellular walls, the risk of any sort of either metabolites or or questionable if any of certain bacteria are able to penetrate through the gut and then travel through the bloodstream or the lymphatics and get to the ocular tissues. The study of the eye gut eye axis or other studies will call it the gut retinal axis, the there are publications on that. We know that there is a connection. We've known actually that there's there's been this mysterious connection between the eye and the gut for a long time, mainly because some conditions, an inflammatory event of the eye called uveitis. A lot of patients will have that, and we know that people who have, any sort of how do I wanna say it? GI upset is oftentimes if you have a strong history of GI upset that can trigger uveitis. And they've never really understood why if you why one kinda goes with the other. But now they're starting to, like, connect, okay, uveitis and there's certain dysbiosis that can trigger that's more associated with uveitis. There's also relationships to diabetic retinopathy. A lot of studies in mice on that, which are quite fascinating, but then also with macular degeneration. And so there we know that there's somehow this balance of, like, inflammatory, proteins that are being triggered and turned on that are traveling, getting to the eye, and this is also promoting inflammatory cascades that are associated with these various diseases. Usually, from what we know right now because I I've been I've been trying to dig into, like, hey. Is there any, like, human clinical trials on probiotics, or prebiotics or anything that we can do to specifically help with eye disease? And there are a few. Most of them are done in animals, not really on human studies. The challenge I have with doing probiotics, and I'd love to hear directly your your thoughts on this, is that they're usually like, oh, well, we picked these very specific strains of bacteria. And my concern is like, well, how do we know that it's kinda like what we talked about the the the ocular surface. It's like, how do we know that that's the exact one that we need, and how much do we need? At what point is it actually hurting us? I feel like that information is not really understood at this point. So, I personally try to promote more of the prebiotics. Hey. You should try to eat more fiber. There's a few prebiotics that are well recommended in in in the health care community. So, so I've tried some of those myself. But, yeah, what what are your thoughts on specifically, like, probiotics supplements? Yeah. Oh, I would be with you a 100%. Generally, for me, it's always the prebiotics and from whole food, you know, staying away from supplements. You know, most people, though, don't wanna do that. You know, they don't wanna change their diet. So but even supplemental soluble fiber in very high doses on its own can induce damage, like, for example, liver damage. There's, studies in animals like inulin, thirty grams per day induces some liver damage. And even in people, there's an RCT where twenty grams per day was well tolerated. But once it got to thirty, now a small segment of that, of a relatively small it was, like, twenty people in the study ended up with elevated ALT. So, so for me, always prebiotics. So probiotics probiotics, like you said, it's not just, you know, is that specific why that specific strain or speed you know, from species. Right? So in some cases, I can see a road for that. For example, there's a, leukemia mouse model. And in the study that I'm thinking of, they sequenced the gut microbiome, and they saw that lactobacillus levels, were dramatically reduced. So they thought, okay. What's gonna happen if we add lactobacillus back in? So it actually had a small but significant impact on muscle mass after feeding that specific lactobacillus species to the to the leukemia mouse model. Right? So in that case in that case, you know, for me, if if probiotics are a strategy, it's, you know, what does your mic what does the microbiome look look like in health? What does yours look like? And even that even then, I'd say that's not a definitive, you know, okay. You're you don't have the specific bacteria. That's not necessarily a bad thing. I mean, it's just based on your genotype. We're gonna have a certain gut microbiome and, actually, all the environmental factors too, diet, exercise, sleep. You'll have a certain microbiome. But so which complicates it. Right? Because then it's like, how would you even know which probiotic and in which situation it may be beneficial. Right? So so that being one side of it. And I I saw you mentioned in one of your videos too. You know? Does it even survive the pH of the of of the stomach? That's for sure, that's a part of the story too. So most people probably taking probiotics is just wasted money. So probiotics is a much more complicated story. And for me, it's almost like you're shooting you're shooting darts in the dark in a in an ecosphere, in in an ecosystem of trillions of trees. You're just shooting little seeds that may that may work. Right? Whereas the prebiotics, if you have the bacteria, they can actually ferment them, and your and your ecosystem can bloom. So but for the Love that. Thank you. Cool. But for the gut but for the gut eye axis, you know, for sure, there's there's a story there. Right? And even I'm sure you you you've looked into it where, you know, the high fat western diet high fat, high sugar western diet, probably the eyes and the animals and those animals are worse, dramatically worse. Mhmm. So what's an interesting part of that story is that the, western diet that's fed to rodents, it has cellulose. So it has technically, it has fiber, but cellulose is poorly or completely nonfermentable compared to other fibers. So we're considering the high fat, high sugar diet is basically no soluble fiber. When you add soluble fiber back in, the animals have some improvement in eye related conditions. It clearly demonstrates it demonstrates that fiber has a role, but but the story the main story that leads there is the Western diet may be bad for us, but the other part of that story is the fiber that nobody nobody seems to focus on. For sure. And and that's actually from what I've read into specifically gut the gut eye axis. We know that, again, higher amounts of especially saturated fats seem to be kind of villainized in this story, But it it does seem like the same Western diets, high sugar, high fat, those sort of diets are also associated with a dysbiosis that leads toward, not only weight gain, but then we also see higher rates of metabolic diseases like diabetes, problems with glucose control. And that also reflects again directly to what we see with the eye with in terms of macular degeneration, diabetes, those kind of conditions. Even in dry eye, interestingly enough, really, actually, some of the the better studies, there's a good few of them, on Sjogren's related dry eye, which is an autoimmune related dry eye. But people with Sjogren's disease have a very distinct different dysbiosis of firmicutes and bacteriodes versus normal controls. And even versus people with dry eye that isn't diagnosed as Sjogren's disease. So it's there's definitely some something going on. Something has triggered this dysbiosis to some bacterias that are growing way more than others. Again, probably environmental, but I always think even, like, growing up. We know that your gut microbiome is very dependent on what's going on with your your parents, what they eat, what you're fed as a young kid. I think it's it's quite variable to around the age of three or four. And I always think like, wow. You know, I grew up eating in that's my parents' fault. Like, they didn't know, but I was I was eating very much the sad standard American diet. A lot of processed food. My parents were thought they were doing the right thing just by giving me food, right, because they just wanna be parents. They want food on the table. But, now I think, wow. I eat so different now than I did when I was a kid. And, one of the reasons I'll I'll just share this. One of the things that triggered me down my fascination with diet and lifestyle was because when I was in college and I was studying microbiology, I started getting eczema on my face. And I thought I had an infection because I was in the microbiolab all the time. I'm like, god. I must have touched something. I got a fungus on my face. This sucks. And then I found out, oh, I'm actually lactose intolerant. And every time I have dairy, my eczema flares up like crazy. And then as soon as I quit dairy, my GI issues got better. And so I started down this journey of like, wow. My diet actually influences other parts of my body. And that was probably my very early introduction to, like, well, there's there's a lot more going on with my diet than than I thought. But sorry for digressing, Don, Don, rabbit holes here. Yeah. No. No worries. So along those lines, though, you know, so, well, actually, off those lines, thinking about it from the other way where, you know, stuff in the guts gotta travel a long way to get to the eye. Right? So, you know, granted, you can make the argument that direct application would be the best way to either get stuff into the eye and get it metabolized versus just the take that long winding road up the nerves or or even just systemically from the gut into the blood and up to the eye. So, is that the future? Or is is part of the future eye drops with customized nutraceuticals, you know, for eye health? I mean, part of it, they are looking into that. I know there are some medications, that are coming up with some creative ways to get medications into the eye. Because this is the thing about the eyeball is there is a whole subsection of pharmaceutical research just on ocular just on drug delivery to the eye because the eye as a structure is very unique, and it's very challenging to get medications to penetrate through the various layers and protective mechanisms that the eye has, that it's very much against a lot of medications. And so and nobody wants to get, like, an injection inside of the eye, which unfortunately is a treatment for a lot of retinal diseases. And so when you're talking about, like, okay. If we get an eye drop, will that absorb into and get to the retinal tissue? Will that actually get to the tissue you're trying to target? It's very difficult. And so, even you know, I think, hypothetically, I think that's where, where a lot of things may go, but there's just a lot of chemistry that needs to be done before we can get to that route. And a lot of, you know, a lot of people will say there's a lot of stuff online people will say. They're like, oh, well, you just take this and put it on the eye, it'll cure this disease. And I'm like, I don't think so because it it's really hard to, like, make that argument that it gets through all those structures and then overcomes the aqueous humor and then somehow gets into it's sometimes it isn't quite plausible. There's so much, like, there's so much exaggeration on the Internet that, you know, they'll take, you know, like, just using the floater story and the pineapple and bromelain. I I've seen and one reason I wanted to have you on the channel, one of the many reasons is you cover that in a video, and I looked at the actual research way before. And I made I came to the same conclusion that you did where this is a very small study. I mean, I think there was no control group. You know? Could it be a real effect in this small study? I don't know. I mean, it's but then you've got people online, and then it blows up where everybody's spreading this nonsense, and it's like a a mass movement of nonsense, like, on such sparse data. It could be true, but there's so much certitude behind it almost from the people promoting it. It's just, so Yeah. That that original study was a pro study, and, certainly, like you said, there was no control group. You know, there was a lot of issues with it. The the same author, at least one of the authors, went ahead and eventually did another study using specifically supplementation, and they did have a control group. But and while they did largely show positive results with it, again, even that study had a lot of, like, questions about the publication. And and so since then, I haven't seen much come out from any of any of those studies. I haven't seen, you know, the I will say in general, the eye care world, especially professionals, were very cautious about recommending product on the market now for helping reduce the symptoms of floaters, And that has, again, one publication which has some researchers behind it that I actually respect and and I know. But even with one publication, the industry of eye care is very cautious. We're like, hey. There's some conflict of interest. You know, we we need to see larger scale studies. We need to see more people involved in these studies, and independent independent research too before doctors start standing behind it being like, nope. We have to start recommending this as a as a possible treatment option. Yeah. Definitely. Alright. Wait. So staying back on the not eye drops necessarily because as you mentioned, some of the pitfalls of trying to get stuff into the eye. But so just like if I if I only do, you know, cardio my whole life, I'm not training my fast twitch muscle fibers because I'm I'm I'm training the slow twitch muscle fibers. So probably Sure. My rate of loss for the fast twitch, you know, the two x to b probably goes away faster during aging because I'm not training them. So is there some aspect of eye health that's related to that? Not necessarily fiber types, but what I mean is the so there you you've made videos on red light therapy, and there is some and I say some potential beneficial effects of red light therapy on the eye. But even there for me, it's such a new and emerging field that I'm hesitant to say, and I've tried it. It does nothing for me in in the doses and the and the intensity that I'm using it at. So I'm not sold yet, but it could have some benefits. So when considering that you're basically, you know, shooting light of a certain frequency at your eye, could that be part of the story where we our eyes don't perceive, which it's the use it or lose it approach to the eye? And if if so, which which frequencies of light? Is it just as simple as anything in the red and near infrared spectrum would be beneficial? Are there more specific wavelengths that we can target the eye to, basically, you know, not lose it, but use it. And, wait, along those lines, in Alzheimer's patients, I guess, or people at at risk for Alzheimer's, you know, hearing aids, I guess, can slow the rate of of, of, progression. So that kinda ties into to this idea too of being the brain being able to perceive sound may be good for neurodegenerative disease. So could the same idea be true for the eye where, you know, you expose it to a certain frequency of light or a portion of the electromagnetic spectrum? It could be subvisible or or above that. So, yeah, what do you what do you think? So the first part about Alzheimer's, let me just kinda comment on that because it's a little quicker. I'm curious about the with the part with the hearing loss. Is that because of I think the question is if people have better hearing loss, like, if they get their hearing loss treated, is it also just you're sending more signals to the brain to keep learning and that helps with, preventing cognitive decline? Do you think do you think that's a part of it? Is that right? For sure. But could that also relate to the eye where, you know because if the eye is less able to perceive over time, if we're addressing it with a certain, you know, electromagnetic frequency that maybe we're less exposed to over time. Like, I I I saw you mentioned in, you know, there's published research on this. You know, being outside, can be beneficial, right, in terms of eye health. So is that a part of now we're exposing ourselves more to, electromagnetic frequency that we wouldn't get because we're inside more? You know? I don't know if that's a part of the story, but and I don't even know what the answer is, but I'm curious to hear your thoughts on Yeah. So I think in general, first with, like, memory loss, Alzheimer's, I think just having clear vision affects Alzheimer's rates, because you're sending good think of light information to the brain, and that's helping the brain to stay alert and and forming new connections. And and that may slow the prevent slow the development of Alzheimer's. So that may play a role. Knowing is it specifically specific wavelengths of light that are contributing to that, I don't know. But we do know quite a bit about specific wavelengths of light regarding red light, and and even some other things like blue light. People think about it that. So right now with red light, again, I've done some videos on it. I'm actually giving a lecture here at the American Optometric or the American Optometric Association's meeting here in a month and a half. So red light is being pretty heavily studied in in the eye for not only dry eye disease, potentially more treating the eyelids, but then for macular degeneration and then also for myopia for my, nearsightedness development for young kids. Potentially, there there is some publications looking at glaucoma, and so there might be a relationship to red light helping restore the health of the ganglion cells inside the eye, which potentially maybe has some relationship to, dementia and Alzheimer's. The forms of light, the con the concerns that you have about red light treatments right now for the eye, I think are very valid. And right now, the research is very young. I mean, red light research has been around since the sixties, but it's still regarding eye and the safety around the eye is still fresh. And there's still debates about where it's safe and where it's not. Biggest the biggest kind of breakthroughs for red light therapy for the eyes really in macular degeneration. There is one device that was just FDA approved for the treatment of macular degeneration called the Velida light system. That actually doesn't use just red light. It it uses other levels of light, so photobiomodulation. Again, it also do with your mitochondria. Right? It's basically sparking your mitochondria to produce more ATP. It has some other antioxidant benefits related to that. But, the Velida light system, I believe, uses around 600 I might be incorrect on this, but I think it's about 670 nanometers of light is one wavelength. Then it also uses, near infrared at 850 and then, another kind of a yellow amber light at, like, five eighty, five ninety, somewhere around there. What's fascinating is that they they do it in, like, a different mode. So it's basically sit there for four and a half, almost five minutes. Your eyes are open for one form of light and your eyes are closed for another, and then your eyes are open, your eyes are closed, and it switches between these different modes. And, of course, there's different energy levels for each one of these lights. So that's that that's at least the most rigorous studies done unrelated macular degeneration, and they've done three major clinical trials of that. And that has resulted in people with macular dry macular degeneration of having not only improved eyesight for a lot of people, like, fifty percent of of the participants have, like, improvement of at least one line of vision. For smaller percentages, people can improve two or three lines. But then it also has other evidence of getting rid of drusen or cholesterol deposits, fat deposits that accumulate in the eye, and then slowing down the rate of developing geographic atrophy, which ultimately leads to, pretty significant vision loss. So there seems to be some good evidence that it does help, especially with aging eyes. The question of what wavelength, what power density, how far away from the eye, the fluence, there's a lot of variables with red light. And I'm still personally trying to figure out, and we may not know. Maybe the research isn't there yet, of where the parameters need to be to have, like, an optimal dose. And I know I'm I'm trying to set up my own meeting with one of the head researchers of these clinical trials for the Valida system because I wanna ask these questions. I wanna know kinda where is the safety limit. What happens if I run this device more often for a patient? Is that gonna hurt them? Is that going to not cause a significant improvement in their benefits? Because on the other side of things with myopia for children, and this is a lot of research ongoing in mostly in in China, because their rates of myopia for children is so much higher. But they're using red light around 650 nanometers of light, and they're shining in kids' eyes for three minutes in the morning and then three minutes in the afternoon. And they're doing that five times a day, and they're doing it for, like, year long studies. And they are finding it slows down the rate of nearsightedness development for kids who are nearsighted. It also prevents nearsightedness in kids who haven't developed nearsightedness yet. But some devices independently purchased from on that part of the world, there's it's published studies right now even criticizing because they find that these devices are reaching levels, too high, of light energy hitting the retina and potentially causing either photochemical or or photothermal damage to the retina in the back of the eye. And so and enough so that in 2023, China changed their category of red light in terms of safety from, like, a safety level two to safety level three. And I think that's probably because then they've they've discovered that, oh, there's actually risk of damage to retinal tissue by people staring at these red lights during these clinical studies. So right now, there's still a lot of hesitancy in the eye care world about safety around red light. So for people who are buying into these devices, if it's a device specifically sold for the eyes, then follow, of course, whatever recommended guidelines it says. If it says to keep your eyes open, eyes closed, how long, not doing it too much, follow those guidelines. I don't know of any commercial devices that are technically FDA approved in The US, that people can just purchase. But a lot of other red light devices, red light panels are sold for multiple reasons. Right? People have asked me, can I just stare at that? I'm like, I don't know. I don't know what the fluence is. I don't know what the power density is. I don't know what the wavelength is. I don't know how far away you're standing from the device. So there's a lot of variables that need to be controlled to be able to say it's safe or it's even effective. So I wish I had a really good answer at this point, but I don't promising. So if you had to say promising red light therapy near infrared, promising for eye health, and as a preventative even, as you mentioned, potential promising. Yes. Very much promising. I even, have been studying some therapy. Right now, I've been reading into research on what can be done before medical procedures like cataract surgery, for example, to more of, like, optimize the dry eye, ocular surface because, again, red light therapy is even being used for dry eye. And they show, hey. Patients who are treated with low level light therapy twice, a few weeks before having cataract surgery, significant improvements in their post cataract dry eye. So it is very promising. But, hopefully, we again, now that we just have the Valida system here in the FDA, in The US, hopefully, we'll we'll start to have more studies and and more findings come out. And, I think it will be probably in a big part of the future of eye care within the next decade for sure. Interesting. Are there other rejuvenation or eye health optimization, techniques or tools that you're hot on, you know, that, seem promising? So most of the kind of rejuvenation area right now is more on the eyelids and healing of preventing dry eye disease. Again, that's the area I'm I'm I specialize a little bit more in. And there are a lot of tools outside of The US. We are just getting, like, a a jet plasma pen sort of thing. Basically, it it it moves a I don't wanna get too much into it right now. I still have to study it more, but, but there are various tools that can be used for the eyelids to to help with the appearance of the eyelids, reduce inflammation in the eyelids, and kind of rejuvenate the skin of the lids because the eyelids and the inflammation that occurs in the eyelids also affects the eyes. So that's the area But I was gonna say that that's a big spot. And then, otherwise, supplementation is an area that I know I I focus pretty heavily in. And there's quite a few clinical trials going on around, like, niacinamide or and maybe that's effect on glaucoma and optic nerve health integrity. There's also, certainly a lot of research on omega threes and carotenoids for benefits for the back of the eye. So there's there's a lot going on there. So the nicotinamide story is interesting because, it can deplete methyl donors leading to an increase in homocysteine, but yet the net effect would probably be positive, you know, as as you I think you have a video on it or mentioned it in a video, nicotinamide and glaucoma. So, but what about things like stem cells, exosomes? Like, would there be cut more cutting edge things apply to eye health that are on the horizon, but yet probably just just starting out or dramatically understudied? Yeah. So probably one of the biggest things is this last two years ago, we did have, like, the first eye transplant, like, successful transplanted eye. The eye does have blood flow to it. The body didn't reject it for the guy that had it. They even have proof that it has electrical signals from the retina to the brain. However, the recipient didn't have usual doesn't have usable vision at this point. He can't see out of it. But the fact that the body didn't reject it and he has healthy tissue within it is remarkable. Like, as a starting point of, like, woah. Would it ever be possible to have a transplanted eye? Whether that be from a donor tissue or thinking really science fiction, could it be possible to even have some sort of biomechanical eye plugged in and and give you useful eyesight? I think it it gives us a lot more hope of the possibilities. Because in the past, we always just like, no. It's it's impossible because the it's like doing a brain transplant almost. The the nerve fiber connection from the eye to the brain is so complex. There's another variable there. Yeah. There there's definitely something going on. Wait. Before stem cells. Sorry to interrupt there. But, also, is it possible to take, you know, just, eye stem cells and just grow a new eyeball in a dish and then granted, although they don't you know, the person's eye at the the the transplant wasn't rejected, you know, you've got that, like you mentioned, the, connections to the optic nerve. Eventually, that'll be sort sorted out, but the the rejection issue would be minimized if we were able to grow our own eyeballs in addition. Maybe I'm not a fan of replacement. I wanna keep what I have in a youthful state, but if if you had a if I had a choice between taking somebody else's, you know, cadaver eyeball and my own grown in a dish, I mean, it's an easy choice for me. For sure. I don't know really where that's at. I I kind of hope that somebody's working on something like that. I don't know if it'll happen in in our lifetime, but, gosh, I can all hope. I know I've I can occasionally seen some things of, like, oh, look. They know how to grow a kidney in a lab, so maybe an eyeball. That'd be really fascinating. I think the challenge is, again, even if they do have your your own human eye, how do they know which wires to connect? Because you literally have millions of nerve fibers that go from the the eyeball to the brain. So it's like, are they connecting the right ones? Even if they don't connect the right ones, will the brain be able to have enough plasticity to relearn how to see with this new eye? We'll be able to make sense visually of what's going on. The visual system of what's going on neurologically with the brain to give you eyesight is even more complex. I think there's a lot of mysteries still going on there. Alright. So then that brings us back to stem cells. So now we've gotta actually do some regeneration with the raw materials, you know, on-site. Yeah. So we there are some research on on stem cells because of, stem cells on the surface of the eye. Some people there's there's stem cells on on limbal stem cells, where the cornea and the conjunctiva meet. And those cells can be damaged. Like, if somebody has a bad chemical burn on the eye, they've been you know, they're at work and a chemical hits them in the eye, massive burn, they've lost those stem cells. So now the eye is not even regenerating its its tissues anymore. And so there are some there are some, treatments where they basically have stem cell transplants onto the eye and and basically kinda refeed or re reseed that those stem cells. There is some publications looking at stem cells for retinal health issues, trying to get your retina cells to basically grow back in cases of, like, atrophy from macular degeneration or something like that. And from what I've read or seen at some lectures, it seems that it's at least underway, but I haven't seen any like, oh my gosh. This is gonna change the world. There is some more, I guess, popularity right now in recent publications around genetic treatments. Like, they're actually doing some genetic, you know it it sounds like Jurassic Park or something like that. They're actually splicing genes, into, like, various viruses, giving you, like, an injection. And for some congenital conditions where, like, labors, congenital, optic atrophy, and for young kids who are, like, at risk of going blind or not having color vision, they can give them this injection, and it changes their genetic code. And their eyes no longer start to have this disease, which is quite fascinating. I think and it's still very early, but the fact that that's even happening now, gives us a lot of hope for other potential genetic eye related diseases, whether that be, retinitis pigmentosa or, you know, even male related color blindness, potentially other because we know that other genetic conditions are related with eye diseases like macular degeneration. If somebody has a problem with complement factor h, the chance of macular degeneration goes up dramatically. So if we have genetic treatments, we can just, oh, let's run your genes. Oh, this is what you have. We'll give you this medication, and now you don't have it, or you will be less likely to have it. So, I think it's exciting. That would be in a minority. You know, the genetic having a you know, adding the gene back into someone who didn't have it, a genetic deficiency from you for b, you know, from birth. But the other side of that is we all have aging eyes. Right? So, you know, I'm not sure that a a gene cocktail you know, for me, it may be turning genes on that have been turned off and vice versa. For sure. Then it's like, how do you do that? Right? And then we're back to, is it eyeball injections? Nobody wants to do that. So Yeah. It goes back to what's the best way to rejuvenate the eye. You know? So we'll have to stay tuned. Right? So Right. And I still say the best thing right now for people to do is, you know, diet, exercise, you know, the classic things that people are always telling to do, eat well, sleep well, the, you know, potential for supplementation, especially if diet maybe not be getting everything in there. The I I do believe omega threes play a significant role in retinal health, specifically DHA, and potentially more from phospholipids. And there's more research ongoing in that, especially in in mice. And so hopefully, we'll know more about that in the next coming years. The sunlight and light exposure, we know plays also a role with the eye, both in terms of, like, UV light. You know, people say sunglasses, wide room hats. Definitely, that, slows down aging changes that go on inside the eye just due to higher levels of light intensity and photo stress. The and then for young kids, I do encourage try to be outside at least two hours a day to negate all of the near work and indoor time that they have. Still not fully understood all of the mechanisms behind that with myopia development, but we do know that, being outdoors, being in a wide open spaces, and potentially sunlight exposure has some relationship to myopia development. Fantastic. A great a great recipe. I have so many more questions, but, you know, I can go on forever. But, doctor iHealth, I appreciate you. Even saying Joey, you know, I I don't know you well enough yet to call you Joey. So, doctor iHealth, I appreciate you, and, looking forward to hopefully having you or having you back on the channel at some point. Absolutely. No. I really appreciate this, and, thank you. And I'm certainly, I'm gonna dig into certain things, whether it be, you know, eye exercises and a couple other questions, and and we'll we'll circle back. We'll eventually make a video together on that. Fantastic. Alright. Ciao. Thank you. Have a good day. Bye.