Last month, I blood tested for the sixth time in 2025. And note that this is test number 64 since 2015. So with that in mind, what's my biological age? That's what we'll see here. This is using Doctor. Morgan Levine's biological age calculator, PhenoAge. And if you have blood test data and you want to calculate your own biological age using this test, there's a downloadable Excel file in a link from my website in the video's description. No email required. Alright. So when entering these nine biomarkers and chronological age, I get a biological age of 35.4 years, which is 17.2 younger than the chronological. Now, at this point in the video, many people often ask, how good is this clock? So, rather than going over that in every video that I make after every blood test, I made a specific video focusing on how good or not that this clock may be. So, if you're interested in that, check it out. But for now, let's focus on where can I improve? So, the maximum reduction for biological age relative to chronological age using this test is about twenty years. So granted, seventeen years younger is not bad. But if I'm not trying to get better or if I'm not trying to improve, it's more likely that I'll at best stay the same maintenance or get worse. So my goal is continuous improvement. So in terms of where I can improve, the obvious would be glucose and I've integrated some changes in terms of diet for the next test and I'll cover that potentially in a future video. But for this video, I'll dig deeper into the MCV or Mean Corpuscular Volume as that data has been moving in the wrong direction for a couple of years, but that's coming a bit later. For now, let's highlight these 64 tests over ten years. So why am I testing so often? And I think this is an important point to mention and I know I've mentioned this in other videos so if you've heard me say this, previously, apologies. But for those who may be unfamiliar, there are many in the longevity space who are testing blood testing once, maybe twice per year. And then that raises the question, is once or twice per year representative of a full year average? One could even make that argument for four tests per year. Is every four months representative of a full year average? We want to get closest to the truth so that we can track year to year change to really try to move the biomarker needle towards youth. And if we're only measuring once per year, I'm not sure that that really measures a rate of aging. So with that in mind, for more context, let's let's have a look at year to year change using this clock as I have 43 blood tests since 2018, which is what we'll see here for year to year change for biological age from 2018 to 2025 as I have 43 tests using Doctor. Morgan Levine's biological age clock PhenoAge. So when I first started tracking in 2018 to 2019, I wasn't measuring HSCRP at every test. It just wasn't on my radar. So I only have three blood tests over that two year span. And over that two year span, average biological age was 34.3. And then, to my point about measuring more often and gathering enough data to have a true rate of aging and evaluating year to year change, I started testing more often. So, in 2020 and 2021, six tests each in each of those two years, 12 tests total, and average biological age in both of those years was exactly 33.9. So even though in most cases, one or two tests per year may not be representative of a full year average, in my case, it actually was pretty close to the truth quote unquote thirty four years in 2018 to 2019 and then also thirty four years in 2020 to 2021. But then I started to increase the testing frequency. Over seven tests in 2022, I had my best year to date, thirty two point one years. Seven tests again in 2023, it got a bit worse, thirty two point nine year average. And then, I increased the testing frequency again now to eight tests per year in 2024 with an average biological age using this test of thirty three point one years. And then after the first six tests in 2025, current average is thirty three point one years exactly where it was in 2025. Note that the 2025 average includes the most recent test, thirty five point four years, which is actually my second worst of these six tests. Now, it's important to highlight here to note my first two tests in 2025 were actually my best so far this year. So if I just stopped and just only measured those two tests and promoted online these great data, it would be somewhat dishonest and misleading because the real story is I've got variability in my data and everybody's got variability in their data, but it's very easy to cherry pick and show one's best data and I think the more honest approach is showing all of one's data and then tracking year to year change. So that's what I'm doing. So with that in mind, this is a real pace of aging. Looking at year to year change with many biomarker tests each year and tracking that over time. And with that in mind, I've resisted an age related biological age increase using this clock, which is good news because even if all biomarkers stay the same, pheno age increases by point nine years for every year of chronological age. Which means that starting in 2018, based on that point nine year per year increase, in 2025, I should expect to see a biological age that's closer to 40 and not 33. So this is good news. Alright. So this is one way to look at the pace of aging or rate of aging by looking at the biological age clock PhenoAge which includes nine clinical chemistry biomarkers. But for now, let's focus on another example including the MCV as I want to improve that as it's a weak spot. So first, we'll focus on the year to year change for MCV and then second, what can I do to potentially reduce it? But first, let's focus on what exactly is the MCV because I think to most people, it may seem like just a throwaway biomarker and irrelevant biomarker but this couldn't be further from the truth. The mean corpuscular volume equals the volume inside of a red blood cell which is what we'll see here. So starting off with a red blood cell that has a small volume that would be a low MCV and then obviously a bigger volume that's a medium MCV and then the biggest red blood cell volume on the cartoon that would be the highest MCV. Now, if MCV doesn't seem like it's an important metric, remember that red blood cells are the most abundant human cell type by far and they're approximately equal to 80% of all human cells including liver, immune, etcetera. So measuring not just total red blood cells, what's in them, hemoglobin, their volume, MCV, the variability in their volume which is the the RDW, and then we could even take it a step further, the omega three index, which is the proportion of the fish oil fatty acids EPA and DHA that are in red blood cell membranes. These are five important metrics that I find valuable to track. And granted, if you're familiar with the channel, I'm not tracking the omega three index in red blood cells. I'm using phosphatidylcholines but that's a story for another day. So what's optimal for the MCV? And lower is better. And if you want to see those data, I have a new Patreon tier dedicated specifically to what's optimal for biomarkers including the MCV, but also 34 other biomarkers which are covered in more than two hours of video content, 52 published references, and these aren't the reference ranges. This is what may be optimal based on how each of these biomarkers changes during aging and their associations with risk of death for all causes. So if you're interested in that, check it out. So let's take a look at MCV versus age over that ten year period 2015 to 2025 as I have 59 tests over this period is which is what we'll see here. So on the y axis, we've got the MCV in femto leaders FL plotted against chronological age and then we'll put up a line in terms of what's optimal for the MCV at approximately 90. So when it comes to the MCV, I don't actually have a range. Around 90, as close to 90 as possible is based is my interpretation of the literature in terms of what's optimal based on how it changes during aging and its association with risk of death for all causes. So when I first started tracking in 2015 for the first five tests, we can see that it was moving in the wrong direction. But then I was able to flip it and move it in the right direction. But this isn't about just looking at two different groups of trends. I want to know the average cumulative exposure over time which incorporates all of the data and when doing that, average MCV over those first 24 tests was 90.8 femtoliters which isn't too far from that 90 femtoliters target optimal target. Similarly, for the next 35 tests, average MCV is pretty close, 90.9. So, if we only look at the average over time, it's decent it's decent, pretty good news. Not too far from that 90 optimal that I've established as a target based on the published literature, But, this is why looking at one's own data and plotting it is important because you can see over the past five years that trend line is clearly moving in the wrong direction and that's important because the MCV increases during aging. Now, some of this may be related to aging but others other another part of it may be related to diet changes that I've been doing to impact potentially impact other biomarkers that may be moving MCV in the wrong direction, which then leads us to how can I potentially reverse the MCV increase and get it back closer to that 90 femtolitre target? So to do that, I've been looking at diet diet and MCV correlations. And for those who don't know, since 2015, every day I've weighed all of my food or almost all of my food. More than 99% of all food has been weighed with a food scale. I then enter that data into a diet tracking app, Cronometer, and if you want to use Cronometer, there's a discount link in the video description. I then pull that data into a spreadsheet. So now, I can take the average dietary intake in between blood tests and then line it up with the latter blood test. In other words, if there's a fifty day period in between blood tests, when I take the average of those fifty days, that now corresponds to the latter blood test. So now, every blood test is a corresponding average dietary intake and this applies to supplements, it applies to the average daily heart rate or steps. You can use this approach for anything. Then, I can look at correlations. So for the MCV correlations that we're gonna see here, I looked at correlations for 99 macro micronutrients and foods versus MCV with the top portion of the list shown here. And And I should mention is the top portion because you can see even at the bottom of this list, the p value is three times 10 to the negative five. So the list would be far too big to show on YouTube. So if you want to see the full correlation list for diet versus MCV, that's on in the correlations tier on Patreon and that's not the only biomarker correlations that I have. I do correlations for all these big biomarkers. So all of the red blood cell measures that I mentioned, kidney function, liver, etcetera. So if you're interested in that, check it out. So in terms of the table that we're looking at, the lowercase r is the correlation coefficient. The p value is the measure of statistical significance. Now, note that generally less than 0.05 is nominally significant. When you have 99 comparisons, five of the 100 or five of the 99 could be false positives. So one way to account for that is by measuring the false discovery rate and a rough way to do that is by dividing that p less than 0.05 threshold by the number of tests. So when I do that, all of these on the list would still be significant after correcting for an FDR but that too is a story for another day. In terms of the n, this is the amount of tests that I have corresponding diet data. Now note that although I mentioned I've been tracking diet since 2015, that was from macro and micronutrients. It wasn't until 2018 that I decided, hey, you know what? Macro and micronutrients is somewhat reductionist. I should be tracking foods. I'm assuming that macro and micronutrients can tell the whole story about foods but technically, I should be tracking food intake too and that can provide more insight. So I have 59 tests that go back to 2015 for macro and micronutrients, but 45 tests for foods. And then also, it's not a dietary component but body weight also included body weight on this chart. So atop the list and somewhat surprisingly are Brazil nuts. And the a positive correlation indicates that higher intake of the food is significantly correlated with a higher MCV and note that I said correlated. I'm not at all suggesting causation. The only way to know is by moving the needle for the different foods and see if the biomarker changes. Conversely, if the correlation is negative, that indicates that higher intake of the food is significantly correlated with a lower MCV. Now, so we can see at top of the list are Brazil nuts and that indicates that I may be eating too many Brazil nuts but only looking at the correlation doesn't tell me how much or how little Brazil nuts, how few should I be eating to potentially impact the MCV. So for that, let's take a look at that plot for MCV versus Brazil nuts over this seven year period and 45 tests, which is what we'll see here. So on the y axis, we've got the MCV and this is plotted against the average daily Brazil nut intake that corresponds to each test. At first, we can see the correlation. Again, the correlation coefficient would be 0.72, so that's what that red line indicates. And then, most recently, for the latest test, I was averaging about twelve grams of Brazil nuts per day and you can see that that MCV for that test was relatively high, 93. For the next test, I've cut Brazil nut intake to five grams per day. And if this is a real correlation based on extrapolation of the trend line, I should expect to see an MCV that's closer to about 90 femtoliters. Now, what happens if I cut Brazil nut intake to five grams ready? Not if I've been eating five grams per day rather than 12. What happens when I cut it to five grams per day and the MCV stays at 93? Well, after recalculating the correlations after blood test number seven which is scheduled for late October, if that's the case, the correlation will weaken and other stuff will move to the top of the list. So, for example, maybe ginger and black pepper maybe I'm eating too much of that and I'll make those changes for the next test. And it's this continuous iterative process that I've used for many biomarkers and that's one reason why many of my biomarkers are closer to youthful than they are to age. So stay tuned to see if cutting Brazil nut intake will make an impact on MCV for test number seven. But this is just part one of the blood test number six analysis. In the next test, we'll dig into the full blood test report. What diet supplements and prescription meds correspond to this 17 year younger biological age? So stay tuned for that video. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon, where I offer blood test consults but also post at least twice per day in four other Patreon tiers. We've also got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself that helps support the channel including ultalabtest.com, which is where I get the majority of my blood testing done, the clearly filtered water filter, which I use every day, at home metabolomics, I'm now up to 20 tests, oral microbiome composition, any testing with Genfinity, epigenetic testing with true diagnostic, at home blood testing with Siphox Health, which includes the best epigenetic clock of epigenetic clocks, GrimAge, green tea which I drink every day, diet tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buymeacoffee. We've also got merch including Data is my North Star, figuring stuff out is my drug, and the conquer aging or diatrying logo which I've got on here. So if you're interested in that, link in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.