Since we're on the topic of skin, you know, and sun and what's optimal for skin health, so I haven't covered this covered this in a video. I may, though, at some point. But, so astaxanthin, that's another aspect of my diet where I've been lacking. And, so for people who know or don't already know, I eat fish every day, and this comes almost exclusively from wild caught sardines, mostly for the omega three, but, obviously, also for the protein. Right? So there's no almost there has historically been no astaxanthin, which can come from things like salmon, which also has the omega three and protein. So why is astaxanthin important? Well, astaxanthin may have positive benefits on skin and emphasis on may because there are only a few clinical trials. And what I'm finding these days a lot on the, interwebs is people will take one clinical study in in a, you know, very few people, and this spreads like wildfire into this is gonna be great. This works. Right? I mean, I see that for, like, just things like hydrogen water and, you know, methylene blue. There's, like, a little bit of published data in randomized controlled trials, not in vitro or cells. So so, anyway, emphasis on May with astaxanthin. So, these are two clinical trials. And what, what I highlighted is in this study and, you know, we'll link to the papers in the video's description or the pinned comment. In the first study, they looked at on the left, in which I highlighted, they did a study in women where it was six milligrams per day of astaxanthin oral supplementation and two, what is that? Two milliliters topically of astaxanthin. So, now which is optimal? Is it get it from oral, you know, food supplement or getting it topically? I mean, I don't know which is optimal. Probably topical, probably be best if astaxanthin really can make a dent on skin health and skin aging. To put the, dose in perspective, I think average astaxanthin I mean, I got this off the, Internet yesterday for, you know, to get four milligrams, I think that's per 100 of, salmon. So you need you need a pretty decent sized salmon, wild caught salmon. You know? I wouldn't go with the farm stuff. You know, so you you need about two hundred grams per day to get eight milligrams of, oral astaxanthin per day. Nonetheless, they saw positive effects on skin, skin health related measures. Right? So, skin wrinkles, age spot size, skin texture, moisture content, which declines during aging. So so potentially beneficial. And this was a randomized controlled trial. This isn't, you know, association. And then in the second study that they did, it was in men. And here too, you know, without going through the data, showing the data, yeah, just going, you know, with the abstract. Usually, I usually, I show data, but for now, just going through the abstract. In men, crow's crow's crow's feet wrinkle and elasticity, and then trans epidermal epidermal water loss, which, water, hydration skin hydration declines during aging. So astaxanthin was able to improve, wrinkles and elasticity and, reduce the transepidermal water loss. Now the reason I haven't focused so much on skin is because it can be be very tricky. Because if you're visually inspecting someone's skin and then looking at it under the microscope and then then you're trying to quantify what you see under the microscope, that can be very tricky. And, you know, and that's as someone who's, you know, worked in a research lab and and done micros microscope related studies, and now you've gotta look at visual differences between, you know, a few samples. It's it's a challenge. So with that in mind, we can see that basically in the second study. Again, randomized control trial. This was looking at astaxanthin supplementation, in in response to UV induced skin deterioration in healthy people. Right? So what they gave was a more physiological dose of, astaxanthin, which four milligrams per day, as I mentioned, isn't a crazy amount of salmon for ten weeks. And just going into that idea of of, you know, tricky to quantify vis visually. Right? So this is the skin swelling. The rectangles are the skin swelling in response to the UV induced, exposure. So they made the skin, you know, swelling. It's it's called erythma. I'm probably mispronouncing it, which is basically just skin, you know, redness and swelling. So this is before treatment. Right? Placebo and astaxanthin. And then placebo, you know, post post treatment, post post placebo treatment, and then astaxanthin, post placebo treatment. So if you're gonna quantify if you just look at it visually, you'll you could say, alright. Well, dark red, light red. You know, darker red, lighter red. But, you know, then is the magnitude in the astaxanthin group better than the what happened versus placebo? Because if you look at it, it looks like there is some improvement in less swelling in the placebo group too. So this is the emphasis on may improve skin health. You know, I'm not necessarily convinced yet. I'd probably place my biggest bet on on topical, as I mentioned, but I'd like to see more studies, you know, for astaxanthin on skin health going forward. But then where it may get more interesting is that there's a recently published study coming from the ITP, which is a gold standard of lifespan related studies at least in mice. And that's because they they look at, supplementation in a few different test sites and use a very large sample size to evaluate lifespan potential lifespan related effects. So it's not a sample size of 10 mice versus 10 mice, placebo versus supplement. It's like, you know, 200 plus mice per group across a few test sites. So, when pooling the data, and this is data in males, it didn't work in female mice on the same diets for the same duration. When looking at median survival, this is point five survival. That's the time when half the mice have died and half are still alive. When compared with the controls, which are in red, the astaxanthin treated male mice, you can see that there's a significant shift to the right, so a significant increase in median lifespan. If you look at maximum lifespan, so you can look at, you know, twenty percent survival here. It looks like there's a significant lengthening there too where it's pushed out, you know, a little bit. I didn't I didn't look in to see if maximum lifespan was impacted. I like to look at ten percent survival, so when ten percent of the mice are still alive. And if we do that, it looks like there's, you know, they're basically overlap curves, at least in terms of median survival. And in mice seems to be promising. So with that in mind, I've cut down on my salmon, sardine intake, and I've started to add wild caught salmon to about a fifty fifty approach. So now I'm cooking it about once a week or once every two weeks, you know, and then prepackaging it, and then, you know, eating that over a few for for a few days. Maybe it's more of a forty, sixty still sardine. So I don't know what's optimal, but some probably better than none, whether that could impact medium medium lifespan or could impact skin aging and health. I don't know, but some probably better than none.