For white blood cells, I find no value in looking at the absolute number because they're not a homogeneous group of cells. In other words, up to about 97%, 95% or more for white blood cells are neutrophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes. Neutrophils and monocytes increase during aging. Lymphocytes decrease during aging. So your white blood cell counts could be stable and you could have divergent things going on at the same time. So, I find no value in looking at the absolute number of white blood cells. But if we did, 3.5 to six would be my optimal. So Brian's would be a bit too low. But then, we could take it even a step further because, you know, people often say, like, you know, your ref your optimal ranges are based on sick population. Well, first of all, I'm looking at the studies that have millions of people if they exist, if not millions and thousands, hundreds of thousands of people. The biggest studies that exist, large population based averages. Could you make a case that less than my, quote, unquote, optimal range, 3.5 to six, is optimal at the individual level for certain people? Yeah. Potentially. So could Brian's 3.1 be optimal even though it's a bit lower than the 3.5? It could be. But, you know, it goes back to this division of the neutrophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes. If, for example, his his, lymphocytes are less than thousand, so that would be one point zero of the 3.1. And then his neutrophils and monocytes are, say, 2,000. Neutrophils and monocytes would be pretty close to optimal in that context, but his lymphocytes being a thousand would be far away from optimal. And we could even I know we talked about this a bit before, but you could even subdivide the lymphocytes into c d four, c d eight, which is, what's known as an immune health grade. So 1,000 lymphocytes will be subdivided into t and I know I'm gonna lose people here because they lost me. You know, they need to get into the weeds, but this is where the the beauty is. We've gotta really understand that the the depths and the mechanism of our biomarkers. So the lymphocytes getting further subdivided into t cells, b cells, and k cells. If you don't have enough of certain of those cell types to fight off infection, you're gonna be more likely to get infections, stay infected for longer, increase your risk of death from infectious mortality, and all cause mortality risk is a part of that story. So even if his neutrophils and monocytes were quote unquote optimal, but lymphocytes were too low leading to a worse immune health grade based on CD four, CD eight, three point one may be may not be optimal. So we would need more context to really properly evaluate if that's, quote, unquote, optimal. But in in terms of the the Lustgarten definition of optimal seam, and your data would probably be closer to optimal than Bryant's.