Hey, everyone. Today's guests are Modar Hassan, Amar Abidi, and Julianna Rosenblum, who come to us today from the College of Dental Medicine at Lincoln Memorial University. Doctor Hassan is the chair of the bio biomedical science department and is an associate professor of biomedical sciences. Doctor Abidi is the associate dean for research and the director of the center for research education and technology, and Juliana is a candidate in the doctor of dental mental sorry, dental medicine program. Together, they recently published the paper entitled unraveling the oral microbiome's role in Alzheimer's disease. And today, we'll present data from the paper followed by q and a. So with that, welcome everyone, and let's get into the presentation. Good morning. First of all, I'd like to thank you, Michael, for having us and giving us the opportunity to come and present what we've been working on for so long. As you mentioned, my name is Juliana Rosenblum, and I'm actually a second year dental student here at Lincoln Memorial College of Dental Medicine in Knoxville, Tennessee. And you both now know my mentors, doctor Abidi and doctor Kisan. So I'm just gonna get right into it. So a little bit of background regarding what sparked my initial interest in this project. Before dental school, I received a master's degree in biomedical sciences with a concentration in neuroscience, and I was simultaneously working in a neurobehavior and neurology lab at the Veterans Affairs Hospital in New Jersey. So I had a little bit of a background both in neuroscience and research. And then when I arrived at Lincoln Memorial, part of me really did not wanna give up my passion for neuroscience despite my clear interest and passion about dentistry. So that's when I approached doctor Kason and doctor Abidi, and we brainstormed kind of a good way to combine the two so I can I would be able to pursue both? And I understand that's a very niche concept, but we did it. I have a history of Alzheimer's and dementia in my family, so picking that as our disease of interest was definitely a no brainer, pun intended, you know, if you will. And then after months of hard work and collaboration, we were finally able to, as you mentioned, publish this manuscript into a prestigious journal this past December, which is very exciting. It's in the Alzheimer's and dementia, Journal of Alzheimer's Association, and now I get to share our findings and the some of the new novel relationships with you. So as I introduced, we know why I hold Alzheimer's disease so close to my heart, but why is that important to everybody else? So Alzheimer's disease is the most common form of, dementia under just a bigger umbrella, and it's categorized by memory loss, behavioral changes, and cognitive decline. From data obtained as of 2025 from the Journal of Alzheimer's and Dementia, a total of seven point two million people in The United States aged 65 and older are living with Alzheimer's disease. So if we look at this chart here, we can see that that disease risk increases as age increases. So at 65 to 74 years, we get 1,900,000 going all the way up to 85 years old at two point five million. Now globally, according to Alzheimer's Disease International from a study taken in 2020, approximately fifty five million people are living with Alzheimer's disease, with that number expecting to triple by two thousand and fifty. So what does that tell us? Alzheimer's is not a new disease. In fact, there are medications on the market already that are advertised to these patients that are living with this disease. But the key distinction here and the point comes to being is that these medications are palliative, not curative. So why don't we look at a different approach to the disease and introduce the possibility that the underlying mechanism behind Alzheimer's may be something different than what's already studied? So here's where we introduce the concept of bacterial distribution and impact. It's no secret that microbes are everywhere, and as we can see based on this figure, there are different percentages of bacterial presence based on where you are in the body. But one thing I'd like to bring to your attention here is the highest distributions being within the mouth and the GI tract, 2630% respectively. Now the similarity in these numbers might not be shocking per se. I mean, let's think about it. We ingest bacteria every day. We eat something. We drink something. We breathe. The oral cavity is a straight shot down to the gut, which, of course, has its own bacterial makeup. That seems reasonable for those two to be pathogenic targets. However, only within the past ten years, give or take, researchers are becoming a lot more open to the idea that microbiome alterations are the ones that could contribute to Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis. So let's take a look at this. If we do a PubMed search, we can see that there are approximately 2,015 records linking microbiota and Alzheimer's disease in the gut. If we search through the records linking oral microbiota and Alzheimer's, we only find approximately two forty research records. Like I mentioned earlier, these studies are fairly recent. So in 2013 is when the first contextual review of the gut microbiota and Alzheimer's disease was published, And in 2017, the first major experimental animal model was presented. That seems pretty cool. Only four years it took to to reveal that. Now in 2002, the first contextual major experimental animal model had been presented linking the two. That's a big difference. So here's where we as a group landed. No one's going to possibly argue that the gut microbiome isn't important, isn't relevant, isn't useful to study. But if we think strictly from a visual point of view, the oral cavity is much closer to the brain, the bacteria are ingested through the mouth, right? So why don't we target the actual source, which is the mouth? So as I mentioned earlier, the oral nasal sinus is the closest microbial reservoir to the brain. Some bacteria easily cross the blood brain barrier and then enter the bloodstream, and the distance to do that from the mouth is much closer than the distance and processes traveled from the gut. The bacteria causing periodontal disease, for example, a disease that causes persistent low grade inflammation, causes an increase in inflammatory cytokines, and that has an established contribution to Alzheimer's disease pathology. But despite all of these concepts, the oral gut brain axis still remains very underexplored. So, am I suggesting that just swallowing and drinking your water immediately causes entrance of inflammatory bacteria? Obviously not. The oral cavity is a complex and diverse microbial ecosystem. Like any ecosystem, in order to function, balance is the key here. Under normal circumstances, commensal bacteria, or the beneficial microbes live in harmony with pathogenic bacteria or disease inducing bacteria. And just a note here, recently, pathogenic bacteria have been reclassified as pathobiones, But for the purposes of this presentation and just for consistency's sake, I will continue to refer to them as pathogenic bacteria. So what happens when there's a decrease in the commensal bacteria and an increase in pathogenic bacteria? This is what I'm going to be referring to as dysbiosis, oral dysbiosis from now on. This is what leads to the chronic release of inflammatory cytokines leading to neuronal death and injury. And the mechanism is simple. Periodontal inflammation releases cytokines. These products enter the systemic circulation, and blood brain barrier integrity is compromised, and neuroinflammation and neuronal injury occur. Two very well established contributors to Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis. Do we have any existing studies that prove this concept? Yes. So what did they find? In 2023, a group published a systematic review providing an overview of some of the examples of known commensal bacteria, S. Salivarius, neisseria, and gemella, and also some examples of pathogenic bacteria, P. Gingivalis, t denticola, f nucleatum, and AA, some of which have been found in, brains of postmortem Alzheimer's patients in the plaques more specifically, some of which have been found in saliva or gingival carricular fluid. And these this was taken as a combination from various studies. So what do we know about the effects of a decrease in commensal bacteria in general? Collectively, these bacteria are known to be anti inflammatory, and a decrease in them will disrupt microbial balance, reduce the, production of neuroprotective metabolites, and lead to neuronal death and contribute to a decrease in cognition. Increase in pathogenic bacteria, which are known to release pro inflammatory mediators, will trigger systemic inflammation, promote blood brain barrier disruption, induce microglial activation, and cause amyloid beta accumulation, of course, comes neuroinflammation, neuronal peptosis, all of which are associated with Alzheimer's disease pathology. Now this particular review only accounted for Alzheimer's disease patients alone, and that's, of course interesting and novel but we wanted to add an extra layer to that what about the presence of comorbidities? There are well established bacterial alterations in several systemic diseases hypertension chronic kidney disease type two diabetes just to name a few. And taking a look at those individually, we thought, can we find any overlapping changes in bacteria? So let's look at hypertension first. Across several studies we looked at, we found that the following commensals were increased. I mean the following commensals were decreased sorry and the pathogens increased the side effects of hypertension and mechanisms are well established and with my previous definition of those commensals and pathogenic bacteria these side effects make sense but guess what If those bacteria seem familiar, we actually see these exact same changes in bacteria appear in Alzheimer's disease from saliva samples with similar side effects, meaning an increase in disease propagation. Let's take a look at chronic kidney disease. Again, across several studies, we found a pattern taken from saliva or gingival carricular fluid, etcetera. We see a pattern of increase and decrease in the bacteria that you can see on the screen. And in the context of chronic kidney disease, these bacteria affect nitrate cycling and increase vascular dysfunction. And once again, these are the same bacteria that we're seeing effects in Alzheimer's disease. Not only this, but the low nitric oxide availability from chronic kidney disease leads to reduced cerebral flow, meaning decreased oxygen and nutrient delivery to the brain, and oxidative stress is known to damage neurons. These factors increase amyloid beta deposition, which is a hallmark of Alzheimer's pathology. Finally, let's take a look at tick two diabetes. Amongst the available published data, we noticed an increase and decrease in the following bacteria, again, taken from brains, saliva samples, GCF. This causes an alteration in gut microbial metabolites, so lipopolysaccharides, short chain fatty acids, and promote systemic inflammation and activation of extracellular signal regulated kinase pathways in the liver. This chronic activation contributes to hepatic insulin resistance and increases, once again, inflammatory cytokines. No surprise here. We see the exact same trend with the bacteria in Alzheimer's disease, again taken from the wide variety of samples that I mentioned. And I'm sure you've been overwhelmed with the amount of bacteria and the names that I've been throwing at you and that you're looking at on the screen in your disease. So for your convenience I have tabulated the the bacteria that actually appeared overlap not only individually but across all the systemic diseases that I mentioned. PD standing for periodontal disease, t t two d standing for type two diabetes, HT hypertension, CKD chronic kidney disease. Interestingly enough, the same trends of increase or decrease that we see in each of these bacteria are the are the same ones that we see in the disease and in this is in Alzheimer's disease and in the systemic disease. So this chart alone can reinforce our theory that these bacterial changes influence and potentially also reinforce neuronal destruction and disease pathogenesis, Of course, in theory. There's a lot we still don't know. While the conclusions that we've drawn are promising, the question in the forefront is definitely, is this correlation alone or is this causation? The next paper that we're working on explores the specific mechanisms of action of each of the individual bacteria and their impact on both systemic disease and Alzheimer's disease. So we also need to pick particular microbes that we're interested in targeting out of all the ones that I mentioned, and then eventually the long term outcomes of interventions and what they would look like for human studies. But conceptually, these answers can be, answer these questions rather can be answered using a predictive model. And saliva and gingival curricular fluid are excellent non invasive options to identify microbial signatures and associate them as disease predictors. And as a dental student, this data offers promise to me as a future dental professional and my colleagues that we may play a pivotal role in disease detection. But what can we do for now? For now, we can focus on maintaining periodontal care, taking the proper pro and prebiotics to maintain that long term desired harmony, and of course management of already diagnosed systemic disease. Because at the end of the day, the goal is always to restore microbial balance and reduce inflammation. Regardless of the gaps in our research, restoring oral symbiosis is imperative to stop inflammation and proliferation of all of the diseases that I mentioned. Looking in the future, we hope to publish our next paper relating mechanisms of each of these bacteria. One particular advantage that we have as an academic institution is, the establishment of our dental clinic, and that gives us access to a very wide patient population. Eventually, we would hope to be able to analyze our own samples from GCF and saliva in hopes of being able to finally prove not only the correlation but actual causation. And, of course, you can never do anything without a village. So this these are all of our collaborators that we've worked with. Obviously, here we are we're here at, Lincoln Memorial University, and we have collaborators at the, University of Tennessee and West Coast University. So we are really lucky that we get to share all this with you. So thank you so much. Thanks, Juliana. That was great. If you could take it off full screen, and then if you guys are ready for questions, I have a whole bunch of questions. To the idea of cause versus consequence. So for all of the comorbidities that you mentioned, it's likely that there's poor metabolic health in conjunction with periodontitis. I'm not sure if you could or or is it? So I can see you going both ways where someone's got periodontitis, oral inflammation, and then that translocate systemically to negatively impact some of the comorbidities you mentioned, but also the comorbidities negatively impact the salivary metabolome, which act as a prebiotic negatively for for the growth of some of those pathogenic bacteria. So how how can we get closer to is this a periodontitis story, or is this the combination of periodontitis plus just poor health in general leading to the poor health of the oral oral cavity? Right. So that is a good question. And, of course, that kind of, gives a little bit of a what came first, the chicken or the egg type of deal. First of all, we would have to look at the age population a lot of the time. Age plays a huge factor into, different, oral microbiome profiles in general. So let's say already, somebody with hypertension or chronic kidney disease or type two diabetes who doesn't have a they don't necessarily need to have an Alzheimer's diagnosis, but they are older and our, oral microbiome changes as we get older, especially with medications that we're taking and that causes xerostomia, like dry mouth or, increases increases susceptibility to caries, things like that. So maybe that's the start, and those are the changes that were that are propagating perhaps the systemic disease. You know, that's a huge age, I would say, plays a huge factor into that, and I don't know how you guys So so if age is the factor of underlying all of the comorbidities, and that creates a systemic milieu that then ends up in saliva as the prebiotic for, you know, the growth of the periodontitis associated bacteria, which can then end up in the brain. So what's the is the best strategy treating the comorbidities and treating overall systemic health and improving fitness and resilience? Like, is that is that the goal? So I I would like to go, back to the previous question you asked. Of course, there are comorbidities and, oral, oral, oral health, they are, connected to each other. However, I would like to mention studies that was done last year, in Wuhan in China where they measure the bacteria profile and saliva from patient with Alzheimer disease. These patients, they don't have any comorbidities. Only they suffer from Alzheimer disease. And they were able to show that, they have the same trends that we show. Like, the bacteria, the bad bacteria that they are increasing with Alzheimer disease and the beneficial bacteria are decreasing with Alzheimer disease. Now what I wanna say is, comorbidities, of course, it can affect maybe it can bypass, the oral health. But, of course, it's bidirectional. So if you have oral, health disease, this can lead, for example, to hypertension. It can lead to diabetes. Also, hypertension and, diabetes itself, they can lead to what? They can lead to, oral health, issues. So in order to, like, just separate between both and human is difficult because you cannot manipulate, like, for ethical reasons. You can mani cannot manipulate it manipulate it in a human. However, what we can do, like, we have options in animals. We can use germ free mice. And what we can do, we can, populate, like, the oral health with bacterias that we just mentioned in this paper. And this is our future directions. This is what we are doing in collaboration with, Pittsburgh University. And what we wanna do is, first, we wanna try to see how this change in the oral bacteria independently of comorbidities can lead to Alzheimer disease. So the best model to use is germ free mice. And then we will add one layer of complexity to it where we will add, like, for example, hypertensive mice, diabetic mice, chronic disease mice, etcetera. I guess this might give us an answer, and but still, it's difficult. As Juliana said, who come first, the chicken or the egg? Yeah. So what's the what's the prebiotic for P. Gingivalis, Treponema, and, well, I forgot 10 I think, Tannerella, maybe. What was the what was the third one? T T denticola. T Treponema denticola. Yeah. What's the prebiotic for their growth in the in the mouth? You mean, what they they feed, mainly, they feed on on sugar Yeah. In order to In order to grow. So then that wouldn't that suggest that considering that saliva should be proportionally the same, have the same concentration, what's in saliva should be in the same proportional concentration to blood. If someone's, diabetic, prediabetic, and have relatively high blood levels of, blood sugar, that would be in saliva. And now we've got an increased prevalence and growth of these bacteria in the mouth, and then that's gonna maybe contribute to, you know, oral inflammation. So is this a high blood sugar, story? It can be high blood sugar story because it's very well known that during type two diabetes, we you can find a lot of glucose in, in in saliva. And by having a lot of glucose in saliva, this will lead to reduction in water and saliva. So we are reducing the saliva amount. And, definitely, this will shift, pH in the oral cavity and will create an ideal environment for bad bacteria to, to grow there. So, yeah, it can play it can play an important, an important role in growing, bad bacteria. Also, it's very well known that, bacteria, they feed on sugar, and they release acids as metabolite. And if you expose these to, to acid for a long time, you'll end up having, like, holes in your teeth, and it will affect your gum. And this eventually will lead to an increase of, bad bacteria as well. So it sounds like, optimizing metabolic health, keeping blood glucose levels, avoiding that age related increase, which is a challenge because glucose levels increase during aging. So it seems like periodontitis and then correspondingly having bacterial translocation from the oral to the brain oral cavity to the brain is almost inevitable. Or is it it is it not inevitable? One could argue that it is inevitable. That's something that people like to say. But I would like to make another point is that as somebody too who feared the dentist for majority of my life, and then ironically decided to become one, I think also one of the keys is maybe it's not inevitable. Maybe if we look at, some research papers that exist, a lot of them are, from overseas. But if we look at those papers, a lot of people are not going to schedule dentist appointments. They don't wanna see their dentist. They don't think it's important. You know, some people just don't take care of their teeth until it becomes an aesthetic issue. And nobody really goes to their general doctor for a checkup and, you know, asks them to see what bacteria can you take a swab of my saliva and tell me what bacteria are changing in my microbiome? You know what I mean? So nobody really does that. So maybe if we took care of our teeth, maybe if periodontal disease in general was decreased, maybe that would that would make it inevitable, but and aging maybe wouldn't be a factor. But, you know, the that's all for So I see. So when considering that it's probably bidirectional, if people are optimizing oral health independent of age related changes to blood glucose, at least that should reduce the risk of having poor oral health and having those bacteria translocate into the brain. Right. And even in in the context of Alzheimer's disease, we don't see they research shows that the disease progression begins twenty years before you even begin to see symptoms or actually get a diagnosis. So if I'm at 20 years old or I'm 26 years old, chances are I'm not going to my doctor and getting a neuro scan and see and finding plaques and tangles in my brain. But maybe the bacteria is coagulating and developing there, and I just don't know about it yet. Yeah. Definitely. So in terms of optimizing the oral cavity, so we hear about, obviously, tooth brushing and flossing. Like, this seems to be the obvious, but I think an an underrated a grossly underrated approach is interdental flossing. Right? So the the analogy that I like to make is, sure, you can brush your teeth and flossing kinda just scrapes a little bit on the sides, but, you know, that's like without having the inter inter interdental brush, it's kinda like washing the front of your house and kind of ignoring the sides. And then the stuff can accumulate, you know, stuff, you know, debris and and sugars and whatever else. And then that can be a a trigger for, you know, gum inflammation leading to periodontitis. So is the optimal oral health not just going to the dentist clearly a couple times a year to get a cleaning to scrape off the plaque, but tooth brushing plus flossing plus interdental brushing and then maybe even getting a, they have specific, like, perial brushes where you could kinda jam into your gums and kinda just dig in it dig in there. Like, usually, when people go to the dentist, you know, the the dentist will say, don't dig into your gums. You're gonna have gum recession. But the other side of that is if you don't actively try to clean your gums or get in there, stuff will accumulate. So is it the combination of all four of those, or what would you say is the best approach for optimizing oral care independent of going to the dentist a couple of times per year? Julia, I'll let you speak first. I'll speak afterwards. There's a few other things I wanna mention also from the, like, the previous conversations I wanna build it into it. So I wanna our dental student to acknowledge first. So Oh, thanks. I I think that is also a good question, but, also, there's a lot of, I would say, there's a lack of knowledge of exactly how to brush. Some peep there's people think that they're just gonna take their toothbrush and put a glob of toothpaste on it and then just hold it there, and that's somehow going to fix everything. Other people take it to the exact opposite extreme where they're just standing there and brushing and taking sandpaper basically to their teeth. That that's also not great. But, again, that that still comes down to, going to see your going to see a professional and not just relying on your own magic potions that you've come up with, you know, or or solutions that you've come up with. You actually have to go and see a provider to give you the a hygienist, a dentist who's going to actually give you the proper tools, tell you to use soft bristle toothbrushes so that you don't get, like, you're saying recession. Tell you exactly in which direction, how long in each quadrant to brush for, things like that. This is not something that you're just going to know know intuitively. This is going to come from actual visits to a provider. Yeah. But wait. Hang on, Amar. So hang on. So in terms of flossing, whether it's Waterpik or, you know, wax string floss, interdental brushing, are you suggesting you you don't need a peri brush if you don't have periodontitis to kinda dig into the gums to get stuff out? Definitely not suggesting that because flossing and taking care of your gums is obviously incredibly important. They're actually, we just get got back from a, symposium in Memphis where, some of the students were presenting different research regarding different types of floss and efficacy and, of wax floss versus, there's, like, new string kind of floss and things. I again, that's more of a personal preference. There is I just think it all like I'm saying goes back to education because, again, if we're gonna argue that inflammation is the driver of all of these things. If you're in there with a perio brush, you know, scraping your gums, you're going to inflame your gums one way or the other, and this still be a pro inflammatory cytokines or the cascade is still gonna go. So I think the key is correctly flossing, using perio brushes, using a water pick. Everything needs to be done correctly. Hey. Amar? Yes. No. I was gonna go one step back. So I'm gonna tell you some clinical practices, so then move into the oral hygiene concepts here. One of the things I wanted to mention to you is, you were mentioning about, like, the niche. Is it diabetes? Is it what direction are we having? So one of the things I wanna express is if you go to the general, endocrinologist right now, the way they study in the practice, whenever their a one c is not in under control, one of the things they actually examine these days is to send this patient for oral hygiene check because there's enough evidence now, clinically present, that we actually are reducing a one c levels for people who actually have good oral health. Okay? So there's a you can look this up. It's available online. Other norm that is available is from, like, rheumatic disease. So you go to rheumatologist. A lot of them are given medications, and they can't control them. They figured out that either removing their teeth per se, because that was the conduit there, or basically cleaning them up, getting them in good oral hygiene perspective, and eventually the inflammation to be reduced because of the localized bacterial population, we're able to actually also see that these medications now work better for these patients. They don't have as much flare ups. So many of the, rheumatologists will send it. And there's more probably to the merrier, but I'm just telling you these are common practices happening clinically now that actually do appropriate that. Now coming to the oral, oral hygiene as she hit, the spot because, technically, the biggest issue we have is the education and compliance. Right? People don't know really how to brush their teeth. They assume a parameter. And then taking, for instance, a, floss or even a toothpick or something and wedging it in there, it's actually traumatic to the mouth. Right? So there's techniques to it. So when you're doing all these pieces and everyone says, oh, logically, it makes sense for me to just go there. But imagine this, if you're already having inflamed gums, right, and you're you have these fenestrated blood vessels existing there, which are already a gateway for potential bacterial, products to get through, when you wedge it through, you may traumatize more. So it depends on the individual itself. So there's, like, pieces of what are you doing in terms of what it's needed? Holistically speaking at the final end, that's why it's so important because as you were mentioning before about how the bacterial plaque develops and, you know, the food and all that's there. Body actually does a unique piece there. I just wanna give you a quick, update on that because you'll find it fascinating. I find it fascinating even till this day is, just like you have calcifications in the body because the body's trying to or mineralization to protect itself. The mouth does the same thing. So when you actually have increased, plaque buildup, different species, microbial species there, with the saliva's help with the body's response, we actually calcify or, you know, that's what we call it tartar or calculus. What ends up with that is with the the irony switches, it kills some of the bacteria, but the bacteria we're concerned more about is the one that's already embedded down and starting in the sulcus. Right? So there's, like, pieces like that in Japan happening, and that's some of the bacterias that we're kinda discussing right now, which is part of that. So I just wanna make that part there. At the end, the under player becomes truly inflammation. So which direction does the inflammation travel? Right? Is it subclinical always coming from the mouth or and which can lead to all these aftermaths, or is it other problems like sugar that we introduce too much which leads to that issue altogether? And a lack potentially of oral prebiotics, say, for example, like nitrate, which can stimulate the growth of some of the bacteria you mentioned, like Neisseria and others. Right? So alright. So staying staying on the idea of optimizing oral health. So I get that, potentially, you can make things worse if you're just jamming stuff into your gums and and in your teeth. But the other side of that is and I I say this anecdotally. I don't know if this translates to others. I neglected, you know, using a perio brush for a long time, and I'd go to the dentist, you know, flossing every day and brushing every day for years, and I would have bleeding upon probing. So I was like, what's going on here? Right? So I once I got a perio brush, and I started to actually get in there, problem solved. No more no more gum bleeding at home. No more glove gum bleeding no matter how much they're digging into my gums when I go to the dentist. So I guess what you're saying, there's some nuance there. If your gums are healthy and you're jamming them and now they're bleeding, I should stop doing that. On the other side, if you're not in there at all trying to clean it out, you may have the, you know, the the the stimulus for the you got your gum inflammation, gingivitis at least, which could end up becoming periodontitis, which leads to translocation and all that. Right? So I guess there's nuances what you guys are saying to optimizing oral health. Correct. And and to the point, what you just said, there is nuances. There are genetic factors. There's age related events where you actually have senescing of cells going on and things of that sort. So the optimization responses are not there. But you're on the money, and Jill also picked up on this part, that you there is a technique and sensitivity how you do these things, and you can protect I mean, our objective here is to be preventative. Right? And so some things are gonna happen. We have the story that's telling that there are players involved that lead to this disease potential. Right? Like, you're exacerbating conditions, which lead to potentially other problems emergence. So that's where the whole thing is by the mouth being regulated that way. We can actually significantly, based on the studies that we've seen, and what we are trying to see as practices and clinical sides correlating with with dentistry. That's what we're trying to see. We're we're seeing as a better management profile, which is part of the whole concept of this manuscript. Also, I would I would like to add, like, brushing your teeth and flossing is very important. But, if we add to it the comorbidities, like, for example, if you have hypertension or diabetes, then you have, like, an increase of, reactive oxygen species that they can affect, the vessels in your gums. They can affect your gum itself, and it will lead to gingival inflammation independently if you are flossing or brushing your your teeth. So I feel one of the best way to treat it is to maintain a a balanced, oral microbiome by maintaining the bacteria that they have anti inflammatory effect, and this can be achieved by using probiotic or, prebiotics. Wait. Before going to pro or prebiotics, just staying on that idea of optimizing oral health. So, non alcohol based mouthwash, which seems like the easiest low hanging fruit. Obviously, nobody should be using alcohol on their mouthwash. We we've seen the effects it can do to blood pressure and its potential links with AD. So what is the optimal way? Like, is water so the oral cavity, pH is, saliva is, 7.4. Some something around there. Right? So we want it to be more alkaline and obviously not acidic. Right? So that that the beginning of the the gut being the mouth, more alkaline. But as we go all the way down to the colon, it's the opposite. We want it to be more acidic and not alkaline as it becomes more alkaline during aging. So optimizing the gut, fiber, short chain fatty acids, it acidifies the colon. So what's the other side of that story? What's the best way to keep oral pH around 7.4? Obviously, not are you gonna say a high sugar diet is gonna make it more acidic? Okay. That's the obvious. But is there such a thing too as too alkaline? Like, if I put sodium bicarbonate in a homemade mouth, you have solution, you know, 1% sodium bicarbonate, which is close to physiological saline, concentration. Is that gonna over alkaline, you know, with a pH of eight? You know? So or it's just water. Rinsing with water and then flossing after eating. Like, what's the what what's the best, quote, unquote, mouthwash, after eating? And I think just Yeah. Go ahead. Okay. I'll go ahead. I'll get the Interestingly enough, there is a big there's a big argument, I think, to be made that amongst amongst some professionals that it's, actually, mouthwash might not even be a real so, I guess, incredibly useful as, like, a one stand alone solution, I guess, because even toothpaste alone gets advertised as this amazing thing that's gonna take away all of the bugs and no more caries and cavities for you. But it's actually, unfortunately, not really true, and it's actually the mechanical, act of using your toothbrush that is what is removing these bacteria, not whatever is in your toothpaste or in your mouthwash or anything along those lines. So just from a personal standpoint, I believe that just the idea of a mouthwash and using that as your way to regulate pH in that regard isn't necessarily the one stop shop solution. It's more mechanically actually using your toothbrush regardless of what you put on it. It's just the mechanism of actually using it. So after eating, no matter what concentration of, acids or bases are in the foods that you're eating to just to to brush, Not try to regulate pH with water or sodium bicarbonate or anything other than that. That's a personal take, and I would argue that a lot some other professionals have different opinions, and I'm sure doctor Abidi and doctor Hassan will weigh in. But personally, I that is what I think it's more of a mechanical issue than it is, a balancing bicarb or water or anything like that. Thoughts, Mudar, Amar? I feel rinsing with water is a key. It's very important to rinse with water after, after eating Because, rinsing with water will especially if you are eating a lot of snacks, rinsing with water will minimize, it will dilute, sugar in, in your mouth. And, definitely, as we just mentioned, like sugar is a food for the bad bacteria that they rely on. So no need to go to the alkalization with sodium bicarbonate or anything that's got a relatively higher pH than that? Maybe Amar can answer this question. So you so the thing is this, Michael, I'm gonna go because it's a your question is very straightforward, but it's multifaceted. Right? Because when you're asking about a day to day condition of, like, what Juliana said, hey. We if you just do mechanical brushing of teeth, we can get rid of the bacteria, which may be, populating. Now that there's a significant piece of that too because generally in animal studies that they have done about the plaque formation, it takes about twenty four hours to forty eight hours in animals to actually produce a proper, like, plaque to actually cause some kind of gingivalitis to form. Right? And the question comes to being is, does that mean after each meal, I wanna do this? And my argument or regulation would be, as you age, you maybe wanna be a little more meticulous. Just just saying for the sake of. But on the other piece of that, do you have to? Probably not. Water is essential because of other reasons too because the the dehydration concept requires it. And if you and then one of the other pieces that we're not to it because saliva is formed by the ductal cells coming through the blood. Right? And the reality still comes to being is how well you maintain or regulate your blood in terms of pH, which is kind of regulated, but your diets matter, what you eat and how much you eat. Like, I mean, I come from a background of Pakistani Indian food. We have natural spices. There are more oil concepts there. It's probably much better for us to drink more water associated and also make sure that things are there. Having alkalinity or something of the mouthwash. And so for localized events, when you're seeing that I ate too much spicy food, there's nothing wrong with doing that. It's just not because then you're just ingesting a lot of it too. At what point did you cause yourself perturbance to the gut? Because the gut needs its own so there's there's pieces like that, like, when you drink carbonated water with sparkling waters these days. Right? Or when you go with alkaline waters and it's good for you. It's good for people depending on the condition given. And overusing and a continuous use will cause other aftermath because we get stuck with here, but the body is still one big piece. So but in localized events to the point, water on the day to day would be essential. If a person is feels like their food gets hung up in areas around which are of concern, I would tell them to brush, after meals as well. So that's that would be the best way to to reduce the opportunity of things just sitting there. So Fantastic. Alright. So brushing and maybe water. Okay. So in terms of prebiotics for the oral cavity, knowing that sugar, obviously, you know, direct intake of sugar, but then also high blood sugar is gonna be stimulus for the bad stuff in the mouth. And then knowing that nitrate containing foods, whether it's beets or green leafy vegetables, are gonna be a fantastic prebiotic for the growth of the quote, unquote good guys. Are there other prebiotics that are important for shifting the balance from, you know, the commensals to the to the pathobionts and and vice versa? You know, optimizing your microbiome with prebiotics. So I would like to talk about a prebiotic that, we made, in collaboration with McGill University, and it's patented now. So what we did without entering in a lot of details, like, what we did, we tweaked the glycosidic bond in it. And we noticed that, this, prebiotic was able to shift the oral bacteria towards the commercial bacteria, so towards, the good bacteria. So it depends what type of sugar, you are, you are using. So, we did this study in, with Amar, and we hope to publish it, this year. We noticed that when we give this, prebiotic to hypertensive mice, even for obese and diabetic mice, we were able to shift the bacteria to, in the oral health and in the gut towards beneficial, beneficial bacteria. But we have to be to be careful what type of prebiotic we are using because and without mentioning names, there is a, prebiotic that it's over the counter. And we noticed that when you use it, it will it will improve the gut microbiota somehow, but it will shift the oral bacteria towards, pathogenic bacteria. Yeah. So which are are there's oral are there prebiotics specific for the oral cavity that don't necessarily get to the gut? They are not specific for oral. They they go to the gut. So it sounds like in order to optimize the oral microbiome, we'd need to optimize systemic health with a variety of nutrients that could like, for example, nitrate that would then end up in the mouth to act as a prebiotic rather than taking like a lozenge specific for the oral microbiome because then that might not actually work to optimize oral microbiome, and it may mess up the gut microbiome, which is gonna gonna end up messing up the oral microbiome. So, yes, there is hold on one second. I just wanna say one piece, and I'll take it. There are, in terms of, dental realm, there are there's a company called ProBioHealth. They actually have oral, pre excuse me, not prebiotics. They're probiotics. I don't recall all their names, but I know that one of them is streptococcus aureus, and there's one more in there. The idea of behind all of that is because microbiome has to have certain, bacterias come together before others can kinda jump in, they have changed the midpoints, the intermediate bacterias, which compete for this, site. So they were trying to reduce the burden of of these pathogens, bacterias altogether by changing intermediate species. So there is that concept there. So that kinda gets the idea of the oral microbiome in terms of who's there and then the oral metabolome as in what's what they're actually doing. Right? So, I think a lot of the so, you know, the studies can contradict in terms of who's there and then whether it's a commensal or not under certain conditions. And then even in the gut, it's like, you know, the the there'll be functional potential based on the 16 s, the, you know, the genetics of it. But then when you do the metabolomic data, whether it's fecal or blood, that doesn't necessarily agree with who's there. Right? So what are your thoughts on oral metabolome based studies to identify you guys mentioned some of it in the paper like gingipains, but this is one example. I'm sure that there's a a variety of oral metabolites, you know, just indicating which is more a reflection of the groups rather than the single species or a few species approach to identify dysbiotic versus healthy. So what do you what are your thoughts on the oral metabolome versus the oral microbiome? So, definitely, the bacteria itself can I mean, if it's increasing and decreasing without changes in, metabolites, it will not lead to to any effect? So at the end of the day, what counts is a metabolize release from these bacteria, whether they are good bacteria or, or bad bacteria. You just give, give an example about, give an example about gingipains that it's really there. There is also LPS. There is, cytokines such as IL-six and IL-twelve that they are all very well known to be released from bad bacteria and the oral health. But what is the problem here? Also, independently of, gingipans, the other like LPS and cytokines, they can also be released by the gut microbiota into into the circulation. And this, again, will put you in this dilemma. Are these metabolites coming from the oral, bacteria or from the gut bacteria? And, again, I'll go back to the same idea. I feel the from the gut bacteria? And, again, I'll go back to the same idea. I feel the best way to approach it and to answer this question is to use germ free mice where we can, inoculate, like, bacteria directly in the oral health or just in the in the gut. And this will let well, this will help you to to know even better if these metabolites are coming strictly from the oral microbiota or from the gut microbiota or from both. Alright. So along those lines, and people are gonna say it's disgusting. You know? But fecal transplants are can improve health in various conditions, whether it's c difficile infection. But is there is there a role for salivary transplants in improving someone's oral health, using whether it's germ free mice or even in clinical studies? Is that a future thing that may end up being a real thing? I don't see why not because it's the same concept like, fecal transplant. So, I I I I think it I mean, of course, you need to do, additional studies, but I feel, yeah, it can be feasible. Why not? Can be. Might be even easier by taking, like, a piece of gum rather than a whole you know, transferring pieces of gum from one person to another in that in that, you know, facility, I guess, if that's what they're doing with it. But you'd have to know what they're about. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Right. Yeah. So wait. So alright. So going back to metabolites. So, urea. You guys mentioned urea in the paper. And independent of CKD where blood levels of urea will be elevated, and then you'll probably have elevated blood levels of urea in the mouth. But urea, as you guys mentioned in the paper, is degraded to ammonia, which will then push the pH towards alkaline. So is that which potentially is good news for the oral microbiome. Right? So within the context of CKD, you'd have high levels of blood urea and then potentially good for the oral microbiome, or am I misinterpreting that? We we have to be super careful when we are interpreting data coming to urea because, also, what we know that ammonia can cross a blood brain barrier. It it can go to the brain, and there in the brain, it can play an important role in increasing edema in the brain. So, everything is to to have a to have a balance. So so we have to be super careful when we are, like, analyzing such type of data, especially when it comes to urea. Got it. Alright. So then along the lines of balance, so then superficially, most people say, okay. Cut sugar out of your diet. Like, no carbs. Right? And but that's a broad thing. Right? Because is it is your diet rich in monosaccharides? Does is is starch, which is a disaccharide, is that gonna impact the gut microbiome the same way as simple simple sugars like glucose? And then you've got the polysaccharides, the fibers, which are gonna impact the gut microbiome and probably impact, the mouth. So, you know, is is the quote, unquote optimal diet for gut health, you know, a low so, obviously, no process if in an ideal world. No processed foods. No UPS. But then you could also make the argument that if someone's on a very high carbohydrate containing diet, if that doesn't optimize insulin sensitivity, that could lead to poor oral health in the long term. So I guess for optimizing oral health, could you make a link between find the diet that optimizes your systemic health, low inflammation, you know, relatively low low blood glucose avoiding age related changes for those biomarkers, and then that will optimize the or microbiome, and it may be different for different peoples. Maybe some people actually thrive on a, quote, unquote, high carbohydrate, non UPF containing diet, where others may thrive on a higher fat. So what are your thoughts on diet and composition of specific macronutrients? And I know this isn't a theme that, you know, for, dentists. Right? But, I mean, it's it's a contributor. So what are what are your thoughts on the optimal diet for the oral microbiome? Well, it's it's difficult. This question is is very difficult. Like, I mean, I don't know the exact answer for it, but what I can tell you, like, it's very important to, to maintain a balanced diet as well. You cannot cut down on sugar completely. It's very important to have a little bit of sugar, you know, because we need sugar in order, in order, to survive. But, also, we have to be super careful, like, because when we ingest food, all this food will go to our stomach, to our intestine when the, the gut bacteria reside there. So we have to be, very careful because you don't want to shift the bacteria as a gut bacteria towards the pathogenic bacteria because this itself, it will increase systemic health. And by increasing systemic health, definitely, you're going to affect, the oral health, which itself will be shifted toward oral bad bacteria. It will potentiate even more the systemic health. So it's very it's very difficult. And here, I feel like, dentist and nutritionist should be should come together in order, to come up with the ideal, nutrition for people that are suffering from Alzheimer disease. Just just to push a little bit more on that. Could you make the argument that we're considering that obesity is linked with comorbidities and those comorbidities will likely negatively influence oral microbiome? And then, obviously, someone with obesity or being overweight would have an increased likelihood of periodontitis, whether it's overconsumption of calories or too much processed food. Could you make the argument that finding the diet that works at the individual level for optimizing, you know, body composition and fitness to minimize comorbidity risk over the long term could optimize for microbiome health, oral health? Definitely, it could. And there is papers that they show that if you control, the gut microbiota, and this itself can control the oral microbiota. Actually, we published a paper, like, last year. It's related to a gut bacteria called Acarbansia muciniphila. And we showed that this gut bacteria, it's very low when, during obesity and during type two diabetes. So if you, if you are able to, shift, or to increase this bacteria in the gut, automatically, you are improving the, the oral, microbiome. And we put in the paper, like, the mechanism by which this bacteria can improve the oral rats is by reducing inflammation because this bacteria, Akkermansia, is very well known to increase, the, anti inflammatory cytokine IL-ten. So, So, yeah, definitely, there is evidence. We and others already showed that if you are able to control gut microbiota, definitely, you will able to, control oral micro positively oral microbiota. Fantastic. Alright. Two more questions. So, when considering that gingipains are cysteine proteases, interestingly, I don't know if you guys are familiar with the biomarker, but cystatin c, which is linked with kidney function. Right? So high cystatin c, worst kidney function. So cystatin c is a cystine protease inhibitor, which increases during aging. So now part of that is it's, poor kidney function will be is associated with high levels of cystatin c. But I wonder if the cells that produce cystatin c during aging may be in part because of the age related changes to the oral cavity and potentially more, you know, Pg and Nevalis, potentially more gingipains, more cysteine proteases, that are either in the mouth or that translocate into the blood, and then we respond to that by making more cystatin c as a compensatory response against, you know, having cystine proteases. So what what are your thoughts? I don't know if you guys have ever even heard that hypothesis pitch, but possible? Plausible? No. I would say it's plausible because sorry. I'm just gonna take one second. Just to give you some insight to what you're saying, there is a PAD enzyme found, in terms of, P. Gingivalis as well. So some of the things that mean, Mudaras also studied together, we actually looked at animals with rheumatic disease, and we introduced them with periodontal conditions or periodontal disease in this case, by giving them Pigeon duvelis. What ends up happening, these specific mice that I'm talking about, which have, an antigen variation, if you will, it's like, HLA change, if you will. They actually develop, rheumatic disease. And the reason why they develop rheumatic disease is because these enzymes are working in the subclinical or going in the blood vessel. They actually change the shape of citrulline, if you will, and causes to become, a, an event for, like, I don't wanna recall exactly the name right now. It'll come to my brain at some point. But the idea comes to being as they become neoantigens. Right? So when they become neoantigen, now your body fights that, and those actually go sit down in rheumatic areas or in this this synovial fluids or whatever you wanna call them. So all of a sudden, you're having that disease. So we have a very well established periodontitis of association to rheumatic disease in many animal models exactly to what you're stating. So to say that something like this, maybe kidney associated where we're having this issue, is completely within the norm of what could be a possibility. So Fantastic. Yeah. Great. Alright. So last question. So if I know we touched on optimizing oral health, but are are there things that you guys do, the experts, the dental experts, you know, to optimize attempt to optimize your own oral health every day that maybe, people can learn from? In my, obviously, vast experience of two years of being a student, I think I'm trying to get better at it. I'm not gonna lie. I don't know if it's working, but my caffeine consumption, definitely definitely trying to cut back on that, just because that's just an acid mouthwash rinse for twelve hours a day. So Is that coffee? That's coffee, not tea? Yeah. No. No. No. Coffee. Yeah. That's about I'm very big coffee drinker. Coffee has soluble fiber. That's the other side of that equation, which can optimize the gut microbiomes. You may be actually doing some good to compensate. Maybe I just need to brush my teeth after, and that's what that is what is that's where it all comes full circle. And you never know. That might be the balance. You just need to talk to a nutritionist first to to make sure that's true. Yeah. I guess brushing your teeth, flossing, cleaning your teeth every six months, and eat healthy diet is a key. Cool. Mark? Yeah. So I'm I'm on the same page, but remember this. You said something earlier. I want just to bring it the the beauty of the con construct of what we are. We were talking about and I want you to imagine this with me for one second. So you're you were talking about, obesity, for instance, or some other issues altogether. When a person starts to take that diet and becomes, let's say, more heavy set, more weight, there is changes physiologically happening for them. By the time they sit in our patient chair, we start to notice specific pieces. Right? So a person who actually has more obesity, they sit around the neck and head area, they have more breathing issues because now all of a sudden they have a fatter structure that causes them more trouble. They stop breathing through their mouth and start trying to breathe from, excuse me, from the nose, start breathing from mouth more, and all of a sudden you're having more, like, obstructive, areas of airways. Right? You can have sleep apnea and other things of that sort happening. If that's happening, if you're trying to breathe from your mouth, you're gonna make your mouth more dry. Right? So your natural fluidics change. And then all of a sudden, your person this person also is having lack of oxygen. If you have lack of oxygen happening, you have more issues going on with the body where your body's compensating the other means. Just just stay afloat. So that it it's it's a very you can actually imagine some of these things happening and how the body's functioning together. In terms of day to day activity of how to maintain things around, I would say majority of the dentists that, do get an, they do brush their teeth more often. Right? They don't they do at least twice a day, but the after meals, they'd start to do it as well. We have access to mouthwash. That's not to say that it's definitely improving anything per se, but it does actually give you that conscious moment because it has essential oils that could still function to be appropriate for better smell and potentially for limited, use and so on. So so Julian's right. Like, the actual studies don't show true true benefit unless used properly. Majority don't because every study that has been done, you have to switch for at least thirty seconds. And, people don't switch for thirty seconds. That's the reality. So it's just just part of it. And that that that's the only evidence based concept that we have. Like, you have to have thirty seconds at least for x y z and certain, essential oils will work well. So there are several of them that actually work fairly well, which you can find in Listerine as well. But generally speaking, on a day to day, we we talked about drinking water is good. We're gonna maintain that. Make sure you're able to remember your habits. Right? If you keep your mouth open too long, you're reading for mouth a lot too. So we try to reduce that habit. It could give you dry mouth in terms of that. But, generally, maintaining fluidics in the mouth is very important because that's the thing that kinda moves everything through for you. So brush your tea, drink water, be aware of your problems when you eat, where the food gets stuck. So So hang on. Dry dry mouth, the prevalence you know, what is it? Zero xerostoma. I don't know if I'm pronouncing it that correct. Xerostomia. Yeah. That's xerostoma. Xerostomia. So that increases during aging. So are there ways we can improve saliva production during aging to help optimize the oral microbiome? So There's our yeah. You go ahead. Go ahead. Go ahead. The the question first, why this increase with aging? It increase with aging because elderly people, they suffer from dehydration. So the best way to do it is to drink a lot of water. So this is the simplest answer. So maybe Amar can elaborate more on it. The the you're you're 100% right. The baseline is maintain water intake, which is very good for all of us. There are things that we do, and I'm not gonna express all the details, but there's new, methodologies from non conventional Western philosophy where you have massaging of certain areas to actually improve fluidics and so on as well. So those things are being studied just like you were saying about nutrition. I think dentistry needs to be more nutrition oriented. We are technically, but we don't teach it enough to actually continue the whole process. We, because it's very pertinent for us because we're talking about all the acids and other things changing, and we don't other than the generic concept of avoid sugar, but it has to be a balanced diet. So there's a principle difference there. Yeah. So massaging the salivary glands, or is this more of a lymphatic, kind of thing? Or It it it's both. It's so it's like so right behind salivary glands and so on, you do have a lymph system going down and across. Right? So, it is lymph draining. There are some concepts that have been used recently with, and I don't wanna deviate the subject matter, but there is a low light, red light therapy, cold therapy. We call them photobiomodulation. And so that's basically a the best one that I know that works well is about 810 nanometer light. Right? It's past far red just to go around for a few minutes and so on. It actually improves fluidics of the localized areas. So that we do use that in in conventional means as well to improve, salary issues. Interesting. Alright. And then also, commercially available oral microbiome for people to measure that on their own? Like, should would you guys say that, would everyone say that, you know, people should be measuring their own oral microbiome composition and trying to figure out how to optimize it, or is this something pay no attention to it, just go for regular cleanings? Like, what what would everybody say? I would argue I would make an argument, I think, both ways. That is a very interesting multifaceted question. Because on one hand, I guess, like, looping circling back to where we started, right, with, people taking oral health into their own hands and thinking that they just need to scrub and you know? So giving giving people access who may not entirely understand the complexity of bacteria and their, metabolic signatures and all of these things. Giving people access to that kind of information and having them regulate those things at home might not be the finest idea just because there's a lot of factors and not enough education behind it. On the other hand, yeah, that would be a great idea if everybody just knew how to you know, your tea, denticola levels are up, so that means you need to cut back on your Coke drinkage this week, you know, something along those lines. It would be easy it would be nice if it was that simple. I just I'm not sure if we're going to reach a point, where it will be that easy. But in theory, one could argue both ways, I think, of what it what the answer would be of, like, an at home kind of measurement. Mudar, you wanna chime in? Yeah. I I I agree with, with Julianna. I I I feel the safest way is to brush your teeth, floss, maintain cleaning. Giving them access to control their own oral microbiome, is is challenging because of lack of knowledge. And, also, I guess, it will be, specific for each individual depending of the disease that you have. Like, do you have hypertension? Do you have diabetes? Do you have a kidney disease? So it will be challenging. So, I prefer I mean, it's an amazing idea, but I prefer that they should go through, like, a a dentist or a physician in order to decide which bacterias they should increase, which bacterias they should, should decrease. We should not give access to the public to control themselves because of, lack of of knowledge. It'll it'll already exist. They're already commercially available kits. Companies that are using full genome sequencing to do this stuff. So, Amar? Yeah. No. I and I in generally the same path with everybody there, education is the pertinent key here. If if they're if they're knowledgeable enough to be able to manage in someone, they can. The issue is the way we have our system here for health care, people just rely on what x y z said and I'm gonna follow that. And if that's what your reliance is, then you randomly have this moment of saying, hey. I wanna just do my own thing. It may not be the best way to process through because they don't have the educational background or they never started from that, point to say, hey. I'm gonna adjust this, change that. Because think about it this way, Mike. We have people here in The US who are taking over a die type two diabetic, and they keep on taking their pill, and they keep adding in their sugar. The the problem has the diet regulation. And so when you see the medications, they keep on adding more and more medication. So the reality still is when I look at it from this angle, I see the general population is not knowledgeable enough to remind themselves to make the adjustments that are needed for them to improve their overall health. So, therefore, the medical professionals are must to be like, there were reminders that, hey. You're going the wrong direction. And so if a person is ambitious enough to being able to do all that, make sure I've I think sure. No problem at all. But that's where it comes down to the educational background. So It was a part of that educational process. Could you argue that there is a paucity of case studies and people documenting, you know, testing the oral microbiome over and over and over with the goal of reducing some of the, quote, unquote, pathogenic bacteria so that people can learn how the professionals are actually doing it, the, quote, unquote, professionals, because it's not really a field. It's not a niche thing right now where someone is detailing, and it's not an easy process. Like, it may take 20 tests to figure out how to move the needle on some of these, bacteria even on the, quote, unquote, healthiest diet. So could you make an argument that there is a road for learning from a professional doing it so that people can actually do it themselves like that if they choose to, you know, in the home environment? I would say so because it's it's compliant based. Yeah. I'll let you talk about it. It's compliance based. At the end of the day, if I if I know a patient can be compliant to the guidance that I'm providing, which is a huge, you know, we don't know. But generally speaking, that that is, that's I would agree with you. I think there is a pathway there. Nice. I was just I just wanted to mention or, I guess, shed some light back into, what I mentioned earlier with the difference between, just recently between 2002 and 02/2002 when the first oral microbiome contact just contextual paper was published versus, 2019 when the first animal study was published. This is we're really in a very, very early stage of what it means to target the oral microbiome in general. So theoretically, I'm sure that there there are a lot of things even, let's say, an insulin those at home insulin tests that you can take. I'm sure so many years ago, whoever was the first person who proposed that, you know, you can can you can test your you can prick your finger just a little bit and test your blood. And I'm sure they were looked at like that's crazy. You know, never nobody's ever gonna be able to do that. It's not feasible. So right now, all things considered, we're so early in the disease, progression, I guess, and so early in looking at the or targeting the oral microbiome that maybe twenty, forty year twenty, thirty, forty years from now, this is gonna be something that everybody's gonna do at home. And there will be enough knowledge to just take your little sample, put it in a little imaginary electronic thing, and it'll just tell you what to do for that day. You know? But for now, I think it's really important to work with a professional because of the gaps in the knowledge for both of us, honestly, for the patient and for the provider. Definitely. Okay. Alright. Thanks, everyone. That was great. Thank you so much. Appreciate it. Have a great day. Mike, can I add one thing? I just wanted to tell you because it came to my brain afterwards. The oral just so if you wanna, recta because I told you it's streptococcus aurellis. They have that piece, but there it's actually streptococcus salivarius. That's they have strains of them that actually upregulate, and one of the positive for them just so so we're talking is these streptococcus salivarius can produce something called bacteriocin. So it's bacteriocin, c I n. That is known to inhibit P. Gingival's growth. That's what so the point comes to being is how well are they being formulated to the oral microbe? I do not know. The concept is that. The concept by taking that is if you up regulate streptococcus salivarius, there's strains that they have. I don't recall the strains right now. But those strains basically actually reduce or produce bacteriasin, which reduces PGN devallis. So just because I said oralis earlier, there is oralis used, but it's not the one I was talking about pro pro pro bio oral health that's uses salivares. Yeah. That could be one way to reduce PG and Divalis. Right? But, aren't they they're at least in vitro studies where, as you mentioned, some of the essential oils I've looked into this where they can, you know, they're they have, bactericidal activity against peach and devouse, like peppermint oil can, can, you know, reduce growth. Right? So, I mean, it it goes back to this idea of it may be different for everyone where maybe someone can increase streptococcal cell virus and then reduce peach and the valus levels in the mouth by inhibiting growth, but then maybe others may need a different approach, which goes to specificity, right, and multiple testing. So yeah. Right. And and the essential oils is difficult to get. If you're if they're pocketed already, you're not getting that essential oil down there. Yeah. So so if you change the microbial, like, as what, Madara was saying even for the prebiotic concept, it's like it's difficult to get a probiotic into an area to build on and survive because everything's already occupied. But if there is a small portion of them living somewhere, you provide the natural food for them, they'll thrive. Right? So in this case, when they're down there, I can't get an oil down there to get actually get them out. So it's just but Even Q tip or on top of a perio brush? Trust me. When when you go into periodontal surgeries, some of these microbes are so problematic. You gotta reflect the the whole, gum down, and they gotta go clean that from that angle. So it it's it gets they get pretty nasty. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Alright. Well, thanks again, everyone. That was great. I appreciate your time, and have a great day. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you. Bye bye.