GrimAge is the best epigenetic clock for evaluating risk of death. And if you missed that video, I'll link to it in the right corner. But for now, which biomarkers are included in GrimAge? That's what we'll see here. So first, it includes age, gender, and an epigenetic approximation of smoking DNA and pack years. And then GRIMH version one, which is shown here. GRIMH version two actually includes a couple of additional biomarkers or epigenetic approximations of additional biomarkers including h s c r p and h b a one c. But for now, I'm only focused on GRIMH version one. It includes seven protein biomarkers that may be obscure to many. Actually, it's an epigenetic approximation of those seven biomarkers. So the first may not be obscure to many who are frequent viewers of the channel, and for that, thank you. It's epigenetic approximation of cystatin c, which is a biomarker of kidney function. But as we'll see in a future video, it's also associated with a biomarker of neurodegeneration. Then, also, we've got leptin, which may seem familiar to many, but then others that are very obscure, TINT one, PAI one, GDF 15, ADM, and the biomarker that I'm gonna focus on in this video, b two m. B two m stands for beta two microglobulin, which then raises the question of besides contributing to grim age, why is b two m important? The beginning of that story will be illustrated by this paper shown here, where b two m was identified as a systemic pro aging factor that impairs cognitive function and neurogenesis. That then raises the question of what's optimal or what may be optimal for b two m. I won't show those data in this video, but it increases during aging and higher levels are associated with an increased all cause mortality risk. In terms of what's optimal, I have a new Patreon tier dedicated specifically to what's optimal for biomarkers, which now includes b two m, which we can classify not just as a kidney function biomarker, but also we can identify it as an immune related biomarker and, as we'll see in a minute, it's related to neurogenesis. Besides b two m, this tier currently includes 35 other biomarkers, almost two and a half hours of video content, 57 published references, and note that these aren't the reference ranges which you can get from any LLM these days. This is my interpretation of what may be optimal based on how each of these biomarkers changes during aging and or associations with all cause mortality risk in the largest studies that exist. So if you're interested in that, check it out. In terms of the data from this paper, let's focus on b two m's impact on neurogenesis. First, starting off with the data here. On the y axis, we've got double quartin number of cells slash d g. So this is the number of do double quartin expressing cells, which is a neurogenesis biomarker, as I'll show in a minute, in the dentate gyrus, which is a portion of the brain. And in terms of double quartin being identified as a neurogenesis biomarker, we'll see that story here. So neurogenesis proceeds along a spectrum from quiescent neural stem cells on the left to mature neurons on the right. And we can see that there's a cell type as identified there that expresses double corten or DCX positive cells. So double cortin is well known as a biomarker of neurogenesis. So back to the data on the right where they compared double cortin expressing cells in mice that were treated with b to m for twelve days. And what we can see is that the neurogenesis biomarker double corden declined by about 20% in just twelve days after exposure, after mice were exposed to b two m. So relatively high levels of b two m impair neurogenesis. And I should also mention that that's important because neurogenesis declines during aging. So when considering that b two m increases during aging, are they causally linked? I'm not sure about the data in people, but this is an association that is not potentially good news. But this is just one part of the story. What happens if we remove b two m? So if adding it is bad for neurogenesis, if we remove b two m, we'd expect that to be good for neurogenesis. And that's what they tested in this study. Again, on the y axis, we've got double quartin expressing cells, so this neurogenesis biomarker. And now we've got b two m minus minus mice. So these are b two m knockout mice. In other words, they knocked out the b two m protein so that these animals so that these mice didn't have b two m. And note that this is a longitudinal study as these mice were 18 old. Old. So this is an eighteen month study of evaluating the effect of b two m on neurogenesis. When compared with the the data in aged wild type mice, which have normal levels of b two m, we can see that the mice that were genetically engineered to not have b two m had more than two times higher levels of this neurogenesis biomarker double quartin. So, collectively, these data implicate relatively high levels of b two m, especially as it occurs during the aging process, as potentially being bad for neurogenesis in people. But could that be true? As I mentioned, these data are in mice. What do the data look like in people? So that's what we can see here, where we're gonna look at b two m levels in brains of people who are controls, who are not diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease, AD, and a people who had Alzheimer's disease, AD. And note that this is a post mortem study, so, unfortunately, the people had died and they biopsied the brains afterwards and then quantified the amount of b two m that was in those brains. And what we can see is that people who were diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease had two times higher levels of b two m in the brain, which, again, is potentially bad news. So with that in mind, what's my data? This isn't just the health and longevity news channel. As I've said this many times, this is also a health and longevity optimization channel. So what's my data? So I currently have six tests for b two m. As I mentioned, I just started measuring it in 2025. And as a quick aside, why I just started to measure this now? After realizing that I'd rather have the actual biomarkers rather than their epigenetic prediction as found in GRIMH And knowing that b two m is one of the biomarkers, the actual biomarkers that GRIMH is based on, I started measuring b two m in 2025. I wish I'd measured it earlier because then I'd have more data in trying to bring it down or keep it as low as possible. So over those six tests in 2025, average b two m is one point five eight milligrams per liter, which then again raises a question of what's optimal. And without going to the Patreon tier, the what's optimal for biomarkers tier, again, lower is generally better. If you want the actual numbers and you wanna see the data that I used to derive that story, check it out. Also, avoiding an age related increase. And this story is currently incomplete as I only have one year of data, so I can't evaluate if I'm resisting age related change. But But then it raises a question of what can I do to reduce b two m as I'd like to go lower? For me, my interpretation of the published literature is that one point dot one point five eight milligrams per liter for b two m, while although not terribly high, isn't as low as I'd prefer to be. So So, in terms of what I can do to potentially reduce it, I'm gonna look at correlations for diet with b two m. And for those who are unfamiliar how I'm able to do that, since 2015, so for the past ten plus years, I've weighed almost all of my food, more than 99% with a food scale. I then enter those data into Cronometer, a diet tracking app. And quick shout out, if you wanna use Cronometer, there's a discount link in the video's description. I then pull the Cronometer data into a spreadsheet, so the macros and micros and individual food amounts. So now each dietary period in between tests can be used for the latter test. In other words, if there's a fifty day period in between blood testing, I can take the average dietary intake for those fifty days and that lines up with the ladder blood test. So now every blood test has an average dietary intake. With enough blood test, once I get to three blood tests, I can start looking at correlations. Now sure, there's gonna be a lot of noise in the data after three blood tests. But as many of you know and have seen on this channel, I have now 60 plus blood tests for most clinical chemistry related biomarkers, kidney, liver, immune, etcetera. So I can look at correlations that can help drive me towards what's an optimal diet and even supplements. So using that approach, let's take a look at correlations for b two n over these six tests with diet to see what I could potentially do to bring it towards the lower end of my range. So this is the top portion of that table and note that correlations for diet with biomarkers for all biomarkers, not just b two m, with 30 other clinical chemistry biomarkers. And then I also look at correlations for diet with metabolomic data. So I have another 600 plus metabolites that are correlated with diet. So if you're interested in that, check us out on the correlations tier on Patreon. So for this table, we can see that the lowercase r is the correlation coefficient. And then on the right, we've got the p value as a measure of statistical significance. And here, I've used just less than 0.05 as the standard nominal threshold for statistical significance. I'm not using a false discovery rate, and if people are interested in why that's the case, just leave a comment and I'd be happy to describe my process for that in the, in the comments under the video's description. So in terms of the correlations, we can see that there are four that meet that significance threshold. Cacao beans, and these are raw organic cacao beans, not nibs, which have a positive correlation, which I've labeled as red. That positive correlation suggests that when cacao intake is towards the higher end of my range, that's significantly correlated with higher levels of b two m. Note that I said correlation. This is not causation. I can't see anything about causation. I can get close to causation by either increasing or decreasing a given amount of food or nutrient based on these correlations. But, again, these are correlations. I'm not presuming causation. On the other hand, inverse correlations, which suggest that higher levels of the food are related may be related to lower levels of b two m, include almonds, lemon, and potatoes. So what do I do with this information? Well, I try to follow the correlations. If higher cacaos is related to higher levels of b two m, if I reduce it, that should lower it. Again, if correlation equals causation, the only way I can find out is by doing the experiment. So to test that, for the next test, I've removed cacao beans. Additionally, what about almonds? So the correlations only tell us whether they're increasing or decreasing, but they don't tell us about amount of food to follow a given correlation. So let's illustrate what the plot for b two m looks like versus almonds, which is what we'll see here, with b two m on the y axis plotted against average daily almond intake that corresponds to each one of these blood tests. First, we can see that inverse correlation. And then based on extrapolation of the plot, if I wanna bring b two m levels lower, I should aim for somewhere in the 20 to 25 gram of almond, range, at least at a minimum per day. So average almond intake, again, because I track diet, I know exactly how much I'm eating for every day. Average almond intake since test number eight, plus test number eight in 2025, is currently 19 grams per day. And you could say, why not go higher? Why not just jack it up to 25, 30, whatever, 50 grams of almonds per day? Well, unfortunately, in my data, almond not not just almonds, but overall monounsaturated fat containing foods are significantly correlated with higher levels of glucose, which is movement in the wrong direction. And you could say, how does that make any sense? MUFA are thought to be heart healthy. Why would that be positively correlated with glucose? I have no idea, but that's what the data shows in in my case. Additionally, almonds are a rich source of oxalate. And, potentially, more importantly, their oxalate to calcium ratio. They have more oxalate than they do calcium, which suggests that oxalate from almonds will be absorbed and not excreted as oxalate binds calcium one to one. So that's those are two main reasons why I haven't gone higher as I have to temper. I have to modulate the amount of almonds that I'm consuming to keep oxalate levels relatively low and to keep my MUFA levels from going towards their highest level, which again, in my case, is significantly correlated with higher levels of glucose. So based on extrapolation of the average of 19 grams per day currently since the last test, we'd expect that I should see b two m levels somewhere around 1.5 milligrams per liter, which still isn't as low as I'd like to get get it to. But on the other hand, it won't it it may not be as high as my two highest test, which you can see were greater than 1.6. But remember, this is just part of the story. I've also removed cacophias. So if both of these foods are somehow involved in mechanisms that impact b two m, the combination of following these two correlations may allow for movement towards lower to, you know, towards one or lower than 1.5. But there may be a sneaky food on this list that the correlations don't yet indicate how strong of a of a of an impact it may have on b two m and that's strawberries. You can see that strawberries have a significant or close to significant that p value is point o six just outside that threshold of p value less than 0.05. So I've I've been eating a lot of strawberries more than usual. In fact, since the last test, close to three pounds per day, which is up from around two pounds per day. Now if strawberries are somehow involved in mechanisms that impact b two m, even if I follow the cacao bean and almond correlations, if those foods aren't actually involved in relatively high levels or low levels of b two m and it's strawberries that are driving that, I may actually see higher levels of b two m for the next test. Nonetheless, this is data collection. That story is informative because the correlations for cacao and almonds will weaken. The correlation for strawberries will strengthen. And then with that in mind, that'll be more motivation to cut down on my strawberry intake. If b two m is a part of that story where high strawberry intake may be driving b two m higher, I'm gonna have no choice but to cut down a strawberry intake for sure, not from three pounds per day to to something more moderate, two pounds per day or even a little a little lower. It's tough for me because I love strawberries and they're satiating. And part of being on a calorie restricted diet is eating a variety of foods that help keep me satiated and strawberries are a key component of that. So will it work? Will b two m move lower for test number one in 2026? That test is scheduled for January 30. And if you're watching this on YouTube, it may have been a month where I've actually done this blood test. If you wanna see those data immediately after they came out sometime in the February, check us out on Patreon, where I also offer blood test consults and post at least twice per day in four other Patreon tiers. We've also got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself that helps support the channel, including ultalabtest.com, which is where I go for the majority of my blood tests. But note that ultalabtest.com uses Quest Labs, which is pretty close to me and it's convenient. And that may not be convenient for others who are into blood testing like me. So I recently reached out to get another lab testing affiliate link, this time from Life Extension, which uses LabCorp. So if you have a QuestLab or a LabCorp in your area and you're into blood testing like me and you'd like to help support the channel, if you use the affiliate links in the video description, you would help out tremendously. At home metabolomics, any detesting with Ginfinity, epigenetic testing with true diagnostic, these are other affiliate links that are in the video subscription. At home blood testing with Cyphox Health, which includes GrimAge, but again, I'd prefer to measure the actual biomarkers relative to the epigenetics. Maybe you disagree and you want the epigenetic test as GRIMH is a very strong test consistently associated with risk risk of death for all causes and a multitude of studies. That too is in the video description affiliate link. Oral microbiome composition, dye tracking with Cronometer, green tea, which I drink every day, the clearly filtered water filter, which I'm using every day too. Or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch, including data is my North Star, which I've got on here, figuring stuff out is my drug, and the conquer aging or diet trying logo. Link in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.