For blood test number seven in 2025, when using doctor Morgan Levine's biological age calculator, PhenoAge, we saw that my biological age was fifteen years younger than the chronological. So what might be contributing to these data? In the last video, we did a deep dive into supplements. And if you missed it, it'll be in the right corner. But in today's video, let's do a deep dive into diet composition. More specifically, the diet composition that corresponds to blood test number seven in 2025 with the full list of all 54 foods shown here. This is average daily dietary intake from September 16 through 10/26/2025 and that's a forty one day period. So why that forty one day period? Well, it started immediately after test number six which was on September 16 and it lasted until the day before test number seven which was on October 27. Thereby leading to that forty one day period in between blood tests and then this is the average of all dietary intake in between for those forty one days. Now, for those who don't know, I've been weighing my food since 2015 every day with a food scale. More than 99% of all food has been weighed over that ten year period with the food scale. I then log that data into a diet tracking app, Cronometer. I then pull the Cronometer data into a spreadsheet. And then I'm able to look at average dietary intake over that forty one day period and line it up with the blood test. So now every blood test has a corresponding average dietary intake and I can look at correlations, But that story is coming later in the video. So this list is ranked from top to bottom. 54 different foods were consumed in grams with two exceptions. Green tea, which is in ounces. And if you wanna use what I use, which is organic loose leaf green tea from Japan, there's a discount link in the video's description. And then cookies, which is in calories. And I have to always say at this point in the video, that's not seven calories of cookies every day for forty one days. That's one day of cookies and forty days of no cookies. Alright. So at this point in the video, I always ask, did I do any experiments that were specific to this test? And the answer is yes as I'm always trying to improve biomarker weak spots without messing up the rest of the biomarkers. Now, for this test, there were three specific experiments. In the first, I increased omega three intake to test the correlation with DHEA sulfate. So for those who don't know, why is DHEA sulfate important? It's important because DHEA sulfate impacts many age related phenotypes and that's what we'll see here. So after DHEA is produced by the adrenal gland and then sulfated, it impacts these age related phenotypes including osteoporosis, obesity, diabetes, cancer, atherosclerosis. It's immunomodulatory, which means that it's pro immune and anti inflammatory. And it's also neuromodulatory, which means it offers neuroprotection and it impacts positively impacts neuroplasticity, which then raises the question of what's optimal for DHEA sulfate. So that's what we'll start to see here as DHEA sulfate declines during aging. On the y axis, we've got DHEA sulfate plasma or blood levels of DHEA sulfate plotted against age on the x. And then we can see that in youth around 20 years old, median DHEA sulfate levels, and I should mention these data are in men, are 300 and that's around eight to nine micromolar. And then we can see that there's age related decline for DHEA sulfate. And note that these data are similar in women too. So relatively high in youth and then an age related decline. Although, how high it peaks in women and youth is lower relative to men. So to address the question of what's optimal for DHEA sulfate, my reading of the literature is three hundred micrograms per deciliter as that's the median value found in you. The that's only part of the story. The other part of that story is its association with all cause mortality risk. There too relatively higher is better. Third part of that story isn't just getting one data point into the quote unquote optimal range, it's avoiding this age related decline. So even if your data isn't 300 micrograms per deciliter, resisting age related change, say it's 200 or one fifty, trying to resist age related change for as long as possible is also how I see optimizing this biomarker and many other biomarkers. And in terms of optimizing biomarkers, if you've ever wondered what's optimal, I have a new patron tier dedicated specifically to that. It currently includes these 35 biomarkers shown here, more than two hours of video content, 52 published references, and note that these data aren't the reference ranges. This is my interpretation of the published literature for what may be optimal based on how each of these biomarkers changes during aging and or associations with all cause mortality risk. So if you're interested in that, check it out. Alright. Back to our story where DHEA sulfate is a weak spot that I'm trying to improve, which is what we'll see here. This is DHEA sulfate plotted against age, chronological age, from twenty twenty two to twenty twenty five, and I have 25 blood tests over that period with DHEA sulfate plotted on the y axis against chronological age on the x. Now for the first 19 tests, the data was relatively stable with an average DHEA sulfate of a 126 micrograms per deciliter. But then take a look at the most recent five tests as there's a there's been a precipitous decline. In fact, my lowest ever DHEA sulfate over this four year period and these 25 tests. So these data are definitely moving in the wrong direction, especially within the context of what's optimal. As I mentioned, three hundred micrograms per deciliter is the target and I'm nowhere near that at a 126. Additionally, in terms of resisting age related change, more recently, I'm not doing great. Although, DHEA sulfate was relatively stable for those 19 tests. As I mentioned, whatever's going on for the past five tests, I've gotta try to reverse that and quickly, Which then raises the question of what can I do to reverse these data? So, following every blood test, I calculate correlations as I mentioned earlier. So after test number six, I calculated correlations and then I tried to follow those correlations with the goal of moving DHEA sulfate and other biomarkers in the quote unquote right direction. Now, note that we are currently on test number seven in this video so I wanna show what my thought process was after test number six in following the correlations to try to move the needle for test number seven. Now, one of those correlations is shown here. This is DHEA sulfate plotted against average daily omega three intake. And as I mentioned, this is just one of the correlations, the full correlation list for biomarkers versus diet on the correlations tier on Patreon. So if you're interested in that, check it out. So, here we can see that there was a significant positive correlation for omega three intake and this is not from supplements, this is from whole foods with DHEA Sulfate with a correlation coefficient of 0.41 and the p value right at the threshold of statistical significance 0.05. If correlation equals causation, and I'm not saying that that's the case, but the only way to know is to do the experiment and find out. If I eat relatively high omega three towards the high end of my range, again, if correlation equals causation, I should expect to see relatively higher DHEA sulfur in my data. So that's what I did. But then it raises a question of omega three from what? What am I getting omega three from? What are my primary sources? Well, they include walnuts, sardines, and flaxseed. Neither of those, in looking at the p value, had a p value less than 0.05, which then raises a question of what do I do? I have a significant correlation for omega three with DHEA sulfate, but I don't have any significant correlations for the foods that provide the majority of my omega three. So with that in mind, I decided to increase each of them. As we'll see in a minute, I'll show the exact amounts that I increased them to try to move the DHEA sulfate needle. But note that it didn't work. Again, this led to my or this was a part of the story for my worst ever DHEA sulfate over these 25 tests. So in terms of what did I change in terms of those three foods in terms of the amounts, I increased sardine intake from 92 to about a 143. So the majority of the omega three came from sardines. With relatively small increases for flaxseed, you can see twenty one to twenty three grams per day and walnuts increased from three to about eight grams per day. Again, it didn't work though. So I've got to come up with a different recipe for improving DHEA sulfate for test number eight. With that in mind, what's the plan for test number eight? Following test number seven, I then recalculated correlations. And again, if you want to see the full list, that's on Patreon in the correlations tier. So, this is the the top of the correlation list for DHEA sulfate versus foods following test number seven. With the correlation coefficient in the middle, the p value, you can see each of these foods is significant at a p value threshold of less than 0.05 and then the n is 25 tests over this about four year period. And what we can see is positive and negative correlations. The positive correlation suggests that when intake of the food is relatively high, that's significantly correlated with higher levels of DHEA sulfate. Again, correlation not causation. I am not at all implying causation. The only way to know about causation is to do the experiment. And then there are also negative correlations on this list, which suggests that relatively higher intake of the food is significantly correlated with lower levels of DHEA sulfate, which would be moving in the wrong direction. So atop the list, for whatever reason, is added salt intake with a positive correlation of 0.78. But then digging deeper, there are other positive correlations including dates, vanilla bean, beets, and coconut butter. If I follow all of those correlations, will DHEA sulfate be at the relatively higher end of my range? That's a part of the plan. While also trying to minimize inverse or negative correlations as shown in red. And surprisingly, olives are inversely correlated with DHEA sulfate. Whether that's related to the well known effect of olive oil being able to reduce LDL and LDL, which is cholesterol, is involved in DHEA synthesis. I'm not yet sure, but the idea that relatively high olive or olive oil intakes may be best for everyone. In my case, maybe not. At least based on my correlation for olives with DHEA sulfate. Besides olives, we can see nutmeg inversely correlated. That data would be moving in the wrong direction too. If you saw the video on nutmeg and one of its metabolites increasing lifespan in animal models, I'd like to keep it in the approach so that it would potentially lead to lower DHEA sulfate, would be bad news in my data. Avocado, celery, corn, kimchi, and lemon are also inversely correlated with DHEA sulfate, potentially bad news. So So in terms of the plan for test number eight, the goal is to follow as as many of these correlations as possible, keeping the positive correlations relatively high intake and reducing or cutting out the inverse correlations, foods that have inverse correlations. So with that in mind with going into the specific numbers, I'll cover that for the test number eight breakdown after test number eight probably sometime in January. Test number eight will be at the December though. So am I following those correlations? So I've added salt back into the diet. I've cut olive intake by about half. So I was getting salt intake from olives leading to a reduction in added salt intake. So now, I've reversed that where I've added salt back into the approach and cut olive intake by about half. I've removed nutmeg, removed avocado, and I've also cut celery by about a third. In terms of the other correlations, it's about a mixed bag. I'm following some but not following the others. So, the top five correlations, so I am following all of them as I don't know if any of them will impact DHEA sulfate. Now, if these are real correlations, the correlation will stay relatively strong or get a bit stronger. Meaning, it'll move closer to one or negative one. Alright. So, back to the any experiments for this test. So MCV has been moving in the wrong direction for a bunch of tests going back over the past few few years and I covered that story in an earlier video. If you missed it, it'll be in the right corner. So for those who don't know, what is the MCV? Well, it's the mean corpuscular volume. So it's the average volume of red blood cells, which can be visually illustrated here. So here we can see a red blood cell that has a relatively small volume, that's a low MCV. A red blood cell that has a bigger volume, so that's a medium. Intermediate MCV, and then big red blood cells or big volume, that's a high MCV. MCV increases during aging. Low MCV is found more likely to be found in youth. So that's one part of the approach for what's optimal for MCV, having relatively small red blood cells. So following test number six, Brazil nuts were positively correlated with a higher MCV which is data potentially moving in the wrong direction. And again, it's important for me to highlight this. This is a correlation. It's not causation. The only way I can test causation is to do the experiment by testing the correlation. So that's what I did. I reduced Brazil nut intake from twelve grams to about five grams per day, and we can see the correlation on the left. Following test number six, that correlation coefficient was 0.72 and the p value was far below 0.05. But note that following that correlation by cutting Brazil nut intake, it didn't work. This is a part of the story for my highest ever MCV. Over 60 tests going back to 2015 at about 96 femtoliters. So then, I recalculate the correlations and that as I mentioned, if a correlation following correlation doesn't work, it weakens and that's exactly what we can see after calculating the correlation after test number seven. As that correlation coefficient moved from point seven two to now point six four. So we can buy a bit and you can see that the p value, it moved a bit closer to 0.05 albeit still statistically significant from three times 10 to the negative eight to two times 10 to the negative six. So it's still a significant correlation but based on this one test, it seems that Brazil nut intake is not a part of the lowering MCV story, which then raises the question of what am I gonna do for test number eight to bring MCV closer to what I consider as optimal around 90 femtoliters. I'm currently testing correlations for lycopene and cacao for MCV for the next test. For whatever reason in my data, relatively higher or highest lycopene intakes are positively correlated with MCV. That would be data moving in the wrong direction. And cacao is inversely correlated with MCV. So relatively higher intakes are significantly correlated with lower MCV. So I've cut lycopene intakes, specifically tomatoes, not cut them out. They're still in the diet, albeit at a lower amount. I'm aiming for about a 125 grams of tomatoes per day, not about 200, which is where it's been for the past few tests. And I've added cacao beans back into the approach, 10 grams per day. Now I haven't gone higher because sat fat in my data is significantly correlated with higher levels of cystatin c and b two m, which are important predictors of grim age. So I'm trying to keep sat fat relatively low, thereby keeping cacao beans relatively low. That's why I haven't gone relatively high intake for cacao beans yet. So the third experiment involved increasing fat intake to test the correlation with lipoprotein a and I'll have more on that in the macronutrient breakdown of this video. But for now, let's take a look at cheat meals because I know that there are some people in this space that absolutely never cheat on their diet and unfortunately or fortunately, however you want to look at it, I'm not one of them. And that's because if I try to go completely cold turkey and have no treat no cheat meals ever, that historically has increased the probability of eventually breaking and having a binge and just going crazy with calories and junk for a few days which throws everything off track and it can ruin literally months of hard work in terms of calorie restriction and exercise training and all of that and even mindset mental health. I'm not trying to do that. So what I what I found what works best for me is immediately after blood testing, it's like I won the Super Bowl. I go out and quote unquote celebrate with a cheat meal. Now, on those days, try to stick to the calorie targets that are on that day. So, if it's a workout day on a blood test day, around 2,500 calories at most. Generally, it's harder to do when there's some cheat meals because cheat meals, although initially satiating and delicious, can lead to less satiety later in the day. So, I I try to include the cheat meal while also sticking to the calorie targets for that day without going a bit too high above that. Now, note that the cheat meals aren't just limited to one day. What I found that works for me is on the day after immediately after testing, the day after, and then up to about a third day. And after that, I'm pretty much satiated on cheat meals or junk and then it's locked in completely for the rest of the diet. No cheats after that. So for this test, it was three days of cheats and then thirty eight days of completely clean back to the standard diet after that. In terms of what those cheat meals involved, it involved well, it's basically a standard. I almost every blood test immediately after blood testing, I had peanut butter. I just love peanut butter. It's great. Immediately after testing, I had peanut butter mixed with jelly, specifically that jelly there. And I also had some peanut butter mixed from Nutella, which was delicious. You know, it was, it it was so delicious I decided to have it for the second cheat day too. On the third day, I mixed it up a bit where I had those cookie Chips Ahoy cookies. I blended them up. I ground them up into a fine powder and then I mixed them with sugar, powdered sugar, and heavy cream to make a homemade ice cream which there too, it was completely delicious. Three days of junk, thirty eight days, no junk, back on the standard diet. In terms of the amount of junk calories that came from Nutella, 950, blackberry jelly was $4.38 And from the added powdered sugar, it was $1.60. A techno technically, I could add the whipped cream to the junk calories as it as it is an ultra processed food. They do add additives to it. I'm not sure if I should do that. If people say in the comments that I should add, heavy cream to the junk calories list, I'd be happy to do that in future videos. I'm not trying to skimp and make it look like I the diet was more clean than it is. I'm happy to add it if people think that it's, a junk food. In terms of junk calories, about fifteen fifty and when divided by all of the calories consumed during this period, it was 1.6 of all calories so the diet was about 98% clean relative relative to how much junk was on these three days. Alright. So this list is ranked in grams. What about ranking foods based on calories? And that's what we're gonna see here. This is the top 10 foods for average daily calorie intake that correspond to this forty one day period from test number six to test number seven. And note that this list is generated by Cronometer. If you wanna measure your own diet with Cronometer, there's a discount link in the video description. So in terms of the top food that provided calories, it was sardines. So I'm not a vegan. I haven't been a vegan for about nine years. Every day I've had fish since then so it's a staple in the diet. In terms of the other foods that are in this top 10, I won't go go through them all, eight of the 10 foods that were in the top 10 list for test number six are also in this list for test number seven. In terms of what entered the top 10, avocados and almonds and pistachios and Brazil nuts left the top 10. Still in the diet but just not in the top 10. Alright. Next up is macronutrient composition starting off with calorie intake which average calorie intake for this test twenty three zero two. And in terms of how that ranks relative to other tests over the past six months or so, my past four test average is about 2,300 calories, twenty two ninety two to be exact and I've done that because I'm trying to stay weight stable. So, body weight declines in the second half of life and I'm trying to avoid and granted I don't think I'm in the second half of life. Maximum human lifespan is one twenty two. I'm currently 52. So I don't think I'm in the second half of life. But when considering that body weight declines during aging in the second half of life, I'm trying to stay weight stable indefinitely, not lose an ounce of muscle or fat. Well, actually, I'd like to lose as much visceral fat as possible while optimizing as much muscle mass as possible within my current body body weight of a hundred and forty pounds. Protein intake for this test, average was about a 126 grams per day which was 22% of total calories. Next up is fat intake which is what we can see here. An average of about a 101 grams per day and this is 39% of total calories. That 101 grams per day was an increase relative to the prior test of 84 grams per day and 33% of total calories. So, where did that fat increase of 17 grams per day come from? Mostly monounsaturated fat. And if you remember earlier, I did that to test close to or significant correlations for total fat and monounsaturated fatty acids, MUFA, with lower lipoprotein a. Unfortunately, it didn't work though as we'll see in a minute. The big question though is fat from what? Because although I have significant correlations for total fat and MUFA with lower lipoprotein a, where did I increase fat from? Avocado intake was inversely correlated with lipoprotein a after test number six. So, to test that correlation, I added avocado more than doubling its intake from 41 to around 87 day. But, there too, it didn't work. So, so far, I've struck out o for three on all of the experiments that I tried to move biomarkers. It didn't work. And I try to be as honest as possible with these things. You know, I'm happy to celebrate successes but I'm also gonna show the failures and then try to learn from them so that I can improve. Lipoprotein a for test number six was 81 nanomolar. For test number seven, it was 80 nanomolar despite following this correlation. Which then raises the question of what's the plan for lowering lipoprotein a as that's a bit outside of the reference range and lipoprotein a is six to seven times more atherogenic than LDL. So So, I'd like to reduce lipoprotein a even lower if I can. Now, for those who are gonna say it's genetic and it can't be moved or manipulated, in my data, I've had lipoprotein values as high as a 145 nanomolar with an average over the past ten years of about 90 nanomolar. So it is possible to stay closer to one's lower end of their reference range or of their range but I'm trying to push it even lower if I can by following the correlations. So how will I try to do that for test number eight? Well, I have a significant inverse correlation for chickpeas with lipoprotein a. So as a heads up for the test number eight diet composition video, which again probably won't happen until sometime in late January or won't be on YouTube until sometime in late January, that data will be on Patreon immediately after I get the blood test results, testing sometime later in December. I've double checked the intake relative to where it is here to about 80 ish grams per day relative to about 40 grams per day. So stay tuned for that data whether it worked or not. Alright. So back to the total fat story. So we can see that omega three, I increased it by about two grams per day, again, from the combination of sardines, walnuts, and flaxseeds. Omega six was a bit higher too because of the increase in walnuts. And I kept sat fat relatively low to test correlations or to repeat test correlations for cystatin c and b two m, which stayed relatively low again for the second test in a row, which supports, for whatever reason, relatively low saturated fat in my diet being better for cystatin c and b two m. Alright. Next up is carb intake and that's what we'll see here. So, total carbs are 267 grams per day, which seems like a lot but note that net carbs equals total carbs minus fiber. Average fiber intake for this test was 82 grams per day and when subtracting that from total carbs, we get a net carbs of a 185 grams per day. We'll multiply by four calories per gram. That yields 32 around 32% of the diet coming from net carbs. Now, note that fiber, a fraction of that, about 20%, is fermented by gut bacteria into short chain fatty acids. In other words, gut bacteria make fat from fiber and it's about a 150 calories from soluble fiber coming from the total fat pool because total fat is comprised of insoluble fiber which is not fermented by gut bacteria and soluble fiber which is fermented by gut bacteria into these short chain fatty acids, acetate propionate and butyrate. So, that 150 calories coming from soluble fiber fermentation leads to about 6.5% SCFA's or check-in then add to get net macros for this test, which was about 46% fat, 32% net carbs, and 22% protein. Now I should mention that this net macro nutrient profile was not associated with my best biological age for any test so far over the first seven tests in 2025. So one could argue that my fat intake was a bit too high, a protein intake may be a bit too high, and net carbs may be a bit too low. Now, also on this list is sugar intake and I'm not tracking sugar intake because it's a diverse group of molecules including glucose, lactose, galactose, maltose, fructose, etcetera. But, what I am tracking is total fructose with fructose and sucrose. Half of sucrose is fructose. So take dividing that by two and adding adding it to fructose yields a total fructose amount. Having relatively higher fructose intakes is significantly correlated with more biomarkers moving in the wrong direction than right. And the diet is fruit and vegetable rich, which contain a lot of fructose, so I have to be careful how much fructose that I consume. So for this test, total fructose was about 50 grams per day. And I should mention, at this point, I have to say that seems like a lot. But over the past ten years of tracking diet, I've had fructose intakes that correspond to a blood test that are way higher, a 122 per day. Also, this fifty grams per day of total fructose was lower test over test. For test number six, it was 57. So here too, and I see this a lot, progress albeit non perfection. Now, considering that lowering my fructose and overall fruit intake was a part of this story for a fifteen year biological age reduction that was not my best, far from my best. With data going in the wrong direction over the past six tests since the first test, one could argue that maybe I shouldn't cut fructose intake. So, that too is a part of the plan for test number eight and I've increased strawberries. We're gonna see a lot of strawberries in my diet composition video for test number eight so stay tuned for that data coming in a future video. Alright. Next up are micronutrients and that's what we'll see here with the full list of vitamins. It may be hard to see so I'd encourage going full screen if you haven't gone if you haven't done that already. And without going through all of the vitamins on the list, for anyone starting on this journey and I always have to say this, I think this is the most important lowest hanging fruit. The goal should be to at least get RDA coverage for all vitamins and minerals. Now, what's optimal beyond that? It's looking at correlations between your diet and supplements with a standard panel of biomarkers and then trying to course correct. You know, it's yep around, find out, test over test over test to try to find your own personalized recipe for optimizing biomarkers. So with that in mind, many micronutrients on this list, on the vitamin list, and as we'll see for the mineral list in a second, are much higher than the RDA as I'm following those their correlations with a standard panel of 25 to 30 biomarkers. I've highlighted the carotenoids as shown there in the green box. If you'll notice for the carotenoids, they're pretty high. And there aren't RDAs established for the carotenoids, but I covered in an earlier video that carotenoids are consistently associated with a relatively younger biological age, so I think it's important to keep them relatively high. So if you missed that video, it'll be in the right corner. Alright. So in terms of minerals, I just wanna highlight one important factor and that's sodium intake, which for this test was twenty seven hundred milligrams per day. In an earlier video, I pitched pitched the hypothesis that sodium can lower norepinephrine, which may be involved in hair grain, but also optimizing HRV and resting heart rate, but on the other hand, negatively impacting blood pressure. My blood pressure, since increasing sodium from about seventeen hundred milligrams to twenty seven hundred milligrams per day, has been moving in the wrong direction. So as a heads up for the test number eight diet composition video, I've since cut sodium intake by about five hundred milligrams per day to reevaluate correlations to see how lowering sodium can impact all of the above HRV, resting heart rate, and blood pressure. So, I'm planning on an update video for that at some point in the future. Alright. So, whether it'll all work, we'll find out very soon. The next blood test is scheduled for sometime between December 15 and December 26. I've actually got three blood tests scheduled during that period and I do that because this is flu season. So worst case scenario, something happens and I have to reschedule. I've got backup tests for the fifteenth, the twenty second, and the twenty sixth. So I haven't specifically nailed down when that blood test is gonna be but I'm intending on getting it done by the end of this month. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where I offer blood test consults and also post at least twice per day in four other Patreon tiers. We've also got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself that helps support the channel including ultalabtest.com, which is where I get the majority of my blood tests done, the Clearly Filtered Water Filter, at home metabolomics, oral microbiome composition, NED testing with Genfinity, epigenetic testing with True Diagnostic, at home at home blood testing with Scipox Health which includes GrimAge, Green Tea, Diet Tracking with Cronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website Buy Me a Coffee. We've also got merch including Data is My North Star, Figuring Stuff Out is My Drug, and the conquer agent or diatribe logo which I've got on here. Link in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.