Surgical fat removal in rats extends lifespan, and that's what we'll see here. On the y axis, we've got percent survival, and that's plotted against age on the x. In terms of survival, let's put up a red line at median survival. This is the time when half of the colony has died and half is still alive. And when compared with the control group, animals that had their visceral fast surgically removed had a significant extension for median lifespan. But note that this isn't the longest lifespan on this curve, And that was for 40% calorie restriction. Interestingly, note that calorie restriction reduces visceral fat, which suggests that the lifespan extension that's caused by visceral fat removal contributes to the overall lifespan extending effect for calorie restriction. Alright. So what about maximal lifespan? That's what we'll see there at twenty percent survival. Now eighty percent of the colony has died, and only twenty percent is still alive. But the story is similar. Visceral fat removal extended maximal lifespan, but note that the longest lifespan increase was for calorie restriction. So taken together, we can see that visceral fat removal extends both median and maximal lifespan. Okay. What's my data? This isn't just a health and longevity news channel. This is a health and longevity news optimization channel too. So how am I doing on this journey? So to find out, I had DEXA performed as shown there in the right corner, and this isn't the only test that I have. I have data going back to previous years, so a total of three tests over that three year period. First, in looking at the big picture, and this picture is color coded, which includes bone, lean mass, and fat mass, which is in blue. In terms of the demographics, so for this test, I was almost 53 years old. In terms of my height, five foot seven or one point seven meters. In terms of my body weight, even though it says a hundred and forty pounds, that's what the DEXA technician asked me how much I weighed on that day. But my body weight scale fasted first thing in the morning was a hundred and thirty eight point eight pounds, which is sixty two point seven kilograms. And this is for a December 2025 test. And note that these data have been on Patreon for about a month. So if you're interested in seeing the data as soon as they come out, check us out over there. Alright. So in terms of visceral fat, on this day, it was point two eight pounds or hundred and twenty seven grams. But this is just a number. Let's put that number into perspective by comparing it against age expected data, which is what we'll see here. And this is data in men. And note that visceral fat mass, VFM, levels in women, I covered that in an earlier video. And if you missed it, I'll link to it in the right corner. So for this plot, we've got v f m or visceral fat mass in grams plotted against age on the x. And then we can see that visceral fat mass increases during aging from 25 to around 65 years of age, which then plateaus after 65. Okay. So now we can put my point two eight pounds or a 127 grams into perspective by comparing it against the population based medians or averages. And for that, we can see that a 127 grams is below the age expected chronological age median. And if you look at the lowest level, the gray line, I would at I would be at the lowest level for visceral fat for any age group going all the way back to 20 years of age. So this is good news. In terms of what's expected based on chronological age, we can see that that's somewhere around 1,300 grams. So my chronological age being around 53. Average or median values for visceral fat around 1,300 grams. So for this test, I'm about 10 times lower than what's expected based on chronological age. So this is good news. But note that this is just one test. And when considering the animal data, the goal is to keep visceral fat as low as possible for as long as possible. So with that in mind, the longevity goal when it comes to visceral fat is to avoid an age related increase. So how well am I doing relative to that goal As I have, again, data going back now to two plus years, which is what we'll see here. So for a December 2023 test and note that I've decided to test at the same time of year every year. And just to be consistent, I there's no special magical reason why I picked December. The first test was in December 2023. So for consistency, I'll do it in December 2023 around the twentieth. So fifteenth to the twentieth for all tests going forward. Also note that I standardized the conditions under which I'm measuring. Almost all food intake is consumed by 8AM. So I've got about a three hour window three to four hour window if I stop by 7AM. Three to four hour window where there's no food, no water. I've done that for each of these three tests in order to standardize how much food I have on the system and and how hydrated I am prior to testing. So for the first test in December 2023, visceral fat mass was point five eight pounds or 263 grams. And then I measured in December or 12/18/2024, and we can see two measurements. Now I was able to convince the DEXA technician to measure immediately one after the other DEXA scans, And that's because I wanted to see what's the test to test variability for measuring immediately one right after the other. And we can see that there is significant variability. On the first measurement, it was point eight pounds and on the second measurement, point five nine pounds. So a point two one pound difference, which is a pretty big gap. So how I handle that is I've taken the average. Now, this applies to almost all measurements. If I'm measuring fasting morning glucose using finger prick, two measurements. In the past, I used three, but that burns a lot of test strips. So at least two measurements and then taking the average. Also, for ketosis, measuring beta hydroxybutyrate, also in the morning, I'm using two test strips and then taking the average. And this will help minimize test to test variability as we're taking the average of at least two two measurements for every test. So visceral fat at twenty twenty four moved in the wrong direction, 316 grams. Then putting the most recent test into perspective for the December 2025 test, we can see that point two eight pounds and a 127 grams is my best data to date over these three tests over this three year period. So in terms of that longevity goal, at least for this year, this is good news as I've pretty much reversed that age related trend moving in the wrong direction. But, again, this is just three tests. This is just the three year span. I'm in this for the long game, seventy plus years and beyond. So the goal is to keep it at a 127 grams or lower for every test going forward. So then the big question is how? How was I able to reduce visceral fat? First insight comes from body weight. For the first test in 2023, body weight on the morning of testing was a hundred and forty point five pounds. And, again, that's at home using my body weight scale, which I measure every day. I measure body weight every day going back for ten years. Alright. So in 2024, on the morning of the test, it was about one pound heavier, a 141.4. Now that might not seem like a big difference, just point nine pounds, but we can see that visceral fat moved in the wrong direction with for just a one pound increase year over year. Alright. So the for the most recent test in 2025, we can see that my body weight on the morning of the test was the lowest over this three year period, a hundred and thirty eight point eight pounds, and that's in association with my lowest visceral fat over that three year period. So now note this interesting trend. When my body weight was at its lowest, I saw my lowest visceral fat, not by little, by a lot, cutting visceral fat by more than half relative to a hundred and forty point five pounds. A hundred and forty point five pounds is intermediate, and we can also see that visceral fat is intermediate, two sixty three, relative to the highest visceral fat here, 316 grams, which is also in conjunction with my highest body weight. Now, note that this is only a three pound rein in order to see visceral fat that's about a third relative to my highest values. So it suggests that even within being relatively lean, getting even slightly leaner within a three pound range can potentially make a big dent on visceral fat. But this may be only part of the story. We can also take a look at body fat as body fat percentage, b f percentage, is associated with visceral fat, which is what we'll see here. This is the population based average for visceral fat mass plotted against body fat percentage on the x. And for both men in blue and women in red, we can see that as the body fat percentage increases, that's significantly associated with a higher level of visceral fat mass or VFM. So for very low levels of body fat, that would be associated with very low visceral fat mass. Okay. What's my data? So now let's pull up that table from before, and now we're going to take a look at body fat percentage for each of these three tests. For the first test, it was 14%. For the second test, the average of those two tests, it was 15.45%. And I should mention I tried to get the DEXA technician to measure twice for the 25 twenty twenty five test, but nope. No luck. They said I'd have to come back the next day, and I wasn't interested in doing that. I wanted to get test to test immediately right after. Alright. Nonetheless, body fat percentage on the most recent test was my lowest over this three year span, 11.9%. So just like the body weight data, note again an interesting trend. When my body fat percentage was at its lowest over these three tests, 11.9%, I saw my lowest visceral fat. When my body fat percentage was at its highest level over over these three tests, 15.45%, that was associated with my highest visceral fat mass, 316 grams. And, for an intermediate level of body fat percentage 14%, I saw an intermediate level of visceral fat mass 263 grams. So, if the goal is to reduce visceral fat, weight loss, and specifically reducing body fat percentage is important. But this may only be part of the story, although this is probably the big major guts of the story. What about diet? How does diet factor into this story? Now, before going into that, we you could say, the diet that helps you get to your lowest body fat percentage may be a part of seeing you achieve your lowest visceral fat mass, but there may be specific foods or nutrients and or nutrients that can help contribute to lowering visceral fat mass. I'm only gonna cover a few of them here. There may be a very long list, and I don't know about causation. All I know is what's been published in studies of others and then what my data looks like. So first, let's start off with walnut consumption. In this study, people who reported high intakes of walnut consumption, that was associated with a 90% reduction for visceral fat mass throughout the duration of the study. Alright. So rather than just assuming that eating walnuts will be beneficial for visceral fat mass, For those who don't know, I've tracked dietary intake with a food scale weighing almost all of my food more than 99% for ten years. And, for those who are unfamiliar, this is no joke. Literally, I have ten years of Cronometer, which is a diet tracking app. If you want to use Cronometer, there's discount link in the video description. I've tracked my own diet for ten years, and then I have all of that data in a spreadsheet. I've I've manually entered it for all of those days. Alright. Nonetheless, I have walnut intake, full year average walnut intake for each of these three tests. Fourteen, seven, and 18 grams per day on average in 2023, 2024, 2025. And again, those are full year averages. Now, here, note the interesting trend. For the most recent test, average walnut intake in 2025 was at my highest, and that was associated or that's that may be a part of the story for seeing my lowest visceral fat. When walnut intake was at its lowest, seven grams per day on average in 2024. I saw my highest visceral fat mass. And then for the intermediate level of walnuts, 14 grams per day in 2023, I saw an intermediate level of visceral fat mass. Now, again, these are just correlations or association. I don't know about causation, but walnuts are a current staple in the approach and I have no plans to take them out anytime soon especially if they may lower visceral fat mass in my case. Maybe others maybe for others too. We'd all have to do the experiment to find out. Alright. So there may be two other foods that could impact visceral fat mass at least in my case. And one of them is a relatively higher fiber intake. So in this study, people who are in the highest fertile of increasing fiber intake throughout the duration of the study, they saw about a 15 reduction for visceral fat mass. Okay. What's my data over this three year span? So average fiber intake, full year average, was 85, 84, and 82 grams per day in each of those three years. Now, here, I don't see any specific trends. For example, for the most recent test, 82 grams per day is not a part, does not seem to be a part of seeing my lowest visceral fat mass. And then for the 85 grams per day, that's not a part of seeing also my lowest visceral fat mass. So it seems that in my case, that dietary fiber intake is not a part of the story or at least within these three tests, is not a part of the story for lowering visceral fat mass or at least getting it to my lowest level for the most recent test. And then a third possibility is green tea consumption. People in this study who reported more green tea consumption throughout the duration of the study saw about a 13% production for visceral fat mass. Okay. What about me? So over this three year span, it's been pretty much a constant. I use loose leaf green tea, organic loose leaf green tea sourced from Japan. There too, if you want to use it, there's a discount link in the video's description. So over this three year span, it's pretty much a constant. I've used that ten grams per day in a stainless steel ball and I drink about two and a half cups around 20 ounces per day. So that it's a constant, it suggests that that may not been a part of the story for why I was able to reduce visceral fat mass from two sixty three and around 300 grams to the most recent test, a 127 grams. Alright. So note that for this test, visceral fat mass of a 127 grams is the lowest amongst 50 year olds in the health and longevity YouTube space. And I don't generally make clickbait claims, but for this, for once, let's follow this rabbit hole. So our good friend, Brian Johnson, at 48 years old, for a test that he took in August 2025, had a visceral fat mass of point five six liters. When multiplied by the density of fat, that yields a total visceral fat mass of 504 grams, which is about four times higher than where I was for this most recent test. Now, I don't know if this is directly comparable because Brian used MRI. And nonetheless, 504 grams is still really low but I'm sorry to say Brian, I've got you beat for at least this one test. Next up is Paul Saladino. When Paul was 46 on his YouTube channel for a December 1 post, he reported having point three pounds of visceral fat or a 136 grams. So here too, I've got Paul B at a 127 grams. Now, if we're being totally honest, a 127 grams is probably not different from a 136 grams. But what I do want to highlight is that Brian is vegan and Paul is not. Now, I'm not trying to say that going vegan is not optimal for visceral fat. By no means am I saying that. But what I would like to highlight is that we can see that having relatively low levels of visceral fat, regardless if you're vegan or if you're far from vegan I mean, Paul's diet is more a lot more meat. Granted, he's got a ton of fruit now. But they're total two totally different diets and very low visceral fat in both of these guys. And then there's me with less hair compared to both of these guys and a goofy smile. At 53 years old for this test or close to fifty three, a hundred and twenty seven grams, I've got them both beat for now. I'm not saying it'll be like this forever. I'm planning on keeping mine as low as I can, and I'm sure both of these guys will probably be lower than me at some point, but it's just fun to compare for this, for this video. Now, I may actually be in third place relatively soon for the 50 year olds, and that's because our good friend Dave Pascoe, three years ago on his website, he posted having point three one pounds of visceral fat or a hundred and forty one grams. Now, Dave is lean all year round, so I'd be shocked if his data isn't consistently around a 100 and thirty grams or lower. And when Dave posts his most recent DEXA data that I'd be shocked to see that it isn't better than mine. But the person who may have us all be is Tony Ruggia on the I Am Longevity channel. So Tony is currently 62 years old and super ripped, probably more ripped than everybody regardless of chronological age. And he's posted on his channel that he's gonna have full body DEXA done very soon. Maybe even if you're watching this video, he's already had it done. I'd be shocked if his data isn't below a 127 grams for visceral fat. And the person who's got us all beat, beat, at least for now, is Seamland. On his channel, he posted having only 54 grams of visceral fat. If you've ever wondered what's optimal for biomarkers, well, I have a new Patreon tier dedicated specifically to that. It currently includes the 35 biomarkers shown here, more than two hours of video content, 52 published references, and note that these aren't the LLM generated reference ranges. This is what may be optimal based on how each of these biomarkers changes during aging and or associations with all cause mortality risk in the largest published studies that exist. So if you're interested in that, check it out. If you're interested in more about my attempts to biohack aging, check us out on Patreon where I offer blood test consults and I also post at least twice per day in four other Patreon tiers. We've also got a whole bunch of discount and affiliate links that you can use to test yourself that help support the channel, including ultalabtest.com, which is where I get the majority of my blood test done, the Clearly Filtered Water Filter, which I'm still using every day, at home metabolomics, oral microbiome composition, any detesting with GINFINITI, epigenetic testing with True Diagnostic, at home blood testing with Sifax Health, which includes the best epigenetic clock of of epigenetic clocks, GrimAge, green tea, as I mentioned in the video, diet tracking with chronometer, or if you'd like to support the channel, you can do that with the website, buy me a coffee. We've also got merch, including data is my north star, figuring stuff out is my drug, which I've got on here, and the conquer agent or diet trying logo. Link in the video's description. Thanks for watching. I hope that you enjoyed the video. Have a great day.