Habit three, put first things first. When habit two is the first creation, the ability to envision and imagine the potential to what could be, then habit three is the second creation, the physical manifestation. It's the real world embodiment and actualization of your character on a day to day basis, moment by moment. Personal leadership is about beginning with the end in mind, but effective self management begins with putting first things first. Habit three deals mostly with questions of time and life management. All of your activities can be categorized under two factors, urgent and important. This creates a four quadrant matrix of time management with appropriate responses for any situation. Quadrant one, urgent and important, activities such as crises, deadlines, and pressing problems. Quadrant two, not urgent but important, activities such as planning, networking, and seeking new opportunities. Quadrant three, urgent but not important, activities such as distractions, interruptions, and meetings. And quadrant four, not urgent and not important, activities such as procrastination, time wasting, and max pleasure. A reactive person does only what's urgent. They begin to act once shit hits the fan and it's all over their face. They also procrastinate and do stuff that aren't actually important nor effective. Being busy does not mean you're being productive or contributing towards what you want to achieve. The best place you want to be in is quadrant two. It's the sweet spot where you don't have to stress out on pushing deadlines or put out random fires. This is the realm of proactivity where you're free to do what matters most to you without feeling rushed. Well, gentlemen, when the shit hits the fan, some guys run and some guys stay. To get to quarter two, we have to learn to say no to other activities that are sometimes even urgent. You have to decide what are your highest priorities and have enough courage to reject other things. There needs to be a bigger yes burning inside you that calls you towards your purpose. To determine what's most important, use the Pareto's principle or the eighty twenty rule. What 20% of my activities will give me the 80% of the results? You would also want to via negativa everything in your life, starting from your material possessions, habits, and ending with people and your energy. The paradigm of quadrant two is seeing things through the lens of importance and not getting sidetracked by things that seem urgent. But I would still advise you to create some urgency in what you do. It will make you pick up your feet and makes life more exciting. Action steps to putting first things first. To actually accomplish your purpose that's in an alignment with your core values, you have to do what's most important first. This is achieved by following a quadrant two meta focus. One, identify an activity from quadrant two that you've been neglecting in your life, but what's what's very important, write it down and commit to it. Two, create your own time management matrix and determine what percentage of your time do you spend in each quadrant. And three, log your time for three days. How accurate was your estimate? Are you satisfied with how you spend your time? How much time do you spend in quadrant one, two, three, and four? Thanks for watching this video. My name is Seem. Make sure to like and subscribe for the other habits. And welcome to Stratton Oakmont. Thanks, man. I'm gonna have a beer. It's fun. Take it easy, Kip. Hey. Thanks for thanks a lot.