The concept of the hero's journey was introduced by Joseph Campbell, and it's a universal monomyth that can be found cross culturally. It involves a hero who ventures on an adventure into a special world, faces faces a crisis, emerges as a victor, and then returns home as a transformed being. The hero's journey is a self imposed narrative with which we define our place in the cosmos and mature as individuals. It brings even more meaning into our lives than ordinary myths do because the protagonist, the hero, is a regular person. In fact, he's a lesser version of himself in in the beginning. As Joseph Campbell put it, the hero is the man of self achieved submission. It's only during the trials and tribulations does the superhero within him get shaped and formed into being. The principles of the journey manifest themselves across all domains of life. The main idea is that the hero goes through massive transformations both internal and external during which he lays aside some of the underdeveloped traits of himself and through a series of epiphanies and development, grows into the much greater version of himself. It's the story of the entire mankind. Campbell described the monomyth in 17 stages. Each step is an individual component, a piece of the puzzle, which the anthropologist called Louis Strauss called mythims that are bundled together into the entire structure. The 17 stages are divided acts. Act one, departure or separation from the ordinary world. Act two, a, descent into the special world. Act two, b, initiation inside the special world. And act three, initiation inside the special world. And act three, return back to the ordinary world. The pattern of the hero is this, a separation from the world, a penetration to some source of power, and a life enhancing return. Now let's go through all of the stages. Mister Bilbo, where are you are still? I'm already late. Waiting for what? I'm going on an Act one, departure. Stage one, the ordinary world. This is quote, unquote before the beginning where the story gets cooked down to a few metaphors and symbols that set the tone for the entire journey to come. The function here is to explain briefly the backstory and some of the principles of existence in the given world. It also foreshadows both the ordinary and special world and creates contrast between them. Immediately, a series of dramatic questions get raised such as what's good and evil. The opening scenes of the Lord of the Rings is a great example to this in which the history of the one ring gets narrated. In this stage, the hero also makes an entrance and gets introduced. Currently, he's in his everyday setting, which reveals his traits, flaws, and desires. Stage two, the call to adventure. Suddenly, there's a trigger, a message from the frontiers or some other catalyst that gets the story rolling. A call to action puts a direct threat on the hero's safety, family, the peace of the community, or poses a temptation such as a lover hidden gold, glory, or success. There are perils of change where the other people or messengers that present the hero with an invitation or a challenge. The ordinary world has become unstable and needs to be balanced back again by risky action. The purpose of the call is to alleviate either a lack or need. Someone gets kidnapped, there's necessity for survival, help, or growth of the hero. In The Hobbit, the cult adventure happens when Gandalf locks on the door of Bag End and the dwarves crash into Bilbo's place. Go away and bother somebody else. There's far too many dwarves in my dining room as it is. If this is some Lothead's idea of a joke, I can only say it is embarrassing. More taste. Oh, Gandalf. Stage three, refusal of the call. The immediate reaction of the hero is to refuse the call. What the heroes predict sounds just too too dangerous and challenging. The hero is also just too comfortable in his current setting and doesn't want to go through the dreadful adventure. He'll make numerous excuses and reasons as to why he's not fitting for the task. Bilbo doesn't want to hear anything about any dragons. Neo doesn't believe what Trinity tells him about the matrix right away either. There's fear that needs to be overcome. However, these are only attempts to delay his inevitable fate. Refusal of the calling can happen at later stages as well. In the Lord of the Rings, it took place several times. At first, Sam doesn't want to hear anything about protecting Frodo, but Gandalf forces him to pick up the task. Then when they arrive at Rivendell, the council can't decide who should destroy the ring. Up until that point, Frodo had only been carrying it with him. However, he then realizes that it's up to him to finish the quest completely and venture to Mount Doom. I will take it. I will take the ring to Mordor. This can be found in our everyday life as well. People have these great dreams and goals to accomplish, but never do anything to turn them into reality. They receive their call to action from within, but they're hesitant and expecting the expecting the suitable opportunity to hit them. By waiting for the right time to act, you may end up waiting for an eternity. The perfect moment will never rise, and the best time to act is now, immediately. As you start walking the journey, you'll figure it out along the way. Walking the journey, you'll figure it out along the way. Shit. Stage four, meeting the mentor. At one critical point, the hero can't run away from his shadow no longer. The dire need for deliverance reaches to high levels, and he's forced into accepting the call. It doesn't necessarily have to mean going on an adventure as the hero may realize that he has to face face some of his own false traits and undergo through personal change. In this stage, the hero meets a mentor from whom he receives something he needs. It can be an object of great importance such as the one ring, information about what's to come, wise advice, practical training, or a boost of self confidence. The mentor dispels the hero of his doubts and fears by giving him strength and courage to begin the quest. There might be even some refusal here, but the journey will begin in spite of it. Stage five, crossing the first threshold. After this, the hero is now ready to start his quest whether that be physical, mental, or spiritual. Despite his greatest efforts, he will eventually cross the first threshold between the worlds he's familiar with and the one which he's not. This is illustrated very well in the Lord of the Rings where Sam stands at the field, which is the furthest he's been away from home. Then, symbolically, he takes the next step and traverses into the unknown. The main narrative is about the story of Frodo and the ring, but it's Sam who changes most during the quest, which makes him actually the main character. Neo also takes the red pill and exits the matrix into the real world. Remember, all I'm offering is the truth, nothing more. Follow me. There will also be a threshold guardian predicting the paths between the two worlds. In ancient Greek mythology, it was the multi headed beast of a dog Cerberus or fluffy in Harry Potter. This archetype symbolizes a force that stands in the way but is an illusory threat. It can be both internal doubt, enemies along the way, or simply a trickster who doesn't necessarily mean harm but simply wants to test the hero. To get past this initial obstacle, the hero needs to use his wit and reflect back at the gatekeeper his skill. Let me see your identification. You don't need to see his identification. We don't need to see his identification. These aren't the droids you're looking for. These aren't the droids we're looking for. He can go about his business. You can go about your business. Move along. Move along. Move along. Joseph Campbell also included an additional stage to this called the belly of the whale. It represents the final separation from the hero's known world and self. Hobbits, it was reaching the town of Bree and staying at the Preciponi where they were surrounded by uncertainty and potential danger. There's is no turning back now. Act two a, descent. Stage six, the road of trials. Now that the hero has thrown himself into the abyss, he has to go through a series of trials and tribulations. The shadow or the antagonistic force will throw traps and enemies to the hero's path. However, the hero will also make new friends and allies who are going to help him. In this stage, his skills and power are being tested. After each challenge, he gains a deeper insight into his character and identifies himself even more. That doesn't mean that he's going to succeed all of the trials. He's going to have to fail some of them to attain more wisdom about the new rules of the special world and learn from his mistakes. In the school of Hogwarts, the children get into all sorts of troubles during the journey, which make them better wizards in the long run. Everything's under control. Situation normal. What happened? I had a slight weapons malfunction, but, everything's perfectly alright now. We're fine. We're all fine here now. Thank you. How are you? We're sending a squad out. I think we need it. We have a we have to leak here, now. Between princess Fiona and the ogre. In the avatar, Jake Sully and Neytiri. In Spider Man, Peter Parker and Mary Jane. Act two b, initiation. Stage eight, woman as temptress. In this step, the hero faces different distractions and temptations that could guide him away from his path. It's often physical pleasure of some sorts such as money, fame, food, sex, etcetera. The woman is simply a metaphor for the temptations of life. Here, the hero is tested to see whether or not he can push off immediate gratification and pleasure. Can he endure some discomfort and rise rise above his selfish desires? Will he stick to his call, or will he sell the one ring to a random broker? This is the nature of the universe. We struggle against it. We fight to deny it, but it is, of course, pretends it is a lie. Beneath our poised appearance, the truth is we are completely out of control. It takes perseverance and grit to resist the temptation. However, the hero can also use wit to approach this challenge. In the Odyssey, the servants are beautiful dangerous creatures who lure sailors to shipwreck on the rocky coast with their alluring song. Odysseus wanted to get past them alive but still yearned for their singing. He was clever enough to order his troops to fill their ears with beeswax so they would remain deaf. Then he ordered them to tie himself to the nest, leaving his ears open and leave him tied tightly to it no matter how much he would beg. The siren song made him go insane in the head, but his sailors kept him bound to the mast. Once they passed the threat, they were safe again. Causality, and there is no escape from it. We are forever slaves to it. Our only hope, our only peace is to understand it, to understand the why. Why is what separates us from them. You from me. Stage nine, atonement of the father. Here, the hero has to confront the ultimate source of power in his life. In myths, it's most commonly the father figure, but it doesn't have to be a male entity. This is the center point of the journey with all of the preceding steps leading to it. All that follow will move out of it. The idea is that the hero has to face the greatest authority in their life. In a way, it's a maturation in which the hero has gathered enough guts and will to become independent. Luke's confrontation with Darth Vader is a literal example of this. He founds out that Vader is his father and thus the story goes through a massive revelation. The father represents power, especially power over the hero. During the face off, that power gets taken from him, which makes the hero seemingly omnipotent and limitless. Luke loses his arm in the fight, but survives and emerges with a lot of knowledge and skill. I am your father. The atonement can take other forms as well. Ultimately, the hero has to confront the dark parts of himself, his shadow. In Spider Man, Peter Parker gets absorbed by the symbiotic venom that begins to poison his mind and control his behavior. The hero has to fight this afflictive force to prevent him from being completely consumed by it. Run, Neo. Run. What is he doing? He's beginning to believe. Stage 10, apotheosis. The apotheosis translated from Greek means to deify, and in Latin, is making glorified into a godlike level. Having hit a point of realization after Dataraj's past, the hero transcends to a higher plane of existence. In this step, the hero goes through death and resurrection. Apotheosis begins with the hero realizing the divine within himself. There can be no final hesitations or doubts about his abilities. He just has to accept that he is the one like Neo in the matrix. As he wholeheartedly starts to believe his power, he becomes unstoppable. Agent Smith shoots him, but he's reborn thanks to the love he has for Trinity. It's a catharsis, an emotional release that purges and leads to a breakthrough. Trinity herself went through a mini apotheosis as she admitted her feelings for Neo. Knock it up. No. How? He is the one. As the hero gets resurrected, he gains true access to his infinite potential. After battling the Balrog, Gandalf dies, but is transformed from being Gandalf the Grey to becoming Gandalf the White. It's about believing in oneself and thus manifesting the power of the hero. Joseph Campbell put it nicely. Quote, those who know not only that the everlasting lies in them, but that what they and all things really are is the everlasting Dwell in the groves of the wish fulfilling trees. Drink the brew of immortality and listen everywhere to the unheard music of internal concord, end quote. Gadas the Grey. That was my name. Gandalf. I am Gandalf the White, And I come back to you now at the turn of the tide. Stage 11, the ultimate boon. The ultimate boon is the highest achievement of the quest. In this stage, the hero has emerged victoriously from the climax and has hypothesized himself to the divine superhero he's destined to be. At the height of his transformation, Luke finally trusts the force within him and destroys the Death Star. The wandering gets cast into the melting pits of Mount Doom, and Aragorn takes his place on the throne of Gondor. The ultimate boon represents seizing the sword or gaining access to the elixir of life. The heroes see who they really are and how they fit into the grand scheme of things. It's a moment of clarity in which the hero sees through any deception thanks to attaining clairvoyance. Act three, return to the ordinary world. Stage 12, refusal of the return. Having reached enlightenment, the hero may not want to return to the ordinary world. He has achieved the ultimate mode of being, and going back into the mundane may seem meaningless. At Mount Doom, Frodo is so exhausted that he simply wants to give up. No. Don't you let go. Don't let go. During the adventure, the heroes verge on the edge of death and feel most alive. This happens in the real world as well. Veterans coming back from war often end up becoming depressed, not always because of post traumatic stress, but also because everyday life seems so boring and dull, just so meaningless. Stage Stage 13, the magic carpet fight. Sometimes things don't go as smoothly during seizing the sword. If the ultimate boon belongs to the gods, then the hero has to steal it. It can turn into a hot pursuit of divine importance and can be as exhilarating as the adventure to the innermost cave. I have not. What? Yahoo. You're all clear, kid. Now that's loaded thing in the home. Stage 14, rescue from without. On the verge of collapse, the hero can potentially not make it in the end. Most of his strength has been used for the ordeal, and he is weakened. However, there can be allies who ride to the rescue. As Mount Doom begins to collapse, Frodo and Sam are rescued by Gandalf and the eagles. Just before Luke fires the shot to destroy the Death Star, Han Solo appears and takes out the fighters that are attacking him. Stage 15, crossing the return threshold. As the hero goes back home, he has to cross the threshold between the special and ordinary world again. He now ascends from hell and brings himself back to existence. Crossing the return threshold is as important as the first one. Initially, the hero's descent symbolized death from home life. Now, having ventured deep inside the underworld, he's symbolically reborn back again. The trick is to retain the elixir of life and the knowledge with him so that he could bestow its powers onto others as well. In the Odyssey, this takes the form of a semi resurrection. After many years of adventures, Odysseus returns to his home island Ithaca. His wife Penelope now has several marriage proposals, who she has been rejecting so far. The returning king dresses himself as a beggar and picks up his bow, which only he could be able to draw. Then he kills all suitors with his sons and gets reunited with his loved one. Stage 16, master of the two worlds. This stage marks the hero turning into a transcendental and supply being who is capable of moving in between the two worlds with ease. He has managed to overcome the shadow of himself and those of antagonistic forces. Such transformation is very well represented by the hero's journey of Jesus and Gautama Buddha. However, Luke goes through a similar process by becoming a Jedi knight, and Aragon also is crowned as king. Why, mister Anderson? Why? Why do you persist? Because I choose to. Stage 17, freedom to live. With such self mastery and discipline comes the ability for the hero to choose how he's going to spend the rest of his days. The hero is powerful, wise, skillful, and able to accomplish anything he sets out to do. This freedom also means liberation from the negative aspects of himself. During the journey, the hero had managed to overcome his fears, anxiety, and afflictive emotions. Because of that, they differ from the ordinary people who are still stuck inside the matrix. The hero has managed to see the true nature of reality and can live in the present, in the here and now. Luke becomes one with the force and later starts to teach others. In the end, Neo gets turned into agent Smith but but chooses self sacrifice by short circuiting the system. The hobbits took the place of leaders in the Shire, and Frodo goes over the seas with Bilbo and Gandalf. Mastery leads to the freedom from the fear of death, which in turn is the freedom to live. These are all of the 17 stages. The hero's journey represents the maturation process of the human psyche. Act one, the hero is brought into the world and is dependent of its safety. We as children are the same. An infant cannot survive without its parents. As the call to adventure arises, the hero has to rise to the challenge and accept his inevitable fate, which is to complete the quest and become great. It seems very scary, but it's necessary for you to reach your full potential as a human being. In act two, the hero goes through massive development, which is built up by challenges reached in the atonement and culminated at apotheosis. This is the highest point of the ordeal during which the child symbolically takes the power from the greatest source of authority in their life and becomes is because of a victim mentality or an authority figure that reigns supreme over us. As an archetype, the hero himself is still a victim who's governed by duality between him and his cause. Once he goes through apotheosis, he matures and transcends his own limits. To live the hero's journey, you don't have to fight the army of Mordor. It's a metaphor. This is not only a story about facing great evil or going on perilous adventures. On the facade, it can take many forms, but in its core, it's still about overcoming oneself. The hero symbolizes the lesser parts of our being, the egotistic disconnected self with self imposed doubts. As you traverse between the worlds of the ordinary and divine, you transcend your limiting beliefs and will gain power. Once the hero has matured enough, he transforms into the superhero version of himself with access to one's true potential. You have to accept the call to adventure of self discovery and actualization. What one can be, one must be. Un Unrealized potential is the worst kind of regret. It's not only for selfish pursuits, but to also bestow the rest of the world with the ultimate boon. The call of self actualization is something we all receive and yearn for. It doesn't come in the form of heralds and messengers, but by our own intuition. We all can feel the limitless potential within us. There wouldn't be the feeling of anxiety in the first place if we didn't know that we're capable of achieving greatness. Most of the time, we simply refuse it because of fear and limiting beliefs. Only in situations of dire need do we accept the quest and begin transformation. What marks the point between the ordinary and special world is a single step that needs to be taken by a special world is a single step that needs to be taken by decisive action. Imagine how much more of an advantage you'll gain by taking the plunge. As you enter deep into the rabbit hole, you're letting the world know that you've decided to complete the quest of turning yourself into a superhero. There are definitely going to be obstacles, challenges, and tricksters along the way, but those things are only fire to our flames. What makes the hero so magnificent are the difficulties he faces and overcomes in the first place. External adversity and internal resistance are nothing else but forces that augment and enhance the hero. As the hero faces these impediments, he's also forced to come to terms with the shadow parts of himself. It's a process of self realization and acceptance. The power of association and perception is incredibly important here. Everything you do daily is a stepping stone on your road of trials. If you were to see it as something dreadful, then you're manifesting the tragic end of a victim hero who never manages to jump over his own shadow. Choose to perceive it as manages to jump over his own shadow. Choose to perceive it as something that teaches you how to become victorious at the final boss fight and you're being courageous, which is the treat of all successful heroes. Everyone's journey is different and unique. It's up for you to know what your heart yearns for. The call you receive is intuitive and comes from within. Knowing thyself is the essential component to this. Accepting random quests to please others or to pursue the wrong ends will mislead you from your true purpose. Before you start manifesting your greatness, you have to do a lot of deep contemplation and self inquiry. Everything else other than following your calling would be a waste waste of your potential. However, one can spend an eternity waiting for a divine revelation. The hero reaches enlightenment only during the highest ordeal while he's in the inner innermost cave and facing the hardest challenge. It's better to already begin your journey and see where it may lead you. Only through decisive action and steadfast steps forward will you define who you are. Stagnation is death whereas motion implies true life. Stagnation is death whereas motion implies true life. It's the core essence of all things living. Start moving towards the self actualized superhero version of yourself as it's what you are meant to do and the ultimate boon of existence.