Habit four, think win win. When habits one, two, and three were supposed to teach you self mastery and personal governance, then four, five, and six are all based on inter dependence. They're the paradigms of cooperation in the name of public victory. Thinking win win is not a technique, but a philosophy of human interaction, one of its paradigms. Here are all six of them. One, win win. All of the parties win. Two, win lose. If I win, you lose. Three, lose win. The other way around. I lose, you win. Four, lose lose. Both people lose. Five, win, simply thinking about winning. And six, win win or no deal. The best option is win win because it also creates better undermines your future interactions. You disobey me, you die. You try to escape, you die. You otherwise irritate or vex me, then guess what? You die. So was that like a a pep talk? Yeah. It was pep talk. Grab what you need for a fight. My wheels up in 10. You might wanna work on your team motivation thing. You heard of Phil Jackson? Yeah. He's like the gold standard. Okay? Triangle, bitch. Study. When solving win win situations, we have to keep in mind two factors, consideration and courage. High courage, high consideration. Win, win. Low courage, high consideration. Lose, win. High courage, low consideration. Win, lose. Low courage, low consideration. Lose, lose. Character is the foundation to win win, and it involves three essential traits, integrity, maturity, and an abundance mentality. An abundance mentality is a paradigm that there is more than enough out there for everyone. Most people have the opposite mindset and see things as scarcity. It's the zero sum paradigm of life. Win win relationships are built and maintained on the foundation of character. It's based on mutual trust, the emotional bank account that's shared and in constant interaction with others. Name of the game, move the money from your client's pocket into your pocket. Right. But if you can make your client's money at the same time, it's advantageous to everyone. Correct? No. Action steps to thinking win win. Start thinking win win following these guidelines. One, think about an upcoming interaction wherein you will be attempting to reach an agreement or negotiate a solution. Commit to maintaining a balance between courage and consideration. Two, make a list of obstacles that keep you from applying the win win paradigm more frequently. Determine what could be done within your circle of influence to eliminate some of these obstacles. Three, select a specific relationship where you would like to develop a win win agreement. Try to put yourself in the other person's place and write down explicitly how you think that person sees the solution. Four, identify three key relationships in your life. Give some indication of what you feel the balance is in each of the emotional bank accounts. Write down some specific ways you could make deposits scripting. Is it win lose or lose win? How does that scripting affect your interactions with other people? Can you identify the main source of that script? Determine whether or not those scripts serve well in your current reality. And six, try to identify a model of win win thinking who, even in hard situations, really seeks mutual benefit. Determine how to more closely watch and learn from this person's example. Thanks for watching this video. My name is Sim. Make sure to like and subscribe for the other habits. Come on. With a common denominator. Keep it up on me. C d l e. How the money comes in, the parade comes to town. Going down Broadway is a one way street, whichever way I go.