Habit two, begin with the end in mind. Beginning with the end in mind means that you start with a clear understanding of your destination. It's too easy to get caught up with activities, people, and commitments that don't serve any significant importance to us. You can be busy, very busy, without being very effective. Most people keep working extremely hard but never stop to evaluate whether or not they're on the right track. They don't ask themselves if the things they do actually matter to them. Begin with the end in mind is based on the principle that all things are created twice. That's the first mental construct or an idea, and then the second physical conditioning of other people, the society, and our subject to the conditioning of other people, the society, and our afflictive habits. Without us even noticing it, we may potentially be following the path that has been laid before us by someone else. That's why it's essential to realize that you are the creator and in control of your own life. Habit two is based on the principles of personal leadership. It's the first creation and not similar to management, which is the second one. Management is bottom line focus. How can I best accomplish certain things? Am I doing things right? Leadership is top line focus. What are the things I want to accomplish? Am I doing the right things? You need to come to terms with what are your values as a person and what do you want to accomplish with your life. But this, my compass, is unique. Unique here having the meaning of broke. True enough, this compass does not point to yours. Where does it point? It points to the thing you want most in this world. Before you start setting any goals and achieving them, you have to identify what your values are in the first place. Because we've been unconsciously programmed ever since birth by everyone else, we have to rewrite our own script. Rescripting or paradigm shifting is changing some of the most basic paradigms we have. It's about swapping out the faulty ones with the ones that serve us. To rescript yourself, you have to have enough self awareness to withdraw from your analytical mind and to look at your paradigms objectively. Try to see whether or not your beliefs and values are beneficial or harmful to you. One great technique for this is meditation. It's a great method for developing greater meta awareness. It also helps you in being more proactive by enabling you to not associate yourself with your thoughts or emotions. Another one is self inquiry. Knowing thyself is the essential component to living a life that's meaningful to you. Keeping a journal, deep thinking, and memorizing past memories can help you gain a better insight to who you truly are. For Covey, the most effective way to begin with the end in mind is to create a personal mission statement or creed. It's based on what you want to be, your character, and to do, your contribution, achievements, and values. Once you have a greater mission to pursue, you become the essence of your own proactivity. To create your mission statement, you can use creative visualization and imagination. In principle, you envision your life as how you want it to look like, empower that feeling, and then write it down. Rescripting your narrative and writing a personal mission statement begins from the center of our circle of influence, from which our most basic paradigms are derived from. It's the lens through which we see the world and the core essence of our vision and values. Whatever lies at our center of life will be the source of our security, guidance, wisdom, and power. Every one of us has a personal center or core paradigms through which our life flows. Spouse centeredness, family centeredness, money centeredness, work centeredness, position centeredness, pleasure centeredness, friend centeredness, enemy centeredness, church centeredness, and self centeredness. None of these centers are ideal nor optimal for increasing your effectiveness as a person. Instead, you should strive to be principle centered. Principles aren't reactive. They aren't influenced by the moods of others. The economics don't scream at you nor bring you flowers. Principles are omnipresent. This centeredness gives the power to you, which is determined by your degree of knowledge and meta awareness. Action steps to begin with the end in mind. To achieve something worthwhile, you have to begin with the end in mind. Follow these action steps to discover your destination and purpose. One, become the leader of your own life. Determine what do you want to accomplish. What do you want to be remembered for? Two, identify where your center of paradigms lies. Where do you draw your sense of security, guidance, wisdom, and power? Three, rescript your paradigms based on your core values and purpose. Determine whether something is helping you or not. And four, write a personal mission statement using visualizations to give yourself a road map to follow. Thanks for watching this video. My name is Seeb. Make sure to like and subscribe for the other habits. The devil's in that dream. Really bad, actually. Ring up me, Harish Joho.