Habit five, seek first to understand, then to be understood. Before we can communicate with someone else in hopes of giving them advice, make making a proposal, or effectively interacting with them in any way, we must first deeply understand their point of view and perspective through empathic listening. For another person to open up and share how they really feel, we have to base your skills of communicating on a character that inspires openness and trust. This habit involves a massive paradigm shift. We typically seek first to be understood. Most people listen with the intent to reply, not to understand. They're either speaking or preparing to do so. Everything they hear gets filtered through their own lens, and they project their own autobiography onto other people's behavior. Empathic listening refers to listening with the intent to understand both intellectually and emotionally. It's supposed to get you inside another's person's frame of reference. You look through it, understand how they view the world, I don't have it. You need the cube to bring me home, but I've sent it off. I know not where. Listen well, brother. I'm listening. Before you start even thinking about proposing a solution or making an offer to someone else, you have to first understand where they're coming from, what's their situation, condition, and purpose. The key to good judgment is understanding. By judging first, a person will never be understood. By default, we tend to listen autobiographically through our own paradigm and respond in one of four ways. One, we evaluate. We either agree or disagree. Two, we probe. We ask questions from our own frame of reference. Three, we advise. We give counsel based on our own experience. And four, we interpret. We try to figure people out to explain their motives, their behavior based on our own motives and behavior. The skill of empathic listening involves four developmental stages. First and least effective is to mimic content. This is active or reflective listening. You're basically repeating what comes out of someone else's mouth. The second stage is rephrasing content. You're putting the meaning into your own words by incorporating reasoning, the logical left side of the brain. Thirdly, you bring in your right brain and reflect feeling. Here, you're not paying much attention to what's being said, but to the way the other person feels about what they say. The fourth stage includes both the second and third. You rephrase the content and reflect the feeling. By using both sides of your brain, you're understanding both sides of the communication. Authentically listening and seeking to understand helps the other person work through their own thoughts and to understand helps the other person work through their own thoughts and feelings. This develops trust and makes any barriers of communication disappear. It opens up a soul to soul flow. The second part to habit five is knowing how to be understood, which is equally critical in reaching win win situations. In habit four, we define maturity as the balance between consideration and courage. Seeking to understand requires consideration. Seeking to be understood takes courage. You need both for a high degree of win win. How to be understood? The key lies in first, seeking to understand, emphatically listening to them, seeing their paradigm, and then presenting your own idea back at them through the lens of their paradigm. Knowing Knowing how to present your ideas clearly, specifically, and contextually increases your credibility quite significantly. By listening empathically, you're not wrapped up in your own head. You really understand and thus lift your integrity. Habit five is right in the middle of your circle of influence. You can always first seek to understand because it lies within your control. It's my own daddy. Trishona. Let him go now. Hey. Drop it on for now. Don't go away. I'm sorry. What do you want? I just want my phone call. Action steps to seek first to understand, then to be understood. One, the next time you communicate with someone, put aside your own autobiography and genuinely seek to understand. Don't push, but be patient and respectful. Two, spend one on one time with your close friends and family. Listen to them. Understand them. Three, share the concept of empathy with someone close to you. Tell them that you want to work on really listening to others and ask for feedback in a week. How did you do? How did you make the person feel? Four, the next time you have an opportunity to watch people communicate, cover your ears for a few minutes and just watch. What emotions are being communicated that may not come across in words alone? Five, next time you catch yourself inappropriately using one of the autobiographical responses, probing, evaluating, advising, or interpreting, try responses, probing, evaluating, advising, or interpreting, try to turn the situation into a deposit by acknowledgment and apology. For example, I'm sorry. I just realized I'm not really trying to understand. Could we start again? And six, base your next presentation on empathy. Describe the other point of view as well as or better than its proponents, then seek to have your point understood from their frame of reference. Thanks for watching this video. My name is Sim. Make sure to like and subscribe for the other habits.