Welcome back to the channel. My name is Sim. Yes. Have no. And I've been fasting for nearly forty eight hours at the moment. If this is your first time here, then your immediate And to be honest, forty eight hours and or two days is actually, and to be honest forty eight hours and or two days is actually nothing. A few weeks back I had actually a three day fast which was actually more difficult. This two day fast is actually very random and simple one. And the reason I did it was because I was traveling and it was more convenient for me to not eat during this time. Which is one of the best things about intermittent fasting. You don't have to eat that crappy airport food or go to a fast food restaurant just so you could stop yourself being hungry. When you become keto adapted, going for days without food is actually so easy. And I was thinking like, yeah, why not squeeze in another forty eight hour fast before the holidays to really cleanse myself with autophagy. Definitely check out my video about the three day fast but this one is going to be about my fasting formula where I go through these specific bullet points and principles. What do I do? When do I do it? And how you can apply it as well. Do it! Okay, here's how to survive the first twenty four hours. What you want to do is to get into ketosis ASAP and induce autophagy because these things are what will protect your muscles from catabolizing themselves. And they're also going to make it that much easier for you to fast to not get hungry. That's why the night before, you should have a low carb ketogenic dinner. This is going to deplete your liver glycogen faster which will allow you to get into ketosis more rapidly as well. When you wake up the following morning, drink a cup of water with a pinch of sea salt in it. This is going to replenish your electrolytes, it's gonna hydrate your cells and it's also going to reduce cortisol. Because your purpose in the morning should be to keep your stress levels quite low because stress is anti ketotic. Getting enough sleep is also quite important because if you get sleep deprived then your blood sugar levels are gonna be jacked up. For instance, on day two I was traveling and because of that I had quite a night of sleep. I had been fasting for over thirty hours by that time already, but my ketones were still quite low at 0.4 millimoles. And it showed that if you don't sleep, then it immediately has a negative effect on your ketosis. To the chopper. But let's get back to the twenty four hour fast. After you drink your water in the morning, wait about one to two hours before you consume any other non caloric beverage. You can still drink some more water, but you don't want to cause any caloric stimulation to your gut. There is some, you know, debate about whether or not teas and coffee actually kick you out of a fasted state or not. But you should still wait a little bit before you start consuming these beverages. Green tea, herbal tea tea and black tea are great. Although black tea has more caffeine in it. One of the best things you can drink as much as you'd like during your fasting window is sparkling water. It's gonna keep your hunger levels close to zero. But the problem is that if you drink too much water then you're also going to, you know, urinate most of it out. That's why you should consume some mineral water or add some extra salt to your regular water so that you could retain the liquids. Losing your electrolytes and minerals is the biggest danger while you're doing fasting. So you might want to ask, should I take a multivitamin or some other supplement? I would say that you don't need to take some supplements during like two to three day fasts, not even a week. Because your body actually stores most of its minerals in its bones and other organs. So I wouldn't recommend taking supplements during the two to three day fasts. Now, what about if you start to get the first signs of hunger? It depends on how keto adapted you are. But the reason why you get hungry actually has nothing to do with the food that you ate. You get hungry at a specific moment of the day just because you're expecting to get food. Your body is running on autopilot and it's mostly a habit. You follow this random circadian pattern that you've built into your physiology. Your body goes something like, hey, this guy, he usually eats breakfast at 11AM. And guess what? It's peanut butter gelatin. If it's 11AM, then you're gonna get hungry. I tend to not eat any solid food during the day, which is why I also get the first signs of hunger only at dinner. Starve it. But what do you do when you do get hungry? Well, then you can drink some coffee. Coffee is probably the best appetite suppressants out there. But at the same time, it can also promote production of ketone bodies which will put you into ketosis faster. And of course, there are a lot of polyphenols and other detoxification benefits. The thing with black coffee is that it has caffeine in it and it also stimulates the adrenal glands. You're gonna pump out more cortisol and this can have a backfire effect on your blood sugar levels, so be careful with this. You can drink decaf coffee throughout the day without with no problems, but don't think that it should be a substitute to water. You should still drink water, man. What about non caloric sweeteners? You should avoid diet sodas or other artificial sweeteners because despite their non caloric content, they can still cause an insulin response. You probably skipped a diet, Cokes. That ain't helping you. Another thing that I love about these extended fasts is that you can be more productive. You don't have to waste time on cooking food, eating or you know the other things that are associated with it. I use these extended fasts to blaze through massive amounts of work. You know, you can do some paperwork, some reading, some writing, whatever your job might be. It also makes you think how big of an obsession food is for this society. There's food everywhere. In the supermarkets, in your fridge, in the pantry, in the train station, in your bedroom, under your pillow, everywhere. And I think that intermittent fasting should be a mandatory part of a modern human. Another thing that will allow you to get into ketosis faster is low intensity steady state activities. It can help you to deplete liver glycogen and promote the production of ketones. You can do some cardio and then start fasting post workout but I'm not gonna do it because I'm not trying to burn fat. I'm doing fasting just for the autophagy and, life extension benefits. If however you have a ton of fat to lose, then you can do some steady state cardio. Right now, I'm very hungry. If you get really hungry, then using some apple cider vinegar can also stave off hunger. Get a glass of warm water, add one to two teaspoons of apple cider vinegar and gulp it down. There is practically zero calories in apple cider vinegar, and it also has some potassium and magnesium in it, which is great for electrolytes. Drinking bone broth isn't ideal because the collagen and the fat, they will definitely stop autophagy. To be honest, the first twenty four hours of the fast are the most difficult part. Tell me, I'm here. This is because your body is still running on glycogen and it needs some time to keto adapt fully. After that, you get into deeper states of ketosis and it's gonna get effortless almost. So if you make it to your bed, if you fall asleep without getting hungry, then it's practically over. You can already consider that fast successful. To be honest, from this point on, it's all downhill because your body will be buzzing with its endogenous ketones. When you wake up at at day two, then you haven't eaten anything for nearly thirty plus hours. You might feel slightly tired, but your mind will be still quite quite sharp. I experienced quite a lot of mental clarity during that time. Another reason is that the elevated ketone bodies in your blood may lead to the accumulation of acetoacetic acid that produces this mild intoxication that is similar to that of ethanol. Why do a lot of people fail these extended fasts? It's because of social pressures and food signals that are coming from their environment. You might think that, oh, I'm gonna have a three day fast, but your family invites you to an amazing steak dinner or a birthday party with cake. What you're gonna do then? Of course, if you have a lot of discipline and willpower, then you're just gonna ignore it. No shit. But if you don't have that kind of indomitable will, then you should avoid those kinds of circumstances because it's gonna set yourself up for failure. During day two, you can follow the same principles that I mentioned. Drink sparkling water, a few cups of tea, a few cups of coffee, not too much. Go for a walk, be productive, and don't make a big deal out of it because the mental warfare is quite present during that time. You wanna quit. You're gonna tell yourself that, why is this? Why are we doing this? I'm just gonna have a little bite here. 50 calories for autophagy. One to two grams of Leucine. Whatever. Oh shit. But you definitely don't want to fall victim to your own traps. It's a test. A test of your physiological keto adaptation. But most importantly, it's a test of your mental fortitude. If you do decide to go for day three then go for it. It's actually more beneficial for autophagy. Going to bed day two is a lot more easier and you've probably got used to it. And when you do get to day three then it doesn't matter that much when you start to break your fast. I have an entire step by step video about how to break your fast safely so check it out. But the general idea is that you should first start off with something easily digestible like warm lemon water with some digestive enzymes, then some apple cider vinegar, continue on with some bone broth, something liquid. And your first meal should actually be quite small and low glycemic because having this instant incidence spike will make you crash and burn and it can also lead to some weight gain. Oh, shit. After your first meal, you wait maybe one to two hours and then you can continue on eating your regular diet, whatever that may be. Be the butter jelly from the baseball bat. Is the three day fast worth it? Most definitely. I even consider it to be effortless in comparison to the health benefits that you're gonna get. You just go hungry for a few hours but you do your health this immense service. I actually think that intermittent fasting should be a part of everyday healthy nutritional strategy. Ketogenic diet because the benefits of fasting, they're also going to start kicking in once you get into ketosis and once you start inducing autophagy. When you're on the keto diet, then those things will happen more rapidly. If you want to know how to combine these two, then check out my Keto IF program. I hope you enjoyed this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Same. Stay keto adapted. Stay empowered.