What's up? My name is Steve. And in this video, I'm gonna talk about the Oura Ring two. Is it worth it? And, what are the most significant benefits that I've noticed from from using it? One ring to rule them all. One ring to fight them. One ring to bring them all. And in the darkness, fight. This is the one ring. Okay. For those of you who haven't heard of it then, the Oura Ring is this cutting edge sleep tracking device that is gonna measure how much time do you spend in different sleep stages. So this is the first generation ring that's been out for a few years. As you can see, it's quite hefty and looks pretty cool. And this is the second generation ring that is, recently just came out. And as you can see, it's much smaller. And, you know, they you can feel the weight difference as well. And this is the black one. This is a prototype that I got to use before the actual release. But, essentially, I've I've been using this one for over a year, and I must say that it is it is indeed one of those things that I find incredibly invaluable because it's gonna tell you exactly, like, how much time do you spend in different sleep stages, how how fast have you recovered from the previous night, what's your heart rate during the night, what's your core temperature, what's your heart rate variability, how fast do you fall asleep, how efficient was it, and, you know, it's like a magic device in terms of actually getting some quantifiable data about what you do during the night, how much time do how many times do you wake up and, things like that. It's quite cool. This is something that you wouldn't be able to, you know, get based on your intuition of, oh, I feel that I've slept pretty good tonight. But in reality, when you look at the data, then, you might have, you know, woken up five times and you barely got any REM sleep. Technology is very useful in actually gaining some insight into what your, you know, human mind can't actually perceive, quantifiably. So in my opinion, like, you should if you want to optimize your sleep and take it to the next level to, you know, be really healthy in the long term, then you want to want to have something that is gonna tell you what's your progress like or, you know, what's your actual status in terms of your sleep. And, yeah. Now the second ring, is also quite useful And I would say that, you know, it's more accurate and it's gonna be more effective in in the data that you receive. They've done some actual studies as well with actual sleep labs where they compare the Oura Ring with like a proper sleep lab with, you know, all the gear around you, and they found that the Oura Ring gives you as accurate data as the sleep lab. So the Oura Ring is one of the best commercially available sleep tracking devices, and I think it's for habitual use for the ordinary person. It's like a perfect thing. You don't even notice it when you're wearing it and it looks kinda cool. But, you know, the second ring the second ring is even more undetectable. If you compare your aura ring with, like, a regular ring, then you barely notice the difference. This is, like, the actual one ring. Yeah. I got it. But, yeah, if you were were to use it, then, yeah, it's perfectly similar. Biggest mover of sleep as far as getting healthy and better sleep is consistency. If you can get to bed according to what your chronotype would dictate, and we help you find that by looking at your past sleep data, if you're consistent with when you go to bed and when you wake up, that is gonna give you the highest quality sleep day after day after day. Now the second gen Oura Ring has had some troubles with its launch, and, they've, had some hiccups, so to say. Some people have actually been quite mad about it. Like, I ordered my ring, like, eight months ago, and I haven't received it. What's up? The ring must be destroyed. And, yeah, true the truth is that, they've they've they've been quite slow with, shipping out the preorders and things like that. And there's been quite a long, waiting time for for them. But, you know, part of it has to do with probably the huge demand for these things because aura has become quite popular over the over the past few years. And I think, like, they simply weren't ready for such a influx of new people wanting to get their hands on this, this thing. And, of course, people like Prince Harry using the Oura ring aren't aren't making it any better. They're only gonna popularize it even further. It doesn't matter what kind of performance you wanna optimize, whether that be business performance, physical, mental performance, whatever it is, you still need to sleep because sleep is the most important, variable that's gonna determine your cognitive functioning and how you feel during the day. And that is also one of the reasons why I think, like, compared to the price that you have to pay for it, which is, like, $300, it's, like, nothing compared to the amount of value you get from it. Like, I would have to I would love to play for, like, 10 times more for this thing because I think, like, it is worth it. I will take the ring to Mordor. So in terms of, like, the batteries, then this is the old one. This is the new one. As you can see, it's again much smaller, much more compacted, and more energy efficient. To chart this old ring lasts for about three days, whereas this one can last for over a week, and the charging of both of them is also quite fast. You can charge up the entire ring in less than an hour, and it's gonna last you a long time. Usually, when I do use the ring, then, I'm gonna look at the amount of hours I spent in deep and REM sleep because those are the those are more valuable in terms of, like, the quality of sleep. And, yeah, that that's a good indicator of how well I slept and how prepared I am for the coming day. If my physical preparedness and readiness is low, I didn't get enough good sleep, then I'm not gonna hit hard. I'm not gonna hit myself hard at the gym and I'm gonna take it easier because my body isn't ready for that. My nervous system hasn't recovered. So that's another example of an invaluable aspect of self quantification. It can also measure your daily steps, so you don't have to be using those Fitbit trackers specifically. You can still get all of them in the Oura Ring. And one of the best things about this is that you can turn it on airplane mode. So you you you're gonna avoid all the EMF or the Bluetooth signaling as well, And, that's why I think the Oura Ring is the best sleep tracking device because you don't have to sleep with Bluetooth around you, and you're not gonna put you know, you're you're gonna wear this ring and you're gonna keep it on your heart or something during the night. You can you're not gonna radiate your organs like your brain or something. It's it's on airplane mode, and it's gonna collect the data while being offline. So it's perfectly safe, and it's not gonna disrupt your sleep or anything. It's because of men the ring survives. Now, of course, there are some cons to these technological devices. They're not gonna be 100% accurate all the time. They may get buggy sometimes. The cloud app doesn't sync properly. But overall, those things are somewhat rare and, they're not gonna be that big of an issue unless you're planning on getting, like, a real sleep lab into your bedroom that's gonna detect every little movement you make and, every little shift in consciousness, then I think the Oura ring is your best bet and it's incredibly cost efficient. So if you are interested in getting yourself one of these awesome sleep tracking rings, then head over to ouraring.com and use the code SIMLUND. You're gonna get a $50 discount and, it's gonna be quite quite a huge bargain in in terms of the actual price to get yourself the one ring of sleep tracking. Well, in that, thanks for watching. Click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered. The ring yearns if the wall has to return to the hand of its master.