So I'm standing here in Toronto, and we're at the upgrade dinner for the Bikers Summit. And it's also always we've always held this amazing, pre pre event meetings or get togethers where we cook the food with some awesome, really high quality ingredients. So let's go check out what, we're having. Looking good. The beef hold on. Fresh wild salmon from Alaska. Okay. Alaska. I want your commentary. What's that? That's the commentary. It's not actually that bitter. Yeah. It's not actually that bitter. Yeah. It's actually weird. And that's really what this blend is is an adrenal tonic. You could also make this in a tea base. We've got it with hot water, but we can easily turn this into a tea based drink where we've got adding our Hora combination batch of tea and so two, but adding in the tonic herb. So this is the hollandaise sauce with eggs and butter and oil and and this is like 100,000 calories. Yep. You just eat this and you don't have to eat again for three months again. Never again. Perfect for Canadian weather. Yes. Hibernation diet. Yep. So what are we doing here? This is the Ayurvedic spice ball. It has tahini, coconut, Ayurvedic herbs, and sesame, black and white seeds. Nice. Really. Yeah. And and there's some meditation. Yeah. It's Alright. Train. The masculine masculine train. Yeah. So this is gonna be I hope there's there's gotta be good sized blocks here. This is scary to me. This alright. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool Yeah. Sacred Masculine looking good. That's this one looking right there. Nice. These this, Sam, is my favorite, traveling medicine. These are these are power pills. That's perfect. So they're they're like a beautiful You eat them. You eat them. Interesting. Round two beetroot soup with the sulfurophane broccoli and the bee pollen bee pollen. Yeah. Super waveform. It's It's cold. Yeah. Bloody Mary. Bloody Mary. Broccoli stock Yeah. It's it's a photoception. Yeah. Oh, you should've been you could've been taking a picture of me taking a picture of this. What kind of a world are we living in? Very well photographed. Yeah. Yeah. I can receive that. A commentary. Oh, it's good. It's amazing. The salmon's incredible. Wild salmon. It's wild. It's wild. It's wild. Savage. You can taste the Aztecs Anthem. How's the food so far? It's absolutely fantastic. Yeah. So we have some under vacuum, you know, sous vide prepared, Pike Parsons, some Atlantic salmon with some really nice hollandaise sauce. My favorite way of having some egg and butter in its purest form. Awesome. Vacuum vacuum fish. What about the fish? Unbelievable. Oh, wow. It's ketogenic. So good. It's all the sauce. Yeah. It's a savory sweet, spice malt. Yep. Anti inflammatory digestive, carmindo warming spice malt. Tomorrow. Toronto. Biohikers summit. Biohacking is not better, faster, stronger, more coffee. It's more about understanding how you optimize sleep and recovery and, the balance of things so that you can perform better in your day to day life. What you see on the bottom here, what you should be eating every day, five to seven servings is bread and pasta and, you know, rice and polenta. So not exactly slimming foods to to most of us thinking about that today, but that's what we are told to eat and things like, you know, an egg. Well, you should eat that once a week maybe. That's, full of cholesterol and so on. And that's exactly what we did. So people always like to blame the obesity epidemic on the people because they say, well, we told them good advice, but they just didn't listen so they got really fat. But that's not really true. Because if you look at what Americans ate and Canadians, we did exactly what they told us. So butter weighed down, eggs weighed down, animal meats way down, and ate lots and lots of grains. Right? 40% increase in grains and all this low fat sugar. Yeah. You're gonna get rid of this, you're gonna add more of this. So that's sort of exactly what we did. We did what they told us to. And the result was, of course, a huge obesity epidemic. So the other thing that people never really talk about when they talk about dietary changes from the nineteen seventies to the February is this fact that we're eating a lot more frequently. And to some degree they're tied in, but on the other hand, you can see that in '19, '77. So, we'll just look at adults, but children show the same distribution. So if you look at adults, they're eating around this is the NHANES survey. They're eating about three times a day. So the big spike here is around two to three times a day, breakfast, lunch, dinner. That's the sort of, thing that we're that's the sort of meal pattern that we're eating. By 2004, what you can see that is we're closer to five or six times a day. So we're eating a lot more frequently. And to some degree it's related to the foods that we eat. Because if you're eating a lot less, butter and eggs and steak. If you're not eating steak and eggs in the morning and you're eating a couple of slices of white bread with jam, you're gonna get a lot more hungry. So then you wind up eating more frequently. And then the other thing that we get told all the time is to eat six times a day. It's like that advice never came from science. Nobody ever thought that was a good idea. It was just because we were hungry, so then we had to eat a muffin at, 10:30. But we're eating a lot more frequently, and that's one of the really big changes of the last, sort of quarter century. Where you see, obviously, a ketogenic diet, low carb plus resistance training, has a ton of benefits for body fat loss. Right? That's great. But the question still comes up is, what about muscle mass? So we were one of the first ones, and you see this all the time. People on Twitter, Instagram, Facebook, they're like, oh, it's impossible. You need insulin. You need this. Instagram, Facebook, they're like, oh, it's impossible. You need insulin. You need this. So we're like, alright. Cool. Like, let's why don't we put this to the test? So this is a paper we just, published. We took 25 resistance trained males, put them on either a high carb or a ketogenic diet, matched for protein, which is something that is often missing in the literature, is that we match them for protein. So that way people can say it was a higher protein intake that that was the result of this. Adapted them for two weeks and then put them on an eight week long ketogenic diet. So here's blood ketone levels. You see here at the top, this is the ketogenic dieting group. Their ketone levels were kind of elevated. We measured blood ketones throughout the entire study. On the bottoms of Western diet, exactly what you would, expect. So here's what we found. You look at lean body mass, both groups at the end of the intervention gained the same amount. They were training hard, three times a week, full body programs, like, really hard workouts. These guys were squatting and dead lifting on average, like, two and a half two to two and a half times their body weight. You look at fat mass, and the ketogenic diet group lost significantly more fat mass than the Western diet group. So kind of this body recomposition going on. We are gaining muscle, losing fat mass. So we basically showed it was possible and it is possible on a well formulated ketogenic diet even when protein is controlled and matched for, you can gain muscle. What we find in these mushrooms is that they concentrate really unique chemistry in their spore pads and all through their bodies they produce something called branch polysaccharides and we're gonna go there we're gonna get there there are these macromolecules that our body can cut up and use as weaponry for our immune system that it can help stabilize our microbiome and build up better soils inside of us, and heal this whole and this whole system. So we call them biological response modifiers. They're immunomodulants. What is that? If I got a low immune system, it's going to bring me up. If I got a high immune system, aka autoimmune, the Crohn's, the fibromyalgia, the the rheumatoid arthritis, is going to help bring that heightened immune response back down. Essentially, a college education in how to show up as a balanced being on planet Earth. And, we find these in all of these medicinal mushrooms. Alright. How we doing over here? We're doing magnetic. Post electromagnetic fields over here. Yeah. You could you could actually see that it shocks the body. Yeah. Right now, we have it at 3.5 pulses per second. We're kind of slowly starting to adjust the magnetic field strength. Right now, it's about 83 magnetic field strength. It can go anywhere to, one to a 105. And then we can also change simultaneously change pulses per second along with the magnetic field strength. How are you feeling now? Are you still feeling it in the neck and the the right hip? Yeah. A little bit. It's fine. It's like you get used to it. Yeah. Yeah. That's good. So that not all not a lot of people get used to it right away. So that means that your cells are already starting to become resilient a little bit. You wanna raise it a little bit? Are you okay right now? Tell me when it's well, even before I I even before I raise the magnetic field strength, let me show you the different pulses per second. So I can go here's four, four point five. There's five pulses per second. Boy, this is five pulses per second. And, again, every one of those pulses is slipping past that cell wall and charging the mitochondria nucleus organelles of the cell and reverberating back into the body. Ketosis is really a highly evolved, highly conserved process. And fundamentally, it's a way for humans to fuel their brains. And the problem is, you know, we store our our our majority of our fuel in adipose tissue and the problem is the brain can't use fat in that form. So we had to evolve an alternative pathway, which is really what ketosis is. So when we're breaking down adipose tissue, releasing fatty acids at a high rate, and that those fatty acids are taken up by the liver and essentially exceeding the liver's capacity to oxidize those fatty acids, we have this pathway by which they can be converted into ketones. And this occurs primarily in the liver. So we're converting those, fatty acids, partially breaking them down into smaller molecules called ketones and our two primary ketones are beta hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate. There are four carbons and unlike fatty acids, long chain fatty acids, these ketones can in fact be taken up by the brain and used as fuel. So that's how we use fat for fuel in order to ensure a stable fuel source for the brain. And once they're taken up, they're they're oxidized and converted back to acetyl co a and generate a t p. And we actually knew all this metabolism fifty years ago. George Cahill at Harvard performed cutting edge research studying starvation, ketosis and it's true. If you're, if you're consuming carbohydrate as a primary nutrient, your brain depends on glucose as an energy source. It needs about a 150 grams of glucose per day just to function normally. But if you're in ketosis and Cahill showed this with very, invasive arterial venous different studies, across the brain looking at, healthy adults who had been starved for up to four weeks, and showed that the brain can extract up to two thirds of its energy from ketones, dramatically reducing its glucose requirements. It's actually in the recording, so I'm gonna take a snapshot out of it. And also say keto. So you see the dissension. Actually, here you can get go ahead and lay your hands out there. So we haven't started working out yet, but what we'll do is we'll do no weight bicep curl. Actually, I'm gonna give you a little bit of resistance. I don't wanna do it anymore. It's that green band. That's alright. We don't need it. Alright. So bicep bicep curls. Ready? Oh, yeah. She's got some I know. I'm more maybe the only reason we make you do the band is because you already worked out. Right? Yeah. I did. Because you already worked out too? Yeah. Alright, Zillow. You're all good. You're happy to train. Go ahead. Step step in the middle there. Alright. So here we go. Give me 20 to 30. Give me bicep curls until you start to feel a lactic acid response. If you feel it already, then we'll we'll drop Can we get a speech on this? What are we seeing here, Ollie? Okay. Here are some, interesting bicep currents. We are having crawl close to hole in one here. Let's see here. Putting cars. Oh, this was a different game. Okay. Oh. All we're having here is a huge biceps and amazing rush club tour. It's it's more difficult to get it like They're about to explode. Right here. We could see land. Yeah. Yeah. Dude. Yeah. I wanna do it. So much HGH. Twenty eight hundred hundred percent burst in human growth hormone within an hour of doing this. Awesome. Yeah. And that's really important because, you know, without without going endogenous injections. Right? Yeah. Just prime and basically lactic acid lactic acid tissue pituitary make HGH. Yeah. So you're making human growth. Pressure off. Oh, cool. Look at that. That's a pump. Yeah, baby. How was it? It's too heavy. Like This is me getting some of my antioxidants in my body. Hormesis. Yes. It's a resveratrol. Well, actually, you know, you're all kind of quantified. I measured my HRV after drinking, and if I have about two up to to two drinks a night if I'm out with some public friends, my HRV goes way up in the morning. Really? If I have more than three drinks, it goes way down. There's a bell curve. Okay. And I think it's because I think with the alcohol, it's it's not so much directly with this, but, usually, I'm in a social context. I think being, like, it helps me HRV being, like, you're in a social environment around like minded people, and I so for me, I always have a a positive effect on, like, being It's like a release. Release. Yeah. But but but there's a bell for you. So I know it's not about getting drunk. It's just like two drinks in the night, and I feel really good. Yeah. That's true. In the Delta Force. Who can who can make the most money, who can most, who can have the biggest house. That's not the goal of living a long time. It's not to snub your neighbor and be in a be in a race against the Joneses. It's to be here to see if you can truly live out your purpose for as long as possible, and that is why you should pay attention to Interestingly, every cell in your bodies has its own clock, And the purpose of these cellular clocks is to temporally separate the timing of incompatible processes, such as building new structures and breaking down damaged ones. That's so Yeah. Nice. Nice. Alright. Let's let's move closer to the camera. Oh, yeah. Let's let's do the hand thing. Let's Let's do the hand thing. Like this like a freaking, like a spiral. Like a spiral. Spiral. Spiral. Okay. We have been avoiding North America for a while and, the reason is that there is a lot of interesting stuff in Europe already. You know, you should come over and see what kind of stuff we are working on in terms of biohacking.