People are pretty tough. Like, they will do some crazy shit if they know it'll actually work. So you can fast for days and days on the salt water and still have good energy to still get your workouts in, especially if you're fat. Fat. Like, it's very easy if you're obese. But let's just say your mainstream fat guy or fat woman. Basically, you fast as long as you can on that salt water until you feel like death. And then you would refeed, and it keeps them so motivated though because they lose weight so damn fast. Like, I think right now already, I probably cost big pharma, like, millions of dollars a year already. Like, the amount of people I get off diabetes meds and shit is just phenomenal. Like, it's ridiculous. Body mind empowerment. Get stronger, faster, smarter, quicker, friendlier, more helpful, more driven. Everything the body needs. Control your mind. Welcome to the body mind empowerment podcast. I'm your host, Sim Lund, and our guest today is Cole Robinson, the snake diet wizard. Cole is the creator of the snake diet that has seen thousands of incredible fat loss transformations with a fasting focused lifestyle. Cole fasts most of the day, lifts heavy weights, weights, runs a Facebook group with over 300,000 members, and reveals the bullshit of mainstream fitness advice. A lot of people have been requested for me to get Cole onto the podcast, and, eventually did it. So we're gonna talk about everything including fasting, carb cycling, ketogenic dieting, exercising, and, general mindset towards becoming empowered. Yeah. So, like, you're you know about fasting. So, essentially, what I do is I I basically teach people a prolonged fasting focused lifestyle, especially fat people mainly. And then once they get the weight off by not eating for days on end, then once they get down, then I actually help them with, like, a, you know, an actual eating routine that might be at most a meal a day, maybe forty eight hour fast. And you probably know all about fasting, like, even cranking up your growth hormone, like, all the Mhmm. Autophagy, all the health benefits from it, cleaning the system. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's that's what I like. I I make a lot of videos about the fasting as well and everything included, like, all the benefits and how to do it. So yeah. My my my audience is probably unknowing knowing the story, and they're they're pro fasting in a sense. They're not they're not biased. Yeah. So a lot of stuff, like, to be dead honest with you now, it almost becomes to the point where I more deal with, like, psychological issues and fear is a big thing. Like, that a lot of people are just fucking scared of everything now because they're so brainwashed into the system. Like, you know, they think that fasting will kill you. They think that, you know, they that everything they think that, like, a lot of the stuff that the mainstream tells them is gonna help them live longer, which it won't. It's, like, everything's just money motivated. Mhmm. So, like, I have a lot of people that are just there it's always fear. Like, fear of judgment. You know, a lot of the stressors in life that cause people to get unhealthy, you know, like, money, chasing the dollar, trying to keep up to your fucking neighbor, and then working a stressful job that, like, cranks up cortisol, makes you eat, like, all that kind of stuff. And that's a lot of the times that's people like, if people wanna check out even my Instagram, like, you know, I get some crazy fat loss results. And people, when they know something will work, people are pretty tough. Like, they will do some crazy shit if they know it'll actually work. So, you know, essentially, I get people to fast a long like, long periods of time on basically salt water. Right? And and they'll their body is almost, like, almost just like a grizzly bear when a grizzly bear hibernates. People don't understand that you know, they don't understand that your fucking body fat is just pure fuel, and you don't need to fucking eat. And that's another thing too. I was actually having a conversation with somebody today about, even just, like like, cooking. Like, it's amazing how people are so brainwashed and so scared thinking that they need to eat at such a high frequency. Like, say, there's three or four or five or six meals a day Mhmm. That they're just forcing these meals. Yeah. You know? And it's like, well, I don't really need to eat, but I better I gotta cook something. You know what I mean? It's it's just unbelievable. Yeah. Yeah. It's like, my metabolism gonna slow down, and, how how how do I not eat? That's, like, a Yeah. That's fucked. The metabolism thing is just people are, like, you know like, it's like you're fucking five hundred pounds, fatty. Like, your fucking metabolism is already fucked. Yeah. And then they're trying you know? And, like, people are they dwell so much on on a lot of stuff. Example. Here's a good one. Even today, I was coaching a girl, and she went and got some blood test done. And this girl has probably lost, like, 40 pounds, and she hasn't had any blood test done forever. Right? And she feels, like, 20,000 times better than she did 40 pounds ago, but she goes and gets blood test done. And according to their range, her thyroid hormone, the I think it was the t three hormone is, like, a little bit low. It's like and I'm like, how do you feel? And she's like, great compared to before. So I'm like, who fucking cares? Yeah. And that's what people dwell on. And then that leads into buying meds off the system. And, like, it's an it's crazy how some of the ranges even when you talk about stuff that a lot of people might be able to relate to, like blood sugar. It's crazy how I don't know what it's like where you go ahead. Yeah. Like, a blood sugar is a good example that you should feel you should be hypoglycemic when you're fasting, but you don't feel tired or you don't feel, hypoglycemic. Yeah. Yeah. Lower than that, then you're still able to function perfectly. Oh, exactly. We could lace into this like crazy. So for starters, people do not have any fucking clue how low their blood sugar should actually run. Yeah. In fact, if I'm not mistaken now don't quote me on this, but they might have changed it. But, basically, the range in where I live in Alberta, Canada, if you went to the doctor's office and they pulled out their blood test sheets, the range of a healthy blood sugar, blood glucose would be between three point three and six millimoles per liter. So 3.3 is right around sixty, and six, basically, you times by about you times it by about 18. So even times so basically, between 60 and about a 100, maybe one ten milligrams per deciliter. And, like, if you're pulling blood sugar numbers higher than five, you're not healthy. Yeah. And they're trying to make it look like you're old. And it's like, you're fine. You're under six. Like, you're already getting to the point where you got a fatty liver, and you're basically a diabetic if your if your blood sugar's always over five. Yeah. Like, somebody like you or me, you know, like, I've done these experiments. This is what I do. I fucking self experiment to find the truth. I've done experiments where I literally ate as much sugar as I could in an hour, and my blood sugar went up to 10. And I recovered back to 4.4, like, you know, four and a half ish in inside of an hour. Mhmm. Like, that's healthy. K. It's not about what your blood sugar's at necessarily. Like, you know, a lot of the people that I get fasting, let's say it's, like, a type two diabetic. So, basically, type two diabetic is completely fuck all. It's just your fucking fat ass, and you need to stop eating and heal your liver. And your endocrine system's all fucked up. So you get somebody that's, like, say, three hundred pounds. They start fasting, and then their blood sugar's rocking and rolling, like, sky high. They're on, like, Metformin. They're on, like, all the other type two diabetes meds. They start fasting, blood sugar clears after usually, with somebody that's decently healthy, it'll clear about after forty eight hours or less. But with these people, it's really high. So sometimes it takes, like, a couple, two, three, four days for them to get into ketosis. Right? Yeah. But so, anyway, what happens is their blood sugar gets down, but they haven't healed yet. So you wanna keep the blood sugar as low as you can, obviously, on their refeeds. If they're refeeding every three, four, five, six, seven days, you want your refeeds to basically be zero carb if possible because then see. Because they still haven't healed. So if they take on some blood some sugar, it'll spike the shit out of it. Right? So that's how you know if somebody's actually healthy. It's not about them having a low blood sugar in the moment because they're on a fast per se. It's about the recovery time. And, yeah, there's a real good sign of, like, true health when it comes to that stuff and comes to, like, liver health. Now a guy like you, you've probably done some experiments for sure with this. But if you're really healthy and you're not overweight and, you know, you're not rocking, like, some sort of a body fat percentage that's sky high, essentially, your blood sugar when you're, say, fasted twelve hours, so you're not in ketosis. Let's say, like, let's say fasted but not in ketosis, you should be, like, in the fours. If you're higher than five, if you're in, like, getting up close to six, you got fucking work to do. Like, you need to start fasting and heal. And if you're in ketosis, your blood sugar should be down in the threes. Yeah. Like, those are good numbers. And that's and so the point was is we're talking about these fucking idiot doctors who don't know anything about the endocrine system themselves. They're all fucking fat. And there soon as the person goes to the doctor because the people are you know, they take the doctor's weird asshole and they don't know fuck off. And then all of a sudden, they're walking out of there buying, like, hundreds and thousands of dollars worth of diabetes for absolutely no reason whatsoever. Go consult your local drug dealing doctor and make sure it's okay. Yeah. So true. The medical medical community is a huge pyramid scheme almost, and, the prescribed Please. The test the test themselves are huge expensive and the meds and therapies and everything. Yeah. It's quite quite, crazy. And, like, you and even, like, you know my personality, and this is the thing that, you know, it's it's no one talks truth. Because, God forbid, even if they're a good doctor let's say they were a good doctor and knew the truth. They can't tell the fat sick person that it's as simple as not fucking eating and going on, like, a strict zero carb, basically, refeeding routine until they're healed because they'll lose their job. Yeah. You know, they'll fucking lose their goddamn job, and that is why guys like me, you know, that help people for free. And, you know, I live, like, this very minimalistic lifestyle. Nobody can't they can't fuck with me, so I can basically preach whatever I want. And that's the trade off. I can say whatever I want, and I just have nobody to tell me what to do, and that's why I get such good results. You know? Like, I've had people I had one girl lose 200 pounds in a year. That's right. And, like, she you know? Like, she didn't pay a dime. She didn't spend any money on food. She was eating, like she even did one fast. It was thirty days long on the salt water. Wow. You know? So, like, if any of your viewers are interested, like, I don't wanna get into the, like, the snake juice, Like, you know, that's what it kinda was just a joke. That's what it started becoming called back in the day. Essentially, the story was what first happened, I started fasting because I got sick. I used to be a fitness trainer. And I got sick and fucking tired of training with a lot of girls actually that all had massive eating addictions. And then I just get angry because it's like, oh, you're training good. They're doing good. You know? And this is back when I still preaching, like, multiple meal a day bullshit, but they couldn't stick to it. They couldn't adhere to that because you can't beat a food addiction with a high eating frequency. So then I just got sick of training because I didn't see the results I'd like to, like, especially sometimes you'd see good conditioning results a lot of times, but you wouldn't see the weight loss results and that's why 99% of the public's even hiring a trainer. So then I started I challenged one girl to a fast and one thing led to another, and that's when I started fasting. And I just seen crazy results. And then, basically, I did I was I was screwing around with some, you know, forty eights and seventy two hour fast, but I did do the first ones on water. And that's when I figured out the salt. Because if you're, like, trying to train hard, like, say yourself, somebody that's sedentary, that's quite fat can go a little longer without getting taxed on electrolyte, like sodium and potassium specifically. Well, I got to about day three, and I went to do some deadlifts at the gym one day, and I basically was almost fainting between each set. So I knew that that was my limit. And then I was doing some experiments with another guy who was screwing around with salt to try to actually kick water, and I had him eating on 40 eights. And it was just it's just crazy experimentation and, like, you know, having a set of fucking balls to actually try sit try shit that led me to doing an eight day fast on the saltwater mix, and that's when I figured it out. That's when I'm like, okay. You can fast for days and days on the salt water and still have good energy to still get your workouts in, especially if you're like, it's very easy if you're obese because you just got so much electrolyte entrained in your body fat. Like, people just don't understand that even when you buy, like if you go back to the hunter gatherer times, you know, the fat has the most nutrition in it versus the muscle meat. Right? Like, it's the fat that the Eskimos really wanted. You know, the fat Like, I think I've seen you do a talk with a lady that was doing a carnivore eating routine. I watched one of your videos and Yeah. You know quite a bit about that stuff. Right? Like, you know, like, I've been getting a lot of people that I coach essentially the fasting aspects, number one. And number two, I'll have them on zero carb carnivore, fairly strict carnivore. They might still need, like, a little bit of butter and things, but that is the best protocol. I'd say on the face of the planet is gonna be a a a hardcore fasting routine. If you're fat, like, at least seventy two hour fast between refeeds and then strict carnivore and keep the refeeds at, like, maybe 500 grams of food, Make sure you're getting in your salts, and you will heal everything. I got a guy right now that's that's got MS, and I like, the results are insane. Like, two weeks, he had all his feeling back in his feet and his hands, and, like, he had no grip strength. Like, he is frail. He's 40 years old. I got, like, you know, like, a hundred and forty pounds soaking wet kinda guy, like, just really frail. Right? Mhmm. You know, what he's he walks. He has a bad way when he walks. And I got him basically eating. I cut all the all the carbs, zero carb. Him, we're doing a meal a day because he's, like, he's underweight. Right? So I got him. I wanna try to gain some weight. I'd like to maybe when he gets really healed up, I'd get him to eat some carbs. And because I know he can gain weight, like, carbs are kind of a Right. You you probably know about this stuff. Like, the way I eat carbs is I never eat carbs every day. Mhmm. Like, I do a carb loading routine. Right? I don't carb up every day. I have either a carb day that is basically super low fat, you know, hit my protein count and a pile of starch, maybe a little bit of fruit, and all the other days are just straight zero carb. Yeah. Because it's gonna maintain, like, a more stable blood sugar and insulin sensitivity. And you, yeah, the only time you would want to consume carbs is when you've exercised and your muscle glycogen is depleted. Right? And at any other time, it's gonna make basically, you know, promote more fat storage and insulin resistance and everything like that. So, yeah, most people Most it's actually quite bizarre to prescribe people to eat high carb even if they're, like, sedentary or if they're obese. It doesn't make sense from a, like, a physiological perspective then. But you know where it does make sense? In their fucking wallet. Well, fuck, of course. It's you know what I mean? Like, look at the shit they sell you that's fucked. Like, you know what's crazy? Like, kale is more expensive than fucking steak. Yeah. It's crazy. Like, it's fucking this this fucking vegan agenda, this vegan agenda is literally making foods that you should eat in moderation at best more expensive than fucking meat. Yeah. Like, truth be told, I fucking hope you got some vegan followers for me to piss off. I fucking hate veganism. Truth be told, you will be a healthier human being by a 100 times if you ate strictly carnivore with a good strong fasting routine. So say if you're lean, you're eating a meal a day, fucking factory farmed the worst quality fucking meat on the planet. You'll still be healthier on that diet than you were eating a fucking vegan diet. Yeah. It's true. It's true. Yeah. Like the Like this the Go ahead. You know? Yeah. I I really think, yeah, like, the humans are kinda evolved to eat meat, and we we our digestive system is more prone to digest, you know, these animal products rather than, plant products. But, yeah, at the same time, some plant products also have their own, benefit in some in some aspects. And, like, a full on carnivore for the rest of your life probably isn't ideal, and that's why Right. Right. Cycle it in between and Right. Incorporate it. Yeah. I actually made a video about that. Actually, after I made I made a video about hormesis, and, I think you actually made a pretty good video about hormesis too. Yeah. Yeah. I I I I I made it first, like, a year ago or something. Yeah. And then I republished it, this time. Yeah. So, like, I did a video, like, not too long ago just talking about hormesis, and the reason that came up was exactly because of what you just said. Because I knew see, these strict carnivore people that are all over the Internet now, just like what you just said, the problem is is it will create a situation of hypersensitivity. Mhmm. Because if you ate because, like, nobody's allergic to meat. K. But, like, allergens are not even allergens are, like, you know, your phytonutrients and everything and, like, lots of, like, say plants. Like, I I always make the point that plants are like medication. Okay. And so a little bit of something that your body has to, like, you know, put in a little effort is not bad. Like, that's a whole hormesis aspect. But if you go if you're not adapting, you go past that plateau, it's, like, detrimental. Yeah. It's it's so true. Like, the the what I see or what I'm afraid of is that there are a lot of people who are jumping on the carnivore bandwagon at the moment even though they don't have any sensitivities towards vegetables or plants, and they may actually cause themselves some issues in the future just because of being so, restrictive. Yeah. And that's the thing because even if you go back to, like, what was it? The Inuit, you know, they'd still have some berries Yeah. And such on you know, they'd have that for at least at least, like, a few weeks out of the year. Right? Mhmm. So they they'd be able to at least get a little bit of that, like, that hormetic effect. And it's it's the same with everything, and this is that's how you build a mutant. We we evolved through hormesis. Like, that's how we evolved. That's how we're so goddamn tough. Exactly. So, like and I agree, like, going zero carb carnivore, especially with the fasting, that's perfect for people that are really fucked up if they got stomach issues from, you know, drinking way too much coffee or taking piles of antibiotics. That's gonna be the easiest way to heal the stomach. But once they start feeling better, they can incorporate tiny amounts of some of these plants, and it's not gonna be a bad thing. Just don't go, like, you know, eating a massive bowl of freaking salad or vegetables in one shot. It's all about that frequency. Right? They just gotta get it in in tiny amounts maybe every couple days to develop that, like, that immunity to it essentially or, like, develop a what's the word I'm looking for there? Just a tolerance to it. Right? Yeah. Yeah. It's so true. Yeah. And and, also, like, there are also very many health benefits and longevity benefits to these, plant products as well, and especially the phytonutrients and, these other sulforaphane and things like that they have, like longevity boosting effect. So if you want to kinda optimize your health, then you would want to incorporate them in in, something. Exactly. And, like, you know, there's and that's why, that's kind of what motivated me to make that video about hormesis because, you know, all these carnivore people that are jumping on the carnivore bandwagon, Like, there's no doubt it's fucking veganism's a goddamn joke because your teeth will fucking fall to your goddamn head after six years when you rotted your teeth, though. Like anyway, I don't even wanna go down that road this second. But but so these carnivore people, you know, they they get that really they get those awesome health benefits right away. It works quick, but like you say, you're you're you're hurting yourself a little bit in the long run as far as how how, Adaptable you are. Yeah. How adaptable you're gonna be exactly. That's the word. How adaptable because you're not bringing in some other stuff in your diet. And it doesn't even have to be much. Like, you could essentially eat basically almost, like, a very low carb routine all the time, which is what I would recommend for almost everybody if they're, like, your regular sedentary basic sedentary person. The only people that would really benefit off carb loads would be guys that are, like, actually training quite hard. Yeah. Yeah. It's so true. The snake diet is a prolonged fasting focused lifestyle combined with proactive eating. And fasting is also another one of those things that I think everyone should follow no matter Everybody should fast. No matter no matter who they are or what the Yeah. Fasting's fasting's a blanket. Yeah. Fasting's pretty much you can cover everybody with the fasting aspect. There's no end. You can cover everybody with fasting and you cover everybody with meat. Mhmm. Yeah. That's true. Yeah. There's not one human being on the planet that shouldn't be eating meat, and that's, like, you know, that's that's the whole thing and that's rabbit hole. Well, exactly. And that's the thing about too just to go back when you're talking about like, we're talking about the carb loading with the glycogen just so people can understand that. Like, I've done experiments where I carb loaded like, the body, depending how big you are, you'll usually hold maybe like, a guy admire your size, you'll hold, like, maybe four to 500 grams of glycogen. Your liver will usually hold, like, about a 100 grams and then the muscles will hold maybe three to 400. Obviously, less when you're smaller. But I've actually done experiments where I fasted. So I carb loaded like crazy and then went on zero food, and I still had some extremely explosive energy on day five. And I wasn't getting flat yet. Like, you know, when you really feel but but I also was very, structured in my training, so I only, like, touched like, I did pretty much just heavy heavy lifting, but very low volume for the days leading up to the fifth day. And so then I didn't tats all the glycogen out of my system. But if I woulda did, like, a big burnout workout, it woulda, like, kinda whooped me, and I probably woulda needed to get, like, carb, like, within three or four days. But if you're really smart about it, it works very well if you load up if especially if you're doing, like, a strength routine, if you're going from, like, a a volume block to, like, more of a strength block, it works good. You can carb up just on the weekend, and you could basically stretch those carbs over five, six days. And the coolest part is, the point I was gonna get to, is contrary to popular belief, you can burn body fat like crazy and build muscle Because it it allows you to still have that glycogen load and, you know, there's some people on the Internet now, they're talking about testosterone of the carnivore diet. I don't give a fuck what they say. Soon as you carb up, you definitely feel it. You feel this spike in metabolism, and your testosterone goes way up. There's no fucking way you're getting the testosterone gains from eating zero carb carnivore. Yeah. Yeah. You're and also your, like, your thyroid and everything else will also ramp up just because you've you've been depleted and Yeah. That aspect of you you're gonna gain, like, a bigger boost from less carbohydrates just because you come from Oh, exactly. Overstate. Whereas if you were to stay high carb all the time, then you wouldn't gain a big bigger of a boost because you you're you're constantly, you know, sensitized to the carb. Exactly. And that brings up a good point actually with, like, insulin sensitivity because when I carb load, like, you know how insulin is like a no no? You know what? Technically, in the mainstream, it is a no no for most people because they're always spiking it and it makes you store fat like crazy. You tax the shit out of your pancreas, etcetera, etcetera. But when you, you know, starve your body of carbs for days on end and you have a good feel for where you're at and then you carb load, you, like, want that insulin through the roof because you just pound the nutrients into your body. And you can like, when I eat like, when I carb up, like, I literally start sweating. Like, it's I I kinda go from, like, kind of flat, like, because I've maybe haven't eaten carbs for three, four days, just zero carb. And then I carb up hard. Like, I'll eat, like, about 400 grams, and I, like, just start sweating. Yeah. Like, it's because your body, it's just so efficient. You can just feel how healthy it is to do that. Yeah. For sure. Like, You know? Yeah. Like, I've I've done the cyclical keto diet in the past as well. And, yeah, those are you you eat, like, a low carb keto for, like, a week, and then you have a big carb load. And, the next day, you can still, you know, lose weight, and you're gonna still feel leaner just because you're so you're gonna metabolize the carbs so fast again. It's not gonna be, like, in any difference even. Exactly. And the other coolest thing that people a lot of people don't understand is that when you got that massive glycogen load So, like, let's say I load up on carbs tonight, which I actually am. Tomorrow night, I won't be in ketosis. K? So tomorrow night, I'm gonna eat, like, basically zero carb. I'll probably just eat, like, steak and eggs or something like that. And but by the next evening, I will actually be in ketosis, and I'll still have, like, two or 300 grams of glycogen. So would it allow would it your body's extremely evolved. Like, people just don't understand this dual fuel aspect. So what would happen is, say, if I was gonna do some, like, aerobic work, like, let's just say I was gonna go for, like, a walk. Right? And I'm in ketosis and I'm still carved up. I will be burning, like, nothing but body fat, like, 90% body fat during that walk. Right? But then if I went and out into the soccer field during that walk and I wanna do a couple 100 meter sprints, got glycogens there to give you, like, superpowers on those sprints. Yeah. It's pretty amazing stuff. Yeah. Like, what it's like exactly. Like, when you're doing low intensity stuff, then you're then, you don't actually tap into the muscle glycogen. Exactly. And you're burning only, like, liver glycogen and, the body fat. Exactly. That's crazy. Yeah. It's pretty it's pretty cool how that works. And, like so, like, a lot of people that I coach, the ones that are actually, you know, down to where they're getting lean, this is the kind of routine I'll get them on. And I'll have them do an you know, I don't know if we wanna talk too much about exercise. We could a bit. But, you know, I especially if it's more of a bodybuilding routine, a lot of them, I'll have them on, like, an upper lower split where they'll train upper lower and try to go six times a week and with one day off, and they'll carb load on the weekend. Mhmm. And that's one routine. I I really like that upper lower split. I get good results from that. But then what I do is I'll do a block, and when I start to maybe plateau on the upper lower split, then I'll go to a strength block, and that's where I'll do, like, full body with really heavy weights, very low volume, and I'll try to get in as much as I can to keep the frequency way up. Because the the best way to train strength is gonna be to keep that frequency sky high. Right? You know, just, you know, like, almost like like, say, bench pressing. Like, say, you train a volume block where you put some muscle, you know, on the muscles that you work the bench press on. Well, then what you do is you would go into a strength block, and then I would just work the movement. And I try to bench almost every day of the week, but it almost feels like I didn't even do anything when I leave the gym. Mhmm. Right? But, yeah, that's pretty much how I train people with the diet. Like, I'll get them to do a carb load routine. And not all of them, though. Right? They gotta train pretty damn hard. Like, I'm not gonna get somebody that's kinda, you know, training aerobic. Like, there's one girl that I'm coaching right now, and she's probably got about 20 pounds to cut, and we'll probably cut all 20 pounds within a month. And I got her eating, like, on 40 eights because she runs about four times a week for training for this marathon. So with her, she's got some body fat, and she's not doing any anaerobic work where she's gonna need a bunch of muscle glycogen stored up. So I pretty much got her basically on a zero carb routine on the refeeds. And the other cool thing, like, you know, when you're doing the keto carb cycling, that's the same idea. But then the best part of this whole thing is when you put the fasting in there, then you got something that's really special. Yeah. Because now you got a situation where you're going zero carb on your zero carb days, plus you're fasting all day eating, like, maybe a meal a day. And then what you're doing when you fast, you're just making yourself even more sensitive to, obviously, that little bit of a insulin spike, but you're mainly you're actually creating a situation where you're gonna burn way more body fat. Yeah. That's true. So what what let's maybe, like, talk about the what what types of, fasting routines would you prescribe to different people? Let's say someone who is, let's start off here, like, some from, like, a first transition of their actually overweight and Okay. How will they gonna transition over to becoming lean and what would they do then with fasting? Okay. So so the way I like to coach people is, like, obviously, kinda know my stuff, like, really aggressive at the start. Right? So right off the bat, I like people to do a seventy two hour fast right off the bat on the salt water. The probably the most important part of that phase there is is that that's to build confidence. Because people you gotta remember, people still think fasting's gonna fucking kill them. So then I prove to them it doesn't. K? So I get them to do seventy two hours, and then if they feel good at seventy two hours, a lot of people do. They feel great because now they've drained all their liver glycogen. They went through, like, that, you know, that's liver cycle, and now they're basically just burning straight body fat, and they feel really good. Especially if they're sedentary, they'll feel great. And then if they feel good at seventy two hours, ninety six hours. If they feel good at that, we'll just keep going, and then they'll refeed on, like, a zero carb small refeed, almost like a little pit stop. And that's how I coach the obese people, the mainstream obese people. Now I can get into how I coach, like, a fat power lifter. It's a little different. Mhmm. But let's just say you're mainstream fat guy or fat woman. Basically, you fast as long as you can on that salt water and until you feel like death, and then you would refeed. And it keeps them so motivated, though, because they lose weight so damn fast. Like, they lose crazy like, your average obese woman, if she's pushing it, so let's say even like, let's say not even crazy aggressive. Let's say I got her on seventy two hour fast. So that'd be a routine. K. Even the minimum that I'd want a really fat person on would be a seventy two hour fasting routine with at most, like, 500 calorie refeeds zero carb. Yeah. And that routine is gonna chop 20 pounds minimum of any girl in a month. K? May and probably even more with a guy if he follows that. But now if they got, like, that will power and they're really motivated, they don't have to do seventy two hour fast. You know? I got should I add a guy that lost he's down, like, a 160 pounds since oh, man. He's down I think he's lost about one sixty in maybe nine months. Or what was it? Like, not long. Yeah. And he was doing long fast. It was less than that shit. I can't remember. If you go on my Instagram, his name is, Lawrence. And so he was four hundred pounds at one point. Now he's down to about two forty. But he would do, like, seven day fast, you know. And and as long as you weren't taxing yourself in the gym with a bunch of, like, you know, high volume, resistance work, a lot of people could do it quite easy. Like, your regular average, you know, woman that's fat, that doesn't exercise, fuck all, can easily fast, like, days on end. Like, you know? So that's how I do it. So, basically, fast as long as you can. Seventy two hours minimum to get some really good results because truth be told, like, fat women, they have, like, basically the same maintenance calorie count as a house cat. I'm not even kidding. I'm not kidding you. Like, if you I have, like, I have so much experience with calories. If you have a, like, a fat lady eating one meal a day, 500 calories with carbs, she won't lose shit. If she loses weight, it'll be moderate, and it won't be enough to keep her motivated and she'll relapse. Yeah. And she'll actually lose muscle because of high carb and not being Yeah. And now that's right about the gray area. Because if if you're eating a meal a day, you it's it you will. It's not optimal. It's not optimal. You're exactly right. Now if you're eating carbs on 40 eights or 70 twos, not like, I've done it. I cut I cut about 12 pounds on a meal a day, high carb routine, and I didn't lose any muscle at all. Like, I had all the DEXA scans and everything to prove it. But now that was a tight window too. Right? Like and I was also there's now the only way if you do, like, big cuts, like, let's say you're a male and your maintenance calories, like, say for you, let's just say you're, like, around 3,000 or so let's just say you're around 3,000 a day with your exercise. If you tried to do a hardcore cut on a meal a day routine, eating carbs, let's say a hardcore cup being, like, you know, getting down to that 1,800 calorie mark, there you have a risk of losing some muscle. But if you keep it, like, at four or 500 calorie deficit on carbs, one meal a day, you won't lose nothing. But who the hell's got the willpower for that? Like, I can do it. You can do it, but the fat lady can't do that one. Right. That's a freaking that's a pretty advanced routine. That's, like, something I'd have, like, a on a a structured power lifter on that routine. Like, some guy that's, like, a 500 pound bench presser, and we're trying to cut him as slowly as we can while still keeping him carved up like crazy. But at that point, we would just put him on a carb loading routine anyway. Yeah. Yeah. Where we right? So but you're right. The you're exactly right, though. You're you'd wanna really be careful of that. And that's why I always cut people because why would they need carbs? Like, seriously Yeah. They don't need any fucking carbs. For sure. Right? So but yeah. So then you get down I think you were mentioning something there. So then once you get lean so let's say we cut all the fat off the fat lady. Now she's down to where she's getting fairly lean. At that point, when she's probably, like, maybe when it starts getting difficult because it will start getting difficult when you start getting, you know, when you got that last 10 pounds to cut, those seventy two hour fast will start to actually get hard. And then that's when I cut it down to 40 eights, maybe do those for a couple weeks, maybe a week and a half, lose that last bit of weight, then I put them on 20 fours, and then maybe throw a 48 in once a week just for shits and giggles on the weekend. And then at that point, if they decide they're gonna go to the gym and start training, then we might screw around and give them, like, one carb up day a week. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. So that's kind of the idea. So and then now with the like, with an athlete that's overweight, like I say, it's different. That's where that carb loading routine works so good. I'd have them definitely not doing any more than twenty four hour fast, especially they're really high level. And I'd have them carb loading usually on the weekend and on Wednesday night. That's usually enough because that way so the the trick is with that routine is you carb up on the weekend, and then you got Monday with your zero carb, and you're not quite in ketosis yet. By Monday night, you're getting there. But then on Tuesday morning, you're definitely in ketosis. So if you wanted to cut weight, the best day to pull calories because of what you said before because you don't really wanna cut on carbs. Like, I never cut on carbs, but like I said, you could if the deficit's small. But that Tuesday, what you do is you'd pull the calories back like crazy because you're in ketosis. It's a zero carb refeed day. You could cut back the calories like crazy. You can even just hit your protein count and cut the fat right back that day. And that so you'd have, like, two days a week there where you're kinda getting aggressive with the cutting for somebody that's wants to cut really slow. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Like, that's a that's a really cool cool good point that you mentioned. And especially with the refeeds or if you're trying to lose weight as well with the smaller refeeds because, let's say, the goals of your this long and fast would be to go into ketosis and to only get enough of the essential fat acids and essential amino acids just to maintain the muscle. Right. And, you for that, you don't need to be eating a bunch of calories. You don't need to be eating, like, 2,000 calories. You can safely get, like, yeah, 500 to a thousand calories with, like, mostly some some protein that has Exactly. A a little bit of fat and that's like the meat. Is that a good option for that then? Yeah. Like, it it's almost like now people would be willing to eat raw meat. Like, I find, optimally, if people have the nerve to do this, if somebody was really fat, I would probably only refeed them on raw liver. Seriously. Because then the raw liver is fairly low in calories because it's not very, like, it's not very fatty, but it's got tons of cholesterol, which is awesome. Yeah. Contrary to popular belief, you want your cholesterol through the through the fucking roof. And so you got so, like, liver is perfect. Right? Yeah. And that's the whole idea because then you can still hit their pro like, you can still hit a decent protein count, low calorie, stay in ketosis, refeeding on raw liver, almost perfect. Yeah. Like And then you're getting some go ahead. Yeah. The like, liver is the number one most nutrient dense food on the planet practically. And Yeah. Like, if if you had if you wanted to cut hard and fast, raw liver is perfect. Like, if you did Yeah. Even somebody that was fairly high performance, what I would do is they could even carb load on the weekend. And if they're smart, they could stretch their carbs off for probably a good, you know, four or five days. They might have maybe one day at the end of the week or two days where they're a little bit lethargic, but then you would just cut on liver. It's perfect. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. But that's go ahead. The liver is gonna give the micronutrients and the Oh, yeah. That is perfect. And that that's actually, like, one of the reasons why people aren't feeling satiated or the reason they get hungry in the first place is they're, first of all, not getting enough protein and then Yeah. Not not getting enough of the essential minerals as well. You know what's actually funny you bring that up? Because the first time I ate raw liver, it the calorie count wasn't very high. I ate about 600 grams, and you're looking at, like, a similar protein count to, like, you know, just basically a steak. Mhmm. But holy shit was I full because it's so rich. Yeah. It's so rich. I was like it was like I was just full of a 600 gram chunk of liver, and I hadn't even ate any other food, which is, like, no food for me because, like, I'm a fucking pig. Like, I can eat a lot of food. And it was it was very rich. Like, it's almost perfect. If people have the balls to eat, to fast as long as they can, and refeed on raw liver. Mhmm. It's almost and then and then if they are a little low on salt, they drink some of the snake too. All obviously, they drink the snake juice during the fasting time. We haven't really hit on dry fasting yet, but Yeah. Before we there's also a place for that. Yeah. Before we do that, I wanna mention over that the the the liver would actually fit perfectly with these extended fasts because Oh, yeah. Like, it's it's not it's, you know, it's still high in vitamin a. And, if you get too much vitamin a, then you're actually caused, like, vitamin a toxicity. And so, yeah, like, if you cycle it, if you have the liver only, like, within Oh, yeah. Like, you're never gonna kill yourself. You're never gonna perfect. Like, you're never gonna get toxic either. Yeah. You're never gonna kill yourself on one big liver load a week. Yeah. Right? You know, you can eat, like, two pounds of liver every Wednesday. Right? Yeah. It's perfect. And, like, like, if you could do that, like, that's the only and, obviously, you got some of your other protein sources like eggs, eggs, yolk egg yolks. And, yeah, that that's the best way to lose weight, man. Like, fast as long as you can and crank that liver up, eat liver, and and drink raw eggs. Like, there's a little bit of argument too with egg whites and things about the protein bioavailable bioavailability and such, but a lot of times, I just like drinking the raw eggs anyway because they're just because I'm just lazy. For sure. Like, Rocky. So Get it like Rocky. And raw eggs, man. If you can't drink raw eggs, you're a fucking pussy. It won't hurt you. Just get good fucking sources. Do your fucking research. There was one other thing I was gonna say about we're talking just before we go to the next thing there, we're talking about that carb loading. Oh, yeah. And that's the other thing too. Obviously, when you're loading the carbs up, on those days, I'm very like, it's very a very dry load. Not dry water wise. I get lots of water in, but, like, no fat. Like, I keep the fat at a minimum. Yeah. Because concert because a lot of people, the keto police, they they don't understand protein because the way it actually works is, obviously, carbs, like, starch or glucose will spike the shit out of your insulin, but protein mixed with the the the carbs will spike the shit up your insulin. Yeah. But the protein on its own, when your blood sugar and if your blood sugar is not elevated, protein won't do shit to your to your insulin. Yeah. It's gonna As long as your sugar and that's where those and that is where a lot of these keto people get so scared because that mainstream keto macros, you know, what is it? Like, you know, 5% protein kind of thing or 10 like, something really low. That is trash. Because all these people, a lot of them are just scared because they don't fast. Soon as you fast, you can get a lot more loose with your macros as well. For sure. Like, I did an experiment, like, where I ate basically two packs of bacon every night and two kilograms of cucumbers. And then you'd looked at the carb count on the cucumbers as, like, over a 100 grams. And then the next day, I would dry fast all day, train my ass off just sweating like a pig. And by that night, before I started my next dinner, I was pissing ketones, like, dark. That's with dry fasting. That's a whole another chat we can have here. Because dry fasting, there's no doubt about it. It is definitely more aggressive if you are trying to if you wanna, like, go down that road and lose weight even quicker. But the problem is is you can only drive fast so long. So if you're one of those real hardcores that's gonna, like, try to fast, like, two weeks straight, I actually have people cycle between the two. You know, they'll drink snake juice for, like, maybe, whatever, how many days in a row, but then they'll dry fast as long as they can. And then once the dry fasting becomes almost unbearable, they'll just hydrate on snake juice for as many days as it takes to get their marbles back, and then they'll just go back into a dry fast again. Mhmm. Could you could you briefly go go over, like, what's the jig snake juice and, how did what's the ingredients? Okay. So basically, all snake juice is is sodium chloride. So, like, some sort of good quality Himalayan pink salt works fine or even some of these good sea salts. It's just salt. So sodium sodium source. And then the other main ingredient is potassium chloride. Mhmm. So back in the day, when I first started doing this, I used to, like like, now, I guess I can talk about how I used to mix it up. I used to actually put one teaspoon of sodium chloride, whatever salt source it was, per one liter of water, and then I'd use one teaspoon of potassium chloride, which should be in, like, the sources of, like, no salt, salt free. There's a million brands of that stuff. Yeah. Yeah. And that's how I'd mix it. And that I got that originally just from, like, the mainstream RDAs. Just bulk you know, I the RDA for potassium was about 4,700 a day. So It's crazy. So I just kind of screwed with it and it worked pretty good. But then I actually had changed it where I I lightened up the dosage a little bit because a lot of people still use my old my old mixture, and it works great, actually. And but some people, when they first start fasting, their bodies will kick like, they'll detox pretty hard, and then they might get some diarrhea and not just from the salt, but just from other things. And so then I messed around with, knocking back those so I knocked it back instead of one and one and one, like, one liter of water with those one teaspoon of each of those salts. I went one liter of water or, like, let's say, two liters of water with one teaspoon of potassium chloride, half a teaspoon of sodium chloride, and one teaspoon of baking soda. Mhmm. So the reason I did that was because you still got the same amount of sodium with the baking soda except you need twice as much baking soda as you do sodium chloride. Mhmm. And so I have I basically have the potassium and half the sodium, and I experimented with that. I did a couple, like, seventy two hour fast with some pretty hard training, and it felt good. So I'm like, okay. This is okay if I can cut it back. It'd be even better for some people. But I added the baking soda in because the baking soda, when you're doing these long fast, it really keeps the pH up in your urine and in your kidneys. Mhmm. Because your kidneys, after a while, you're not gonna really hurt them, but they'll get hot. Like, I I like to use that word hot. It's like they get quite acidic because you're in such a deep state of ketosis for so long. But it's more to do with, like, the dry fat because what happens it's not even about the acidity hurting your kidneys, but what happens is build up from the past, like, all the minerals that build up in your kidneys just from bad diet and shit, and, like, all the calcium and oxalates that fuck shit up from all the greens everyone eats. What happens is you're when you especially when you start dry fasting, you will kick stones. It doesn't happen too often, but what people do is I get them to, like, be preventative about it, and they'll be drinking this new snake juice recipe, and they'll be knocking back the baking soda with it. Where before, I used to have the baking soda separate. And what it'll do is it'll, like, get like, I'm this works so good. Like, baking soda works so damn good that I've had people, like, after, like, four or five days of fasting, their backs are just killing them, like, you know, kidney pain. Mhmm. Not because they're they're in any danger, but because they might they're they're they're getting, like, some sediment breaking loose. Yeah. And that that baking soda will, like, break those stones down like that. And, like, the pain will instantly go away. So that was something that I because I had it happen. So what happened to me was my very first somewhat long dry fast. I went five days way back in the day. That was my first long one, which might have been my hardest one to this day because I was really lean going into it. Like, I was, like, 8% body fat going into this dry fast, and it was just it was pretty radical. I got down to, like, one fifty six to hardly walk. Like, fuck. How long how long was that? That was probably that was a five day hard dry fast. That was probably about a year and a half ago. Wow. That's crazy. Or so. But it was because I was so light. Like, I've done a I've done a seven day dry fast, like, hard, but I was also a lot heavier. I was, like, one ninety going into that one. Yeah. If you're if you're heavier or if you have more fat, then it's like a more buffer zone. Oh, exactly. Especially yeah. Because your body's got all that. Because as soon as you get in a deep dry fasted state, your body starts producing that metabolic water, and you got, like, water for because it's like you're a camel. Yeah. Exactly. It's it's You know what? It's actually really interesting how when you're really fat and your body holds water. I'll I'll actually use, like, a hard dry fasting technique to, like, get people, like, water adapted. Kinda like how you get fat adapted really well when you're when you're, like, always in ketosis. It's almost like that. You get water adapted, and then what's that? Sorry. It's like the next level of of fat reduction. Yeah. And so what happens it's just like when you're in ketosis all the time. Like me, I'll bounce back and forth really easy. Right? It's same with dry fasting. It's like once my body senses that it's actually low on, like, exogenous water, you could say Mhmm. It'll, like, bounce into what to, like, fat burning mode even quicker to get the water. It's really interesting. And so then sometimes people on their very first hard drive fast, they'll get, like, the nastiest headaches. And that's what happened to me at forty eight hours. My very first one, I, like, thought I was gonna fucking die. Like, my head was just pounding. And then the next day, I was good. Like, at 72, I was fine, like, after the forty eight hours, and it was because my body had to make that shift. Almost like when you go through that hunger phase when your liver glycogen's emptying when you get into ketosis. Exactly. Exactly. Yeah. Like Very interest. Go ahead. Initial shift, like, of our initial barrier. And once you cross it, then your body shifts into, like, a different gear. Exactly. Gotta become And that's why one of the best routines to, like, stay lean like, when I did that bacon cucumber routine, when I dry fasted all day like that, I felt good. And the thing is, like, my skin like, pretty much how I feel now, it was a good routine. The only thing that routine lacked was glucose. So, like, that's a good routine if you were gonna, like this is better, though. Carb loading actually carb loading and cutting carbs completely on the days that you don't have carbs is better than that, but that worked really good. I was training really hard too. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's it's yeah. Like, the optimal kind of cycle would be incorporating every everything that we talked about. Like like That's right. Longer longer fasts, having, OMAD fasts, then having Yeah. Carloads, and then having dry fasts and kind of cycling back and forth with all these. So so this is actually so you wanna hear my exact routine right now? Sure. Let's go. Basically, what I've been doing like, I'm just maintaining right now because I'm actually trying to, like, build a little bit of muscle because I've just been fasting so god. I've been fasting so hard. This is the first time in two years that I'm actually, like you know what I mean? Not gonna do a long fast. Like, I've maintained, but I haven't been able to make a gain in two years because I've just been fasting so hard, which which is pretty amazing. Some of the long fasts I've done are pretty radical. Like, I went ten days on salt water and followed up with a five day dry fast, lost 35 pounds in fifteen days. Wow. And that was only, like, that was only three weeks ago, man. Like Oh, yeah. That's cut ahead. That was your, the the weight loss transformation. Or Yeah. That one. So, yeah, I, like, fast that was a nasty one. Like, I that one took me a little bit to recover from, but now I feel great. But so my routine now is just like what you said. I put everything into it. So I carb up on Saturday and Sunday right now. I just pretty much go with, like, sweet potato, rice, like, just glucose. Right? Little bit of fruit, maybe some berries, and then I eat, like, lean cuts of steak. I'm not a real big fan of chicken breast, but the main thing is you wanna go with a really lean cut of meat. And I usually try to hit, about one to one and a half grams per pound protein body weight. So I'm trying to hit about, you know, maybe I I don't even care if I even hit 200 grams, to be honest. Because the other thing, when you fast as hard as I do, your body is very protein sensitive. So that's another thing. That's another old school cycling practice that some of these, like, multiple meal a day guys would do. They'd actually cut protein for one full day out of the week, But you don't need to do that shit when you fast all day. You you're just always sensitive. Exactly. So yeah. So I carb up on the weekend, one meal a day at night, drink a pile of water, and then Monday, I go straight zero carb carnivore, one meal. And what I do though is I try to dry fast the whole way. So I try to I dry fast unless I'm dying in the gym. So I try to train earlier in the day, and then I'll stretch that dry fast out to the evening. And then I'll eat on a dry stomach, which should hit this point. I always eat on a dry stomach and I don't drink any water afterwards for at least an hour or two because it keeps your h c it keeps your stomach acidity nice and low, your HDL levels nice and high, and that makes us digest food way better because that's one of the biggest problems of the mainstream population is their stomachs are fucked. Yeah. So I dry fast the whole way, eat my meal at night. Tuesday, same thing. Dry fast. Tuesday is the day I decide if I wanna maybe try cutting some calories, and I might drop it down to maybe 2,000 calories, like, you know, and still hit my protein count, just cut the fat back. And then depending on how I feel, I'll carb up on Wednesday, but that was not as aggressive. So I might hit, like, 300 grams of carbs, like but that one, I'll just hit maintenance calories. Like, I I might overeat slightly on the weekend by maybe, like, you know, a it doesn't really matter. Like, maybe a thousand calories over on the full, like, total. Like, maybe over 500 on each days. Mhmm. And then Wednesday, I'll drive fast all day, train, carb up that night, lean meat, no fat, for as low as fat as I can, whatever's in the steak, like, nothing. Like, maybe seven grams of fat for a 100 pound serving. Then Thursday, train, carnivore, repeat, dry fast all day. Friday, I do the same. And then Saturday is my last day of the week where I train, and then I take Sunday off and I carve up Saturday and Sunday. That's my exact routine right now. Mhmm. Yeah. It sounds good. And if I was gonna and if I was gonna turn that into a cutting routine, what I would probably do, because I'm doing a six date now you wanna kinda work it around your training schedule. Right? So right now, I got if I'm if I wanna cut, I'd probably only carve up on Sunday and Wednesday, and I wouldn't carve up Saturday night. The reason I do, like like you know, that would be kind of like a little trick just to cut a little bit. It'd be just a a little slow a little bit of a slower cut because then I'm getting a carb load and three workouts in, a carb load and three workouts. Mhmm. Yeah. And then, like go ahead. The carb loads are gonna help you kinda train harder, and that's gonna transition over to more gains and more fat works as well. And that's the thing. So, like, I know some of these guys on YouTube talking about the carnivore diet and shit and their strength. I do not fucking care what they say. You are not as not even close. Not even close to as explosive. And the problem with that is if you can't lift as much weight in the gym, then you're not gonna make the gains. Yeah. Because you can't you can't stress your body enough. Like, when I'm when I was on straight carnivore, like, I did it. That's how I know, and it just felt just like when I was on strict keto back in the day. I felt good. Your sleep is great. Everything is great, but you are flat. And you do not have the strength. Like, here you know what the difference is? It's like, okay. I'll tell you the difference. So, obviously, I just got done that long fast. It taxed me a bit. But at the start what was it? The week before last week. So we it's Sunday now, so, like, not so not last week, but just at the end of of the week before. I bench pressed, like, I was doing still a full body or no. I I started the split routine. Anyway, I bench pressed 225 pounds for 10 strict pauses. Mhmm. Okay? And that was pretty much all I had. Like, that was me on zero carb carnivore. Mind you, I came off that long fast. Mhmm. Two days ago, I bench pressed two twenty five for five sets of 10. Like, that's the difference. Right. Like, it's unbelievable. Even my deadlifts. Like so I actually deadlifted, like I don't know. I I was doing full body on that on that fifteen day fast, and I trained right up to day 10. And then when I started the dry fast, I cut the training. But even my dead lifts now, like, I pulled 315 pounds for a five by 10 yesterday. Like, I that would have killed me, like, a week and a half ago on zero kart. For sure. What are what are your, records in terms of, like, you you're still fasting, but you're still able to lift some heavy weights. So what are your, like, numbers? So that one fast when I told you that I did that experiment when I went eight days on the salt water when I very first figured this stuff out, I bench pressed 315 pounds for two double or three double pauses at five days fasted at a hundred and seventy at a hundred and seventy four pound body weight. So, like, that's and that was me, like, not probably training as, like, as, like, specific as strict as I should have been going up into that. That's pretty damn good. For sure. Yeah. And that was on that was on the fifth day of not eating. I still hit that weight. And the old I only lost I lost a rep Mhmm. Which is quite a bit, but, like, that's not bad for considering so say I can hit, like, you know, three triple pauses on Monday carved up, and then I still hit three double pauses on, like, you know, Friday. That's pretty damn good. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's, it's considering, yeah, like, that you trained before that and, you haven't eaten anything. So Yeah. And I also trained all the days leading up to that bench press day. I still squatted and deadlifted all the days before that. Yeah. It's crazy. Like, your your body It's a human body is amazing, but this is where it comes back to the fear, and people are scared to experiment where I just, like I love, like, I like, like, the fear drives me. You know? Like, even you know, a lot of these guys, like, basically eating a lot of rotten meat and things on the Internet now. Like, it's not too popular yet. But, like, the fermented meat, like, I got, like, meat on my count like, on my shelf right now that's, like it's liver. It's lamb liver. And I just bought a jar, and I've been editing it out, like, every, like, two days. And it's not even in the fridge, man. It's on the shelf. And I'm gonna get it I'm gonna let it get, like, like, rotten and It's gonna Good. You know, pre predigest it in a sense that the fermentation and the bacteria are gonna Exactly. More more easily digestible for you as well. Yeah. Well, you've heard about high meat. Right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Like, the Eskimos used to you know how they figured it out how good it was for them? Who know? Well, what they did is back in the day, they had, like, dog sleds. Right? And they they gave the dogs a bunch of rotten meat versus the fresh fish, and they would go, like, twice as long Wow. On the on the fermented rotten meat. And so then they're like, well, we should try this. And that's when they started burying that meat, that high meat. They bury it in the ground, and they basically wait till it got so stinky that they could smell it like a mile downwind. And they'd just be drooling over this, and they'd do it right before winter because it'd give, like, this crazy hit of, like, natural, like, probiotic. Yeah. Yeah. So but that's That's Go ahead. That's one of the aspects of having, like, how influential the gut health is and how the microbiome influences your everything Exactly. Health and, your strength and everything. So this And that's So the reason why they got so that peak of an energy boost might have not have been because of the meat. It was because of the bacteria and True. True. True. True. Yeah. It's like happy gut makes the like, what is it? Like like, that whole happy gut healthy mind? Like, your gut health is number one. And that's why no matter what anybody says, I will never promote coffee. Even though I know because of, like, hormesis and the hormetic response, Like, I know somebody could go, like, eat a couple of coffee beans, but it's just too much. You know? And nobody can limit it because it's just too much of an addiction. For sure. It's not something people can control. Right? And that's why I had a guy tonight. Same thing. It's the old same old story. You know, like, you've probably seen this where people are like, oh, I can't gain any weight. My metabolism's so fucking fast. I can't gain any weight no matter how much I eat. So first, I ask them how much do they eat, and then they're actually eating a lot. And I'm like, well, how much do you shit? And they're like, I shit, like, four times a day. Well, I'm like, your gut's fucked. That's why they can't gain any weight because they don't absorb they don't absorb anything, And that is gut health one zero one. Yeah. That's true. Yeah. Like, Pete It doesn't matter what you eat. It matters what you absorb in a sense. Yeah. Like, it's actually it's actually a healthy thing to be able to gain a quick 20 pounds. It's actually healthy. Like, I can put on say if I was eating a meal a day and, like, in a tight window, an hour, and I could just eat as much food as I could get and a bunch of carbs, I will literally get up as heavy as maybe a buck ninety, and I will plateau. I will not gain a pound over a buck 90. And it's really interesting because I was watching a guy on YouTube. I forget his name. He was talking about body fat, and it was a good point. Most people have, like, kind of a window from when they're extremely lean to when they're, like, carrying, like, a little extra fat. And let's say it's, like, about 20 pound window. But once you get to a certain weight, what happens is that's when you start putting pressure on your system. So now your body can you you have like, your body fat cells can store a certain amount of, like, glycerol and fatty free fatty acids or fatty acids. But then when you get to this point where you're, like, going past that, and you're especially if you're doing it quickly, you'll put pressure on your system, and that is exactly when your blood triglycerides will start going through the roof. Yeah. So you can be very healthy with an extra 20 pounds. And you know what? When I just did that last experiment, I don't know if you're following me, but I got fat deliberately for about six weeks there. And I was just eating, like I was still trying to fast as much as I could. I was probably eating, like, on an eight hour window. I was eating a lot, though. I was eating just garb like, I was eating fucking McDonald's and dates. Because McDonald's is easy to get in. Right? I just wanted to get the experiment over with. I just wanted to get like, gain the weight. Perfect mackerel is McDonald's. Like, you got carbs, fat, and and protein. Like, how perfect is that to get fat? Perfect mackerel. So yeah. So, anyway, I got up I think when I got up to about a buck 90, because I know my body so well from doing all these experiments, I got up to about a buck 90, and I felt good. And as soon as I started creeping up over that, like, started getting some chest pressure, fucking started getting, like, a little bit of, like, some you know, maybe it was just from the bread and some toxins in there and maybe the gluten or something, but I was getting some bumps on my arm. You know what? My my health just really started to suffer Yeah. To put on that extra thirteen four I I think I got as heavy as two zero six. Mhmm. It's really interesting how and that's why, like, now, like, even, like, sumo wrestlers, you know, these guys, like, they fast. You know? Like, I was pretty much trying to eat like a sumo wrestler when I was gaining the weight. Yeah. Because I didn't I wanted to still keep myself insulin sensitive, so I didn't ever wanna go to where I was eating meals throughout the whole day. Yeah. Because I wanted to at least be half assed healthy. But what I would do is I would get up in the morning. I would train fasted. Soon as I was done training, I would go straight to McDonald's and eat, like, literally, like, $50 worth of McDonald's. I'd eat, like, six burgers. Right? Mhmm. Like, the big like, like, four or five or, like, quarter pounders, double quarter pounders, and, like, a couple Angus burgers. Then I go straight home, have a nap just like a sumo wrestler. Exact same. And then I get up after the nap, and then I pound back a bunch of dates, like, get even more and more fructose to try to get fat. Yeah. Yeah. And and it's like a it's a healthier thing to kinda lose the fat fast as well to not get stuck in the the higher higher, stable balance of a higher body fat in a sense to not get used to the higher body fat and get back into a leaner state. And That's and that's a good that's a good point because so gaining fat really quick is is really bad for you. K? Yeah. Now losing fat really quick is the best thing that could happen because your mind is very powerful. So, like, just losing weight quickly is gonna put you in a good state of mind because you're happy and motivated. Yeah. So even you know what I'm saying? But, like, you know what's really cool? Is actually, it's crazy. Another thing was blood test. Fuck blood test. So these guys went to the doctors that I was helping, and he's like, cool. It was like, my cholesterol is, like, really high, and he hadn't eaten for, like, seven days. And I'm like, no shit. It's like your body's breaking down so much body fat that it's like your own cholesterol. Yeah. Exactly. It's amazing. And that is exactly the only fucking reason that vegans can pull off their stupid diet for any time at all. Their body fat saves them. Soon as they get lean, their liver runs out of all the minerals, they run out of that freaking precious body fat that carried their ass, they have no cholesterol, and that's when their fucking brains start shrinking. Yeah. So and it's yeah. Like, even if you yeah. You're if you're fasting, then your cholesterol and LDL may rise because you're burning body fat. And if you eat a bunch of saturated fat and things like that, then your cholesterol may actually drop because of that that you're, you know Exactly. Not compensate for it. Exactly. Because if you as soon as you eat it, it actually put the brakes on the fat burn. Yeah. But really, regardless, the whole point there was is that, like, high cholesterol just doesn't mean a fucking thing. You want your cholesterol like, I want my cholesterol, like, sky high. Now don't get me wrong, your average fat ass that goes to the doctor that's been eating bread and sugar and everything, you know, and their cholesterol is through the roof and their triglycerides are through the roof. Like, that's all just bad. Yeah. But it's not the cholesterol. It's the fucking it's it's your fucking pig. Like Yeah. It's You know, you gotta lose you gotta, like The the the atherosclerosis is also caused by, like, the inflammation and the inflammation caused by carbs and sugars, and cholesterol is gonna go there and try to heal that, those scarring in the arteries. Actually, I've actually talked about that a lot. And, actually, you know what? The worst biggest cause of inflammation under the sun is insulin. Yeah. Like, insulin itself is like it the sugar and it's the sugar, obviously, having high blood sugar constantly is gonna obviously flare your freaking arteries up and shit. Basically, it's like, you got crazy high blood sugar. Like, you don't need to be, like, a rocket scientist to fucking figure this shit out when you got blood sugar that's so high that you literally have syrup in your veins. Of course, it's not gonna be healthy. You know? And then you got, like, your insulin's high all the time, and then you got that causes crazy amounts of inflammation. So as soon as you fast, you're dropping your insulin down to rock bottom. Like, that's how that's how you actually can reverse type one diabetes, believe it or not. It just takes a a lot more time depending how bad the case was. Because most people that have type one diabetes were following a mainstream lifestyle, no fasting, eating lots of shit, and then they usually, it's an autoimmune problem that was caused by some sort of stress, like somebody died or something like that, and then their essentially, their pancreas stopped or started producing less insulin. Their their pancreas is getting attacked by their immune system, their beta cells. And then one day, they end up actually getting dehydrated, and then they're because their blood sugar gets past this threshold. There's, like, a threshold that where your blood sugar gets to a certain level. You'll start pissing like a racehorse because the last line of defense is your kidneys to get rid of the blood sugar. So you'll start pissing and these people don't know that they're fucked up yet, then they get dehydrated, end up with ketoacid diabetic ketoacidosis, end them in the hospital. And then guess what they do? They fucking be like, oh, you're type one, put you on the fucking insulin. And I've had people that came to me, they got diagnosed type one. Within a week, I had them off insulin. Yeah. It's crazy. It's un that's, like, I think that's almost one of the biggest because, technically, they're just killing the person with the insulin. Yeah. It's it's it, like, it doesn't make sense from a mechanistic perspective as well to give to give diabetics, like, insulin to cause them raise the the the insulin even higher where whereas, you know, the the issue is that the the they they have, like, blood sugar that is high, but you can drop the blood sugar with simply fasting and eating low carb and Exactly. Avoiding the incidence spike in the first place because that that additional incidence spike is still gonna cause more issues and more, insulin resistance. And and, you know, and that's the same thing, and that's why that's why you know, they always just treat the fucking symptoms. Right? Yeah. That's why some of these crazy diets, like, the people don't even really fast, just, like, you know, like, you know, like, the bacon experiment Mhmm. Or, like, any of these diets that seem really crazy. Fuck. Eating bacon all day, that's 20 times healthier than freaking if you cut like, if you're going carbs, zero carbs, you're gonna get so much better results even without fasting. You combine straight bacon with fasting and add a little bit of lemon juice in there just to make sure you're covering your vitamin c, you're laughing. Yeah. Yeah. It's so it's so crazy. Yeah. Like, fasting is really almost like, you know, covers almost every aspect of, health and, longevity in in terms of, like, nutrition. And a lot of a lot of, you know, research is showing that, yeah, one of the one of the surest ways of prolonging lifespan is to do, like, semi caloric restriction, but, you know, that caloric restriction isn't necessarily the key. The key is to go into autophagy and to Yeah. Like, real like, caloric stoppage they should call it. Yeah. Because Like not not just cutting calories, caloric stoppage is what it should be called. You you can eat you can eat like a very few calories and starve yourself but if you're not doing fasting, then you're not doing anything good for your longevity either because you're not going going into autophagy, and, you're not, you know, recycling the world one ourselves. Yeah. Like, even, like, now that you just mentioned that event, you know, the worst like, for your viewers to hear this, the worst possible way under the in the like, under the sun to lose weight is gonna be trying to lose weight on a high frequency eating routine through cutting calories and eating carbs. Yeah. That's gonna be the worst. So, basically, that exact diet is a bikini a mainstream bikini competitor that's trying to lose fucking weight for a show. And that is why only the only people that can keep muscle on because it's extremely catabolic, the only people that can keep muscle on is people that are on steroids that are running that style. Now the people that they're in a bulking phase, they can get away with it because they're not trying to cut. Septa's still gonna be unhealthy as fuck because they're spiking their insulin all day. Yeah. But they'll they don't give a shit. They're all about health. They just need they just want they they're taking insulin and growth hormone anyway. It doesn't matter if they're low on any of it. Yeah. And if if even if you are trying to bulk, you should still add some intermittent fasting for the health. Oh, for sure. Yeah. That that's see, that's the one thing with those guys. Now that's the thing. You see, they wanna be in an anabolic state twenty four seven. So it all comes back to if you're trying to un if you're trying to run an unnatural muscle mass like, if you're trying to run an unnatural body composition Mhmm. Via massive amounts of muscle mass, you have to run an unnatural way of eating. It's For sure. But there's no way that Eddie Hall, like, you know, or like Bradshaw, like, some of these strong men, if they went to if they even tried fasting, they're just gonna lose weight, and then then they're not gonna be as there's no way they could maintain a four hundred pound body. Yeah. Like, now the sumo wrestlers, see, that's where the sumo wrestlers, they fast, but it's, like, just in the morning before their workout or during their fasted workout. But it's still healthier than what those strong men are doing. That's why Eddie Hall had to basically retire. I think he would have died if he would have kept doing it. For sure. For sure. And so the whole point is with those big bodybuilders that aren't natural, basically, you you can hit your genetic potential as a natural through a fasting focused lifestyle where you're eating say, you're really lean eating one meal a day. You could definitely hit your genetic potential. Gotcha. But right? But the guy that's on the gear, there's no fucking way he's gonna hit his geared up potential with a hardcore fasting regimen. It'll work really good for him to cut, but there's no way he could get as big as he would get because he just needs so much insulin and so much fucking food that they don't even care about their health, though. That's what they give up. They give up their health. Right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You don't you don't wanna be anabolic, so to say, all the time and throughout the day either, even if you're natural. Like Exactly. Eating three meals a day with highly anabolic foods like high carbs and high protein, spiking insulin is still gonna, you know, be detrimental for your longevity and life In time, it'll tax your system. In time, it'll tax your system. Plus, as a natural. Funny thing is you'll actually be more anabolic in the long term because you're keeping your insulin sensitivity so high, and you're cranking up your g h, and you're cranking up your testosterone. So even if you're trying to bulk on a six meal a day diet as a natural, you will never get the results you would get when you're fasting and trying to pack all that food in a tight window. Yeah. For sure. Exactly. And, you know, the like, you you can say the argument that fasting is actually the normal in a sense that evolutionarily we're more Oh, that's what yeah. We're more adaptive. Less eating frequency and, having these more frequent meals is unnatural definitely. Yeah. And that's what you were saying before. I was gonna say that that when you said fasting basically is the you know, fits all for everybody health, like, benefit beneficiary or benefit whatever you wanna say there. Basically, we evolved we evolved to fast. Yeah. So it's like something that we should all do for optimal human health. Now here's a good point, though, before I get off lose this thought. So the carnivore diet. So let's say we're leading a meal a day routine, and I'm eating zero carb carnivore. Now when we're talking about genetic potential, let's say doing, like, a carb cycling routine, I put on, like, some muscle. Okay? And I'm doing, like, my meal a day carb cycling on the weekends and maybe throwing in the carb load on the Wednesday just like what I do. If I went from that style of eating routine back to, like, a full time zero carb carnivore, I will absolutely lose muscle. The reason is that carnivore root routine will not sustain the gains that I made on that other routine. Does that make sense? Yeah. Yeah. Like, you're gonna lose. It I won't lose it quick. Yeah. But I will eventually lose my progress that I get from that. That's a better I don't know. That's a better diet when you're carb cycling. For sure. So I I would actually lose progress if I stayed on a carnivore routine for long enough. Mhmm. Because of what you said too about just losing strength, and I wouldn't be able to put out in the gym and that's the way and the same ideas if if you took, like, somebody on steroids, you know, and you take them off their crazy ass multiple meal a day bulking diet and when they're and, also, obviously see their whole lifestyle supporting this massive anabolic swing. So you off you take them off all the drugs and everything, obviously, their potential just drops like a rock. Same, like, similar idea, but the carnivore diet versus carb loading. You're just never ever ever gonna have the performance when it comes to to explosive performance not eating carbs. It's impossible. For sure. Yeah. Like, once you take out the stimulus, which would be, like, either anabolic steroids or lifting bodybuilding style, then you're gonna lose the the the response as well or the effect, the fluffiness in a sense. Yeah. And, like, that in the thing, you know, and, like yeah. Like, I I wish, like, I wish I could I could get those results eating, like, zero carb Yeah. Carnivore keto style eating. I like that. Yeah. Like, I feel light. I feel clear headed, but I try I've tried so many it just doesn't work. I like, especially, like, it does not work. I like, you know, like, what's his name there? I I listened to some some of his stuff. He's knows his shit, like Sean Baker. But the problem is is a lot of the stuff he set records and all this was, like, from the past for one. But not even that, he's such a carnivore advocate now that He's so annoying. In his best interest to always be promoting that. There's no fucking way he could ever do a carb loading routine. Yeah. Well, he could. See, that's where I'm, like, flexible. He should try it out and not be get not get tied up with with, you know, creating his whole entire identity around. Exactly. Because all is I'm looking for is the truth and what's what the there's like you said, there's always a fasting routine and a macro routine for everybody, and I pretty much dumbed it down that the best routine for pretty much everybody to heal is gonna be a zero carb carnivore routine with, like like, crazy amounts of prolonged fasting. And then once you're healthy, the best routine is gonna be a carb cycling routine. Yeah. For sure. Exactly. That's that's simple. You know? Like Yeah. We can yeah. We we can, we've been talking a long time now, and we can tie it up. And in a sense, it's a good point to end. But before we do that, like, I wanna ask, like, where where would you like to plan on taking the snake diet, movement? You have, like, a huge Facebook group. Yeah. How how are you gonna plan to So influence? So end of the day, like, I just I think if you wanted to get like, if it's about me as far as, like, my goal and what I want, I wanna just I fucking hate the system, man. Like, I dealt with the system. You know? I had skin issues when I was a kid. I dealt with doctors. I had fucking, like, allergy shots and all this all this bullshit. You know? And I just want people to wake up, and and I think end of the day, if you can solve the obesity epidemic. I wanna solve the fucking obesity epidemic. Mhmm. I want people to be fearless to fast. That way, we're not such pigs and we're not soaking up all these natural resources. Then these vegans could stop bitching because the obesity epidemic's a problem. Right? It's not it's not the meat. Like, by on a side note too, there's not one study that actually is, like, isolates meat. It's always meat and a bunch of other shit. Meat too. Yeah. Like, fuck these vegans. Make that. But, yeah, I wanna I wanna solve the obesity epidemic, and I feel that that would just make the world a better place in every aspect because people, you know, that are unhealth health is number one. You need if you don't focus always on your health, you're just not gonna go down the right road. And I tell people this that are stressing about a job or a relationship or something. I'm like, as long as you focus on your health and you become the best version of yourself health wise and, you know, confidence, all the other stuff, spirit like, you know, mentally, everything just works out. I can't explain it. It just works out. Mhmm. And so that's my goal. I just wanna I just wanna solve the obesity epidemic and just get rid of these fucking scam artists. And, you know, I I can't stand big pharma. Like, I think right now already, I probably cost big pharma, like, millions of dollars a year already. Like, I the amount of people I get off diabetes meds and shit is just phenomenal. Like, it's ridiculous. How how many results are you getting per day in a sense? Oh, fuck. Like, oh, yeah. If your viewers wanna check my stuff out, so I'm the snake diet wizard on Instagram. So there's just it's like result after result after result. Like, this shit is so easy that I have people that just watch my YouTube videos, and then they take pictures. And then, like, a month later, they send me pictures where they, like, they've lost 30 pounds, and I didn't even talk to them. Yeah. And then, also, like, I coach people for free over voice memo on Facebook. Like, my but, like, I'm, like, same with you. Like, I'm obviously pretty radical on my channel, but, you know, like, you know, YouTube censoring the fuck out of me. Like, they don't they won't let me do live videos now, and and, like, I got two Facebook pages that are almost at 5,000 people on both of them. Mhmm. And one of them is almost always blocked, so I gotta alternate between the two. You know? Like, I I have all sorts of issues. Facebook group is, like, 300,000 members. Yeah. Yeah. It's a little over 300,000 now, but even there, I was getting censored. Like, they wouldn't let me add people to the group. Like but, yeah, like, anybody who wants to know how to lose weight, check out my stuff. It's weight loss is a fucking joke. You don't need to spend a dime. Don't ever get suckered into any bullshit. If you wanna get a good fitness trainer, that's a whole another story. But as far as just the weight loss, all you need to do is stop eating and drink fucking salt water. Yeah. That's that's that's true and fast. Faster hassle. That's right. Yeah. And my yeah. Really enjoyed talking with you. And, My last my last question is, like, what what would be this one single piece of advice or a habit that you wish you adopted sooner that improved your body and your minds? Well, obviously, when I first started fasting, right, that was the biggest thing. Yeah. Yeah. I was thinking so. Right? The fasting pretty much cured any skin issues I had for years. Just and then I real I had it's all about control. It's all fasting gives you full control of your as far as weight goes, it gives you full control. Another thing I'd recommend for people who wanna, like, lose weight is accountability is key via pictures, like and measurements. K? But pictures, you wanna take a wicked set of starting pictures, and you wanna take them every seven days. And don't compare yourself to fucking Instagram models because it's fake as fuck. All of you people need to worry about is take a set of pictures, and every seven days, try to improve on your last, the way you look in your last set. And that is the best way to make progress. And then if you're fasting, you know, tell the people in your social circle right away. So tell like, people just it's fear. You gotta be able to tell people to fuck off. You gotta be able to tell people, this is what I'm doing. You're not gonna change it. Yeah. And that is probably the biggest issues I deal with is that fear of judgment. Yeah. Other people other people should also fast in a sense of they should get motivated by. You can't you can't let anybody, like, control your life because nobody really gives a shit about your life other than you. Right? So but, like, that just to wrap that up. So, like, the fasting and then, obviously, you know, there's there's just even, like, my training frequency, just going back more to, like, the natural lifestyle in every way I almost can. Like, probably one of the biggest things is, like, my backstory. Like, I don't wanna get into it, but, like, I do live, like, a very, like, simple life. Like, I deliberately actually try to almost be poor, financially poor, but, like, I don't have to be. Like, you know, there's a lot of people that wanna, like, pay me money to coach them, but I won't go down that road because I feel that I can help a lot more people. I just always help people for free. And when I do and instead of letting them pay me, I make them do accountability pictures for free help and post them on that big group in front of 300,000 people. Because that is so good when people take those pictures and it gives them that slap upside the head feedback and they post them on that big group. That is so key to starting on a fat loss journey, and it makes you stick to it. And that's Mhmm. That's what I do that nobody else does, and I can do it because nobody's paying me anything. So people because they haven't paid me a dime, they don't have me by the balls. I can make them do whatever the fuck I want. And that's why I get such that's why I get such wicked fat loss results. Yeah. Wow. That's, yeah, truly amazing. And, and I I believe a lot of people will definitely get a lot of valuable information about fasting and, you know, motivation, everything from your channel. So yeah. Cool. Thanks for coming onto the podcast, and, looking forward to more of the crazy transformations, and, we'll probably talk in the future again. Thanks, Tim. You have a great night. Yeah. I'll see you around. Bye. Take time is a prolonged fasting, focused lifestyle. You fast as long as you can. Not hours, but days, weeks, and months. If you're fat, you don't need to eat, drink water, and salt. You don't need anything more than that. It's not the same one. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you leave us a review on iTunes or the other podcast applications that you may use. Definitely share the video on YouTube. Check out Kohl's Facebook group and YouTube channel. But other than that thanks for listening. My name is Seam. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.