Boom. What's up? My name is Seem. You know, a lot of people say that fasting makes you energize. You feel like a million bucks, which is the truth. But at the same time, some people tell that they feel slightly tired because of that. So why is this so? Recently, I went on to Anthony DiClemente's podcast, the biohacking secrets, and we're gonna discuss about why you're feeling slightly tired while fasting and what to do about it. So check it out. He's dead tired. What about the people who try to fast and feel awful? Weak, shaky legs, brain fog. What's going on there? Usually, a lot of these problems come from, mineral deficiencies and lack of electrolytes because, yeah, like sodium and, potassium and magnesium, those are the big biggest free, electrolytes that people are already mostly deficient of. And especially when they're fasting, then they tend to lose it by excreting them through the urine and, and, you know, dehydration. So, like, generally, whenever I do feel tired slightly, then it may have to do with drinking a little bit of water with some added sea salt or pink lemon or pink lemon rock salt into it. So that's gonna fix a lot of the issues of, lethargy and, heart palpitations even and muscle cramps and things like that. And, generally, like, there's also the problem that if you're fasting, then you may become yeah. You're you're gonna or subconsciously, you're gonna start moving less because your body has less energy. So if you stay indoors all the time, if you're sitting on your couch while fasting, then you're kinda missing the point. You still have to keep moving around. You still have to get sunlight into your body and, adjust yourself to the circadian rhythms and get some fresh air and things like that. And, whenever I do feel tired, then going for a walk, a little brisk walk for ten to fifteen minutes is gonna definitely recharge the entire body, and you're gonna feel awesome after that. Yeah. It's so counterintuitive. When you feel like garbage, all you wanna do is sit on the couch or watch videos or something like that. And I've at least realized in those moments when I'm tired, if I do what I wanna do, which is nothing, it just extends the amount of time I feel like shit. Yeah. Whereas if I'm like, alright. Snap out of it. Go for a jog. Jump on the rebounder. Go for a walk. Do some breath work. Something that is an expenditure of energy where even though you you feel like you're already shortchanged in that department, if you put out a little bit more, it's you end up feeling way better than just riding it out and being lazy. Snap out of it. And you'd mentioned the electrolytes earlier and that being another one of the reasons that people who kinda transition to fasting while they're still building their their fasting muscle may experience some of that weakness or, way waning energy. You just don't pink Himalayan salt in there, or do you use an electrolyte supplement like salt stick or something else? There are, like, a lot of electrolyte supplements, but, most of the ratios on of them or the or the quantities, they aren't really worth it in terms of money and, and convenience. But you can get, like, most of the bang for your buck by simply using regular good quality sea salt or pink or pink or pink or rock salt and, to get the sodium. And for, like, things like potassium and, iodine and magnesium, then there are these salt substitutes. And, in The States, there's this brand called Nusalt that has, like, a ton of potassium for it. But in Europe, there are, like, different alternatives for it. I'm using this Finnish brand called, or something like that. But, yeah, it's basically a salt substitute. It has less sodium, but it's gonna have more potassium and iodine. So a lot of the research is showing that sodium is not the problem. It's when we it's it's the processing of the sodium that's the issue. Yeah. What what's the deal with these salt substitutes? Like, I think the salt substitutes are generally safe, and, they're not gonna raise your blood pressure because you're already fasting and, your insulin is so low, which is gonna prevent any, you know, any negative side effects of sodium retention or something. But, you know, the issue is the, yeah, the fear of salt and, the fear of, sodium raising your blood pressure comes from, the presence of insulin as well. And And if you're doing, like, a keto diet or if you're fasting, then you eliminate insulin. You have lower blood sugar in general, and you actually need more salt and more sodium to kinda counterbalance that effect. So research is yeah. It's it's it's it's showing that it's not the sodium. It's the insulin that is causing issues. Mhmm. And and that's part of the reason that it's that our electrolyte balance can become thrown off more so when we're fasting than when we're regularly eating because of these changes in our insulin, and and we we don't have salted food constantly being consumed. Yeah. Yeah. Like, the the kidneys, they're gonna detect lower levels of insulin, and they're gonna flush a lot or they're gonna release they're gonna hold onto less water, and you may potentially simply start urinating a lot, and, you're gonna lose some electrolytes. So to negate that effect, you would make you wanna make sure that you're not drinking too much water either because it's simply gulping down unlimited. All of water is gonna simply make you piss it out, all of it. And, also make sure that, you do, like, balance it out whenever you do become dehydrated by adding more sodium into your foods. Salt. Alright. That's it for this short clip. If you wanna listen to the rest of the podcast, then I'll leave the link to Anthony's YouTube channel and podcast in the description box below so you can check it out. But other than that, thanks for watching. Click the like, subscribe notification bell as well. My name is Sim. Stay energized. Stay empowered.