Like, the superorganism as your body is, it's always constantly trying to detect the presence of nutrients in in your system. And based on that based on those nutrients, it's going to either, you know, conduct these certain metabolic processes, namely, like, anabolism or catabolism. Is it going to promote, DNA replication and cellular growth, or is it going to actually try to preserve its own resources and mobilize the resources it already has. So it in in in hopes of, you know, surviving for longer. So there's there's always constantly your body is also constantly looking out for these different nutrients in your system. And, the main signaling factors or the fuel sensors that are detecting this are like, mTOR and, AMPK. So mTOR is the main anabolic pathway of of the human body, which is going to promote, like, things like protein synthesis, cellular growth, and everything that is related to growing and, being anabolic, so to say. And the opposite to that is AMPK, which is another fuel sensor that gets elevated when you run out of, nutrients and when you run out of your body's endogenous energy, so to say. So there's this constant, constantly constant process of monitoring. And whenever you do run out of, you know, your body's own internal resources, then AMPK is going to trigger this other metabolic pathway called, autophagy, which is, which is the process of cellular recycling. Basically, your your healthy cells, they're gonna start, searching out for old and worn out cells to convert it back into energy. So it's your body eating itself so that it can, survive for longer and get the energy it needs from the cells that it's not using. So those are the so that it these are the pathways that are responsible for growing and repair. So there is things like exercise that contribute to AMPK, and and that leads then, to to a cascade of effects, including fatty acid metabolism, fatty acid synthesis, autophagy, and protein synthesis through mTOR. If I understand correctly from this, what is key here is things like energy starvation. I guess that basically points to fasting. And are are you saying that with intermittent fasting, you can activate m p k, and and that can lead into, triggering the pathways that are helping you to maintain the homeostasis and, to to potentially, support your longevity. Yeah. That's that's that's correct. And, that actually is the you know, one of the most surest ways or one of the few ways scientists actually know how to prolong lifespan in any species is through, intermittent fasting and caloric restriction. So those are the things that have been found to expand the lifespan of, like, yeast by 100% almost and even more. So that's, like, double their lifespan if they if they consume less less calories. And in monkeys, monkeys can live also, like, 40% longer if they're fed fewer fewer calories. So the probably the same same principle applies to humans as well in in some extent. But, the the the one of the biggest culprits or one of the biggest, you know, mistakes people tend to make is that they kinda put caloric restriction and intermittent fasting into the same pot. Although they have, like, similar benefits and the similar mechanisms, you can you can be eating very little calories without, you know, activating the health benefits of autophagy just because of your feeding yourself all the time. So they've actually done a few studies where they showed that that, the the one of the most important, factors that contribute to increased lifespan are linked to autophagy and not necessarily caloric restriction. You need autophagy to gain the longevity benefits. For instance, they had did some studies with mice where they genetically mutated them so that they wouldn't be able to activate autophagy. And they found out that those mice didn't live longer. And whereas the other mice who did have, you know, the autophagy genes, available, those mice were still able to live longer. So the key is to still being able to activate autophagy without necessarily having to deprive ourselves from calories all the time or as or at least as not as much as you would think you need. You can still eat very much calories, maintain a lot of muscle mass, and, still activate autophagy by, you know, being very diligent and very cautious with your time time, timing of your feeding and still gain the benefits of longevity. At least that's that's one of my theories. Because you don't want to deprive yourself from calories for too long because you're going to potentially lose a lot of muscle mass, which is another, you know, problematic thing when it comes to longevity. One of the reasons people die is because they're losing a lot of their muscle mass, and in so doing, they're also sacrificing a lot of their metabolic health and, their bone strength and things like that. So people people age because of sarcopenia, which is linked to a lot of, like, problems with metabolism and to neurodegenerative issues and not not elevating mTOR enough, you need you need mTOR as well for longevity to maintain your lean muscle mass, and you never want to deprive yourself for too long. So the key is to find this balance between autophagy and mTOR and to know how can you activate these genes at specific times that contribute both to your longevity and muscle muscle maintenance. Okay. So, let's dive deep into deeper into caloric restriction and intermittent fasting itself. It's often when people change their diets into a more fat based diet. It can be easier for them actually to, then restrict the amount of calories that they're eating because fat gives them a more steady fuel source. So a good example might be, some kind of drink like coffee or tea with some fat in the morning. And it's very satisfying. So you kind of easily skip any snacks that you might be craving for. So you're not getting into this yo yo effect of being constantly hungry with the crashes of blood sugar. So that kind of leads easier for people, with, higher fat diets, into, calorie restriction. Yeah. It's like I mentioned, it's it's super easy for people to simply start off by skipping some meals every once in a while to have these periods where they go into a deeper state of autophagy and a deeper state of ketosis. Those are one of the things that everyone can start off by, you know, not feeling obligated to eat just because their doctor told them to or just because they think it's gonna be good for them. Whereas in reality, skipping a meal may actually be much more beneficial in the in the long run. So, yeah, what I tend to advise where most people is to practice intermittent fasting at least in some shape or form every day. And, that's gonna be super convenient for, you know, body composition as well as productivity. And, you know, generally yeah. I mean, being more act or activating more of those pathways towards longevity, like autophagy and, things like that. But when it comes to balancing out with mTOR, then you can do it on a daily basis very free very easily. And I do it myself on a daily basis. So what I do is I extend my fasting window every day at least until, like, you know, eighteen or twenty hours, and then I eat my calories in a smaller time frame maybe within, like, two to two to four hours, at at usually. So that's, like, a really good balance in my opinion. And at minimum, it would be people would want to fast for maybe, like, yeah, sixteen hours every day to gain these benefits of going into at least some mild autophagy. And and and to and to combine it together to actually, you know, have the AIMTOR pathway directed towards the right place, which is to build, you know, muscle tissue and drive fruit and synthesis, then I will also work out before I actually eat any food so that the resistance training and lifting weights, that's gonna activate the mTOR pathway, and that's going to drive the food that you do eat into the right spot, so to say, and you're gonna use it for more, quality anabolism and, quality muscle gain instead of, like, fat fat fat gain or something. Right. Right. Doesn't also activate the GLUT4 receptor on cells so that they they shovel the circulating glucose into into the muscle instead of somewhere else. Yeah. That's yeah. That's true. Like, even like very short contractions of maximum effort, like doing isometric holds with some push ups or something like that in a plank hold, that's gonna also already activate some GLUT4 receptors on your muscles, which are gonna go, you know, which are going to help incident direct, the sugar and, the food into the into the cells much faster and replenish glycogen. Speed the kind of call it, kind of like a minimum effective dose. So, probably with exercise, you don't mean that you need to go for a thirty minute gym thing or or or just running around. So, what what's your protocol? Let's say you're in a restaurant. You've been fasting and you decide to have a huge meal with some, you know, some sweet potatoes and you have some rice and all kinds of things. You're getting some glucose. It's evening now. What kind of exercise protocol would you do that when you come to the table, that the other people are not gonna look look at you like, what's going on here, man? Yeah. Generally, for the GLUT four receptors, even as little as maybe, like, like ninety seconds of of, exercise of some resistance training can activate the GLUT four receptors and, you know, make you more insulin sensitive. But, generally, what I what my minimal effective dose exercise would be something very, high intensity and with very short, rest intervals. Maybe like this my go to exercise, like, I think would that would be, like, the biggest bang for a buck would be, like, burpees, regular burpees, where you go down down into a deep squat. You push yourself into a push up position. You do the push up, and you and then you jump back up. So that's, like, a very strenuous exercise, and it's quite difficult, especially if you do it, like, a very at a very rapid pace. So when I'm when I'm usually, like, traveling or if I'm short on time, then my go to exercise for the day can be even as little as five minutes of burpees of doing maybe, like, 100 burpees with some you know, resting very little in between sets, and that's gonna be very, you know, well enough for that. But, also, maybe, like, simply, if you were to do it at a restaurant or something, you can maybe, hold some isometric contractions or something that that may be activating these good four receptors. And easy ex easy exercises for that may be like holding the horse stance with your feet, you know, sideways and being in this, like, deep squat holds or doing something like the planche, which, will also, you know, activate, the muscles in your shoulders and upper body mostly. Yeah. Yeah. I'm also showing here just a simple wall sit. A simple wall sit would be would be actually pretty good to do in, in a restaurant. You can even go to a toilet and do something like this. Yeah. Totally. So let's go back to the health effects of this. So you're obviously doing these things for, for a purpose for also to make sure that you're shoveling most of the glucose that you're then getting into muscle growth. But if we look at the health effects of this, old fascia, so what it contributes to is stronger immune system, better cardiovascular function, prevention of type two diabetes and fatty liver. With the strengthened immune system, you can better fight off infectious disease, cancer. And you can also prevent neurodegenerative diseases, and and things related to to premature cell death, inflammation, and aging. Is that right? Yeah. It's it's so true that, autophagy is linked to most of these things related to aging in general. And one of the, let's say, one of the, best contributing factors to it is, that you can also maintain your mitochondrial functioning as you age. So there's this theory of that, one of the reasons people age is that their mitochondria become more dysfunctional, and, the mitochondria are the powerhouses of your cells that, that produce energy. So as you age, your mitochondrial functioning is gonna drop, and, that's that is also going to, you know, be this domino stone that is gonna lead to all of these other age related diseases and issues. So with autophagy, you can actually start recycling those those mitochondria that are that are damaged and that are slowing you down, and you're gonna convert them back into energy. So this there's this additional process called, mitophagy, which is, like, basically, my mitochondrial autophagy. So, yeah, that that that's gonna be keeping away the bad stuff that is causing you inflammation and, slowing you down and using those those, you know, building blocks back into, you know, new new new things that are gonna that that can be used as, like, new building blocks. So one of the reasons, it's it's like an accumulation. People accumulate a lot of waste and because of poor nutrition habits and because of poor nutrient timing, they're going to inhibit the recycling process as well. So they're constantly accumulating. So that's one of the biggest reasons why the, general diet in the West for the mainstream people is gonna be very thing that is isn't gonna support their longevity. Right. I'm actually showing here an image of mitochondrial health. So in this image, you notice how calorie restriction combined with physical activity leads into the activation of mitophagy and mitogenesis and that leads into, I guess, lower inflammation and and better stem cell function. And then you have, the the better mitochondrial function is related to the the ability to deal with reactive oxygen species, basically low level inflammation. And, if if this process doesn't work very well or you have reduced physical activity, deregulation of hormonal activities, then an inflammation that can lead into premature aging. Yeah. That's that's true. Body mind empowerment. Get stronger, faster, smarter, quicker, friendlier, more helpful, more driven. Everything the body needs. Control your mind.