You might have heard about the amazing health benefits of this thing called autophagy. It can reduce inflammation, fight cancer, strengthen your immune system, and make you live longer. But autophagy also has some negative side effects that most people aren't aware of. So in this video, I'm gonna talk about the dark side of autophagy. You underestimate the power of the dark side. So basically, autophagy is this process where your cells dissemble and recycle their dysfunctional components. Inadequate autophagy is said to be a major determinant of aging. Reduced cellular turnover and accumulation of waste inside the cells are common to all age cells. Autophagy is also critical for maintaining the functioning of your mitochondria by eliminating the dysfunctional components and keeping the healthy ones more alive. However, autophagy can do both good as well as bad in some situations. It has dark side. The entire process of autophagy and self healing is called autophagic flux, which includes, one, the formation of an autophagosome, two, fusion with lysosomes, and three, the degradation of the autophagosome. Removal of pathogens by autophagy is called xenophagy, which has many immune strengthening benefits. However, some bacteria like Brucella use autophagy to replicate themselves. Others include pardonella, coxiella, and potentially, Lyme as well. That may cause some bacterial overgrowth or at least prevent this death. One of the essential autophagy genes, a t g six BSCN one encoding the Beclin one protein has been found to suppress tumors in cancer. However, it's not been found to be that big of a tumor suppressor as previously thought. And sometimes, it can be even promote cancer due to this self replicative process. Basically, self healing can enhance the strength and fitness of these cancer cells against stressors, which is gonna make them more resilient against starvation and chemotherapy as well. It's not clear whether autophagy prevents or promotes apoptosis or programmed cell death. The outcome turns out to be dependent on the stimulus and cell type. Blocking autophagy enhances the pro apoptotic effect of bupropylene on human gastric cancer cells, which is a Chinese medical toxin used for tumor suppression. In this example, less autophagy led to the death of cancer cells because the cancer cells were weaker, whereas with autophagy, they became stronger. Basically, when these malignant tumors and cancer cells get put under nutritional stress, then they're gonna use and hijack the effects of autophagy and keeping themselves alive. They're planning to betray me. So it's not all black and white with autophagy. Some viruses use it to replicate themselves whereas others get eliminated through apoptosis. What's more, autophagy functions in different tissues as well. There's some in the brain. There's some in the liver, in the muscles, fat tissue, and it's not all the same. But how do you actually measure autophagy? Most of the measurements of autophagy are done in other animals, not in humans, which is actually quite difficult to know how do these different pathways manifest themselves in human tissues. To estimate autophagic activity, it's essential to determine autophagic flux, which is defined as the amount of autophagic degradation. Monitoring autophagic flux is still complicated even in model organisms and is currently impractical in humans. But we do know that autophagy is regulated by these different pathways like AMPK mTOR and incident signaling. Therefore, you can only kinda predict and guesstimate what's the state of your autophagy by looking at your insulin, blood sugar, ketones, and whether or not you're fasting at all. So in general, when your blood sugar gets lower and you're fasting and you haven't eaten a lot of carbs, your liver glycogen is depleted, you're in a catabolic mode, then you are probably in quite deep autophagy versus if you eat, whether that be protein, carbs, or fats, then you're inhibiting autophagy by raising the nutrient signaling of your body. That's why you don't want to be in autophagy all the time because it can make you too catabolic. Autophagy is needed to maintain muscle mass and to prevent aging, but at the same time, too much autophagy can also make you lose some of that vital tissue that is actually helping you to live longer. And to maintain that muscle, you need things like mTOR, IGF-one, insulin, and protein. So it's not that black and white with those things either. The idea is to balance autophagy with these anabolic signals like mTOR and I g one, but you don't want to be overly excessive with either of them. Don't underestimate the force. So what's gonna determine whether or not autophagy is gonna do good or bad is gonna depend on many other things such as the functioning of your mitochondria, the microbiome in your gut, the circadian rhythms, your methylation status, your biomarkers, and what other lifestyle habits you follow. All of these processes are dependent of autophagy in some aspect or another, which is why prevention is the best medicine. So how do you prevent autophagy from going dysfunctional? First of all, you should align yourself with the circadian rhythms. Most of the autophagy process actually happens during deep sleep. So definitely, you wanna make sure that you avoid blue light at night and allow melatonin to do its work while you're sleeping. Secondly, you should also fix your gut and microbiome because most of the hormones and other metabolic processes originate from the gut. You should expose yourself to other environmental stressors like the sunlight, heat, cold, physical exercise, and stuff like that to create this hermetic response and make your body more resilient. You should still practice intermittent fasting daily to keep the autophagy process active. And to keep your mitochondria working properly, you should get enough minerals, micronutrients, and essential fats and proteins. But other than that, make sure you don't disrupt your autophagic flux. I'm here to put you back on schedule. Click the like, subscribe, notification button as well. My name is Seem. Stay autophagic. Stay empowered.