Many people in research, if you put them on a keto diet, they'll start losing fat even if you try to make them gain weight. Or 75% of glycogen was resynthesized within six hours after a strength training workout. And that's fasted. That's without any any dietary intake. Exactly. The training volumes actually needed to make those carbohydrates necessary. You do not encounter those for strength training. Your body has the building blocks. Blocks. If you give it protein and it it can take the fat, it can build muscle mass as long as the training program and everything is stimulating that process. You're talking about an obese individual. They need to lose fat yesterday. So anything you do that gets them to lose fat will improve their health. I mean, people have this idea that dieting isn't healthy or whatnot. Any biomarker you look at will improve with fat loss. Body, mind, and empowerment. Get stronger, faster, smarter, quicker, friendlier, more helpful, more driven. Everything the body needs. Control your mind. Welcome to the Body, Mind, and Poetry Podcast. I'm your host, Sim Lund, and our guest today is Menno Henselmans. Menno is an online physique coach, researcher, and entrepreneur who founded the Bayesian Bodybuilding website. Bayesian Bodybuilding is an evidence based approach to fitness that looks at the current data and forms the most reasonable course of action based on that. Menno, welcome to the show. My pleasure. Good to be here. Yeah. Nice to see you. And, I've seen a lot of, you know, awesome, podcasts and different, YouTube videos about your work as well, and, I'm glad to have you on the podcast. Cool. Nice. So did I did I get, like, the definition of Bayesian bodybuilding right? What would be the intro? Yep. Yeah. The problem with, the Bayesian bodybuilding that I found it, and you explained it well, is that it's a nice concept, but for most people and like you say, even, podcast host that people have listened to many of my other podcasts, it's Bayesian is still you know, a lot of people are like, is that a country in Europe? So it doesn't really, resonate. It's like the the point 1% of the population is like, oh, that's awesome. And then most people are just like, Yeah. And bodybuilding is also something that to a lot of people are like, okay. He just calls it bodybuilding. For me, it's what it is, muscle growth fat loss. You know, some people want it to the extent that they can go on stage. But all those people, they want to just look good naked, do it for recreational purposes. But it's the same principles that apply. Muscle growth fat loss. They call it getting tons or whatever, but it's the same things just to a different magnitude. So I I like that, but it's still it scares off a lot of people and that, makes it so that you you cannot help as many people as you want. So, I'm just going back to, basically ditching the brand altogether. Because at some point, actually been brainstorming about names and stuff. And and my girlfriend actually said at some point, why do you even need a brand? And then I thought, yeah. Yeah. Why do I even need a brand? I don't need a brand. I just it's my own name. Yeah. For sure. It is, like, in in a sense that, people tend to associate your work with your name already, so it's, like, easier in Yeah. And it's more more it's more liberating in a sense as well with with my own, like, from my own personal experience that, if if you don't confine yourself with, you know, the realm of Bayesian bodybuilding, then you can have, like, more freedom with the content you produce as well. And, it's important to know. But, what I do like about, your work so far and research is, like, that you're very evidence based, and, you do it, like, in a very scientifically, way of thinking. And, you know, you don't make these rapid conclusions preemptively like a lot of people tend to do. So so, like, a lot lot of people that tend to jump on different trends and cutting edge strategies for burning fat and building muscle or whatever it is without knowing, like, actual the full story. So let's maybe start off with some of the biggest fads of, let's say, the year 2018 that you have come across so far. Latest fads, I mean, a lot of things there's there's truth in there. I'm not even sure if I'd call it a fad like CBD is really, getting popular right now. And, you know, there there's something there. People just swing in the direction of, you know, cannabis is bad, marijuana is evil, and everyone that used it should be incarcerated. And then they swing to the other direction. Like, this is some magical curve that if you take it, it will cure epilepsy and it will make you sleep better than ever and, everything. It does everything. So, there it's just something that has applications. It's strong, anti exulytic, I think. So it helps reduce anxiety, and, it can help sleep mainly via that purpose. Other than that, I'm I'm very unconvinced that it does much. So in that sense, not a fan. Other trends, maybe not really 2018, but, there's still a strong trend of, exogenous ketones, which I'm not really a fan of. You could say I'm a fan of ketogenic dieting, but not really of, doing it with supplements. I think if you go keto, just do it with dietary needs, and don't rely on the supplements. There's actually research showing that they can hurt performance. So the idea is that you get the best of both worlds. You get glucose and ketones as substrates for energy, but it seems that the body is not very well equipped to handle both at the same time, which makes sense from a physiological point of view. It hasn't adapted ever to using both efficiently at the same time. So it seems it can actually hurt performance. It's been studied for, cognitive performance. It doesn't do anything. The only promise it might have, I think, is appetite suppression. And that could be promising, but you do have to factor in that it has calories. So a lot of people think it's sort of, it's it's for fat loss. So they think, yeah. So with a lot of fat burners and the like and any fat loss food, if it has calories, then it has to be worth its calories and to be so appetite suppressing that it suppresses energy intake, not just, equating what you consumed but also making it so that if you don't track your macros, you end up with even lower energy intake than you otherwise would. Then it can be, you know, legitimately used for fat loss. A lot of people just get the impression you consume the more you consume of it, the leaner you get. But it still has calories, so it doesn't work that way. Yeah. Yeah. I totally agree. Like, both with CBD and exogenous ketones that, I don't really notice a big difference when taking either of them. And, I would imagine that they would work only if people had if their if their diet wouldn't be optimized, and they wouldn't then maybe they would get some sort of benefit, like, if they have, like, high levels of inflammation or, if they're not even doing the keto diets. But you mentioned that you are a fan of, like, low carb keto. So, what do you think about it? And what's the best, you know, application for for for that? Mhmm. Yeah. I'm I'm sort of known as a a keto guy in the in the bodybuilding circles because, not because, I guess, I'd say a minority of my clients are actually on ketogenic diets, but, in contrast to, like, mainstream bodybuilding who is vehemently, high carb and low fat, they're all proponents of super high carb dieting. And you have the idea that if you go low carb, you can't perform in the gym and you get all these ills and whatnot. Fat is what makes you fat. So in contrast to that, I'm, like, very pro keto. But I think it's mostly it's a tool. It's certainly not suitable for everyone. Some a lot of people just cannot stick to it. Mhmm. A lot of people cannot stick to it because they don't know how to do it well, but there are also a lot of people that just don't respond that well to ketosis or they just don't need it. They get the same results before we've got it. I probably fall in that category. I do well in ketosis. I noticed no detrimental effects on performance in the gym. Even with very, very low carb intakes, like 30 gram net carbs per day. Some people would go even lower. I think in general, you don't have to go lower than you need to to feel well, but as long as you're actually in ketosis. So for me, I think for a lot of people, it doesn't make that much difference. It's mostly personal preference. And if you respond well to the appetite suppressing effect because that is huge. Many people in research, if you put them on the keto diet, they'll start losing fat even if you try to make them gain weight. There's actually a recent study of of that that they, have people and they were supposedly in energy surplus and trying to gain mass, but they ended up losing fat. And then the researchers proposed their ketogenic diet is inefficient for muscle growth. And, no, it was just it was so good for fat loss, basically, that it suppressed their appetite, and they ended up with very low calorie intake. They ended up losing fat instead of, bulking. Right. Yeah. That's that's super interesting that, it was like, yeah. Yeah. The the the reason they didn't build muscle was that they simply under eat and subconsciously under the but, yeah, I I totally agree that, yeah, keto is, like, amazing for some people who are able to make it work, and it's really context dependent. So it may not be, you know, the best best diet for purely muscle mass, comparing something like a high carb diet, but it still has, like, a it it it has its benefits. And I would say that in terms of, like, lean bulking and such, then it can actually be really, really effective that you won't gain that much fat and, you you can you can still maintain, like, consistently, your physical performance at the gym as well. Mhmm. Yeah. We have a review in, currently, in the works that should be submitted reasonably soon, about the effects of carbohydrate intake on performance. And I think a lot of the the anti keto crowd and like, are going to be, disappointed because the the main finding of the review is actually that you can go very, very low carb indeed as long as you, do it consistently because the glycogen expenditure, that's the usual, mechanism why people say you need a high carb intake to shoot glycogen scores to be high. Well, it's even very heavy duty workouts for high volume for a single muscle group. You're talking about twenty, maybe forty percent of the patient. Forty percent is the highest level that is found in research. And then you're talking about bodybuilders doing super high volume. Usually, it's still like twenty percent depletion. In women, sometimes, considerably less even. And that resynthesizes within twenty four hours under most circumstances. You have, the core cycle, the prep cycle. The body can use that, quite efficiently to still produce, glucose and thereby glycogen even when there is a very low supply of dietary carbohydrates. And the the glycerol backbone of triglycerides or fat can also be converted to glucose and there's the, not so desirable pathway, of, amino acids that can be used for glucose production. That would be a last resort ideally if you have sufficient protein intake. It should only happen if your protein intake is excessive in the first place. So I don't think it's a it's a major concern. The, there was actually a study by Pascot et al, which is really old already, but never really went mainstream. It found that 60 or 75% of glycogen was resynthesized within six hours after a strength training workout. Wow. And oh, that's fasted. That's without No issues. Any any dietary intake. Exactly. So the body is actually quite efficient basically at I'm usually over over simplifying this, but it effectively recycles lactate Mhmm. To, get new glucose. So the body's really efficient in that sense. And I think that it's just, you know, there is a theoretical concern, for high carb intakes. It's just the training volumes actually needed to make those carbohydrates necessary. You do not encounter those for strength training. Now endurance training, or especially mixed like, concurrent training like team sports that's mostly anaerobic, but also very high volume and mostly concentric only, like soccer, those kind of sports, rugby. American football actually has two long rest intervals so it may not apply but, tennis for sure. Those sports actually they're like right in the sweet spot, for massive carbohydrate utilization where our ketogenic diet is likely to be somewhat detrimental. Pure strength training and, like, ultra endurance training, they probably don't suffer at all from a ketogenic diet. So I actually think that for most people, a ketogenic diet won't impair muscle growth at all. Mhmm. Yeah. It's so true that, you don't even need to work out that hard in a sense to to to, promote muscle growth or to stay or to get stronger. You can you can do it very safely, with within these rep ranges that that can be achievable with the keto diet and, like, a low carb intake. And it's it's also, quite amazing of how the body is able to literally take its own body fat and, convert it to the exact fuel it needs even if you have done, like, resistance training and you haven't eaten anything. So part of it may have to do it that you're actually taking your own body fat and, converting it into muscle glycogen and using it to replenish it. For instance, like, if you were to exercise and, you stay fasted after the exercise, then then your muscle glycogen would be replenished with your body fat, with if you if you stay to continue the fast. To to some extent, but, it would only be the the glycerol. Mhmm. It's it's not gonna be super efficient. It's mostly gonna be the recycled lactate probably, but it will recent size quite a lot. Mhmm. So you can definitely you have, just based on the the the 20% figure of glycogen depletion, you'd you'd have about five workouts in you even if you were completely fast and not eating anything. So you basically have, like, five potentially good workouts in you without any energy intake. Now not gonna be optimal for muscle growth for sure, but purely from a performance, point of view, it's it's it's doable. I think definitely if you compare that to the idea that a lot of people have, like, if if they miss, the 100 gram carbs free workouts they cannot perform in the gym, that's just ludicrous. That's, like, 100% no SIBO effect. It's in the brain. It's actually research about that that if you have people, you tell them different amounts of carbohydrates intake or you give them placebo so they don't know if they consumed carbs or not and, how many carbs. Even a study with a complete placebo breakfast, I think they use special gels. They can modify and then you have the idea that you're consuming food, but it's actually it's it's nothing. It's just like water and flavoring. Mhmm. And they had usually detrimental effects, of usually, they had detrimental effects of, not having had breakfast in that situation even though the other group was not having breakfast either. Okay. So Yeah. It's it's Even compute placebo breakfast, can can promote performance just because people have this idea that they need the carbs. Yeah. It's it's like, yeah, the the best performance enhancing supplement is placebo and, having your mindset on point and, not being influenced by the idea that you need carbs. And a lot of it has to do with your, like, the psychological belief system that has been enforced by the mainstream fitness industry of, yeah, you need to eat, you know, six more meals a day, high protein, high carb all the time. And if you do, miss your post workout shake, then you're gonna lose the gains and miss the as well then. You're gonna lose all your gains. Placebo effects are so underrated. I still think it's it's actually mind boggling how, a placebo effect can do things like decrease or increase increase your blood pressure and actually have physiological effects in body. One of the coolest study, I think, coolest studies that has has pretty much ever been done is a study in, I think, the nineties or the eighties when this was still considered ethical. They gave people placebo steroids and, I think the other group did actually have, take steroids, but a pretty low dosage, but still. And the placebo group actually made, so much better gains that was better than what you'd expect from that dosage in other research. The placebo effect was actually stronger than the actual effect that those steroids has in all the research. Wow. Like, you could see, like, in the in the trend, they made, like, barely any progress, and then they were taking a placebo steroids. So fake gear, and their the gains just skyrocketed. I think they gained, like, 20% strength in a couple weeks on older outlets. That's really, really astounding. Yeah. So so it it part of it may have to do as well that if you are taking steroids, then you're kinda expecting the steroids to be magical and, naturally gonna increase your muscle growth without actually lifting heavy weights. So you so so with the placebo, you would aim for lifting heavier. And, if you do if you lift steroids, then you're kinda holding yourself back just because you you you think you're under gear. Yeah. I think a lot of people will just train much harder when they're they're on steroids. Mhmm. There's actually a lot of effects because there's also research on the the effects on moods and cognition of, at least testosterone. We don't have that on other, steroids, but they're probably similar. Androgenic anabolic steroids are all pretty similar to testosterone. And they found that in research, there's actually no effect on mood and cognition. So the common question, is, like, how does it feel to be on steroids? Well, apparently, you don't feel anything. Like, there's just you know, there's a placebo effect. Because if you look at online forums, there are people like, how does it feel to be on steroids? It's like it's like you could tackle a bus. And, you know, that's that's probably 100 just an an idea that you have. And if you feel like that, you know, you're you're a beast mode in the gym, you're gonna just train much harder, get better results, maybe probably stick to your diet better and stuff as well. Yeah. It's like a self fulfilling prophecy completely, man. Yep. Yeah. One of your articles, that I read on your website mentioned about how it is possible to build muscle and burn fat at the same time. And, a lot of people say that physiologically it's impossible, but, your article kinda refuted that. Can so is it possible then? Can you talk about it? Mhmm. Yep. It's definitely possible. So the the misconception that people have is they basically state, it's it's a misconception about thermodynamics, the laws of energy balance. They think you need to be in energy deficit. To lose mass, you need to be in energy surplus to gain mass, but calories and mass are not the same thing. You need to be in energy deficit to lose bodily energy, and you need to be in energy surplus to store bodily energy, but that energy can come from different departments in the body. So you can be in energy deficit, lose total net energy from the body but that all comes from fats and at the same time you can be building and storing energy in the form of muscle mass. As long as the total sum is negative which is quite easy because fat has so many more calories than muscle per per kilogram or a gram. Just the density. So, it's it's it's very doable even in the one to one ratio. You'll still end up in very steep energy deficit if you lose one kilo of fat and build one kilo of muscle mass. Mhmm. So, you'll end up in energy deficits, but your weight will actually be stable. And I see this with a lot of clients. It's actually some people say this is like a it's like a theoretical concern. It's it's really, really not. If you do things well for most trainees like novice intermediate trainees, I'm not talking about like elite of bodybuilders, but just most people, and even people that have been lifting for quite a few years, in my experience just because they haven't optimized everything, they can maintain a stable weight during at least the first weeks of my coaching. It's like one to two months. After that, it gets very hard for most people, but they can maintain their weight, lose a lot of fat because they're building muscle at the same rate as they're losing fat. And there are tons of studies showing this. It's not just like me and my clients promoting. What I do is like it's in so many studies you see this and it's also not only in studies on untrained people or novices or the elderly. There's stuff on Olympic athletes. There's actually a study on, female bikini figure and body fitness competitors which found that some competitors, you know, the average wasn't recompositioned but some competitors achieve body recomposition during contest prep. So at the bottom ends of body fat levels and quite, you know, advanced trainees. Bikini, it doesn't have to be advanced these days, Samuel. But, still, they were seriously training. Mhmm. And, rugby players, like, very strong guys. Elite gymnasts, they weren't super strength trained. Some elite athletes also not super strength trained, but still, you know, hard training people, military personnel. So it's people that say it cannot be done have simply they have never had good results themselves or with clients and they obviously do not need scientific literature because the evidence is is all over the place. Yeah. Yeah. I I remember that one study as well from from, like, these, gymnasts who were put on low carb keto and, they they got stronger. They burned body fat, and they increased their lean body mass. So it it it has to show that there is, yeah, truly possible even in people who are exercising a lot more than, regular regular people. And part of it has to do with also, like, the macronutrient ratios have to be quite on point as well in terms of you won't be able to do it with the standard American diet macros. You you will in that case, you would actually, you know, lose muscle and gain fat that is that is a potential. So the mac what would be, like, more optimal macros for this kind of a very lean body recomposition? Yeah. High protein diet is essential. So we've I'm known as a low protein guy because of my first articles was, basically debunking the myth that you need a gram of protein per pound of body weight. Mhmm. And I showed that this actually in the literature and it's still true today after a lot of research, and there's no benefit in nutrient timing controlled settings. So you have the same meals at the same time a day, you just have the total daily protein intake that differs between groups. We have, I think, 40 studies on this, well over 20, and they all found no benefits, no statistically significant benefit at least of, higher protein than 1.6 gram per kilogram per day total body weight which is, point seven two gram per pounds, I think, compared to, going way higher. So, based on that research, I've co offered a meta analysis with some of the brightest clients I think in evidence based fitness. Stuart Phillips, and that was, the McMaster University did it most of the grunt work and we just did some reviewing and, look at the design and make suggestions. They definitely did groundwork, so I can take credit there. But was a huge project, and we basically met analyzed all literature. It was restricted to mostly supplements, though, but that's because it's easier to control, protein intakes because people aren't super adherent often in research. And if you just give away protein, they can, you know, they can, get themselves to do that, but it's more difficult to have them eat more steak or whatnot, especially if the whey is free, which it usually is in research. So that mathemas confirms. No benefits. The the break off point was 1.6 gram per kilogram per day protein of total body weight. So that's basically as much as most people will likely need. I recommend 1.8, which includes, a double standard deviation based on Lemons research in the nineties. Still holds true today. That should mean that you cover also the, you know, the the special snowflakes among us that have, super high protein requirements for some reason, digestion or whatnot. And they, therefore need more proteins. Mostly theoretical, but they they probably exist. So, if you make sure that you have that, those are the key components. You have a good strength training program, high protein intake. You know, there are nutrient timing and all these things. But purely from a physiological perspective, what does the body actually need to, build muscle mass and energy deficit? Well, it needs to get energy from somewhere. Well, it has tons of body fat. So many people think that I'm getting pretty lean. I don't have much energy anymore. Well, it's about, eight eight to 9,000 calories per kilogram fat. Even in counter shape, most men still have, like, five kilo fats. We're talking about easily 50 k calories. Mhmm. Or 50,000 kilo calories, it would be. So of, which would be kilos and kilos of muscle mass that can still build with that body fat as long as they also get the protein. And there's a few other things, water and stuff, well, it's never a problem, and other components that are most likely in the food you eat anyway. So you your body has the building blocks. It just if you give it protein, and it it can take the fats, it can build muscle mass as long as the training program and everything is stimulating that process. Yeah. And probably, like, being more key to adapt it will also be beneficial in terms of that you would get get better access to that body fat, you know, because, you know, like you said, there's a ton of energy stored on the adipose tissue, but a lot of people still don't get access to it or they experience, let's say, like a muscle loss even if they have excess body fat. Yeah. It might. Research is a bit still contentious about better, keto can enhance fat loss. There's two studies, that show it's true. Most find it's neutral. And one of the studies was by Jacob Wilson which is was been strongly contested as, for data frauding. So that's, iffy and there's one study, but it was only five subjects or so. Though in it, but it was actually legit, probably, and it had five measures of muscle or fat loss. So it it suggested. I'm not entirely convinced but it certainly, being keto adapted is gonna be positive for sure. So they're not keto adapted. It could be like more muscle sparing in a sense that, Yeah. The the one that small study found the increased nitrogen balance, which would be, which would lend support to the idea of protein sparing. At first, if you're getting keto adapted, there's actually good research, in metabolic work conditions that shows you go into negative, protein balance. So it's bad news. When you're getting it when you're getting through the keto adaptation periods, you may actually be more at risk of fossil loss. But then the weeks afterwards, that's also what that small study at least found, I think it was after six or eight weeks or so, then nitrogen balance turned positive again And it actually became more positive than the control group. So it might be there is something there that, is protein sparing, and it might actually also decrease protein requirements a bit. Mhmm. So that you can recomp more efficiently. Yeah. Yeah. Like, the the body kinda needs some time to get used to it and adapt. But, what about if someone is, like, really obese and has, like, 50 to 100 of extra weight, would they be still, you know, able to build muscle and burn fat, at a at a huge deficit even like and, like, training fasted almost? Training fasted is gonna be hard, because you you need you need, exogenous ketones or protein, basically. So there there needs to be protein from somewhere. Otherwise, the body will, just be breaking down protein at some point of its body to fuel muscle growth in another. Protein needs to come from somewhere. But you don't have to be too precise with the timing probably, especially in trained individual, obese. They're gonna have a very easy time actually with body recomposition, and they can crash diets very hard. I think, I'm not a huge fan of pure fasting. I like to use protein sparing modified fasts Mhmm. Which is basically fasting but you get your protein and essential nutrients out. So it's make sure that you're you're covering, you know, health basis, and, you don't get deficient in vitamin c and the like, and you get protein in. So I'm a huge fan of that. And for obese individuals, I think, my methods are sort of known as being very, very aggressive for obese and overweight individuals. I think many people are way too conservative. I mean, you're talking about an obese individual. They need to lose fat yesterday. So anything you do that gets them to lose fat will improve their health. Many people have this idea that dieting is unhealthy or whatnot. Any biomarker you look at will improve with fat loss in obese person, even in an obese person. If you look at insulin sensitivity, risk of thrombosis, blood pressure, just name any biomarker that you can study and look at someone's health, it will improve. Cholesterol levels, triglycerides, anything, it will all improve with fat loss even if you have a really crappy diet. There's a, like, there's a one guy that did the the Twinkie diet, and I'm not sure if he did blood work as well, but, there's been a lot of people that have been on really crappy diets, liquid shakes and whatnot, weight gainer stuff, weight weight watchers, weight losing stuff, and they still ended up better. So you can have a really crappy diet and pure fasting, for sure, you'll be you'll be better off than if you were, obese because the fat loss is just so much healthier Yeah. Than any alternative. Yeah. And also, like, to kinda lose the fat faster and, like, the the idea of a slow and consistent caloric restriction isn't actually that good because you're gonna you're gonna stay fatter for longer and, you it will also cause more metabolic damage in the long term. Yeah. Like I said, they they just need to lose fat, immediately. So there really isn't any the longer you keep them obese, the the worse the more damage it does. Yeah. So, it's also definitely not motivational. You can you can calculate the expected time it will take if you go, like, super conservative. Like, people say, oh, you you should stick to a 5% deficit or something. You can calculate based on that, just based on the thermodynamics. How long will it take to create the energy deficit needed to lose their, you know, 20 kilos, 50 pounds, or whatnot of fat? You're you can be talking about a year, two years of nonstop dieting before they're even in the healthy range. Yeah. That's that that prospect alone is is, just maddening for me. Yeah. It's most people most people will, yeah, lose their interest and get bored in a sense. They don't they don't see the results. And there's also research on this on dietary adherence that's, also by meta analysis that has confirmed this. People that lose fat, fat, or weight, it it studied, but basically fat. People that lose more fat in the initial phase of the diet, they're more motivated because they they can see it works. And a lot of people, they have given up hope. I've had this with a lot of clients. They come to me and they're like, they they they're basically desperate. And like, I've tried everything. If you can make me lose fat, then, you know, that that's awesome. I I just don't trust it anymore. And if you show them that it can be done, that it's just a matter of good programming, they you teach them exactly what they need to do, and that gives them hope and that opens up everything. It's it's huge difference in mindset when they know, you get the results if you put in the work compared to, you know, they're they're desperate and nothing works. Lose fat or die. In addition to that, then the person would still, have to engage in, like, heavy heavy resistance training. So we so we mentioned that, you know, protein and lifting weights is gonna be the the main, signaling factor for triggering muscle growth and stimulating the mTOR pathway and the things of that. So how, how heavy would the person have to train in terms of, to make it happen? The traditional idea used to be that there is this, hypertrophy zone of, like, six to 12 reps that you have to stay in. But this is, it never really made that much sense. It was probably mostly based on, feeling. Like, if you lift a weight that's, like, 15 or more or lower, if you don't feel it, basically, they're at least the first reps. So that probably gave people the idea that it doesn't work. But it turns out that, the fatigue you accumulate over time, you do get, levels of muscle activation and fiber recruitment in the end of the set that, you know, the first reps are indeed ineffective basically, but later on in the set you get similar levels of mechanical tension as you get with heavier weights. So it seems that actually as long as you train close to failure, so and training very hard and you're not leaving any reps in the tank or very few, then, you can go as low as about 30% of one RM which corresponds to approximately your 30 RM. So which you could lift 30 times which is very very light indeed. But you have to go close to failure and there are some, it induces a lot of fatigue and it's very mentally demanding. So a lot of people don't like it. Mhmm. But inferior, you don't have to go that heavy. And you can also go super heavy if you want as long as you get enough volume in because muscles are basically they're, they just respond to tension. And as long as the tension is high enough, they will grow. And then it's the time of the tension basically that determines the magnitude of growth. Now a super heavy weight will trigger very high levels of mechanical tension on muscle fibers. There's very high force production required to lift the weight, but, the time on retention is very small. If you do only like sets of two, then there's almost no time on retention. So there is not a lot, you'd have to do a lot of extra sets to get the total time on attention to a good enough level for maximum muscle growth. Mhmm. But in principle, they they work. Yeah. Yeah. And and, that kind of a total volume and total, load can be basically, you know, spread out throughout the entire week and, the entire training cycle. How how how long does the muscle building stimulus, you know, stay elevated after after working out? They they usually say that it's the that protein synthesis is gonna be elevated for, like, forty eight hours or something after Mhmm. Working out. Yeah. That's a bit of a bit of a canal room in research at the moment because we have quite a lot of research on protein synthesis, muscle protein synthesis. And it shows that usually, it's like twenty four, forty eight hours. There's some indication that untrained individuals of the stimulus lasting more than seventy two hours. But basically, the time you can elevate protein synthesis above baseline, which is so it's technically a delay in muscle fullness researchers call it. Basically, the process of muscle growth. This is the time that you have that stimulus. If you give your body protein, then it will ramp up process emphasis and build that extra muscle tissue. Now it seems based on that research that this this period last maybe three days or so. But we see in the research on training frequency that as long as you do enough volume, then you can stimulate, so much growth that presumably you're growing the whole week because training frequency research shows that even if you do one session per week, which is what most traditional pro bodybuilders actually do, you can actually get similar results, maybe not the same results in every research, but similar to training more frequently. So that's a bit of, a contentious topic at the moment. I'm a proponent of higher frequency research because definitely based on literature on most protein synthesis as well as the the general trend in the literature being that higher frequencies are better or equally effective. And there's only one study, which is a recent study. It's the first study ever that has ever found a statistically significant negative effect of higher versus lower training frequency given the same total volume. Mhmm. So it's, you know, there I think a strong argument can be made that, it's most likely to be beneficial, at worst, neutral to train more frequently. But if you don't have a lot of time, you only train a few times per week, then just make sure those sessions count, put a lot of volume in those, and it's not the end of the world for your gains. Mhmm. Yeah. And with, let's say, a higher frequency training routine would also mean that, you wouldn't overtax your muscles with one session altogether. Like, for instance, if you do it if you train once a week, then you're gonna burn yourself out completely, and you're gonna rest for the entire rest of the week. Whereas, like, higher higher frequency kinda keeps you, more more more in control or more careful with, the loads. Yeah. Exactly. You have to separate between training frequency and volumes. A lot of people, when they hear of this new research on training frequency, they'll read the frequency project and like, in a study between five and two that I posted on my blog. And they're like, oh, I'm gonna try high frequency training. And then they just just do their program that they were doing before, like, four days, and they start doing two extra days. So basically, they just add 50% volume all at once, and then they get injured and whatnot. And they're like, high frequency doesn't work. But you have to separate between the total volume, which is probably best measured by how many hard sets are you doing for a muscle group and how often are you training your muscle group. Mhmm. So you can actually have, like, a high frequency program if you do four full body sessions because most people will say stimulating muscle group four times a week, that's high frequency. But it only requires only four sessions in the gym, which is now for my kind of clientele, not that much. Most most of my clients train four, four to six times, some seven as well. Mhmm. That was per week. But what about, like, meal timing? If you do lift and your protein synthesis remains elevated for, like, let's the the coming few days, then, how would you have to in implement, like, the protein intake in within that time frame? Mhmm. Yeah. That's a good question. There's, a few studies that have sort of looked at this question. A few that have directly looked at it. And it's interesting that we have research showing that the the anabolic window, the period of fossil protein synthesis increase post training, decreases as you get more fast. We also have a study showing that in untrained individuals, actually, compared to bodybuilders was, Nori et al from, Japan. They, found that the the protein timing doesn't matter at all. They don't train individuals probably because that that stimulus is gonna be around for days. So, you know, if you have your post workout shake immediately after the workout or four hours later, it doesn't matter. It's it's like all within the same time frame physiologically speaking. But for the bodybuilders, it actually came to a few hours. There's a few other indications as well that suggest to me that you want to sort of mimic this curve of protein synthesis. Basically, you have to fuel, the anabolic window. So the anabolic window is it's an anabolic window of potential, researchers sometimes call it. It doesn't mean you actually get that protein synthesis. You do have to fuel it. So I like to basically get you have more protein in the periods after workouts and especially the period between the workouts and the evening. There's a few studies that have looked at this. If you have you wake up, you have to work out, and you go to bed. And if you have most of the calories a year, that gives poor results in a few studies than if you put shift the calories to post workouts in between the period of workout and bedtime. Mhmm. So, yeah, I'm a big fan of doing that. I'm basically trying to, synchronize calories and protein with the metabolic window. Mhmm. Yeah. And, it's, yeah, it's super I also like to think that, you know, using protein for recovery and repair is probably much more important than taking it before that before you you have you have stimulated the muscle. So, yeah, if Yeah. Let's say that's that goes back to the idea that you can build, muscle and lose fat at a deficit if you strategically time your protein, more carefully after the workout. Yeah. So, yeah, that's that's interesting. But let let let's how would how would it change in some people who are doing the, like, intermittent fasting for, like, sixteen or twenty hours a day or something like that? It could it could still work. I don't think faster training is gonna be optimal. It's actually a recent study. I reviewed on Facebook about this. A pretty crappy study because it only had, like, five subjects, but it, it's wrongly suggested at least that it was, between a group training completely fast and not having anything post workout either, a group having just post workout protein, and a group having pre workout protein. The group with the pre workout protein actually had the best, training volume, the highest training volume and the best muscle growth of strength development over time. Mhmm. And that's I think makes a lot of sense. Ideally, of course, you want both. It doesn't have to be super immediate, but you don't want to sort of sandwich your workout between two meals. Doesn't mean running down to the locker room, slamming on a protein shake. Just means you want those amino acids in the blood. And if you have a, like, a whole meal, like steak or something, then those those, amino acids are gonna be around for at least six hours generally. So no immediate rush, but you don't want to fuel that period. And you want to make sure that as soon as you are exercising, you want hyperamino acidemia, so elevation of amino acids in the blood. Yeah. The mTOR you referred to earlier, it registers that signal. It basically integrates all the signals for muscle growth like, do we have amino acids? Do we have tension on the muscle fibers? Are growth factors active? Is this guy on here? And it integrates all of that and sends it down to the nuclei, the cell force, the DNA. And they basically have the blueprints to form your whole body. And that information is, transcribed to the ribosomes. It's literally it's like you have the blueprint, it's translated and transcribed, goes through ribosomes, and and those are like the factories that create new proteins. Those make the proteins as per the blueprint, and that is the actual process of muscle growth and muscle protein synthesis. And that adds to the contractile tissue in the muscle, so you get bigger muscles. Mhmm. So it makes a lot of sense that having all these sensors for mTOR in place, so the mTOR sensors, you know, we have the stimulus and we have the means to build muscle that it's all in place. Yeah. It's I I I agree as well. Like, it is probably a bit better idea to have some amino acids in the blood before you train just to protect against, potential muscle cat catabolism and gluconeogenesis and things like that. Yeah. But, what what about, like, let's say, BCAs then, how would how would they can they circumvent the need to actually eat protein? No. I think they can't. I think it's almost always you're better off with just whole protein. Because what what BCAs basically do is, leucine in particular, the other BCAs are sort of along for the ride, but leucine is the the star of the show. Yeah. Leucine is like a signal that switches on mTOR. But it's like the analogy I like to use is like it's like a light. Leucine is the switch. You try to turn on the light, but you also need electricity. Mhmm. So there's actual so recent study that found that if you just consume leucine, you're you're getting mTOR activation and, p 76 k, that whole anabolic signaling cascade is gonna be activated. But there's a bottleneck, the translation to the ribosomes because the the anabolic signal was there but there are no other amino acids to actually build muscle protein. So you actually don't get an increase in muscle protein synthesis. There are earlier studies thought that this was true because they saw mTOR increase. And normally, mTOR increase is followed by protein synthesis. But that can only happen when you also have the other amino acids. Otherwise, they're the the rate limiting step. Yeah. It's it's I think almost always even financially, you're better off buying weight than VCAs. Yeah. For sure. Like, it's gonna be coming with with the actual building blocks as well, not just not just the construction workers. Yeah. So so in general, like, for someone doing, any form of intermittent fasting or even, like, a regular diet, then they would have benefit from having slightly less protein before working out and kinda back loading more protein in the post workout scenario than when the Yeah. When the protein when the protein synthesis is, you know, elevated. Exactly. So and I think that in general, if you you look at, like, lean gains type intermittent fasting, it has things right, not for faster workouts and the VCAs, but it has things right in the in Martin Bergman's, like, normal setup where someone would basically train, or break the fast just before their training Mhmm. And then have most or almost all of their calories of the day in between that window between bedtime and the workouts. And that actually synchronizes nutrients very well with the anabolic window and protein synthesis. But if you place the workout, like, all the way in the morning and then you fast for twelve hours, before you start eating, that's likely not ideal, and VCAs are not gonna help that. It's gonna only gonna make more expensive urine. Yep. Very expensive urine in the heat. But but but but what if you eat protein? Let's say you haven't worked out for, like, like, a week and, you haven't stimulated mTOR and, muscle protein synthesis. What happens with eating, protein in that window? Like, how will how does the body respond? But will will it still build muscle? Or Mhmm. Yeah. You well, muscle, probably. You're gonna think of it as, like, a process that occurs all the time. All all in both of our bodies right now, we have protein synthesis and breakdown, and it's the balance over time that determines whether there is actually loss of tissue or, gain of tissue. And if you haven't eaten for a long time and you have a high protein meal, you actually get a substantial increase in protein synthesis because the body is basically recovering the lean mass it lost. So it has the it has the means and the stimulus in that case to build muscle. But if you don't have another high protein meal, then probably you're not gonna build a lot of, muscle after that anymore. But if you do a training session, now you have a huge stimulus for muscle growth. So now you can have many high protein meals, and all of that will be used for muscle growth. Mhmm. Yeah. It's it's it's yeah. The training stimulus is, yeah, one of the most important factors for muscle growth. And, just, you know, although there are some people who do who take steroids without training, they're still gonna grow muscle. It's it's still not optimal for, you know, the regular people to expect to build muscle without training heavy and, doing, like, compound lifts as well. Exactly. What what researchers say is that nutrition is permissive. Mhmm. So the training is what actually causes and instigates muscle growth. It creates a stimulus. And nutrition is just there to see how much of the cup you can actually fill. So your nutrition alone never achieves much. Even if you you you build hard without training, you can actually get a little bit of muscle mass, but there just isn't much of a stimulus for the body to build lean mass. So it will mostly just store it as fat because if you are a person that's untrained, your body basically faces the trade off. We have a lot of excess energy. Are we going to store this as just body fat, which is a very efficient process? And it's it's just there. We can leave it there. It's like a it's not an inert storage depot. It has hormonal functions and the whatnot on a post issue. But, you know, mostly it's it doesn't do much and it's easy to maintain. Or do we build lean muscle mass, which is actually gonna cost us a whole lot of energy, and then we have to maintain that lean mass as well, which is also energetically expensive. And if there's no obvious reason for the body to do that, then it will just choose to store fat. Right. Right. Yeah. But but let's say what what what would happen if you, over consume protein? You mentioned that there is no benefit to eat above, 1.6 to 1.8 grams per kilogram. But what what happens if you do exceed that amount? It will usually be oxidized, which means it basically contributes to fat gain just like any other nutrients. Mhmm. Because it doesn't store a protein directly as possible. That's very, very energetically, inefficient, but you're you're never consuming just protein. Like, I sometimes use protein refeeds for this purpose because in theory, if you eat nothing but protein, or it's almost impossible. You're literally you're eating, like, supplements, chicken breast. It's not it's not the most tasty way to eat, but, it's gonna it can have its purpose once in a while, especially after contest prep, I think. But then, indeed, it's gonna be extremely energetically inefficient for the body because it usually has to convert the amino acids of mucose first and then glucose to fat. And that's the the energy loss that occurs in all of these steps is is so massive that I think, I'd have to check the figures, but I think it's going to be only 25% or so of your surplus than what you can actually store as fat. Now normally, almost everyone has a mixed diet. You know, low fat, high fat. There is some fat in the diet. There are some carbs in the diet. Even ketogenic diet will have like thirty, fifty grams of carbs often. You can go super low carb but then even then there will be some carbs. So often what happens is the protein gets oxidized so used as fuel basically for energy and then the body has the fats that it now doesn't need to use for energy because it uses the protein for that and it stores the fat. So in the end, the end result is the same that if you over consume protein in energy surplus, you will actually get fat on that just like if you over consume carbs or fat. Yeah. It's it well, it's not gonna be the protein itself. It's gonna be the glucose from the protein and, and the the fat that it was gonna end up with. So yeah. Yeah. And and mostly the the other fat that, you were eating. But Right. Nonetheless, the protein contributes to the fat guy. Yeah. For sure. Did you take one of my protein bars? How how how much, protein and carbs and fats do you yourself eat at the moment? What what's your, like, macro splits or something? I actually don't know my exact ratio. I know my protein intake is above 1.6 for sure, above 1.8. Almost certainly. I eat ad libitum actually a lot of the time. When I go into contest prep or photo shoots then in the last months I will sharpen things up and I've I've tracked macros much of the time, when I was still gaining but I think I'm pretty tapped out in terms of natural potential right now. So, I just eat a Levitin and that allows me to basically maintain my six pack year round. Very convenient way for me to eat. You know, it doesn't mean you just eat whatever you want. Absolutely not. I eat actually super legit if you compare me to, dare I say, most fitness professionals. They don't really eat eat eat the talk, I guess. Yeah. But I I'm a big proponent of, lots of vegetables, healthy eating. Mhmm. I almost always avoid starches because they just lead to overeating and fat gain for me. Mhmm. I actually have a huge appetite and a normal metabolic rate, you could say. So if I start eating rice and, bread and whatnot, then I'll just very quickly guess that. Mhmm. Unless I track, my calories, but I don't want to do that. I just stick to it's pretty paleo, but paleo with, like, artificial sweeteners and dairy and Right. Pretty lean, healthy foods. And coffee. Foods. Yep. The coffee. The the most common Paleo food, coffee everyone drinks. Yeah. But, do you do, like, any intermittent fasting or something of that? Yeah. I, I only eat two meals actually myself. So I do make sure that I sandwich my workout between those two meals. So after this, I'm actually gonna have my next meal. And, I usually have my first meal, then I work out. And then about six hours after the first meal, I have my second meal, which is the bigger one. It's like twice as big actually Yeah. In terms of calories and nutrients. So then I still have reasonable nutrient timing, I think. I don't think it's ideal to have only two meals if someone is interested in maximum muscle growth and it's not yet very advanced. So they can actually still, you know, ramp up muscle protein surfaces around the clock. But for me, right now I think I'm, you know, basically just maintaining if there's some muscle to gain. I'm happy to do it very slowly. Based on my measurements, I gain less than a pound of muscle a year at the moment. So Mhmm. It's a slow process. Yeah. I think, like, yeah, that kind of that kind of interval fasting with two meals and, and a relatively higher protein is kinda really good for, like, very lean lean, progressive increase in in body body mass. So, yeah, I think it's it works wonders for most people. But what what what do you have any specific training goals in the near future? Or Not really. I usually set, like, sub goals, like my phone squad or whatnot. I've you know, most strength goals I think of, fit. I just try to, stay injury free. I still do all, like, the compound lifts. I do a lot of variation, do stuff like trying to set a squat PR, those kind of things to keep you motivated and, you know, get you guys to give some goal because cause I think bench press goals are like, I I only way for me to beat those goals would be to, get at a higher body weight first and then, but then it's not a real PR basically where it's just body weight. So, I've basically done all of those cycles at least three times over, maxing out on best press and, you know, sometimes I get, like, a few pounds over the previous PR, but, I think the reality for me is I'm pretty much at my my nanny max as they call it. So Mhmm. So in the maintenance space So that's, I mean, that's after, almost sixteen years of training. So That's that's amazing. Yeah. And, you mentioned, earlier that, you're you're kind of rebranding your, website and, moving on to, like, a personal brand and some. But, I believe, like, you also at the moment, provide, like, personal training and, some certificates as well on your website. Can you talk about that? Mhmm. Yeah. I do, the same stuff I was doing as patient bodybuilding. So my two two main things I do is I work on my PT courses that are online PT course, actually, certification programs. Basically, try to provide the stuff that actually teaches people how to be good PTs and get results in clients because most mainstream, fitness certifications, you know, they're they're nice to put on your resume, but that's really it, unfortunately. Mhmm. And, coaching, of course, I still do coaching. That's how I started. It'll, began for me actually when I was still a business consultant. Those are two main things I do. I don't really have any products actually at all at the moment, but I'm writing a book on, the science of self control that that will be out. I don't know. Sometimes in the future. Sometime. Yeah. Awesome. So but where can people learn more about your work and, your future projects? Mhmm. Basically, my name and I'm on some on Facebook. I'm on Twitter, Instagram. Facebook's probably best if you like scientific references and stuff because Twitter is like, I ran out of characters fighting everything. And Instagram, you can post links, which is really annoying if you want to sign it and you reference your work. So Facebook's probably best if you have that. But, yeah, I'm on I'm on all those mediums and on minimalismmodels.com, you can, find everything I publish, basically. Awesome. Well, it's been a pleasure talking with you, and, I believe, like, a lot of people gained some awesome information about how to actually build muscle and, lose fat at the same time. So but but before I but before I let you go, I wanna ask my last question, which is, what would be this one piece of advice or, habit that you wish you adopted sooner that improved your body and your minds? One piece of advice, that's tricky. For me, at least, one of the the the big things, in terms of at least physique, maybe not productivity and the like. Actually, I'll I'll focus on a bigger one, like productivity and everything is, organize your life. Actually, there's one piece of advice. It's it's the most, important advice of everything. Organize your site your life so that you maximize, well-being and happiness. That's like where welfare economics, the whole principle of, utility theory and economics, psychology, everything converges. Healthier people live longer, healthier people, or happier people are healthier. Happier people live longer actually, even controlling for, physical health. In general, happier people can push themselves harder in the gym, have better self control and easier times to consider diets. Happier people just are just better versions of ourselves. So, if there's one piece of advice I can give everyone is try to be happy, and that is, I think, the key to making the most out of yourself. Yeah. That's that's amazing advice. And, being happier yourself will make the society a better place as well. So every everyone would be happy then. Well, that's awesome. And, thank you for coming to the podcast again, and, looking forward to your work in the future. Thanks. My pleasure. That's it for this episode of the Body, Mind, and Palmer podcast. If you wanna support us, then I would greatly appreciate it if you could leave us a review on the iTunes or the other social media platforms. Definitely check out the show notes for the topics that we discussed in this episode. Thanks for listening. My name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.