I've kind of reversed aging biologically. My chronological age is 37. And currently, my my biological age based on telomere measurements is 20. You should structure your day so that by the end of the day, exercise is an option, not a necessity. Because we know from data, the amount of turbulence and the amount of resistance to blood flow that occurs from a hard workout after being sedentary all day long could actually increase your risk for high blood pressure, for heart attacks, or for other issues during exercise. So the presence of mild hormetic stressors spread throughout the day, including sunlight radiation, exposure to heat, exposure to cold, exposure to hunger, exposure to digestive stress, or body stress from the intake of Body mind empowerment. Get stronger, faster, smarter, quicker, friendlier, more helpful, more driven. Everything the body needs. Control your mind. Welcome to the Body and Mind Apartment podcast. I'm your host, Siim Land, and our guest today is Ben Greenfield. Ben is one of the leading experts in the world of biohacking and health. He has one of the top fitness podcasts called the Ben Greenfield Fitness Show. He does public speaking, runs Spartan races, writes books, and does many other things related to optimal living. Ben, I'm glad that you could make it to the show. Hey. Thanks for having me on, dude. Definitely. I can see that, you're using, your walking treadmill desk. So are there any other, biohacks that you're currently doing? Like, right now, I'm walking on the treadmill. Sure. I I could name two. I, I've got a an ICES m one PEMF device on my wrist because I actually have a race this weekend, and I'm dealing with a wrist sprain from a little car accident. These these PEMF devices are really good at, shutting down chronic inflammation and improving healing of bone and tissue. So I am doing pulsed electromagnetic field therapy on my wrist. And, what else would I be doing right now that I could tell you? And and supplements Breakfast yeah. Breakfast this morning was just a couple servings of ketone esters and about 20, grams of essential amino acids. So, you know, kinda sorta in a fasted state. You know, that allows you to maintain a fasted state and be somewhat anabolic or at least, allows you to keep your appetite satiated, get some of the anti inflammatory benefits of the ketone esters and also some of the neurotransmitter in the in the gut healing and joint healing benefits of the amino acids. And then, my workout this morning was a little, hypoxic training session on my, on my bike with a unit called a Live o two, which basically extracts air from the room and concentrates it in an oxygen concentrator. And then you can, with the flip of a switch, kinda flip back and forth between low ox excuse me, low oxygen and high oxygen. And then for the blood building benefits, I like to to kinda heat myself up going back and forth from hypoxia to hyperoxia with some intervals, and then I finish up with about twenty minutes or so in the infrared sauna, which I came out of about a half hour ago, and, do a quick cold plunge to make sure I'm not sweating all morning. So, yeah, those those are a few of the little things I I was up to today. Yeah. Another day at the office. What's that? Another day at the office. Yeah. Yeah. Another day at the office. Living the dream. But you've been recently I've been doing a lot of these other crazier or, let's say, less conventional biohacks as well, like, stem cells, NAD injections, and, some other some other things related to, you know, tick enhancement and so on. So kinda do you wanna talk about it? Or Yeah. Yeah. I'd, what what do you wanna know? Let's maybe, like, talk about the the stem cells because I I feel like those are the biggest ones that people would be interested in in terms of, like, antiaging and longevity. Sure. What do you wanna know? Well, can you maybe give a brief overview about the procedure of how what kind of an experiment did you do and what were the results? Well, I've I've done a little bit with stem cells. You know, the stem cell theory of aging is that you have niche niches, tissue niches where stem cells reside. And that as you age, your your pluripotent stem cells become more and more exhausted in terms of their availability. And so by replacing those with either autologous stem cells from your own body, such as your bone, or your fat, or using a nonautologous stem cell source such as umbilical or amniotic or even placental stem cells. You can replace those stem cells and enhance quality of life as you age. And furthermore, if stem cells are injected into a an area, where there is tissue damage such as a joint, they assist with repair and recovery of the joint or even if they are allowed to cross the blood brain barrier, which they normally wouldn't do, but you can actually you can induce temporary blood brain barrier permeability via something like, the sugar alcohol, mannitol, does a good job with that. You can inject that and then inject stem cells and have them cross the blood brain barrier to work in neural tissue. So there's a lot of uses for something like stem cells. And what I've done is I have had some, some some disk adjustments and, some work done on my back. Following that, I have done, mix of umbilical and amniotic injections into my back. But because it's a foreign protein, may spark an immune reaction and could even carry a virus or a prion or anything like that. I'm I'm still a little gun shy of umbilical and amniotic. And had I studied it up more at the time, I probably wouldn't have done those injections, until I'm 100% satisfied with with the fact that they're safe. The other things that I've done is I've had a company called Kiner Labs in Florida take placental stem cells, kill off the DNA in the nucleus, and then extract the cellular signaling molecules, the small vesicles called exosomes. And then I've had those mixed with my own bone marrow aspirate and pretty much injected into every joint in my body while I was under anesthesia, including cosmetic enhancement, you know, microneedling throughout the face, mixed with my own blood, my, what's called platelet rich plasma, which is a very common procedure for cosmetic enhancement, sexual enhancement injected into the the corpus cavernosum and head of the penis, and then also all of the joints. So that protocol was done by it's called a full body stem cell makeover that's done by a clinic in Park City, Utah run by doctors Harry Adelson and Amy Killen. And in addition to that, I've had, I've had my bone stem cells stored at a company called Forever Labs in Berkeley, and my fat stem cell stored at a company called the US Stem Cell Clinic in Florida. And particularly from the US Stem Cell Clinic, I've had my stem cells shipped to me. I got a concussion last year, and I did that IV into the bloodstream with the mannitol to assist with healing from recovery for my brain. I've also injured a couple of joints that I wanted to speed up healing for, most notably my knee, and also my elbow. And I've gotten stem cells shipped up to me and been able to have those via the the supervision of a physician injected into those joints. And then finally, for the antiaging effect I alluded to earlier, I've had stem cells over the past couple of years administered via an intravenous injection or infusion into the blood. So those are just some of the ways that stem cells can be used. How how how have you felt after these, procedures? Or how fast do you feel the difference? Oh, they definitely speed healing. Even more notably, they speed recovery from workout. So you bounce back more quickly from workouts. In terms of the TBI and the concussion, a great amount of clear headedness after getting the stem cells injected. And then, sexual performance, primarily length of orgasm and firmness of erection, Definitely noticed, both of those improved markedly. My wife has also had sexual enhancement procedures where she's had stem cells injected into her vagina and her clitoris, which basically kinda keeps those organs from aging as quickly. And then she's also done some some facial treatments with stem cells and had her own fat stem cells stored. You know, should she get in a car accident or get a concussion or have anything happen to her similar to me, she has those stem cells available as well. So, in terms of telomeres, I've noticed that, my telomere length the the rate of lengthening of telomeres, which can be measured by companies like Spectracell or Telo years or life length, my telomere length has also decreased in the rate at which it is shortening. And so I've kind of reversed aging biologically. My chronological age is 37. And currently, my my biological age based on telomere measurements is 20. And most of those more profound changes occurred after I began utilizing stem cells. Yeah. Sounds sounds really good. And in terms of, like, experiencing, second youth almost. Yeah. In a way. Yeah. I mean, you know, it's not gonna reverse aging or induce immortality. For sure. But at the same time, it definitely improves quality of life or, you know, just faster healing of injuries. Mhmm. Mhmm. But there are also, like, some other ways to promote similar responses like, lengthening their telomeres or or protecting them against against the damage. There are a lot of ways. Yeah. A host of compounds can assist with either, enhancing telomerase activity, which would be the enzyme that that keeps, telomeres from shortening excessively. And there are also protocols you can do to increase your stem cell production or your endogenous stem cell health. You know, I talked about pulse electromagnetic field therapy and how I have that on my wrist right now. Well, if I were to do a PEMF treatment on the long bones of the femur, that via the marrow and the femur can induce some amount of stem cell production. As a matter of fact, PEMF was originally developed, by a scientist who was working with NASA to research whether or not it could be used to increase stem cell availability. And so that's that's one way to do it. Another way would be to Would you use the PMF, during sleep as well? For stem cells? While while you're sleeping, like using a PMF MET or some some sort of device? Yeah. Yeah. Not really for stem cells. We're just to enhance delta brainwave production. Yeah. I have a I have a mat called a Body Balance designed by doctor William Pollock, and that's one of the few PEMF mats that will kind of run throughout the night. And so I sleep on that. Yeah. Absolutely. Mhmm. So so, yeah, PMF can be used in a variety of ways. I I have a few different PMF units that I like. There's also a table made by a company called Pult Centers. That's probably one of the more powerful forms of PEMF, and that one comes with coils. It comes with rings. It comes with pads. And you can pretty much use it as like a doctor on on anything that goes wrong or all I can get a massage on it, for a couple of hours. And so you you're opening and closing cell membranes and enhancing removal of inflammation, increasing the the influx and efflux of metabolites when you're when you're on this PEMF table. So in addition to that, a a few of the quick things you could do to enhance stem cell health, the number one one would be fasting. They're intermittent fasting for twelve to sixteen hours or weekly twenty four hour fast or even, you know, two to four times a year, a more extended three to five day restricted calorie fast, very similar to doctor Valter Longo's protocol and his research where you're eating 600 to 800 calories per day along with water for for a three to five day stretch multiple times during the year. You know, I'm personally a fan of just doing a twelve to sixteen hour overnight fast, eating a late breakfast, or doing something that guided this morning, you know, just having some ketones or amino acids, especially if you've worked out in the morning. And then, eating, you know, around sometime between twelve and and two for your first meal of the day. Wouldn't then wouldn't wouldn't to that. Wouldn't the I mean, unless it's like a break break the fastest state or, like, they're gonna stop the autophagy and so on? No. I mean, it's like a speed bump. I mean, the the anabolic response that you get in the benefits for somebody, you know, like me who's an exercise enthusiast as an athlete far away, any ability of those to to take you out of a fasted state. I mean, it's it's If you take it like I just I just launched a I just launched a bar, and people are like, oh, it's a high carb bar. It's got the equivalent of a freaking teaspoon of honey in it. Right? A lot of people in our industry are way too orthorexic and way too jaded and very dogmatic. And to to the extent where, you know, it's it's almost to a fault. So, yeah, I mean, for me to do a a workout and a sauna and everything else this morning and have 20 grams of amino acids, I I would have needed to have eaten close to a 100 grams of amino acids to even get me close to being out of a fasted stay. And I've tested blood glucose. I've tested ketones, and it's just fine to do something like that. So also have to remember that amino acids are different than the amount of calorie you'd find in, like whey protein or a steak or eggs or anything like that. It's it's literally just the constituent amino acids. So very, very non insulinogenic. They can always produce for for ketones as well. Some some PCAs could go go to, ketogenesis. Yeah. Some of the leucine and the isoleucine and the valine can, can increase Right. Ketone production. Absolutely. So the other thing would be in addition to a twelve to sixteen hour daily fast. You know, what I like to do is just a a weekly or a bimonthly twenty four hour fast just from, like, a Saturday dinner to a Sunday dinner. And for me, still competing as an athlete, that's about the most. I can kind of restrict calories without getting some of the neuroendocrine deficits or the metabolic deficits from excessive calorie restriction or excessive fasting. So, yeah, fasting is good for stem cells. PEMF is good for stem cells. There's, of course, you know, any sirtuin enhancing, compound or sirtuin rich food would enhance stem cell production. So your blueberries, dark chocolate, resveratrol, green teas, blackcurrants, you know, any of these type of tannic foods or dark foods. Those are super helpful. And then there's some there's some data on colostrum, some on chlorella, aloe vera would be another, coffee berry fruit extract, curcumin. And so you could almost kinda make yourself a morning smoothie with a lot of these compounds that would enhance stem cell health. You combine that with some fasting, with some PMF, and, you know, a lot of sirtuin rich foods kinda spread throughout the day. And those are those are some of the low hanging fruit when it comes to, to stem cell production. Yeah. Yeah. So super easy in terms of that. Everyone can simply add these, these compounds and the spices into their into their mix, into the smoothies, and, they're gonna be tasting delicious as well. But what given that we're on the topic of, you know, longevity and antiaging, what would be the, like, good diet for for these, these goals of antiaging and longevity? Oh, well, that totally depends on genetics. I mean, if you have familial hypercholesterolemia or you produce a lot of the a y p one gene that allows you to digest starches very efficiently Mhmm. Or you have a what would be called, like, a PPAR gene deficit that would cause you to have a more inflammatory response to, say, saturated fats or even polyunsaturated fats, you wouldn't be a candidate for a high fat diet and would instead you know, if you have, like, the APOE four four gene, that'd be another example, or even APOE three four to a certain extent when it comes to saturated fats, which I have. That's why I don't do a lot of coconut oil and butter and, you know, I eat a lot more monounsaturated Mediterranean fats. But, ultimately, what I'm getting at is that there are there's a lot of people for whom, you know, like a ketotic diet is definitely not a good idea and could cause some health issues or some gut issues or both, and they would better thrive on, like, you know, like a ketahban type of diet or a Mediterranean diet higher in starches that are healthy, like sweet potatoes and yams and tubers and coconut starches and some things like that along with, more Mediterranean fats like avocados and olive oils and and monounsaturates and to a certain extent, some seeds and nuts. And so, it it really depends. But, ultimately, when you look at, for example, you know, the blue zones or areas where there are a lot of longevity hot spots, you do see dietary characteristics that seem pretty prevalent no matter what the macronutrient ratios are. For example, fasting. Right? There's always some element of fasting, whether it's a high carb or a high fat diet. Some periods of fasting or some periods of caloric restriction seem to induce quite a bit of benefit. Another example would be the intake of a high amount of tannins and a high amount of, antioxidants and mild hormetic stressors from wild plants and herbs and some lices. Right? We see that as prevalent whether it's a high fat or a high carbohydrate diet. Absence of processed and packaged foods, of course, absence of rancid vegetable oils, you know, those type of things should go without saying. Even if it is a higher carbohydrate diet, it would be a higher carbohydrate diet lower in rancid vegetable oils or or processed and packaged foods. Eating together in social situations such as family dinners or group dinners, that's another prevalent characteristic. And then, you see a lot of, you know, not a lot of breakfast skipping per se, but kinda like light breakfasts, relatively heavy lunches, especially, you know, in in in Ayurvedic protocols where the digestive fires are hot middle of the day. So you eat your biggest meal of the day kind of at lunch. A lot of times, it's followed by a siesta or a nap. And then dinner is not as light as breakfast, but dinner is moderate. But it's finished a healthy amount of time prior to bedtime, always kind of finished with some kind of postprandial activity like a walk. Yeah. And, oh, another characteristic is usually you see some amount of physical activity prior to breakfast. Right? So that's kind of the way that that the day is laid out in many of these blue zones. So those are some of the dietary characteristics that seem prevalent no matter whether it's high carb or or ketotic or any variation thereof. Yeah. Yeah. I I wanna point out this idea that, that the people, they eat a wide variety of foods and that they're not, you know, specifically keto or specifically vegan or something. They're I think, like, the gut microbiome is so critical in the sense that they they have the ability to digest a wide variety of foods. Like you mentioned, these wild herbs and, these different hormetic foods that most western people, they don't get exposed to almost at all. And that's also one of the reasons why there is so many autoimmune disorders and gut disgust gut dysbiosis. Yeah. Yeah. Not only not only a wide variety of foods, literally hundreds of different foods. I think the average American eats some it's something crazy. It's like it's like 40 to 60 food groups throughout the year. And when you look at a lot of indigenous populations or hunter gatherer populations, it's hundreds of different food groups per year. And in many cases, dirty foods. Right? Like, foods that sell soil on them or foods that are fresh harvested or foods that are rich in probiotics or fermented, or even foods that might be parasitic or have, you know, helmets in them. I I didn't even mention this, but, like, you know what? Every three weeks now, I'm actually drinking a small vial of worms from China and worms from Thailand. I'm literally populating my body with some of the old companions that, historically, our guts would have been populated with. And those act as the you know, one's a tapeworm and one's one's a helmet thick parasite, and both serve as immune system modulators. My gut has never felt better That's great. When when dosing with with these worms that I drink, once every several weeks. So yeah. I mean, ultimately, wide variety of foods and even even dirty foods or things that we might be consider things we might consider nasty, but, you know, look at the animal kingdom and and it's rife with, you know, consumption of foods that are not necessarily pristine and clean and wiped down with with antibacterials or soaked in vinegar. And, you know, of course, you need to be careful with herbicides and pesticides. But, ultimately, yeah, wide variety of foods and and even the inclusion of some dirty foods. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's funny to think that culture in the sense of society and, and people, they want to avoid these sorts of things that it's it's, you know, dirty. It's something to be frowned upon. Whereas in reality, getting exposed to these microbiomes or these microbes is making you more cultured on the cellular level and in your gut. Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. But what do you think about these, diets that, you know, neglect neglect this aspect, like, these very confined diets, let's say, like the carnivore diet or or the vegan diet? Oh, we can't really name many populations. At least I can. Maybe you can that, you know, are still around that have thrived on all meat diet. Or, you know, you can look at maybe the Seventh Day Adventists in California who have thrived on a on a largely plant based diet. But as far as, like, cultures and populations that have been around for a long period of time, you know, in most cases, you see omnivorous diets. You know, even if meat is moderated, I didn't mention that as a characteristic when talking about the blue zones. But you certainly see that. Right? Like, some amount of protein restriction, some amount of meat restriction. And, even though I am a fan of that approach, I'm a total omnivore. Right? And I will have a large serving of meat usually every two to three days. Right? And and so I I really think that this dogmatic approach to diet, while it might be fun from an n equals one self experimentation method to kinda see how you feel and what works for you, I I still think that an omniverse diet largely comprised of real foods and very heavy in plants and herbs and spices with some element of fasting and some attention paid to the timing of meals is really the most intelligent way to eat. Yeah. Some sort of a food cycling and seasonality mixed into it is, like, the pro probably the proper way of doing it. I'm glad you brought that up. Yes. This concept of feast, famine cycles. This concept of, you know, like I mentioned, the two to four times a year, eating a very low calorie diet or even eating, for example, more carbohydrates and fruits in the summer when you're more sensitive to insulin and when you have higher amounts of vitamin d and when those foods are in season and eating more warming foods, more fermented foods, more meats, and more fats in the fall and the winter. We certainly see many elements of this type of seasonal eating across a lot of indigenous populations. And so, yeah, I'm very cognizant, you know, of how often I'm doing something like ordering coconut milk off Amazon or buying avocados imported from Mexico, my local grocery store. That's that's something I'm more and more careful with these days versus simply eating what happens to be seasonal and local around me. You know, right now, I'm eating a lot of produce and a lot of beets and lettuces and kale and Swiss chard, bok choy, quite a bit of zucchini and squash and cucumber, a lot of fish, the and and, but not a lot of eggs. Right? And the reason for this is our our garden is overflowing right now with produce. We're reporting this right now, in August. However, the hens, we have we have chickens. The hens are, they're hatching. And so we don't have a lot of eggs because the hens are are breeding and producing chicks. And so, you know, it's an example very simple example of seasonal eating. Right? So I have a lot of produce. I don't have a lot of eggs. There's tons of fish down in the river. Right? So so I know that that fish would be something good for my body at this time of year. I'm not doing a lot of hot foods, all lighter foods. And, my wife goes hiking at a park nearby and has been founding a lot of berries. And so I've been doing a lot of berries because those are in season, and that's that's what's around me. And so, you know, that that's a perfect example of kind of how we can seasonally eat even in our modern age just by looking at the clues that nature is giving us and by, you know, resisting the temptation necessarily just buy it because it's available. And don't get me wrong. Like, I love to make, let's say, like, you know, half an avocado and some collagen and some stevia and some ice, some cinnamon, you know, maybe a little dark chocolate. I make myself, like, a nice ice cream at night, but that's certainly using, you know, half the foods in there really aren't seasonal. Some of them are processed and packaged. Another example would be like what I had for, quote, breakfast, unquote, this morning. Right? Ketone esters and amino acids. Right? So sometimes there's an element of ancestral living combined with better living through science. Right? Like, I'm okay with both provided that you make these decisions intelligently. Yeah. Yeah. It's funny that you mentioned that, we also we grow our own food, and we also have our own chickens. And we have the same situation that, we don't get that many eggs at the moment. And, the the and the garden is full of full of, you know, greens. So it's still as fast. Yeah. Yeah. I like it. Would you like an egg? So but but let let's maybe talk about the exercise now. Like, what's the best exercise for longevity? Low level physical movement throughout the day. Mhmm. We don't see a lot of exercise like CrossFit WADS or triathlon training or things like that in a lot of these blue zones, you know, where there are large amount of centenarians. They're riding their bicycles, they're gardening, building fences, building walls, building homes, moving dirt. However, living in a post industrial era, you know, you kind of have to simulate that. Yeah. I'm walking on a treadmill right now. Right? And I have another call after I talk to you where I'll also be walking on my treadmill. And I might walk like this just kind of lightly for three to five miles a day, lifting heavy things every once in a while, whether you're working outdoors or you're just kind of keeping a a hex bar or a deadlifting bar somewhere in your home that you can pick up and set down throughout the day, kinda sprinkling that type of thing throughout the day. You know, you can have a pull up bar where every time you walk under the pull up bar, you do a few pull ups. But the way I I like to think about is unless you're an athlete, unless you're getting a paycheck for exercising, or unless you're finding a great deal of self satisfaction by training for a marathon or a triathlon or the CrossFit games or an obstacle course race or something like that. And and I don't judge you if that is the case. I mean, that's how I make my so my profession is I race, you know, in in a lot of these things. So I exercise more than than what I would admit to be ancestral or natural. Unless you fall into that category, you should structure your day so that by the end of the day, exercise is an option, not a necessity. Because we know from data that if you exercise hard at the beginning of the day or at the end of the day, but you're sedentary for eight hours in between, you really don't get much of a cardiovascular advantage. And you can even argue that when you're sedentary, the amount of of, and Katie Bowman has some good work on this, a biomechanist, the amount of turbulence and the amount of resistance to blood flow that occurs from a hard workout after being sedentary all day long could actually increase your risk for high blood pressure, for heart attacks, or for other issues during exercise. So my recommendation is low level physical activity all day long. Make sure you expose yourself to hormetic stressors like sunlight radiation, heat, cold, occasionally lifting heavy things, occasionally sprinting, like maybe go check your mail and then sprint back, you know, down the driveway to your house or, you know, go play soccer or tennis or or a sport like that. But, ultimately, when it comes to hard workout sessions, I really haven't seen any data that those confer longevity. And as a matter of fact, once you exceeded about ninety minutes of chronic cardio and once you exceed about sixty minutes of hard workouts, you see an increasing risk of mortality. So those people who are doing, like, two a day hard workouts or those people who are going out and doing, like, a bike ride in the morning and a swim at lunchtime and a run-in the afternoon, which I used to do a lot of when I was a competitive triathlete. They're probably shortening, not increasing lifespan. Yeah. Yeah. It's so true that more isn't always better, and, there is, like, only a minimal effective dose that you can get away with. Yeah. Yeah. But what about sleep and circadian rhythms? Those are probably the biggest ones that get neglected. Yeah. It it varies just like diet. You know, you can look at a book like the power of wind by Michael Breus or at genetic snips that dictate circadian rhythmicity. And we certainly see people who do a little bit better at night who probably, in ancestral times, would have operated quite nicely as a sentinel or a spy or someone, you know, standing guard over camp at night. And we need those kind of people in society. I think they comprise something like 10 to 20% of society. And most people kinda fall into that 09:30 to eleven ish PM bedtime, sometimes even slightly earlier, you know, close to when the sun sets, and then sometime between, like, a five and 7AM wake time with, in most cases, the highest amount of melatonin production and core cooling and, lymphatic drainage and hormone production and neuronal repair occurring if you are in bed and getting close to being asleep by about 10:30PM. And, ideally, you've completed any hard workouts if you are doing those type of things or anything that's very sympathetic nervous system stimulating about three hours prior to bedtime. And then we see, you know, waking, a large amount of morning sunlight or blue light exposure upon waking, large amount of red light exposure and absence of blue light exposure in the evening. And, generally, in most people, about four to six sleep cycles during the night or or during any twenty four hour cycle. You know, it might be, you know, three sleep cycles during the night and a fourth sleep cycle or a fifth sleep cycle while taking a nap during the day. Right? There's even a coach who coaches professional athletes named Nick Littlehales, and he because his athletes travel a lot and some nights they're getting three hours of sleep, and other nights they're getting ten hours of sleep, For example, on a weekend, he simply ensures that they're getting about 30 to 35 sleep cycles during any given week. Right? So there are a lot of different ways to track this, but, ultimately, absence of blue light at night, presence of red light, in bed by about 10:30, sleeping for four to six sleep cycles, and you can even measure sleep cycles using, like, an Oura ring or, you know, sleep tracking device like that. And then waking up, getting a lot of sunlight exposure in the morning, and then avoiding any sympathetic nervous system type of stimulation within about three hours prior to bedtime. Those are some of the things we see that can increase your circadian rhythmicity. You know, and then, of course, there's normal sleep hygiene. Right? Sleeping in a cold environment or taking a a lukewarm or even a cold shower prior to bed to ensure that the body temperature is low. There are even devices like a ChiliPad that will circulate cold water under you while you're asleep, and I I certainly like and I I use that. I keep my home at about 64 to 66 degrees while I sleep at night. And then, of course, darkness is important and, limiting the bed to only sleep or perhaps sex are you know, that's that's a prudent idea as well. And then ensuring that you have absence of noise, you know, whether that be via foam earplugs or some type of white noise device that's placed in airplane mode next to the bed. You know, these are all normal sleep hygiene parameters, but, you know, ultimately, yeah, circadian rhythm is very important. Probably some of the better books on sleep out there are the book Sleep by doctor Nick Littlehales, Why We Sleep by doctor Matthew Walker, The Power of When by doctor Michael Breus, and probably one of my favorites of late, a book by doctor Satchin Panda about, I believe it's called you know what? I forget what it's called. The Circadian Code, I think, is the name of it. Yeah. Exactly. That's a really good book about circadian rhythm as well. So there's a lot of really good resources in this day and age when it comes to sleep. Yeah. That's true. And, you're also I I think you're writing your own book, your next book in the same area. My next book is more focused on antiaging and longevity. Mhmm. There are certainly some pretty comprehensive chapters on sleep, on nootropics and smart drugs and biohacking the brain. There's a lot in there on kinda like we touched on the minimal effective dose of exercise and the perfect workouts and even biohacks for workouts and exercise. It's a I mean, it's about a thousand pages long right now, so there'll be a lot that kinda goes to the cutting room floor or that winds up on my website. But, ultimately, yeah, the book kind of is it's about mind optimization, body optimization, and even quantum physics and spiritual optimization, you know, the importance of gratitude and love and belief, sound healing, you know, and and, and kind of a mixture of Chinese traditional medicine and Ayurvedic principles combined with Western medicine and biohacking and and science. So I've been working on that book for about a year and a half. And, yeah, folks go to bengreenfieldfitness.com and sign up for my newsletter. I'll be sending out a few newsletters prior to the book's release Nice. Kinda leading up to when it gets released. But I'm looking at at 2019 is probably when that book is gonna get released. Okay. Looking forward to it. But, which we we what do you think is the most important one for for, longevity, like sleep, nutrition, exercise, or these things like relationships and the community that we've been not talking about? For me, Sys. That I mean, over and over again, we see that probably the two biggest things you see in fruit fly studies, yeast studies, rodent studies, and even human studies would be the presence of mild hormetic stressors spread throughout the day, including sunlight radiation, exposure to heat, exposure to cold, exposure to hunger, exposure to digestive stress, or body stress from the intake of of, like, the wild plants and herbs and spices that present a mild stress to the body. That that would be one thing. And and exercise, of course, is considered a hormetic stressor as well. Right? Like movement. Yeah. And then that and reproductive usefulness or fertility or, like, number of offspring produced or at least number of offspring that that is trying to be produced, you know, frequency of sex, frequency of interaction with the opposite sex, and either number of children or number of sexual encounters. You know, I would say if anything, like, you know, don't be afraid to to kind of, like, be hungry and to sweat and to be cold and to shiver every once in a while or even go out of your way to do something like that every day. And then try and have sex regularly or have a robust kinda, like, social life that even just includes lots of encounters with the opposite sex. And those would be probably the two biggest things that, based on studies, you could do for longevity. That's very interesting. Yeah. Like, it's it's it's as if, like, the, people who are exposed to these difficult situations and toughness, they they're tougher to die. So yeah. Yeah. Harder hard harder to kill, as we say over here in America. Harder to kill. It's about how hard you can get hit and keep moving forward. This is gonna be the topic you're gonna you're gonna be talking at the Biohacker Summit in Toronto, right, or something similar? Yeah. I am gonna be talking at the Biohacker Summit. And, yeah, it will it will be a lot of a lot of this type of information, and and some some newer things that I'm researching right now in the realm of antiaging and longevity. So, yeah, I'll be I'll be presenting on some interesting things there. Nice. Nice. We're actually organizing the biohacker summit in Tallinn, with with Demu and and his team, in September as well. So it's gonna be awesome. I like Tallinn. Tallinn's great. You never go there. You were recently too. Right? Much. Yeah. You need to go and eat at this restaurant, Old Hanse, up in Old Town. It's a medieval restaurant where they can eat bear and elk and, and wonderful, pork and all all manner of spice and wines and kneads, and it's very Tallinn's a very cool kind of medieval town. I like it there. Nice scenery. If you guys do the conference next year, keep me posted. I'm probably not gonna not gonna be out there this September. But, yeah, I I love to get over to Europe. I think I'm actually speaking in Japan for most of September, so that's where I'll be. Yeah. Definitely. We'll definitely keep you updated. And I'll I'll I'm I'm coming to the Toronto event as well, so I'll see you there. Great. Yeah. I'll see you at Spark. Yeah. But, you also mentioned that, people can, sign up for your newsletter at your website. Are there any ways they can, come come or come into contact with you? Yeah. And I'm also on Instagram. And I I tweet a lot of research studies too. So Twitter and Instagram, I post a lot of kinda, like, foods and recipes and workouts and things like that to Instagram at instagram.com/bengreenfieldfitness. And then on Twitter, I'm just, Ben Greenfield. So, yeah, any anybody who would like to to learn a little better, follow me. Usually, I try to I try to be as helpful as I can. So yeah. Definitely. And really enjoyed talking with you, Ben, and, I'm glad that you make it. And my I'm gonna ask you my last question, which is, what would be this one piece of advice or a habit that you wish you adopted sooner that improved your body and your mind? You know what? I don't wanna kick the horse to death, but I would say fasting. Yeah. I have to be careful because there's a lot of, for example, like, lean skinny women who exercise too much who hear that, and they're like, I'm gonna fast and still do my hot yoga and my spin classes and my Yeah. CrossFitting and my kettlebells. And and, no. Like, my wife fasts, but she you know, her typical day of fasting, she's kinda, like, in the garden and fermenting some foods in the kitchen. And, you know, she might go to the gym once every one to two weeks. Right? So, yeah, there there's a there's there's definitely a line that needs to be drawn. But, ultimately, I would say fasting. Just being a little more cognizant of of hunger signaling and the type of foods that I eat. And, I guess the last thing I would say is this, then I have to go. But it would be you know, fasting is not necessarily synonymous with caloric restriction. Like, I eat I eat probably 4,000 calories a day, but I just have long periods of time that I go between eating. And sometimes I'll eat literally a 3,500 calorie dinner with half a bottle of wine. Yeah. You know? That's good. But I but that might be after I haven't eaten since 10AM. Right? So so yeah. It's I would say that fasting, though, would be probably the top thing that I would have adopted earlier. Yeah. I agree. But, yeah, thanks thanks, Ben, for coming on the show, and, I'll I'll see you in Toronto, I guess. Awesome, man. I'll see you there. Thank you for having me on, and, goodbye, everybody. I'll see you around. Alright. See you. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you leave us a review on iTunes and other social media platforms. Also, if you're interested in participating the Biohacker Summit, whether that be in in Tallinn or Toronto, then check out the links in the show notes. And, I'm definitely gonna be participating in all of them, and it's gonna be an amazing time. It's one of the best it's the top biohacking and human optimization conference in the world. So the links are in the show notes. But other than that, thanks for listening. My name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.