A lot of people are doing intermittent fasting in hopes of activating autophagy, boosting stem cells, and reversing aging. But is it possible to gain those effects while fasting for only sixteen hours? This video is gonna be about, do you get autophagy while fasting for sixteen hours? Make sure you click the like and subscribe for future videos about autophagy as well. They do say that it takes about forty eight to seventy two hours to gain autophagy, but that's based on how long it takes for someone to reach ketosis on the standard Western diet. How long it's gonna take for you to get into autophagy depends on many things. Nutrient and growth factors that regulate autophagy are glucose, amino acids, and insulin because they affect the anabolic catabolic balance of your body. The fuel sensors that monitor this are mTOR and AMPK. How long until autophagy kicks in for you specifically depends on the nutrient balance of these factors such as glucose, amino acids and insulin. The most popular method of intermittent fasting is the sixteen and eight method where you fast for about sixteen hours and eat food within eight. So do you get autophagy while fasting for sixteen hours? That would depend primarily on how much carbs and protein you eat during the reading window. Consuming excess calories of all kinds are going to inhibit autophagy and it's going to take a longer time for you to get into the therapeutic zone of autophagy because your body has to burn through that stored fuel first. Practicing mild caloric restriction already will enable you to tap into the autophagy zone much faster because you're in caloric restriction. Starving. Liver glycogen content dictates the balance between mTOR and AMPK. It's also the most important part to regulating ketosis and glycolysis, whether you're burning ketones or glucose. The liver can store about 100 to 150 grams of glycogen, and if it's full, you're inhibiting the formation of ketone bodies and stopping autophagy. When liver glycogen gets depleted, you start to create ketone bodies from fat. It takes about sixteen to twenty hours of fasting to deplete liver glycogen by doing nothing at all. Things like walking, doing cardio, or exercising will definitely speed up this process. Ketone bodies also stimulate chaperone mediated autophagy or CMA, which targets only specific amino acids and substrates. Beta hydroxybutyrate and other ketones tend to be higher during fasting and starvation, but they're also elevated when eating the ketogenic diet. Being in ketosis while eating the ketogenic diet can support the autophagy process by stimulating chaperone mediated autophagy. Certain fats like MCT oil or coconut oil can also stimulate this process a little bit, but too much calories from all kind will still inhibit autophagy by activating mTOR even if it doesn't raise your insulin. The therapeutic ketogenic diet is probably the most fasting mimicking diet. Its ratios are 5% carbs, 15 to 20% protein, and 70 to 80% fat. However, to gain the real effects of autophagy, you still have to fast. Fasting for just sixteen hours isn't probably gonna give you almost any autophagy. The post absorptive state of metabolism lasts about four hours after the meal you've eaten. In reality, you enter the fastest state only after about five to six hours of not eating because prior to death, you're still fed and you're burning the calories you ate. If you finish your last meal at 7PM in the evening, then your real physiological fast starts around midnight. On a sixteen to twenty hour fast, you've only spent time in a fasted state for about twelve hours, which probably isn't enough to trigger autophagy. Disappointed! You can only experience mild autophagy on sixteen hour fast if you practice mild caloric restriction, you eat low carb, you don't eat fruit because fructose is gonna refill liver glycogen, you don't overeat protein and you also spend some time walking around in a fasted state as well as doing some exercises. There are also some specific foods that stimulate the autophagy process without having a significant source of calories, such as black coffee, herbal teas, apple cider vinegar, medicinal mushrooms, turmeric, berberine, and even cayenne pepper. So breaking your fast with these foods at the sixteen hour mark may prolong some of the physiological effects of the fast. But this raises the question, would you want to be bothered by doing sixteen and eight types of fasting if you don't really get that much autophagy from it? Why not just eat three meals a day and then have this prolonged fasts, like, three days every once in a while? Personally, I would say that a one meal a day diet with about twenty two to twenty three hours of fasting every day is definitely more autophagic than sixteen:eight types of fasting. But a sixteen:eight type of fast is still better than nothing. The physiological effects of time restricted eating are still quite immense and they do have an effect. Even if it's not autophagy then you will still experience improved insulin sensitivity, lower blood glucose, more fat adaptation, better blood sugar regulation, and the other hormonal benefits. On a one meal a day diet, you could eat carbs and still start producing ketones by the end of the next day as long as you don't over consume them. On a low carb diet, you could potentially reach that therapeutic zone of autophagy a bit sooner just because of having lower glycogen stores. In conclusion, the sixteen and eight type of fasting is the bare minimum I would recommend for everyone to follow because it still has a lot of the physiological benefits. It will keep your liver glycogen lower, which in turn will enable your body to tap into ketosis and autophagy on a more frequent basis as well. If you want to know how to master the art and science of nutrient signaling, meal timing, food combination, and intermittent fasting, then check out my book Metabolic Autophagy. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay autophagic. Stay empowered. Wait a minute.