Our next speaker is is, is amazing amazing. He is one of the pioneers really in when it comes to understanding the real health effects of ketogenic diets. So, yeah. Thanks, Cyborg, again, for this amazing speech. And, one point I want to bring out is that one of the biggest tragedies in life is not knowing if you are diseased or or even if you are diseased, not knowing what to do about it. So the purpose of my speech would be to kind of bring some real time interventions or lifestyle lifestyle practices that you can implement into your life and kind of gain this insight of how how can I see my body, going? In what one in what directions am I heading towards with my health, and what are the trends? So, yeah. So the topic of my speech is gonna be balancing the anabolic and catabolic cycles of life. So this is gonna be this sort of, like a metaphorical, title though to it as well. So let's start from, what is life itself? This is this is life, basically. It's a collection of, you know, genetics, DNA sequences, chromosomes, mitochondria, everything, bacteria that is ultimately gonna create you as a as a superorganism. And, when you dissect the life into two parts, then at first, you're gonna get, where life sprouts into existence is gonna be DNA replication, cellular growth, and that's gonna be true the the term for that is gonna be called the anabolism, where you're growing. And the opposite to that is entropy or life itself, the process of living and dying, and that's gonna be catabolism. Those twos are these balancing, counterparts of, life. And when you look at when you look at it from a metabolic perspective, then, these these two are always interacting and they're balancing each other, but depending depending on the input and output of your system. So at the top, we have fuel, which would be everything that is going to allow you to live, like oxygen, energy, food, calories, everything they included, and that's gonna go into your your metabolic furnace, so to say. And in that, it's gonna be cycled into it's gonna be broken down into energy through the process of catabolism. And through the process of anabolism, you're gonna build that energy into whether muscle tissue, bones bones, fat tissue, and brain cells, and everything. So a good picture to think about it is that when you're born, you're, you know, being anabolic. You're being, born into this world. And, when you die, you're gonna eventually lead to the point of ultimate catabolism, where you're being recycled back. And the same principle can be found in the example of, like, building tissue, like muscle tissue and everything that's anabolic. And creating energy itself is catabolic as well. You're literally breaking down energy molecules so that you can recycle them back into, like, literally building this tissue and, starting to live. So you can see this trend in your everyday life as well as as a human being. Like, when you're born, then, you're you're being very anabolic, so to say. You're you're producing out of growth hormone and that's going to help you to kind of build this new tissue and build new bone structures and everything included. And as you age, all of these anabolic hormones, they begin to drop just because of the process of entropy, like, growth hormone decreases as you age. And usually after 20 and after 30, that's when your growth hormone is really going to begin to plummet and you'll begin to enter the catabolic cycles of life. And the same trends can be found in, like, overall muscle mass and, overall strength as well. Like early life, you're growing, developing. During your adulthood, you're kinda maintaining it. And in your older life, the the general trend is that you begin to lose all a lot of your muscle mass and everything included. You're weight weighing down yourself. And, one of the biggest reasons why we age are connected to these anabolic and catabolic cycles, so a huge cause of aging itself is this term called sarcopenia, which translates into muscle loss and as you saw in the previous previous slides growth growth hormone declines and, that's going to basically lead to sarcopenia. That that's one of the causes of why you kind of go into this catabolic mode because, you're not producing that much growth hormone, you're not producing that much testosterone, and, you're not being you don't have enough of the anabolic hormones to sustain your lean muscle. But sustaining your lean muscle is incredibly vital for your, general longevity and lifespan, not because of just only having the youthfulness, but at the same time, it acts like a huge, metabolic organ as well, muscle tissue. Like, it protects against, it makes you more insulin sensitive, which will then protect against heart disease. It's going to help you to have some cognitive performance as well and, of course, maintains joint integrity and everything. And a lot of people why people die is or why old people die is, like, they fall off stairs. They broke their hip, and they're gonna simply, you know, they don't have the resilience and robustness. So when you look at the extremes of these extremes of these cycles, then on one hand, we have like extreme anabolism, which would be like these huge bodybuilders who are taking it to the extreme. And on the other hand, we have, like a old old person who is simply losing all of all of the marked muscle mass because of being too catabolic. But the problem is that both of them can lead to, like, death in a sense that both of them can accelerate your aging, and, you don't want to be at the ends of each spectrum at the at the bottom ends. So I want to achieve this balance of where you know how how can I balance these cycles and to in in so doing sustain increase my lifespan and also promote longevity and live a more healthier life? So let's move on into some more technical, tips in a sense. So this this is not the food pyramid. This is not the Illuminati pyramid either. It's, the it's the protein kinase, pyramids or triads that is going to bring it's gonna give you this illustration of how your body, detects and balances these cycles of anabolism and catabolism. So this is going to describe the main nutrient signaling factors that are constantly monitoring the energetic status inside your system. So your body is constantly in from the perspective of evolution, it's constantly detecting how many nutrients are circulating your bloodstream. And in so doing, it's gonna detect, okay, I have these nutrients. Okay. I can be anabolic. Or if I don't have enough of these nutrients, then I'm going to have to shift into a catabolic state because because of not having the essential nutrients for for that. So on the bottom left corner, we have mTOR, which is the main, anabolic pathway of your body. It's, it's short for mammalian target of rapamycin. So it's this sort of a genetic, fuel sensor that directs cellular growth and anabolism. It's going to make you build muscle. It's going to, promote telomere lengthening. It's going to, like drive DNA replication and everything that is related to anabolism and growing. And on the top, we have AMPK, which is another critical fuel sensors from an evolutionary perspective as well. And AMPK translates into AMP bacteria protein kinase. So AMPK detects also the the lack of nutrients and it mainly gets elevated in the presence of energy starvation when your body gets depleted of nutrients. When you run out of its, you know, immediately accessible calories and things like that, then your body's like like very adaptable machine, and it's not gonna die immediately. It's going to simply start to mobilize a lot of the, stores or the energy stores it has stored inside its body, like in the bone matrix, in the adipose tissue, and everything included. So AMPK is helping you to kinda survive periods of energy deprivation when you were starving in the past as a hunter gatherer or when you were simply facing famine. So AMPK then is going to lead to the activation of this, fuel sensor called u ULK one, which will then activate this pathway called autophagy. Autophagy is, what we'll talk about next, but autophagy is like the main catabolic, pathway that will that will help to mobilize a lot of the body's resources to survive. So what is autophagy? Autophagy, it translates from Greek, autophagos, if I'm not mistaken, and it means self digestion or eating of self, And it literally is the process where your healthy cells, they start to, you know, move around inside your body, and they're starting to eat the, old and weak cells so that they can be converted back into energy. So So it is literally is like a huge some sort of hunger games happening inside your body and, it's going to help you to sustain yourself and it promotes the survival of the healthy cells because you want to get rid of the old and weak cells while maintaining the healthy cells, so you can, you know, keep maintain your longevity in a sense. You don't want to lose the good stuff. And there are many benefits, scientifically proven benefits of autophagy as well, such as it's gonna reduce inflammation, it's gonna strengthen your immune system against pathogens, anti aging benefits, longevity benefits. It can cure a lot of diseases and even even, there are some studies that they can even cure cancer and tumors and everything like that. So it's the cycling of old and weak cells and it's gonna eliminate a lot of these pathogens and viruses as well. So it's like this very your body's innate healing mechanism that is like even even, it's even recorded in a lot of ancient scriptures and these different, texts as well. So another one of the reasons why you age and what's the cause of death is, there's this theory called the mitochondrial theory of aging, which basically is that, as you age, your mitochondria, which are the powerhouses of your cells that the cells, the organelles that are responsible for producing energy, those cells, they're gonna eventually waste away and that's going to lead to many other issues related to energy production. You don't have enough energy, you have a weakened immune system, and because of that you're most more susceptible to disease and everything included. So you wanna maintain, like, healthy mitochondria, as long as you can and, make them more powerful in a sense. So everything that you are exposed to on a daily basis, like breathing, these lights, moving around, eating, sleeping, those things, they're causing some sort of oxidative stress or they're they're causing some damage to the mitochondria. It's inevitable, like, entropy itself is the accumulation of damage or oxidative stress to the mitochondria. And that leads to the creation of these different free radicals and reactive oxygen species that will if not if not if not controlled, then they will eventually still lead to apoptosis, which is cellular death and the destruction of your mitochondria. But on the other hand, we have you can't protect against that. It's it's possible through the process called mitophagy. Mitophagy is like mitochondrial autophagy, where your healthy mitochondria will be recycling, old and weak mitochondria back into healthy mitochondria. So that's gonna protect against the mitochondrial dysfunction. So it's like the autophagy is like one one of the critical aspects of longevity and maintaining gold is, mitochondrial functioning, and it's you can think of it like Pac Man indeed, where the Pac Man is hunting down these ghosts, which are like unhealthy cells. And Let's move on with the AMPK. As we saw in the previous slides, AMPK is the one that is going to help to activate autophagy, to activate this process of recycling. So AMPK is always being activated by these things that put more energetic stress onto your body and, one of those things, that AMPK helps to activate us further are things like fatty acid oxidation. You're gonna burn more fat. You're gonna improve glucose transport. You're in more insulin sensitive insulin sensitive. You're gonna trigger autophagy and, but the problem is that AMPK is still like a catabolic, fuel sensor. It's gonna block the other anabolic, anabolic pathways like protein synthesis are growing. So you have on one hand, you have mTOR that is going to promote growth and on the other hand, you have AMPK, which is promoting metabolism and it's going to block mTOR so that you could have the ability to recycle it because your body is quite clever in a sense. It's not going to activate autophagy if it doesn't feel the need to. It only does it when it's under like serious energetic demands, when it needs to produce more energy. But autophagy isn't, you know, the end all be all, and it's not all good all the time. When you don't have enough autophagy or dysfunctional autophagy, then that will still lead to, like, weakness and atrophy. You're not being able to sustain your lean muscle mass. And on the other end of the spectrum, on the extreme, if you have too much autophagy, then you will also be, like, causing detrimental damage to yourself. Like in the example of aging where you lose a lot of muscle mass. That's like too much autophagy is still bad. So the aim is to have this balance where you can be at the optimal dose of autophagy with these daily interventions. So let's go back to here again. So we we saw that AMPK, energy starvation, nutrient depletion will lead to autophagy and Autophagy is blocked by mTOR. MTOR is the growth growth, pathway that will block autophagy. If there if if there's too much mTOR, then autophagy can't be activated because those those two those two things are constantly being, your body wants to prioritize anabolism, and it wants to promote as much storage of energy as possible. So what is mTOR? Like I said, mammalian target of rapamycin, the main, growth pathway of their body and mTOR is mostly activated by nutrients factors and growth factors such as insulin, IGF one, glucose, carbohydrates, and amino acids as well, protein. And one of the main amino acids that drives mTOR, or the most powerful one, is leucine, which is, then going to lead to this cascade of different metabolic pathways that's ultimately gonna end up with muscle protein synthesis or growth, cellular growth, cellular replication. So again, these things are constantly being balanced out. At the top, we have insulin IGF one, which happens in nutrient excess if there's too many nutrients inside your body, whether that be carbohydrates or amino acids, whatever there may be, that those are gonna block, EMPK and and autophagy and nutrient excess is also be activated by too much mTOR and that will then accelerate aging and can lead to some higher risk of cancer. And on the other hand, we have caloric restriction where your body is depleted of energy. It's very efficient with the fuel that it has. It doesn't have excess. It's, you know, being able to work with what it's got as efficient as Gan and that can will that and then will lead to like a longevity and better metabolic health and longevity. So let's go further. IGF one, which we saw activate sampore is one of the these IGF one is like a growth factor that gets activated by growth hormone in the brain from the pituitary gland. Whenever your pituitary gland releases growth hormone, then growth hormone will travel will send a signal to the liver and the liver will then release IGF one into the bloodstream as well. IGF one is then going to promote muscle growth, bone strength and tissue repair and general anabolism. And studies, meta analysis have found that, if you have too low levels of IGF-one, then your risk of dying increases. So on the left, we have low levels of IGF-one and on the right, we have also high levels of IGF-one. So both are bad again, too low levels of, IGF-one and too high levels of IGF-one can be detrimental. So again, in the middle, somewhere in the middle is like a good optimal dose for longevity. And again, this this can be taken, as illustrations. So caloric restriction, energy depletion, it's one of the few ways of scientists actually know how to promote lifespan in practically all species, whether that be yeast, bacteria, monkeys, mice, and other life forms. So this graph shows, rhesus monkeys, where you can see when they're fully fed, then their age is somewhere, you know, 30 or so. 10% caloric restriction leads to like a few months of extended lifespan and 50% caloric restriction, almost doubles their lifespan or at least 50% increase in their in their lifespan. And there have been even some studies on yeast cells where caloric restriction doubles the lifespan of yeast by 100%. So it's one of the few ways of actually we can see that it works. And, you know, probably the same principles apply to humans. It's not conclusive, but, it there there are some, similarities. And, one of the reasons why caloric restriction promotes your lifespan, you know, there are there are many things that can contribute to it, like lower insulin and lower obesity and a better metabolic health, but a lot of evidence is showing that the effects of caloric restriction are actually directly linked to autophagy, like we mentioned earlier. So they've they've actually done some studies on some mice where they genetically modified the mice in a way that they wouldn't be able to activate autophagy because of some genetic mutation and those mice, even though they were caloric restricted, they didn't live longer, but the ones in another group where they were proficient at causing autophagy, those mice, they still live longer. So the key is autophagy and, you know, maintaining this recycling of old cells, that you can, you know, clean out clean out the, damaged particles inside your system that are simply causing oxidative stress. So so the so the key is to activate autophagy, not caloric restriction because you can eat very few little calories and basically starve yourself without living longer just because you're not activating autophagy, if you get what I mean. So you have to cut and and at the same time, you can activate autophagy without having to starve yourself. So you have to be you you you can biohack it in a sense. You have to be smart about it, and you don't have to starve yourself to promote your lifespan. You can do it, with these different ways of, how I'm going to share with you. So how to increase autophagy? One of the best ways is intermittent fasting and, when I say intermittent fasting, then I'm not necessarily meaning, like, starvation. There's this there's this immediate, you know, idea that you may come is like starving yourself and such, but intermittent fasting is simply time restricting the period where you consume your calories. And one of the best examples of it, one of the most convenient examples of it is like, during the twenty four hour period, you fast for sixteen hours and you eat all of your calories within eight hours. So you can consume the same amount of calories, as you would on a normal diet, but you simply do it in a very smaller time frame, and you maybe skip a breakfast or or something like that. And because of that, you're gonna allow autophagy to be activated because autophagy gets activated only in, like, energy depletion. But if you're eating small calories, whether that be like a small breakfast or something like that, then you're not gonna allow Watophagy to kick in. But if you simply extend the fast and you maintain a zero caloric intake and you fast for maybe like sixteen hours, then you're gonna allow autophagy to actually, you know, do its work and that's going to promote longevity without necessarily restricting your calories entirely. Another things to look out for is to control their insulin and blood sugar again because, yeah, those are what are be driving the mTOR activation. Caloric restriction again to some extent will be beneficial, but, you know, there's this, dichotomy again or this trade off of if you restrict your calories too much, then again, you're gonna be predisposing yourself to metabolic disease. So that so that I would simply focus on the intermittent fasting part and simply time restricting your food. Then of course exercise and training are again some ways of promoting autophagy mainly, aerobic exercise in this case like cardio. Those that's gonna be more pro autophagy than the resistance exercise and other foods like hormetic foods and herbs, spices, certain foods that I'll share later. Those are also gonna be having some autophagy effect. And what I also think is a really good health intervention and and disease prevention is, like, these extended fasts where you fast for, like, three to five days a few times a year, which which are gonna be good for going really deep into the autophagy pathway and really recycling all those, potential pathogens and diseases that you may come across. So, like, really good prevention. What about mTOR? Like I said, you wanna activate mTOR as well to, you know, sustain your health span and longevity. So resistance training is best the best way to activate mTOR, lifting weights and focusing on strength movements to actually strengthen the bones as well. Driving muscle protein synthesis is also crucial, like a lot of people say that, yeah, you shouldn't eat protein or whatever. But you know, if you don't eat protein, if you don't get enough of the amino acids, then you're gonna actually promote sarcopenia and lose muscle mass. So you actually have have to eat. You have to balance it with the catabolism and the best sources for that is like amino acids. The best, the most powerful for that is leucine, which I'll share with the foods in the next slides and other things like supplements like creatine monohydrate, which is supplement found most or naturally is found in red meat, but as a supplement is also like very convenient. It's gonna help you promote more ATP and, it's gonna help to maintain, like, muscle mass. And phosphatic acid is also like this lipid that is produced during exercise. Some foods contain it as well. In the next slide, I'll share it and generally being in a caloric surplus or eating more food is gonna drive mTOR. So when you look at these, let's say in a real life example, then the daily meal cycles, which you would eat during the day. So the red one would be, like, activation of nutrient signaling. You consume some calories, and that's going to either increase insulin or increase mTOR. And this is like a traditional three meals a day. So the green zones would be these periods of fat burning and periods of autophagy. So this is like a three three square meals a day, which doesn't really give you the good balance because, like, twelve hours of eating, you don't really go into autophagy with that with that time period. But in the example of the sixteen hours of fasting and eight hours of eating, you simply skip one meal and you're gonna prolong the period where your where your body can go into the state of autophagy a lot faster. And that's gonna be like a really good, really simple convenient thing everyone can do in a sense of simply time restricting their daily food intake. And if you want to really promote it further with autophagy, then you can also take it even further and consume your food only like once in in one sitting During like four hours or whatever it is, so there are different ways of you can do it and a real overview of how to actually balance it daily time restricted feeding, you consume these autophagy boosting foods during the first part of the day, then you stimulate AMPK with exercise. You train low glycogen in a sense of you deplete your body with exercise. And after the workout, when you're wanting to repair, you want to promote muscle protein synthesis, then you consume these things that help you to sustain muscle mass. Because if you are fasting, then you want to balance it with adequate protein and things like that. So what are these foods that can, contribute to this autophagy boosting foods? Are these adapted any curves like ashwagandha, ginseng, curcumin, ginger, these are already curves and also like medicinal mushrooms like chaga, reishi, lion's mane, Polar Nutrition in the back is they have, like, a few examples of that. Also, sulforaphane vegetables like broccoli and, cauliflower, coffee and tea as well, they're gonna activate autophagy to a little bit. Polyphenols and resveratrol from berries and, and these and these are anti diabetic, drugs as well, like rapamycin, metformin, and berberine. They're gonna suppress insulin and blood sugar and mTOR as well. So what about mTOR? Again, leucine rich foods like eggs, dairy, those are the highest sources of leucine and generally mTOR can be activated by protein as well like poultry, meat, fish and also like starchy carbohydrates like rice, potatoes, those things And one one interesting thing is that if you combine carbohydrates with protein, then you're gonna drive, more insulin. You're gonna increase insulin a lot more than if you were to eat, maybe, like, simply protein as such. So it it can be, you know, think about it. Do I need to spike my insulin that high with combining carbs and protein, or can I achieve the same result by eating simply low carb and protein? So we have to kinda know what your goals are. And again, like I say that it's, you know, it's about balancing the cycles, but in in reality, there is no real balance. Like, you're always tipping from one end to the other, whether that's during the fastest state, you're being extremely catabolic and when you're eating, you're being more anabolic. So their balance is almost like a myth. It's a constant process of, of, cycling between those processes. So that's the end of my speech, and, these are the places where you can find more of the more of my content about these different, interventions. And, I wanna thank you for listening. Awesome. Thank you. Yeah. Yeah. So out of the list of foods that activate the mTOR pathway, I think I did most of them this morning. Expect, medical, you know, pharmaceuticals like Metformin and it's undiabetic drugs. So what do you think about using such kind of, interventions? Like Yeah. It's it's it's in a sense of, it's much easier to avoid the bad stuff than it is to try to compensate for it in a sense. You can, okay, you eat some cake, which is gonna drive your blood sugar up Yes. And you can potentially take something like metformin or berberine to lower the blood sugar, but in a in a sense, like the much easier thing to do would be to not eat the cake at all and avoid the blood sugar spike in the first place. So, like, you you have to think about it. Is biohacking in a sense, am I biohacking some sort of a habit or am I biohacking the response? Absolutely. So, like, I would I would say, like, depends on the situation, but, yeah, in most cases, avoiding or removing the bad stuff is a lot more effective for both, you know, every every aspect of life. But in the end, like, habits, those die hard. I'm gonna be talking about that after lunch. Thank you, Sim. Sim is only 23 years old, and he's written almost five books already. So, I mean, look at that guy. Give him a lot of applause. Thank you, Sim. Body, mind, empowerment. Get stronger, faster, smarter, quicker, friendlier, more helpful, more driven. Everything the body needs. Control your mind.