Our all of our diseases, both mental and physical, are due to overconsumption, whether we're overconsuming food, overconsuming entertainment. So if we wanna regain and retain our strength, as men in particular, but all people, then we gotta stop the consumption. And I think the best way to begin that process of returning to our true nature is to fast from food. Yeah. Stop eating. Counting macros is hard. Doing cardio is hard. Fasting is simple and easy. It's cool. I love it. Body, mind, empowerment. Get stronger, faster, smarter, quicker, friendlier, more helpful, more driven. Everything the body needs. Control your mind. Welcome to the Body Mind Empowerment podcast. I'm your host, Simland, and our guest today is Elliot Hulse. Elliot is the founder and CEO of Strength Camp, which is a fitness business that not only teaches weightlifting, but also teaches you how to become the strongest version of yourself. Elliot, welcome to the show. Thanks for having me, Sam. Yeah. It's, good to see you again. And last time we saw from in face to face was in Chicago a few months ago in November, if I'm not mistaken. So, what what have you been up to, like, since that time? It's funny because I know we're gonna be talking about fasting today, and it as soon as I got home from Chicago in November, that's when I started experimenting with prolonged fasting. So between between then and now, it has been a tremendous transformation in my body and in my life due to these big chunks of days without eating. Right. Right. Yeah. You do look look, quite different and you, much leaner, much more cleaner, so to say that, what got you into this or why did you want to start, trying these fast? Well, it's funny because I first started fasting in 2002, and I did it as a spiritual fast. I became part of a spiritual community. And it would as soon as I joined, they were like, hey. By the way, this is our fasting month. And so I'm like, okay. I guess. And, you know, I had just finished playing college football and stuff, so I was I was huge. I was drinking protein shakes three times a day. And here they are. And, they're like, well, are you gonna fast with us? And I was like, okay. Yeah. So I did it. And so it was nineteen days. And it was sort of a little different where, it was no food and no water, so it was a dry fast, but from sunup to sundown. Right. And my life changed big time at the at the time. My body changed and my life changed. I attributed it to a myriad of different things. You know, I was reading a lot of spiritual scripture at the time and praying a lot. And so, you know, there was a there was a transformation of character and mind through that. But it wasn't until many years later that I began to realize the the the transformative effect that the fast itself had, not just on my body and how much weight I lost and how energetic I felt and how bright and aware my brain became, that, that now so much new science I mean, it's only been the past few years. All of a sudden science is interested in fasting. Back then, I didn't know what was going on. So, you know, ten years later, I think, like, 2012, 2013, I started, you know, when, Warrior Diet came out, started messing with fasting again. And, and I remember the great benefit that I had every year by doing the Baha'i fast. And so knowing that I was coming up on my fortieth birthday, and, I had started and failed at a few different attempts to transform myself. I just thought back to how rapidly and how, how extraordinary the transformation always had been when I would fast for that for that month for that nineteen days. So I decided I'm not gonna wait. I'm not gonna wait to do a nineteen day fast. I wanna just start now. And so in November I started, I started out with, the toughest part was learning how to go to bed without eating. So I did a couple thirty six hour fasts and then I pushed it to forty eight. And then I started doing three day and five day fast. And it it was a lot of fun. I love challenging myself. And I didn't expect to lose nearly as much weight as I did as quickly as I did. I was actually a little astonished. I didn't I never thought I would. I thought I'd lose, like, you know, ten, fifteen pounds. I'm I'm down, like, forty forty forty five pounds. That's pretty gross. And, and the the crazy thing is that it was it's not like it was hard. Counting macros is hard. Mhmm. Doing cardio is hard. Mhmm. Fasting is simple and easy. It's cool. I love it. So, like, I'm ready. This is a lifestyle now. This is it. That's that's the way I'm living. Yeah. It is it is so true that it's not just like a physical kind of practice. It is a lifestyle that you do kind of who would want to adopt into your life. And, you know, part of the reasons why those, you know you mentioned those spiritual circles that they they kind of promote fasting is also why part of the reason that it's gonna it's gonna implement these sort of periods of healing and periods of abstinence into the person's modern life so to say that in the past hunter gatherers they would you know naturally fast all the time and quite frequently but you know after after humans got more access to foods then you know their their comfort seeking simply didn't want to you know fast that voluntarily. So we're kind of putting it into this you know spiritual context. It helps the person to also kind of follow the certain rules that allow them to you know voluntarily or, you know, deliberately go through these periods of abstinence. And, you know, it heals the body, it heals the mind as well. And it is something that I do think it's almost like an invaluable part of, living in the modern worlds where, like, there's so much temptation and there's, like, excess of, everything. Mhmm. Yeah. Our all of our diseases, both mental and physical, are due to overconsumption. Whether we're overconsuming food, overconsuming entertainment. And so funny thing this year, I was introduced to red pill philosophy, and I started reading Raul Tomasi. And like a lot of the a lot of the young men that I, that subscribed to me, they were asking me lots of questions about, like, men going their own way and no faps. So all this they they just started pouring all these questions with masculinity on me. And so as I started delving into a lot of the guys that that, you know, that's their thing. Mhmm. I began to realize how, of course, there are a myriad of different ways that the world feminizes us. But I think the number one way is by having us constantly in a state of overconsumption. And that by eating, eating, eating, eating, you know, you like I like to say that the the nature of the sexes are found in the organs. And so the vagina is an absorption. It's a taking in, organ. That's what that's what the feminine does. They consume. It's a consumptive energy. And so the more we're constantly shoving our mouth with food, the further and further we move away from the strength of our masculinity. So if we wanna regain and retain our strength, as men in particular, but all people, then we gotta stop the consumption. And I think the best way to begin that process of returning to our true nature is to fast from food. Yeah. Stop eating. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's also like you can see the same principle in, domestic animals, you know, in in nature and like wild animals, they are really alert. They're not obese. They're healthy and, fully functional. And, you know, as soon as you put them into this confined sitting and you start force feeding them, then they develop disease and they are somewhat slothful. And, you know, there's a there's a huge difference between a lion that's in a zoo and a lion that's in nature. Like, although, you know, the the life of a lion in nature may be more dangerous and more uncertain, it's still, like, more, you know, vibrant, and it's definitely, like, a more healthier version of the lion that's in the zoo. Yeah. And, what kind of, maybe maybe maybe we can go through some of the methodologies or how did you fast during this time as well? Like, maybe what kind of windows did you practice, and how did you train, and what did you eat at that time? So, I jumped right in with doing thirty six hour fast because I've done, you know, twenty four hour fast or or oh, mad in the past. And, it was cool. It was good. But I was looking for a challenge also too. And I had never gone in my I guess in my entire life. I'm 39 years old. I've never gone to bed hungry. And you know there are millions of starving children that go to bed hungry every single night. And I'm like, can I not go to sleep without eating? You know? And so it was it was sort of like a little bit of a mental thing. And so I began with those and I was doing, two to three. So basically every other day. Every other day, I go to bed without eating. That's how I really started to get to started to get the ball rolling. When I was during the fast, those fasting hours, I was drinking water. And I had always added some sea salt to my water, but I began adding a little bit of potassium as well, because I didn't stop training. And it was easy to keep training with these thirty six hour fasts. Right. So just water, I broke now in the beginning, back in, like, November and December, I'd break the fast, but I was just gorging. I mean, I I'd eat any and everything. I couldn't wait. And, you know, one of the things I have a lot of in my house, which, I was gorging a lot on was like nuts. And I just like, and I just start eating piles of nuts and then I have a stomachache and then I'm drinking protein shakes. And, oh, man, I felt horrible. So I learned very quickly that, I've gotta be mindful Alright. About how I break the fast in between. So once I started to get the ball rolling with the with the every other I call it no I call it nomad. You know how you got nomad? Mhmm. One meal a day? I say nomads. I'm doing nomads today. It means no meals a day. Mhmm. And so as I started getting rolling with the nomads and, learning how to break my fast without gorging, I decided to start doing, three day and five days. Mhmm. So and, you know, this is all experiment for me. And like I said, I didn't realize how quickly I was gonna drop weight. I was just testing the waters, so to say. And so, during those three day and then five days, which I would do, like, you know, every other week. Actually, for a while there, I was doing three days every week. I was just going Monday was Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and break on Thursday. I did that for a couple weeks. Mhmm. While I was doing, while I was doing those, I was mindful to break my fasts now with, with more, ketogenic, and and, and nutrient dense foods, and staying away from the nuts, and, you know, really looking to nourish myself a lot better during those times. That's when I it's funny because you or I'd say maybe around that time, that's when your book came out. And I remember, about a year ago, I started reading your, your keto cycle books. Mhmm. And so, when I realized that, okay, I'm gonna be fasting and I wanna break these fast properly. I went right back to your old ebook and I I started looking at them. I was like, alright. So I gotta keep the ketosis. I can't do the insulin spike thing. It just doesn't it I I have too many side effects right now. Mhmm. And, so if I if I do, like, honey and white rice, it I'll start getting itchy and and it's it just doesn't work for me. So I'm trying to find out what what carbs to break my fast with when I want to. I'm, you know, still trying to figure that out. But, but I do feel great just keeping it high fat and high protein like I have been for years. So it's like, you know, just do it to, you know, works. Right. Right. Yeah. That it is so true. Yeah. It's not not kinda over there isn't like a one size fits all solution to everyone and, everyone fasts differently. Everyone eats the foods different foods and, yeah, it's very individual individualized. What kind of what kind of carbs have you been trying to, break the fast with? So, it's interesting because, I started getting into the work of Arnold Ehret. And, and and I spent a good couple months studying his books, rational fasting, the, the mucusless diet healing system. And then I which led me to all these vegans and fruitarians, even breatharians. I'm checking out these guys on YouTube and I'm like, my I'm impressed by them. I'm like, I don't know how you do this, but I I like the ideas. Like like, they sound wonderful. Like, yes. Imagine, you only need to eat fruit. Like, that sounds great. It's cheap and it's easy and Right. Man. So I really I guess maybe, January, February, I started, delving into that work, and I came across a lot of guys that use, fasting and, vegetate or vegan and and fruit based diets in order to heal. Because I knew that as my birthday was approaching, I one of my goals this year, and I still got time, is to heal myself of a lot of a lot of the autoimmune stuff that I'm dealing with. Like, you know, like I was mentioning before, the itching and the dandruff, and I got some skin problems. And so, before before going into my extend my ten day, which is my longest extended fast, I was filling myself my mind with all these ideas. And even though I couldn't do it just yet, you know, you've asked about carbs. Like, you know, they were saying, like, eat a lot of bananas and a lot of vegetables and, like, you know, fill up all these carbs. On the on these fruit fruit based or, or plant based foods. Eat watermelon. And I'm like, oh, man. That sounds great. So knowing that I couldn't do it because of the autoimmune, the the skin, the inflammation that I get from it. Mhmm. I said to myself, I'm gonna do a 10. I I I was gonna do twenty one days, but I ended up breaking. I'll talk about that later. But I I was gonna do an extended fast, and then start eating vegetables and fruits and higher starch things, you know. Because prior to that, I wasn't I just wasn't, you know, answering your question. I just I stayed away from it because I know what happens. It's bad news. And so, I went ten days starting in the the March 1. And I did well. I made some mistakes. We can talk about that later. But when I decided to break after on the eleventh day, I was like, okay. I'm gonna try I'm gonna go vegan for a week. I was gonna go vegan for a longer time, but after a week, I was like, I can't do this anymore. I went vegan for a week. And so I broke my fast with, with a bunch of salad, cooked carrots, cooked beans and broccoli. And then I started adding chickpeas, which are high in carbs, and sweet potatoes. And so for like two, three days, I'm eating I'm eating all this. It's I needed a lot of calories because, you know, that's low calorie stuff. But I'm eating all this like high starch stuff. Like I was having fruits. What kind of fruits was I eating? I was eating, oh, bananas and apples. I was eating much of well, berries don't bother me too much. So I was eating I was eating all that stuff. I was being a fruitarian. I was eating a vegan. So I was a vegan for two two, three days, and I was okay. By the third day, I'm getting foggy headed. The rashes are coming back. I'm feeling horrible. I'm like, oh, man. It's I can't do it. So I pushed it out. And I'm getting chubby too, which is crazy. So, I'm starting to I'm starting to retain water. I was super lean after my ten days. I'm starting to retain water. I'm getting foggy headed. Their ashes are starting to come back. I'm getting grumpy. I'm waking up heavy in the morning, which while I was fasting, I was waking up bright in the morning. Mhmm. And so by the seventh day, I was just sick with myself. And I was like, I can't this is not working for me. It's so funny because right about that time, I started looking on YouTube for vegan bodybuilders. I'm like, I don't know how they do it. These guys must know something I don't know. So I'm I'm looking at all the videos and 90% of them are they're soft. And I'm like, they're vegan bodybuilders, these kids, but they're soft. And they're eating a lot of processed food. Mhmm. And and I'm just shaking my head. And I'm like, I this is impossible. This doesn't make any sense. This is not gonna work, but I was hopeful. I was still hopeful until I got a phone call from a friend who I hadn't spoken to in a couple years. Probably a year or so. And she, she and I went to college together and she was a shot putter. She was always jacked. Shot putter. She threw discus. She's a beast. And, a few years later, you know, after college, she and I met up. She started doing straw man too. And she's lifting stone. She's winning competitions and stuff. And then about, she goes vegan. And I was like, wow. Okay. Cool. Good for you. Now here I am after going vegan for a week, watching all these YouTube videos, getting soft and frustrated myself. And she calls me. And I'm like, hey, Gina. How are you doing? And she says, oh, you wouldn't believe it. I was in and out of hospitals and going to the doctor, and I was having all these problems. And I'm like, well, well, what happened? She's like, apparently, vegan doesn't work for strong athletes like me. That's not the way she said it, but she's like, because she's still trying to do strong man. She's like, apparently, vegan's not a good idea for me. I started eating meat again, and I'm feeling great. And so right then and there, I I put my foot down. I was like, alright. That's it. I can't do this. This is this doesn't make any sense. God is showing me all the different signs that being a vegan athlete just ain't for me. So, here I am back to eating high fat, high carbs. I mean, sorry. High fat, moderate protein, low carb. And, and right now I'm still trying to figure out what carbs I try to I try to do maybe a 150 Mhmm. A hundred, two hundred fifty grams once a week. Right. Which, you know, which I probably don't even need to do. I just want to do. Mhmm. But I still haven't found anything that works. So unless I go through a healing, which it might take me a twenty or a thirty day fast, which I'm prepared to do, just I'm gonna wait. I just I can't I have to stay away from it. Right. Right. Yeah. It is quite interesting. And, a few things I wanna point out is that, yeah, if you are going go under starting to go for, like, a really long fast, then the best thing to do before that is definitely not to have like a bunch of carbs. So because, you know, if you are it's it's it's you know, I I I believe like you can probably tell from a personal experience as well that fasting in ketosis or on a keto diet is definitely much easier than fasting on a high carb diet because, like, you're already gonna stay in the therapeutic zone of ketosis with, like, lower carb intake and, you won't suffer that much during the initial kinda shift. So that's, like, I always recommend people to, like, if they are going for longer fast, then, eating keto or low carb before that a few days at least is gonna be much, helpful for, transitioning over into it, much faster. And yeah. You you you didn't have, like, any you mentioned some autoimmune issues from some carbs and, but, you didn't have, like, any serious health concern that made you want to, you know, go for a long fast. You simply wanted to fast, as a way of losing fat and, also preparing for your upcoming birthday as such. Am I right? No. I did wanna heal. I wanna I wanna heal from these goddamn skin conditions. Right. My skin's all fucked up, man. I get, like, I get rashes on my elbows and in my knees. And then I I maybe the past year or so, I've been getting really bad dandruff. Mhmm. And it's funny, when I don't eat, when I fast, it goes away. Mhmm. No problem. Right. Yeah. It's Even Yeah. It's quite interesting that you usually something some, autoimmune issues, they all kinda originate from the gut. So, maybe looking into some form of maybe taking like a bacteria test as well looking at, if you have, like, maybe potentially a small intestine bacterial overgrowth or something that that's that's something to kinda look into. What what was interesting is, as I started doing the more prolonged fasting and, and looking into healing, I started, I came across the idea of doing salt water flushes and, an enemas. And so I was like, okay, cool. Because, I wanted to give that a try, you know, when I can clean out my body. So, during the ten days, I was doing enemas in the beginning, and then towards the end, like day eight, day nine, I I was doing some flushes. And it was crazy because while the first few days while I was doing the enemas, you know, by the time I get to, like, the third or fourth day, like, there wasn't much coming out. There was a little bit, but there was not that much debris coming out. I figured, especially after not eating and doing enemas, that by date day 10 or actually the morning of day 11, that if I did a flush, there'd be nothing there. Yeah. There's nothing in there. And it turns out that even after doing a bunch of animals and ten days of not eating on day 11, there was still a bunch of debris that was coming out in the toilet. So I'm pretty confident that I've got a lot more cleansing to do. Mhmm. Mhmm. Yeah. It's quite interesting, yeah, that, there is definitely, like, a lot of food. You know? Imag because the part of reason is that people eat, a bunch of food every day, and they don't really fast at all. So it, it kinda clogs up in the in the intestines definitely. Like, even if you think that you're eating a healthy diet and eating clean, then, you know, imagine that most of the food, it may not get, you know, fully eliminated, especially like, plants and fiber and such. You know, you probably aren't absorbing all of the plants that you eat and, you know, the the it still gets simply accumulated there. Mhmm. Yeah. It was crazy. I couldn't believe it. How did did you train during this time as well? Or, did you take it like a breather? That was probably my biggest mistake, during the ten days. And so, like I said, I planned. I wanted to go twenty one days. I wanted to go forty days if I could. You know, that was a lot of ego. That was my Jesus ego. Thinking that I figured that I'm gonna do be like Jesus and and do four days, but nope. The first, the like the first three days, the first let me tell you how dumb I am. The first day, I did my normal workout. I had a beast workout, because you know I'd eaten the day before, and I'm like, I'm going into this. My first day of, fasting. I did a beast workout. Then, I went into my backyard, and I'm I'm I'm planting some new bamboo. Mhmm. And I wanna put a bamboo fence in the back. And so, I gotta dig a really deep ditch across the back, and I have to put this barrier. And so there I am. I just did a workout. I'm in the backyard. The sun's beating on my back. I'm digging ditches. The next day, I think I, you know, I may have did something. I worked out again on on Wednesday. By Thursday, which I guess was like maybe day four, I was I was hurting so bad. I went for a walk, and I could barely I could barely walk. I re I totally overdid it. And so, I I stopped training right after that. So, like, the first three three, four days, I beat the crap out of myself. Then I had no choice. I had to stop. In fact, I ended up spending hours the next few days just laying in my hammock. I just I had to lay down. I I couldn't do anything. Mhmm. And then when, I the day that I broke the fast, we had it was spring break for my kids, which is another thing. You know? I I I think the next time I do this, I'm gonna make sure that I have nothing planned. Spring break for the kids, and we took them to Disney. The first time, you know, my kids my daughter is 15. We haven't taken there. We live in Florida. Never been to Disney. So here we go. We're gonna go to Disney. And, on on day 11, we I had spent we were there for a good twelve hours walking around in the sun, waiting online. And by the end of that day, I I knew I was dehydrated, and I was burnt out. I was like dragging my feet walking. And, and I realized at that point, okay. I gotta break this fast. And so, that's when I broke the fast. Yeah. What what what are you, like, eating now then, after having gone through it? So for the past few weeks, I just went back to the good old tried and true, of eating mostly keto like ketogenic. You know, I I gotta keep my carbs between 10 or 515%, you know. Mostly fats. What I have done have been doing differently, I've got I I got I learned a few really cool new tricks and tips from your Metabolic Autophagy book, which, you know, great book and thank you for sending it to me. Mhmm. So, although I was doing, like, OMAD, now so for example, I'll, like, I tie my meals more differently. I try I time my meals around my workout and my and I usually work out in the morning. So for example, I ate last night, and then I worked out this morning, and then I ate this morning. But then I'm gonna go all night, all the rest of the day today through tomorrow, and then break fast tomorrow night. So I'll get like a thirty six hour fast. Mhmm. And what's what's different is I was doing these thirty six hour fast and just working out and not eating. Now I jam the food right up against my workout. And then I get a thirty six, and then I get food right again around my workouts. And so I got that, from looking at at least the idea came to me while I was reading some some of the stuff in your book. And also too, I started while I was reading your book, I also read, The Longevity Solution by, Jason Fung. And I just learned about mTOR. You know? So reading your book and reading that, I'm like, oh, okay. So maybe I don't need to be eating nearly as much protein. So, you know, I make sure I keep my proteins, like, around a 150, which I wasn't eating that much more than that, but now I'm cognizant of it. I'm like, okay. Cool. I don't need to eat more than that. So, you know, between a 125, a 100 protein, from metabolic autophagy. I I learned about, low mTOR and different, like, the mTOR capacities of the food. So I've been rotating, you know, so I don't always do, like, the moderate mTOR. I'll like I'll be I'm just more conscious Mhmm. Of having more, like, low mTOR foods and, some of the AMPK and auto autophasic stimulating foods. Just more aware of those, and I try to throw that stuff into my into my rotation. Right. Yeah. Sounds sounds sounds like cool. Yeah. It's it's pretty, I would imagine it works quite well that, having, post workout meal and still getting, like, a long fast after that as well. So, yeah, I would I would always imagine that it's better to have some calories as a post workout meal because your body will be more readily available to absorb them and use them for, like, recovery and muscle growth. So yeah. I'm looking forward to, like, you know, what's your results are gonna be because so far you've been seeing some, amazing results I see. Yeah. Definitely. How has, like, you know, you've been doing this for a few months and, how has, like, fasting changed you as a, like, a person? Have you seen any differences? You know, I've been really focused on the physical benefits of fasting for this for this period of time. But prior to it, and every time I I fasted prior to this, it has been for metaphysical gains. Because that's how I learned about it. And, like, again, like your book is great, but all the research that you you cite just came out. It's like, they they they didn't have this research like three, four, five years ago. So there's really not that much to go off of. I think, Eat, Stop, Eat by Brad Pilon was the first, like, scientific book that I read about it. Mhmm. So, I've experienced the metaphysical gains that are associated with it, which, you know, are like steadfastness. I think that's my new favorite word because it has the word fast in it. Steadfast. I I think I'm gonna do something with that word. I'm gonna make something Good one. Yeah. Steadfast, which is like, you know, that firmness and that commitment and that discipline. While I was fasting, I recognized well, yeah, I guess I have to say that I did recognize quite a quite a bit during my ten day fast. That level of objectivity that's only available when you're not fully engaged with the flesh, where I could see myself I could see my emotions rise before they came out. Or like Yeah. Or not even where they came out because I don't you know, I'm I'm very conscious and I try to remain stoic. But even before they reach the level of physical excitation, I think because the body is so tired in a lot of ways. Like, you know, there are times where I'm fasting and I'm like especially after beating myself up those first few days. Where I'm just like, I'm super tired. And so, like, maybe my wife or one of my children or one of my employees will do something or say something that normally, like, I'd be like, where while I was, like, super tired, I I would hear it. And in my mind, I'd be like, you're an asshole. But then but I but I'm not mad. I'm I'm okay with it. So I think there was something where this, there's sort of like this separation between or this space between stimulus and response that widens where I'm not nearly as reactive. Yeah. It's, I definitely noticed that as well. And I I like to call it, it's more of like, yeah, it builds up the space that you can, create a better response to everything that happens, and you kinda become detached from, on the stimulus. Like, part of the reason has to do that you're kinda limited in energy, and you become more mindful of what goes on inside your body. And, part of it also like is that you mentally or psychologically lose the attachment to everything, material. Like you mentioned that, you know, after, you know, doing usually it happens around like day three or day four where you kinda flip this mental switch that, okay, everything is okay. I don't care that I I don't care that I don't I don't get beat. I don't care that I'm tired. I don't care that, you know, my body is breaking down to a certain extent. It's a good thing because it's eliminating all the waste material, and you don't you don't care that if you know that some some people are like assholes or whatever it is. Like, you you you lose all this attachment to material things whether that be like food, you know, sex and, money and, you know, these attachments. And it's a really kinda interesting experience that this fasting for me is almost like a meditation that you are really, like, detached and you're looking at things with a bigger perspective. Mhmm. Yeah. I also became very fascinated with, with Christian orthodoxy. And so apparently, the, you know, the original church, the Eastern Orthodox, they fast up to, like, 200 a year. I mean, they're they fast twice a week. They've got these these periods of fasting. And so I I wanted to learn more about their ascetic practices. I was like, what are these guys doing? And why do they fast this much? And so I I found some really fascinating books. One, which I would recommend for anybody who's gonna go through extended fast. It's a small book called The Way of Ascetics written by a, you know, an Eastern Orthodox Christian. And every day, I would just read I would just read one page, and a lot of it is about being stoic. It's about discipline. It's about steadfastness. It's about detachment. It's about, being humble. It's about fasting. There's a whole chapter in there where each one is about fasting. So as I would read those and then meditate on them, they also, they aided me in my ability to remain detached throughout the past. Yeah. Yeah. You know, there's a reason why fasting has been practiced by all these ancient monks or, these, spiritual warriors, as a mean of not only, you know, promoting health, but also as a means of developing discipline and, cultivating these aspects of, you know, being able to say no to these these temptations and such. So, yeah, there is definitely a huge, mental development that also occurs because, you know, although it it is easier to not, you know, eat anything and to say no to all of those, calories and such, but at the same time, it's also sometimes it's more difficult to fast. You know? You know, some people simply, you know, they say that you can't out exercise a bad diet, but you can definitely, you know, make more room for calories by exercising a lot and becoming like this sort of a a bunny who's running on the treadmill, so to say. And, you know, sometimes it's actually, you know, on a personal development level, then, it actually is much more difficult to say no and to abstain from all of those things and fast instead. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. What what else have you been, kinda interested in, recently? You mentioned, you know, this, last interest that you've been in delving to. Well, this whole year has been almost like a resurgence of my own inner masculine. Where, like, I've been a mentor to men my whole life. I'm the oldest of of boys. Mostly boys, you know, in the neighborhood. I was always the the leader of the pack and captain of the team. And so my whole life pro strong, man. I mean, my whole life has been about leading men. And between age 36 and 39, like these past three years, I would say that I've gone into a tunnel. And there was a tremendous amount of healing that needed to happen for me metaphysically, you know, in my soul. I had to confront weaknesses. Let me put it that way. There were a lot of weak parts of myself. I would even say feminized parts of myself that I didn't recognize were there. And, and so these past few years have have have given me ample time and room to heal those aspects of myself, to bring them to the forefront. And to when I say heal, I mean look be able to look at myself objectively and acknowledge my sins, acknowledge my weaknesses, and confront them, and and then work through them. This past year, liter literally since April, which we're moving into April, which is like one full birthday year for me. Mhmm. All of a sudden, it's like I'm coming back to life. And so it's it's fascinating because I was aware of the concept and I experienced it many times in my life, but I think never to this extreme degree that life is literally about rising, death, and rebirth. I mean, that's really the story of Christ, you know. That's why I call Christ the sun. You know, the sun. The The sun comes, that it's zenith, shining bright. Yo, Elliot. And then, you know, makes its way down. And I think that if I am to be the mentor that I know I'm called to be in this life, and to and to work with work with the development and the strengthening and the empowerment of men, then I I needed to go through my own bullshit. I needed to get I need to purge myself of my own weaknesses. And so I'm glad to be beyond that. And what I find so fascinating and fun is now that my alphaness, if I can call it that, alpha Elliot is back in a in a in a very powerful way. I'm into all kinds of new cool new cool shit. Like, you know, me and some guys with shooting some semi automatic guns and going deep sea fishing. And, and and reading books and going to this I I'm going I'm gonna be speaking at the twenty one convention, which is a this is an all men's convention, and it's this one's about fathers. Another thing that's been huge for me in terms of regaining and stepping firm into my new masculinity, at age 40, is being a father. And I've been a father since I was 23 years old. Mhmm. I I started having children when I was a kid, you know? So I didn't know what I was doing. I'm just, you know, I'm just doing whatever life brings to me. And so, you know, I got I got to where I am in a lot of with a lot of un unconsciousness. And just this past year I've become more conscious of what it means to be a father and to be a patriarch. Even though my oldest is 15 years old. So that has been huge for me. And so a lot of the books that I consume, and a lot of the ideas that I love speaking about revolve around masculinity and fatherhood. And and fasting fits right in there with it. Yeah. Because it's such an aesthetic practice. And you know, this is men that are practice aesthetics are men that are looking that are that are aiming to strengthen their own resolve, their own steadfastness, their own detachment. All the masculine virtues are available through fasting. So I think it fits right into it. It's almost like the icing. It's the icing on the cake. I found red pill and I discovered what MGTOW means. And I, you know, I I see the value in it. I became a Donald Trump fan this year. I wasn't sure at first, because I was beta. But then, I started looking at the guy and I'm like, my dad's super alpha. And, and I resented him as a kid growing up because of that. Because, you know, I grew up in American public schools and So, I started taking an honest look at him and I'm like, why does everybody hate this guy? And he reminded me of my dad. And I was like, ah! Because this guy is so alpha that he just pisses people off. Right. And so, I had all politically, you know, I think politics is a game. I enjoy it. I enjoy it just because I think it's fun. I don't get emotionally attached to it. Although people just they do. So they like, a lot of them hate me because I think Donald Trump's cool. But politically, I've almost all I've always been conservative, but libertarian conservative. Meaning, like, meaning libertarian meaning give me my freedom or give me my death. And I'll give you your freedom and you just stay out of my way. You know, just kinda like let's let's play fair and leave leave each other alone. So but when, so I was a libertarian when, and a conservative. I had to become a Republican when Ron Paul was running in 2008, 2012, and I loved Ron Paul. He was all about ending the Fed, and, and, yeah, it was I was a big Ron Paul fan. But then when Obama was, reelected for the second time, I was like, oh, fuck this. And that's really like when I went into my beta mode. I was like, we got another woman in office. It was Obama. Oh, God. He's beta as hell. Mhmm. And so I think that I think at that point, I was like, forget it. And I went into my I think it's my at that time, I went down into my feminine tunnel. And then so when I came back out, and Donald Trump was president, I was like, oh, this is great. The whole world is becoming alpha again. So Mhmm. Let's go. Right. Yeah. I think, it is true. And, you know, some people may kinda get the misunderstanding about alphaness and beta ness so to say that they think that being alpha is, you know, all about this destructive energy. But in reality, it's actually, you know, like a creative force that simply requires to be, like, steadfastness and requires discipline and self control and so on. So that fasting definitely cultivates those characteristics perfectly and it's, you know, fasting itself isn't like, you know, powerful. It it isn't like over energized state. You are, like, limited from the energy. And that that is also made me, like, a true form of an alphaness that you don't over express yourself just for the sake of doing it. So to say, like explode exploding, just for the sake of it. You are kinda being more mindful about your energy and, you're also, like, somewhat controls in the sense that you you possess the power, but you're not gonna unleash it just for the sake of it, you know. Yeah. That's been huge for me in this whole healing process. Like, I've been always been an explosive and an expressive guy. Because I can be. I can jump high, I can throw things, and I shout. And I and so I've that has done good things for me, but I also recognize how ungrounded and unmasculine that I have been in that. Even though I could tear somebody to shreds because I was so aggressive. It's not it's not generative. It's not alpha. And so, these these these past few years, I've grounded myself much more. Again, fasting, you're so true. You're so right, bro. It's like it's that grounding practice, energetic grounding. I've taught bioenergetics and I've done, you know, active meditation, these things to sorta purge and relax. But to be completely honest, I'm finding that fasting is the most powerful bioenergetic, practice that I've engaged in. I don't need to do nearly as much as I did before. Even meditation, I don't I don't I still meditate, but I don't have to do it nearly as much. And if I don't, I'm still okay if I'm fasting. Yeah. For sure. And, it's it's funny that, you know the process of fasting you know triggers the process the triggers the pathway of autophagy. So autophagy also translates into self eating and in mythology there's this creature called the ouroboros or the snake that is biting its own tail and that that literally is like the mascot for autophagy and fasting that in order to become like a more transformative version of yourself, the new version of yourself then you have to eat yourself and you have to go through the process of autophagy and kind of destroy the old and broken down version of yourself and these other parts that are simply holding you down and then you can become reborn into like a newer version. So it's the autophagy process is like it's not only like physical, it's a definitely like some psychological transformation is definitely a huge part of it. Yeah. That's cool. But how do you kinda see yourself, you know, coming up in the upcoming years and the months? You mentioned some events and such, but what what else is in your on your radar as a, like, you know, inspirer of men and being like the alpha of of other other men as well? Well, fasting is a big part of it. It has to be. And it's so funny because, when I started going into the tunnel, when I started going into my dark season, the first thing it's it's crazy. Because the first thing that came to my mind, right as I started going to that season, was Elliot, you need to fast. And you need to fast for a long time. And it's crazy because I I second guessed myself at that time. And so I, like, I brought it up. I had, like, I hired coaches. And I was talking to them. And, you know, I had a mentor and I brought it up. And they all told me, no. No. No. Don't do that. Why would you do that? It doesn't make any sense. And so I I ignored my soul. And I think that's a big part of why I suffered. Because I think if I wouldn't have fasted when I was being called to fast rather than listening to other people, maybe I would have come out a little bit sooner or learned a little bit more. But, you know, everything happens the way it's supposed to. But now, on my it's so funny because now on my way back up, it's like God once again is like, hey, are you gonna fast now? Mhmm. And so I'm like, oh, okay. Alright. I guess it's fasting. So, making fasting a lifestyle, bro. I don't I can never see going back to anything less than, than than fasting. No one should ever eat more than one meal a day. I I don't think I'd ever go back to that, you know, unless it's just like Christmas or something and I feel like eating. But otherwise, it's like so fasting for myself, I've been doing grounding camp, which has evolved into one of the things our ancestors understood with regard and all of our ancestors, regardless of the culture, regardless of the religion, understood about the maturing masculinity is that there needed to be a clear and official demarcation that that indicated a death and rebirth. Or an evolution from boyhood to manhood. And then from manhood to middle adulthood and and so on and so forth. I found that every twelve years, this was once told to me and now it's been my experience. Every twelve years, which is interesting because I have more 24 year olds following me than any other age. It's so funny because whenever I poll the audience, how many people here are 24? There's always a significant amount of 24 year olds. Which tells me that, you know, every twelve years, there is sort of you go into another hero's journey. And so there you're called to action, you know. You're usually 24 year olds are confused about what do I do next? Who am I? What do I want? I know at 36, I went through it again, like exactly at 36. I was like, who am I? What am I doing? What do I want? And so, I call that a life path initiation. And so it happens all throughout our lives. But our ancestors understood that, that men that were particularly men, because it's a bit different for women than their psychology. But particularly for men, especially as we're moving into adulthood, which, you know, adulthood just happens later and later and later in our culture. There needs to be a initiation, a rite of passage, an honoring, a recognition, a process, and mentorship to see one's way through that phase. And so that's what Grounding Camp has evolved into. And, even though it started out as something else, I know that this is what I was called to the reason why I was called to do it. And, and fasting is now going to be a part of it. In fact, I'm gonna do a five day, five day grounding camp immersion in, in September. We just we just booked the place where we're gonna do five days of fasting for the entire initiation period. Wow. Yes. Sounds interesting. And, you know, the initiation itself is also like, yeah, you mentioned the hero's journey, and it's, kinda it requires the same process of autophagy on a on a personal level. Is quite interesting. Yeah. Yeah. You mentioned the it's coming in September. Is is is is that the only event coming this year? So in June, coming up in just a couple months here, we have a a three day grounding camp, that's happening in Upstate New York. And it's at this grounding camp, the guys who are coming don't know this, but if they're watching this, they'll find out that I'm gonna introduce some intermittent fasting, you know. And I kinda sensed this earlier this year when I did I did a grounding camp in, in January. And it was in Texas. And I fasted, because you know I had already started fasting. And I began to recognize that, you know, we do a lot of exercises. We do a lot of it's it's a workshop. And it's a lot it's a lot of physical stuff, but it's also a lot of metaphysical stuff. We're we're spending a lot of quiet time. We do fasting from talking and things like that. But But I began to realize that these guys are stuffing their faces three times a day in between, you know, we're trying to do some deep spiritual work. And it almost seems like every time we eat, we go it's like we take two steps forward and then we take a step back. And so now they're digesting. So, you know, we're getting somewhere, but now they're digesting. And then, you know, we were it was in Texas. And, you know, Texans, they eat a lot of Mexican food. So they're eating beans and shit, and guys are farting during the meditation. Thinking it plays out. So this this next one in June that we're gonna do, we're fasting. You know? So Mhmm. It's a it's gonna be a part of the initiation. So I have that in June. September, I have Florida. And then I might do something I'm thinking in, like, Arizona or California, maybe in December. But as far as ground to camp, that's that's what's going on for this year. Nice. Nice. Where can people learn more about it? Groundingcamp.com. Okay. Nice. Yeah, we've been talking, and this it was good to see you again. So we'll start wrapping up the podcast as well. So, before I ask my last question, what's this one piece of or sorry. Where can people learn more about you? Oh, you know, I'm gonna start uploading on YouTube again. I've been doing it a little bit, you know, here and there. You know? There was a time when I was uploading three times a day. That's when my channel was growing really fast. So, definitely look me up on YouTube. I got two channels, strength camp, and then I have Elliott Hulse. Mhmm. And then, I'm pretty vocal on Instagram. So you can find me at Elliot Hills on Instagram. Nice. Nice. Yeah. My last question is what's this one piece of advice or a habit you wish you adopted sooner that improved your body and your mind? I wish I would have read Metabolic Autophagy earlier. Yeah, dude. I'm so excited about all the news. And you did a great job with all the research and the resources, dude. I I'm so proud. I really I honestly mean it. Like, I love your book. And and then also too, you know, a lot of the new resources that have been coming out. But I wish I would have had the backing of of all the science that's now out that proves that fasting must be done, and that it's so good. You know, I I I second guessed it myself in the past. I knew that fasting was good experientially, but I stopped myself. And I think it had a lot to do with my ego. It just needed more more information. And now that all the sciences out there and guys like you and Jason Fung and others are are bringing the research together and and putting together great books, I wish I would've I I wish that would've was available maybe five years ago. Mhmm. Maybe I would've been here faster. Yeah. Yeah. I'm glad I'm glad that you liked it. And you you your work has also been, like, a huge inspiration, so thank you for that as well. So you you have done your work definitely in my own example. Yeah. I know, man. Well, thank you. That's good. And, yeah, well, thanks for the coming to the podcast, and, we'll probably see each other in the future sometimes. You got it, brother. It's always been a pleasure, and keep up the great work. Alright. Thanks. Alright. That's it for this episode of the BodyMind Appointment podcast. If you wanna support us, then I would greatly appreciate it if you leave us a review on iTunes and the other social media platforms. You can now order my new book Metabolic Autophagy that covers a lot of the same topics that we talked in here. It's a collection of certain lifestyle habits and practices that prioritize longevity as well as performance. To support this podcast, you can also become a Patreon and get the exclusive video lectures from my biohacking boot camp that covers circadian rhythms, intermittent fasting, autophagy, resistance training, biofeedback, and many more. But other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.