Yeah. I think it's more quality where your protein's coming from more so than quantity. And I think lack of cycling protein. So you want phases of where you're working out and basically breaking down your protein and intermittent fasting where you're not consuming a lot and then feasting. So it's more so people aren't going through the cyclical protein intake that we used to do that our genes are matched to. Chronically eating a high amount of, you know, animal protein, not necessarily a good thing. You need to cycle that. I'm actually doing the research on the substance. I've published several clinical papers and I've done an entire review and I've looked at all the studies and simply from an evolutionary aspect as well. I'm pretty confident that it, that it will contribute to my longevity. Do you want to know what it is? Body, mind, empowerment. Get stronger, faster, smarter, quicker, friendlier, more helpful, more driven. Everything the body needs. Control your mind. Welcome to the Body, Mind, Empowerment podcast. I'm Ejos Seamland, and our guest today is James de Nicolantonio. James is a cardiovascular research scientist and the associate editor of British medical journals Open Heart. He's also the author of The Salt Fix, Superfuel, and the Longevity Solution. James, welcome to the show. Thanks for having me on. Yeah. And, I've been really being fascinated by your recent books, and they've been also really good, especially like the Sulfix and the Superfuel. But, how did you get involved with, you know, into this research of cardiovascular health and general medicine? Yeah. So, I mean, it started when I was a community pharmacist. Basically, I was having a ton of patients coming up to me, put on blood pressure medications, and now they all of a sudden weren't feeling well. And they were also told to, like, cut down on their salt intake. Right? Because, I mean, I mean, since ever since the nineteen sixties, every single medical doctor has been trained that if someone has high blood pressure in your medical office, you recommend a low salt diet. That's like first line, you know, dietary advice. But my patients weren't responding well to that. And so when I would kinda push back and say, well, maybe, you know, get your sodium levels tested, you know. And a lot of times they would come back low. Patients were feeling dizzy on low salt diets. And, you know, when the doctors would either tell them to increase their salt intake or they would lower their blood pressure dose, they felt amazingly better. Mhmm. So I know I knew the power of maintaining an adequate salt status, not only for my patients, but being a wrestler and I ran cross country, in in high school, I knew the importance of salt and exercise. So if exercise is supposed to be one of the best things for us and salt helps people exercise better longer, then why would why would there be a blanket recommendation for low salt for everybody? So when I actually looked at the the research, there's not a single clinical study that actually has given the same diets to patients with the only difference being the level of salt intake. They always give them, like, more fruits and vegetables. They cut out processed meat. It just happens to be lower in salt. Right? Mhmm. I don't honestly, have no idea how these meta analyses, including those type of studies, can actually conclude that low salt is the driver of the benefit. But they do, which makes absolutely no sense because, again, they're changing the entire diet. And when you look at these longevity populations, like, you know, Japan, South Korea, these people are living the longest and living the healthiest lives. They eat a ton of salt. So, like, you know, they're eating kombu. If you if you don't know what kombu is, it's basically a salty seaweed. It contains almost a thousand milligrams of sodium per ounce, in the average South Korean and the average person living in Japan is consuming, you know, anywhere from five to six grams of sodium. Mhmm. So when you even look at it at a population level, there's never been any evidence to stand for. So that's really what got me into writing the book. Mhmm. Yeah. It's quite interesting, yeah, that, salt has been villainized, but it it's like essential thing for life. And even animals go out of their own way to seek salt in nature. And, in the past, I will also believe I think I read it in your book that, in medieval times or in Roman times, the people were also paid by salt. So it's really, like, even for people quite a quite an important thing. But but how how does the kind of correlation was created initially that salt is gonna cause, like, a heart disease or something? Yeah. So there was a just like with, you know, the demonization of saturated fat and animal fat with Ancel Keys, we had a similar type of story with salt. We had someone named Louis Dahl who he created genetically modified he inbred mice and rats to be sensitive to salt. And when he gave those sensitive rats in the equivalent of, you know, a 100 of salt for a human, so, like, 10 times the normal salt intake, Yeah. They developed hypertension and strokes and things like that. But when he tried to give even a high dose three or four times the amount of a normal salt intake for a human to normal rats, it did absolutely nothing. So a lot of that was extrapolated for not only his genetically modified salt sensitive rats, but also from basically cherry picked studies. So he would look at he looked at six populations. He published, a paper back in the 1960. And very similar to the Ancel Keys story where where Ancel Keys drew kind of like a linear line as animal fat increased, so did the risk of heart disease. Louis Dahl did the same thing. He plotted six populations and showed that as salt intake increased, the prevalence of hypertension increased. But then twenty years later, you had, you know, inner salt and other studies come out that looked at about 50 different studies, and you actually saw that as salt intake increased, blood pressure slightly went down. And a lot of people don't realize, like, salt can literally treat hypertension in certain cases because when you restrict salt, your artery stiffening hormones go up. So aldosterone, renin, angiotensin two, the exact things that we block with medication to lower blood pressure, lower stroke, and heart attack is what gets elevated when you cut out salt. So, you know, it was based on just poor evidence from decades ago. So it's like, if you restrict your salt, then you actually cause hypertension in a sense because of the body is gonna crave crave for it. And I I I think also, like, insulin may play play quite a role in the, elevation of blood pressure that people think is associated with salts, but it's simply caused by insulin and carbohydrates. Well, yeah. That's I mean, one of the things that a lot of people too are are missing on a keto diet is the salt because, you know, insulin levels, when you cut out carbohydrate intakes, insulin levels go down, and that causes the kidneys to spill out salt. So when you're not getting enough salt, what do the kidneys wanna do? They wanna retain more salt. How do they do that? They the body elevates insulin levels and makes you become more insulin resistant on a low salt diet so your body can retain more salt. And not only that, so you can absorb more salt. So the clinical studies, if you look at, meta analysis looking at low sodium diets, they show that it significantly increases fasting insulin levels. And when you look at oral glucose tolerance tests in people who have been on a low salt diet, It increases the AUC of glucose and insulin just as bad as you would see with a high sugar diet. So literally, low I need people to think low salt is just as bad as a high sugar diet. Wow. That's great. Quite quite a paradigm shift, I believe, for a lot of people. But how much, how much salt should people consume them on a day? And I and this is the this is where we get in the nuance of not just salt, but how much protein. It's different for everybody. Right? So, like, you know, salt intake is highly dependent on how much you're losing. So you can lose a lot through the kidneys if you're consuming caffeine. So if you if you're someone who drinks a lot of coffee or you drink caffeinated tea, you're going to need a lot more salt than someone who doesn't drink those beverages because most people view coffee as a diuretic, but it actually depletes you of sodium and chloride much more. So you lose about, you know, a full, if you were to consume about six cups of coffee, you'll lose about a full teaspoon of salt. If you consume about four cups of coffee, you lose a full half a teaspoon salt in the urine. So Mhmm. That's just one salt depleter. I mean, low sodium levels in the body is the most common electrolyte abnormality. So certain people who have, what's called POTS or postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome. When they basically go from a seated to a standing position, they feel dizzy. Those people need a lot more salt. You know, and if you're someone who exercises, I try to exercise twice a week. The average person's gonna lose about a half a teaspoon of salt per hour of exercise, and that depends on how how hot it is. And in the book, I go through how much you need depending on the ambient temperature. But, I mean, just typically, if you're on a ketogenic diet, you know, most people need an extra thousand to 2,000 milligrams of sodium or an extra half a teaspoon of salt on top of, you know, one and a half teaspoons already. So you're looking at someone who's on keto may fully benefit from two, two and a half full teaspoons of salt depending on lifestyle. Mhmm. You're right. Right. Yeah. That's true. That's true. But, are the other electrolytes also important like magnesium or potassium? Yeah. No. They are. And and, really, salt allows people to eat those bitter foods that are high in magnesium and potassium. A lot of people think, you know, meat is high in potassium, but the problem is is when you cook meat, it cooks out the potassium. Mhmm. So just because, you know, raw meat is high in potassium, that's not exactly the potassium you're getting once you cook it and eat it. So, you know, I think potassium and magnesium are missing minerals. But I think even bigger than that is insulin resistance, which causes your cells to not be able to take up magnesium. So if you are insulin resistant, you need insulin to not only drive potassium into the cell, but also magnesium. And if you are hyperinsulinemic, which probably seventy five percent of the population is, you are spilling magnesium in the urine because insulin is a magnesium waster. So even more so than consuming foods, it's fixing the insulin resistance and the hyperinsulinemia that's affecting seventy five percent of the population that's causing us to be depleted in magnesium. Yeah. And, how how would you what what would be, like, the first step for someone to fix their hyperinsulinemia? Yeah. I mean, the easiest thing would be fasting. Right? Intermittent fasting, particularly, you know, probably if you wanna get into the deeper autophagy, you really wanna hit eighteen hours at a minimum, unless you're working out. I mean, working out nothing's gonna be put you into autophagy quicker than doing, like, a high intensity exercise. Your muscles become insulin sensitive for forty eight hours. So it's the best way to activate autophagy and to improve insulin sensitivity is literally just start lifting weights. You know what I mean? It's it's as simple as that and doing some high intensity interval training. Of course, people that, you know, have advanced heart disease and things like that, they they would need to obviously be followed by a doctor and go slow and all this, and there's always nuance to everything. Right? Mhmm. But in general, exercise, which everybody knows, intermittent fasting. And then there's these cool little dietary swaps that you can do, that activate autophagy and improve insulin sensitivity. Cutting out refined, you know, sugars, carbs, everybody knows that. Some people are starting to understand the harms of omega six and how omega six drives insulin resistance as well. If it's from refined vegetable oils, not getting enough omega threes is important, particularly marine omega threes. So those are some of the things that people can do to improve insulin sensitivity. Right. Right. And, you do talk about it in your, newest book, The Longevity Solution, which you actually, coauthored with doctor Jason Fung. So, can you talk about, like, how did you end up writing a book with him and, what's it about? Yeah. So, basically, like, I I was confused, you know, about what type of protein should I should I be eating? How much protein should I be eating? You have, like, one camp that says you need to conch like, continuously consume a low amount of protein because you have animal studies that show if you restrict methionine by 40%, you know, mice can live 20% longer. Mhmm. And there are longevity populations like the Okinawans that only consume 40 to maybe 50 grams of protein per day. But the problem is is they don't really lift weights. They're about 15% smaller than the average American. Right. So you can't necessarily extrapolate those really low protein intakes with what you should be doing. So what, like, doctor Fung and I try to do is, yeah, we looked at the blue zones because blue zones are the people who are living the longest. But then we also try to apply, you know, this to Americans, people who are lifting more weights that are larger. So, you know, the book was, first, is there any benefit to consuming both plant and animal? Is there advantages to one or the other? So, you know, I really wanted to take a look because, you know, I started out being like animal protein, we consumed it for two point six million years, you know, and same with plant protein. But let let's talk about red meat, for example. How could it be potentially bad for us? Like, I never really looked into it. But the thing and I'm not saying red meat is bad. I consume about a pound and a half of meat per day. But the thing is is if you actually look at the studies, we hang meat for a couple weeks. Like, you know, a lion, they they get their meal. They consume it very quickly. Otherwise, other hyenas and things like that, they're gonna scavenge it. So they're eating fresh meat. Mhmm. What's the difference between hanging meat for a few weeks and then consuming it and eating fresh meat? Well, there's a big difference. The porphyrin ring around the iron molecule starts breaking down. So now you're releasing free iron, basically, molecules that are oxidizing the fats, the proteins, and the phospholipids in hung meat. Yeah. Hung meat tastes amazing, but it's much more oxidized than fresh meat. So there are things that I think that we can do to combine with red meat to kinda counteract some of the harms. So luckily, red meat has carnosine, which is one of the most potent antioxidants because it can bind free iron and free copper ions. But I don't think it gets you there a 100%. So plant proteins come in importantly too because the animal fats that we consume two point six million years ago weren't saturated in the persistent organic pollutants that they now are. So so basically, the only way to bind persistent organic pollutants and animal fat is plant fiber. It's the only way to bind it. And if you absorb these persistent organic pollutants, some of them have a half life of thirty years. And once you intermittent fast, you're releasing those into the bloodstream. And there have been many studies in animals that have shown that when you fast an animal and you release those persistent organic pollutants, there is significant damage to the brain that occurs, to the organs. And there's this basically hepatobiliary recycling. You just can't excrete these. So you gotta be able to bind them in the intestinal tract during that hepatobiliary recycling of these persistent organic pollutants. So you consume some resistant starch. I mean, God forbid you consume a little resistant starch. Right? I mean but I try to look at solving the solving my my health through a twenty first century lens. Mhmm. Mhmm. So, yeah, it's it's quite interesting that, although we do you know, some people try to live a healthy life, you can't really avoid all the environmental toxins and other, kinda inflammatory compounds that we all get exposed to even in our past. So those things, they still have, like, some residue that has kinda left in in our body. And, if you do release them, then the only thing that can help with that is to with with the consumption of these plant fibers that you mentioned about. Exactly. Right. Right. Yeah. That is kinda yeah. It kinda puts into the perspective that food quality is really important, not only for, like, longevity but also, like, your cognitive functioning and everything else. So, what what what what from the perspective of longevity, what do you think about then the idea that, you know, protein consumption is, you know, associated with increased cancer and increased mortality? Yeah. I think it's more quality where your protein's coming from more so than quantity, and I think lack of cycling protein. So you want phases of where you're working out and basically breaking down your protein and intermittent fasting where you're not consuming a lot and then feasting. So it's more so people aren't going through the cyclical protein intake that we used to do that our genes are matched to. So either, you know, just chronically eating a high amount of, you know, animal protein, not necessarily a good thing. You need to cycle that. So in the quality and how you cook your meat, right, grilling versus cooking in the crock pot, it does make a difference. You are creating advanced glycation end products and other heterocyclic amines when you grill meat. There is a there there's there's been benefits of consuming a low advanced glycation end product diet in clinical studies, simply by not overcooking meat. They took participants, and they put them on like a like a, you know, more of a slower cooking type of meat that they were consuming. And there was improvements in biomarkers, blood pressure, insulin sensitivity. So all those things will add up. But and and there's the nuance of pastured eggs, which I think is super important compared to just your factory farmed egg. And then also grass fed meat versus, you know, grain finished meat. Yeah. That's for sure. Is there, like, any limit or the amount of protein they that, like, a person would, have to stick to, or or does it vary? I think, you know, if you're doing a full body workout and you are a larger guy, you can benefit from consuming up to about 40 grams of protein, and in just regards to muscle protein synthesis. But if you're someone just working out your arms that day, 30 grams is probably enough. And then when you get older, you become what's called basically anabolic resistant to the muscle protein stimulating effects of protein, and you actually need more. And elderly seem to benefit from whey protein in particular because it's high in salt sulfuric proteins, basically high in cysteine, which helps foreign glutathione. And so elderly seem to benefit from actually eating a little bit more protein, maybe like 1.2 grams per kilogram of body weight. Mhmm. Mhmm. Yeah. That's that's for sure. It's it is true that, you know, in the in the longevity blue zones, the people there, they do have, like, a much more cleaner diet and high high quality nutrients. And, they're also likely they do different types of activities throughout the day. What's what kind of similarities or, some unique characteristics that you found from those blue zones that you talked about in your book? Can you, like, go through those? Yeah. So, basically, like you said, low processed food. It's all natural food. They're using, you know, healthy salt added to the food. It's not all it's not processed all added into packaged foods. Mhmm. They are doing more of like a, not necessarily like a rigorous lift heavy lifting like we do. We don't have as much time as some of these people in the blue zones where they can just walk all day and do light moderate exercise for prolonged periods of time. So we have to figure out a way in the in a half hour to an hour or maybe twice a week to gain those benefits quicker. But, yeah, it's definitely more social bonding, definitely more marine omega three intake compared to what we we consume, and a lot more antioxidants. I mean, literally, that and a lot of I mean, going through it, people you know, I really, with the book, The Longevity Solution, I wanted to understand what is aging. Like, literally, what is it? And, basically, what aging is is it comes down to damage to the DNA of your cell. Mhmm. And once the DNA is damaged, the cell can either die or it can become a senescent cell, which is even worse. So these senescent cells basically secrete pro inflammatory cytokines, and that's what aging is. It's an accumulation of senescent cells, accumulation of damage, and you can reverse that. There are things called senolytics, which can actually lyse and break up senescent cells. One of the strongest being fisetin, which is in strawberries. In order to actually get the therapeutic dose, most people are not even consuming close enough. You need 14 ounces of strawberries a day to get a therapeutic dose, basically, of fisetin to basically break down those senescent cells. Mhmm. The other, molecule that is a senolytic is EGCG in green tea. So this is why, you know, in the longevity solution, we were, you know, promoting green tea, promoting red wine has some of these things. Red wine also has quercetin and actually has resveratrol and a very bioavailable form of resveratrol through red wine as well. And you're getting, you know, the benefits of the grape skins and seeds with the red wine. Mhmm. So things like that. But, really, how do you prevent DNA damage? That's number one. Okay. So so one of the best ways to do that is hormesis. You strengthen your cells. So exercise, you induce heat shock proteins through sauna or hot baths. Mhmm. So you're kinda, like, strengthening yourself. That's one of the best ways to promote longevity is hormesis. Everyone used to think it was, like, consume a ton of antioxidants, and that's part of it, but not for the antioxidant benefit. Most antioxidants actually work by upregulating your own endogenous antioxidant systems. They actually damage you. Most and most foods high in antioxidants cause a little bit of inflammation, causing your own body to upregulate its antioxidant enzyme systems. So things that you can do to prevent the damage, again, hormesis, so the exercise, light sun exposure, eating plants because they're slightly pro inflammatory, but then lead to, again, that increase in hormesis Mhmm. Protein cycling, intermittent fasting. And then it comes down to what can you put in the cell to prevent the damage. So one of the best things would be astaxanthin. Astaxanthin can span the lipid bilayer, can protect the outside and the inside of the cell, and it can also protect the the, the fatty acid tails from oxidizing. So, you know, pro protecting all your cell membranes by saturating your cell membranes in astaxanthin from krill oil or, you know, seafood is an important strategy to prevent the DNA damage occurring in the first place. And then we talked about, well, once it's occurred and you've had these senescent cells, how do you get rid of them? Well, you can consume 14 ounces of strawberries a day. You can take maybe a fisetin supplement. I mean, I can't give recommendations. This is just general info. Mhmm. I think it's about sixty five milligrams of fisetin that's been shown to activate, you know, the senolytic therapeutic benefits. And then consuming it's not just green tea. Unless you're consuming 10 to 12 cups of green tea, you're not gonna be able to get enough, EGCG. So you either have to have a catechin enhanced green tea beverage or eight hundred milligrams or less a day of green tea, like, extract supplementation is another way to activate autophagy and and senolytic, you know, benefits. Yeah. I I do. It's it's quite phenomenal that, these, polyphenols and these these, antioxidant compounds, they work in a way by causing some mild stress to the body, and then the body kinda gets stronger by upgrading all its antioxidant defense systems and other pathways. So, it's it's it's a it's, like, you you you can't say that it's it's harmful, but, the kinda end result is gonna result in, like, a more positive, result. But but what what what what do you say about some people saying that, it's not worth it to kinda stimulate these pathways with the help of plants because you can stimulate the same pathways with things like exercise and cold and heat and fasting and so on. So why would you want to go out of your way to go eat the plants? Right. No. So what I would tell people is number one, those things don't bind the persistent organic pollutants. It's just something that you have to get generally through plants, at least in a natural way. You can consume things maybe like activated charcoal. They're they're not really clinically tested that well. You can maybe try to do some pectins and other other binders. I don't know how well they work. But, again, so that's you know, maybe you can get something like that. Number two would be the resistant starch. You know, consuming resistant starch is extremely important. If people cannot you actually are a fat burner. Your bacteria in your colon are burning resistant starch and producing short chain fatty acids. So you are the ultimate fat burner when you are a fiber fermenter. So so a lot of people wanna be like this fat burner, and I'm not consuming carbohydrates. But, really, if we're more bacteria than human cells and you wanna be a fat burner, you wanna be a fiber fermenter then. Because that's what produces the short chain fatty acids like butyric acid, and that's what activates GLP one when you do that. And GLP one basically has this broad spectrum benefit on the brain, the heart, insulin sensitivity, things like that. Every single longevity population consumes a very high resistant starch diet, and every paleo study that you will ever look at, at a minimum, we generally consumed 40 grams of fiber, or resistant starch, but even upwards of a 150 grams. Mhmm. So there's real benefit there, I believe. If you are someone who can't tolerate plants, fine. I get it. But I truthfully believe those two benefits are very important. The other benefit is unless you're consuming raw meat, which has its risks, when you cook plant or animal food, you create a b six antagonist. So even though you think those foods are high in b six, when you cook them, you create a b six antagonist. So the only way to get b six in a bioavailable way is to consume things like green bananas, consuming raw plants. I'm not gonna consume raw animal food simply because I don't wanna risk, you know, consuming raw eggs or things like that. So there's a there's a third benefit of consuming plants that you can't just get through intermittent fasting or drinking, you know, some beverage. You know, some people can tolerate, you know, plant drinks like green tea and coffee, and they don't consider that consuming plants. So those that's three, but there's there's many other benefits too. One being alkalinity. I've looked at the clinical studies. If you look at any randomized study giving either sodium bicarbonate, potassium bicarbonate, or just simply giving people more fruits and vegetables, they their kidney function improves, their bone health improves within about a few months. Mhmm. And you see that in populations. You can you can see those benefits quickly if you test someone with moderate kidney disease or you test the elderly. If you test me and you, you're not gonna see benefits in just a few months. And so no study has ever been done for a decade, giving people more plants to improve the alkalinity of the body. So a lot of people will argue and say, well, blood pH is kept constant. Alkalinity is a bunch of garbage. And that's not true. If you actually look at the studies, the citric acid in the urine will, go up when you consume plants. The pH of the urine, if you're consuming a high animal protein, low plant diet, the pH will go down. Your urine is more acidic. Your interstitial fluid is more acidic. You cannot pee out those animal proteins that are high in sulfur and that are more acidic. You can't just or you can't just breathe them out. Excuse me. Some people think you can just breathe out that acid. These are nonvolatile acids that you're consuming, and there is a net acid load. And sometimes the bones will be pulled of their alkaline minerals to maintain your abnormal blood pH. So I think in the long run, the the the alkalinity benefits of either consuming a sodium bicarbonate beverage. You don't have to eat plants, but you could consume a mineral water that's high in bicarbonate. That's also important in fasting too because within two to four days of fasting, you go into metabolic acidosis, which is why you see minerals continue to spill out in the urine in the fasting studies that go beyond a day or two is because you're in metabolic acidosis. So part of the benefits of reversing that is you is consuming, like, bicarbonate during a fast. Like, I I always drink Gerald Steiner water because that not only provides the bicarbonate, but the magnesium, calcium, things like that. Yeah. It's a good good trick to, make the body alkaline again without having to, like, eat a bunch of vegetables or fruit, especially during, like, a longer fast or something. Yeah. But but, a part of it, why you become so acidic during a fast is also, like, the ketone bodies. So, what's the role of ketone bodies in that scenario? And, you know, is there, like, a kinda safe limit that people should kinda, avoid? Yeah. You know, going through the studies, I do recall I was trying to dig into your exact point, like, why does the body become so acidic? And ketone bodies were a part of it, but I can't recall what the other part is. That that was about half of the reason why. And there's another half of the reason. I have to go back and look at the studies again, to see what what the authors hypothesized why. But, yeah, I mean, part of the reason too in a fast why salt is so important, people go on these water fasts and they never bring in the salt, is because ketone bodies are negatively charged. So they will pull a positively charged ion with them in the urine. So you they'll pull sodium ions until you can basically adapt. It takes about a week of adaptation. But even if you go fasting longer for that period, twenty five percent of people who fast will have these gigantic spikes of salt loss even up to a full teaspoon in the throughout the day. Even though they're consuming absolutely no sodium, your kidneys never fully shut it off. So for the other three out of four people who are fasting, they're probably gonna lose about 40 to 50 milligrams of sodium. They'll never be able to fully shut it off just in the urine. That doesn't count, you know, sweating. You'll probably lose depending on if you're exercising anywhere upwards of a full teaspoon of salt. Mhmm. Yeah. That's that's quite interesting. And even even even more so to it's it's even more important to kinda take your electrolytes and salts doing it fast as as you as you said. Yep. For sure. Yeah. I wanna return to the, resistance start for a moment. You mentioned that it's, you know, beneficial for the gut. And, what what kind of where can you find in which foods? Yeah. So, basically, you're looking for once you cook a food, you've basically cooked out the resistant starch. So good resistant starch foods, my top one is undercooked potatoes. So potatoes, most people don't view potatoes as a vegetable. They don't think it's healthy, but it's actually one of the highest sources of potassium. And if you can get healthy organic potatoes, yellow, red, purple, they can provide good phytonutrients as well. They can provide good beta carotene for especially sweet potatoes. So if you undercook them, I don't necessarily eat for the pleasure of eating. I'm eating for also the health benefits. So I don't mind eating a somewhat hard potato. It's almost like a soft apple is how hard you want that undercooked potato to be. So if I'm gonna be cooking potatoes, most people will throw them in an oven for at 03:50 for a full hour and get that nice caramelized potato. Mhmm. Whereas generally, I I really only cook them for maybe thirty five, forty minutes, and that's it. Mhmm. You can regain some of the resistant starch by cooling them for a full eight hours. And when you cool them for eight hours and then reheat them, you have basically still you you can almost triple the resistant starch by cooling it. Actually, you quadruple it. Excuse me. So you go from, like, let's say, four grams of of fiber to 12, or to 16. You quadruple it. And then when you heat heat it, you lose about 25%. Now here's the key. If you do a blood glucose test, okay, on a cooked and cooled potato, the the difference in glucose on a, like, a blood glucose meter isn't gonna be that different. It's the AUC of the glucose that's different, and it's the amount of starch that's hitting the gut and the GLP one that you're not measuring that increases. So we know that higher resistant starch foods don't necessarily have that much lower of a blood glucose spike. But if you look at there's clinical studies in people who have had their colons removed and have ileostomies, and they've done comparisons. They've cooked and cooled the potato, and you get four times the amount of resistant starch that hits the ileostomy, so to speak, that's basically would have hit the colon if these people had colons. Mhmm. So we know clinically that if you cook and cool a potato, there is a difference in how much fiber is going to hit your gut, and that will affect how much GLP is released in short chain fatty acids and all these other benefits. You're not gonna necessarily see it on a blood glucose monitor reading. But over a long period of time, if you if you tested people eating cooked and cooled potatoes versus people who eat cooked potatoes, I guarantee you, you would see insulin sensitivity going down in the people that are consuming the cooked potatoes versus the cooked and cooled potatoes. Need longer term studies. You gotta look at many more biomarkers than just looking at a blood glucometer. Yeah. For sure. So the it does, like, have, like, some sort of an anti inflammatory effect as well? What's that? What does? Anti inflammatory effect. Yes. It does. Resistant starch absolutely has an anti inflammatory effect. Remember, you're absorbing a ton of minerals through your colon too. So, the you're changing the acidity too. You're I I if I recall correctly, when you're increasingly short chain fatty acids, the study show you absorb minerals better as well from the change in the pH of the colon. Mhmm. So there is an important aspect too. A lot of people demonize plant foods because they're less bioavailable, but then they make your colon healthier and they change the pH of the colon so you absorb minerals better lower down the intestinal tract. Mhmm. So how much you're actually getting in the body is more than what people think because of that aspect. Yeah. I do, like every once in a while when I do have, like, some sort of a carb meal then, the potatoes I do like I'd like to keep them, at least, like, slightly, less cooked and, tougher so that they would maintain some of the resistant starch. And, the cooking and cooling technique is also pretty, convenient, so to say. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. And you can tell too, like, you know, the the the easiest way to tell is you literally just have some more gas when you cook and cool a potato versus when you're just eating potatoes, that aren't cooled. And and you will notice that. If you eat potato salad, you're a little more gassy versus, you know, a a cooked potato. But other foods that are high in resistant starch that are common foods in longevity populations are beans and whole grains. The problem is is the whole grains promoted in The United States are terrible for you. They're not real true whole grains. So there's a huge nuance and, you know, I'm I'm working on a book kinda to talk about this and to really go into the the details of this. But current whole grains are ran through a steel roller mill. And when you run a whole grain through a steel roller mill, it's so fast and there's so much friction, it strips the bran off the whole grain. And so now you're losing the resistant starch, and you're exposing basically the healthy fats to more of the oxygen and becomes rancid in a lot of whole grains. Just throw the three parts back together and call it a whole grain. That's not a whole grain. It has to be intact. And the definition of a whole grain was produced to help agriculture. By saying as long as it contains the three parts, even though they're not intact, you can call that a whole grain. And the problem is is it's not regulated. So a lot of these agricultural guys aren't even keeping the germ, which has all the vitamin e and the healthy fats. They're throwing it out because it makes their bread go bad quickly. So they're just throwing two parts in and claiming it's a whole grain. But if you look at a lot of healthy populations, they consume a lot of traditional whole grains. So if you look at the Sardinians in Italy, they consume a lot of traditional sourdough bread and a lot of other, you know, more rye breads and and things not using, you know, yeast, but using a true sourdough type of, you know, way of fermenting and getting the healthy bacteria, and it's totally different than what we think is a whole grain in The United States. Yeah. For sure. That's, that's, like, a really important point, and I'm glad you brought it up that, yeah, there's a difference between regular, you know, white bread and this sort of a healthy, quote, unquote, whole wheat breads that's sold in supermarkets and, like, traditional sourdough sourdough bread. And, all of them have, like, a different effect on the body. And, yeah, it's quite unfortunate that, you know, although some people may react negatively to all types of gluten, but there's still, like, a different like, a difference in quality between breads and between cereals and everything else. Yeah. I mean, there's clinical studies showing that, you know, it's not necessarily the gluten. When you start stripping the vitamin e and all these other benefits from whole grains and then you're just giving isolated gluten, gluten, that can be a problem. And what's interesting about whole grains, why they're so uniquely, in my opinion, beneficial, is they contain a ton of ferulic acid, which is one of the most potent antioxidants. This is where coffee is getting most of its benefit. Even though coffee doesn't contain ferulic acid, it contains chlorogenic acid. And your bacteria convert chlorogenic acid to caffeic, and then your body converts caffeic to ferulic. And so ferulic levels after you consume a cup of coffee are higher than caffeic or chlorogenic acid. So you're getting most of your benefits through plant consumption through ferulic acid. It's an amazing antioxidant. It's been shown to prevent, like, ischemic reperfusion injury in animal studies. And the bran, of whole grains is very high in a bioavailable form of ferulic acid. And the other key benefit is something called, IP six or phytate. Everybody thinks phytate is horrible because it can bind minerals, but phytate isn't a big issue if you have a good diet. If you have a if you're only eating cereals, then, yeah, it's a problem. But if you're eating a a very healthy high mineral diet, you're going most people are probably gonna benefit from this phytic acid in whole grains, and here's why. So the storage form of phosphate and inositol in whole grains is called IP six or phytate. And basically, this molecule has been shown in cancer patients. They'll give IP six plus inositol to improve clinical outcomes in cancer patients. And so this molecule can even bind free iron in the blood. So it can bind other free copper and other basically transition metals. So if you give phytate or if you give whole food fiber in animal studies, it regresses cancer. It reduces the amount of tumors. So I think there is a huge benefit to consuming this quote, unquote demonized, like, mineral binder. Yeah. Yeah. Like and and that's and that's another form of, like, mild hormetic stressor at all. But how how would you, how do you personally consume, like, these Greens? Grains. Yeah. Yeah. What I normally do is I'll probably have, like, two slices of Ezekiel bread with pastured eggs. So I'll I'll use the Ezekiel bread to bind any type of persistent organic pollutants in the yolk, and I'll get some phytic acid from that. So Ezekiel bread is basically, it's kept in the refrigerator. That's almost how you know a whole grain is truly whole grain is is if you don't keep it in the refrigerator, it'll go bad within one or two days. So if you're getting a bread that doesn't go bad quickly, that's not a true whole grain. So really, the refrigeration section for whole grains is a great place to start, because they're keeping it in the refrigerator because it's a true whole grain. So I'll do something like that, or a traditional sourdough bread I'll eat every now and then. Or I will consume true, like, 100%, like, whole wheat. Trying to think. I don't consume, like, the whole wheat bread that's ran through a steel roller mill. Like, anything that I can get that's not ran through steel roll like, steel roller mill is what I'll try to consume for whole grains. I'll even consume things too, like quinoa and some other type of, you know, pseudo grains. Right. Right. Do you do you pay pay any attention to, like, insulin or something, like that when you do eat? Like, it those those food that you mentioned there is like like higher in corp. Are you worried about insulin or blood sugar fluctuations? No. Because see, the thing people worry about insulin, but then you're consuming these things with fats and with proteins, so it's not gonna really spike your glucose or your insulin. So, yeah, if you test just potatoes, you may get an increase in glucose. But I don't eat just potatoes. You know what I mean? I will eat potatoes with meat, with some fat. So when you combine, you know, those food groups, you're not gonna really see the increase in the spikes. And again, it's really not I mean, it it's not really the spikes. It's the damage that you cause. If it's not an inflammatory food, you can have cyclical increases in insulin and glucose. It's not that big of a deal. It's if it's chronically elevated where that's an issue. Mhmm. Yeah. For sure. For sure. Do you do any type of, interval fasting, as well? Yeah. Yep. I I normally never eat breakfast. So usually, I'm fasting for at least sixteen hours. But I generally don't really fast more than eighteen, just because I I I generally tend to work out, do full body workouts twice a week. And so I don't feel like I need to do twenty four hour fasts. I think some people if if you can get away with that, great. That's awesome. I just my body tells me I need to eat at around eighteen hours. I just feel better when I consume two meals because it's hard for me to get in all the nutrients I want in one meal on a consistent basis. But if you could tailor that meal and you can really make it high quality, you might be able to do that. You might be able to basically eat one meal a day and get away with that. Yeah. For sure. That's it's kind of the the the definite that there are many ways of going about it, and, some people, you know, choose to do it differently. But, we we we've talked about these, polyphenols and, plant compounds. I don't wanna play like, I don't wanna play the devil's advocate, but, essentially, like, you can potentially, like, get some of those same, short chain fatty acids from animal fats as well. So, why would what would be, like, some the rationale to be still getting them from, fiber? Yeah. So I think what you're saying is is, like, butter has butyric acid in it. Right. Right. Consuming the the butyric acid and then it being hit by the the acid in the stomach, does it even make it to the colon? And is it is it in the same levels as what would be produced by your bacteria? I would say it's very doubtful that you can consume, like, these short chain fatty acids from animal fats and get the same benefit as feeding your gut bacteria to produce those naturally. Mhmm. I've never seen a study that has shown that consuming, like, you know, exogenous short chain fatty acids produces the benefits that you'll see when you look at clinical studies testing resistant starch. Right. Yeah. I would say, yeah, it's it's like a you wouldn't want to place your bets or your all of your bets on this one one way of eating just in hopes of that it's gonna work. It's much more, like, much more sustainable and much more wiser strategy to kinda spread it out a little bit and, make sure that you cover all of your kind of bases. Like, when you become more restrictive, no matter if you're vegan, which I don't believe is necessarily the best way to health, I think you can do it if you really know what you're doing. Like, it took me forever to find a plant food that actually contains active B twelve, that plant food being chlorella. And there's been clinical studies showing that if you consume chlorella, it actually improves b twelve status. But very I don't think a lot of vegans really are consuming all the foods to hit the, you know, the vitamin d that's missing, the b twelve, the carnitine. The more restrictive you get, the worse you probably are gonna be. So that's goes from the one spectrum of carnivore being very restrictive and and muscle meat carnivore being even more restrictive. Right? And then you have the other spectrum of being vegan. And I think our book landed right in the middle for a good reason. Half half plants, half animal foods is what my plate looks like. And I think we did a pretty good job of saying, here's why half your food intake on the plate should come from plants and half should come from animals because of x, y, and z. And we go we have tables in the book of why. Yeah. Yeah. You do kinda cover it, really well. And I I think that you can be restrictive, but it's it should be done in, like, a more of, like, a cyclical manner and do it short term so that you can experience the fluctuations and cause some, like, beneficial adaptations in the body. So Yes. It's like a long term restrictive maybe, like, the isn't gonna be the optimal for longevity. But if you do it, like, short term and you cycle it, then it can have, like, a hermetic effect as well as, like, maintaining more of the the, metabolic flexibility. So it's it's almost like going back into the ancestral way of eating where hunter gatherers would go through different seasons and, different food groups as well. Yeah. Exactly. So, like, to package it all up, like, what what do we do for longevity? Cycle your food intake, consume antioxidants because now we're being hit with a lot more damage. The ozone layer is not what it was before. So sun rays are great, but they are also more damaging than they used to be. Mhmm. The animal fats are also more damage damaging than they used to be. So maybe you need a little more plant. So half half plant, half animal foods when you're actually eating. Cycle those foods. Cycle protein intake, high protein intake when, you know, after a workout. Lower protein intakes on days you're not working out or days you're fasting. Maybe a little red wine or green tea or coffee, one of those type of polyphenol beverages with red meat to help bind some of the iron. Mhmm. Potentially, some way to bind those the free iron from the red meat, cook your foods better, and avoid the processed junk, that kinda wraps it all up in a in a decent package. Yeah. For sure. How how can, people maintain, like, a healthier intake of fats or how how how what kind of, fats should they try to get? Yeah. So good question. You know, you're it's again, it's hard because, you know, marine omega threes are so healthy, but then you have to deal with the contamination aspect too. So, you know, it used to be great maybe a hundred years ago to consume wild salmon every single day, but now you have to be aware that, you know, there's some contamination. So to be honest, I I don't even, at this point, consume a whole lot of wild seafood. I used to, but honestly, now I just take krill oil and and a very high quality, high dose fish oil, because they test for the persistent organic pollutants, the ones that I use. And so I'm not gonna be getting the mercury either, and I'm still gonna be getting the benefits of the high doses of omega threes. But also with krill, I'm getting the choline, and I'm getting, the astaxanthin as well. So that's kind of what I think people are missing too is they're missing the the very first form of life on Earth and the very first food that every single life form evolved on, and that would be blue green algae. And I consume spirulina every single day. Mhmm. And I've done an entire PubMed review on spirulina, and all the clinical studies are incredible on it. Mhmm. I consume about six grams twice a day. And this this this spirulina or blue green algae was formed three point eight billion years ago. It's literally these blue green algae are what gave us the oxygen, gave us life. It was the bottom of the food chain of everything. So all life formed off of consuming this food. Mhmm. And that tells you something that there's extremely amazing benefits. And I published clinical studies on this topic and on spirulina. And, basically, it's another hormetic activator in a way. It increases, and it's like a bilirubin mimetic, and it's been shown to improve insulin sensitivity. So I think I think consuming these types of foods like chlorella and spirulina, no one's doing it. And I think there's a tremendous benefit that could be had from doing that, Not just from the chlorophyll, but also from these things contain, like, zeaxanthin and other carotenoids that are healthy, GLA, healthy fats, and a healthy omega six fat. Does it does it have any potential for pollution as well? So yes and no. It depends on how it's grown. So that's a good you wanna definitely get a manufacturer that tests for heavy metals, which is something that I make sure I do. I get a company that does test for that. So that is important. But, actually, chlorella is one of the best things that combined heavy metals, pesticides, and insecticides. So I rarely consume a meal without taking chlorella, and I rarely consume a meal without taking, spirulina. Yeah. It's it's really pretty pretty damn good. I I myself I I myself enjoy, like, these, you know, tablets as you can chew upon. And those are, like, also really convenient, for traveling. And if you are, like, thinking or you're expecting to be exposed to some something, then, yeah, it can be quite used as, like, a pre question, thing as well. Yep. But, what kind of other supplements are you taking? You know, you mentioned that you're taking like your, like a high quality omega three, but what what else? Yeah. I take about 13 supplements. So L histidine, I take two grams of histidine twice a day. We published a research paper on that. And so histidine has been shown at that dose two grams twice a day in just twelve weeks to cause a six pound fat loss. So histidine is this healthy amino acid that gets converted to histamine in the brain, which has been shown to improve leptin sensitivity, reduce hunger, improve fat loss. So I take that two grams twice a day. I take taurine, one and a half grams twice a day. You're getting all my secrets today. I've never told anyone really like what I supplement with. Spirulina, six grams twice a day. Chlorella, three grams twice a day. I do the krill oil, about four grams of krill oil. The krill oil I get, if when I take four grams, I'm getting eight milligrams of astaxanthin with it because they enhanced it with organic astaxanthin. I take high dose fish oil, like, very high quality fish oil. I get about three I generally take about three grams every day. And then I will do these super foods. I I put in my collagen shake. I will do a little bit of maca, and I will put in some camu camu for the vitamin C. And and maca is high in copper and manganese. So, like, some of these bone building, collagen building minerals, I put in my collagen. I will do a very high quality, like, pastured whey protein, just after I work out. That's really the only times I'll use it. What else? Pycnogenol, hundred milligrams a day is what I'm taking. I will do grape seed extract, three hundred milligrams a day. Vitamin k two. Mhmm. So I will do both forms, k four or MK four and MK seven. And then, also, I take k one with it. So, it's all it's a combined, like, Vitamin K one, Vitamin K two supplement. I do D through Vitamin D three. And there's probably a few that I'm missing here. Glycine, I will take as well. About four grams of that twice a day to help build collagen. Creatine, five grams once a day for cognitive benefits, but also, obviously, for the athletic performance. And acetylcysteine, anywhere from six hundred to eighteen hundred milligrams a day to help build boost glutathione levels. What else? That's almost it. You almost got all of them. Well, yeah, thanks for sharing. It's a really awesome awesome list. But, what do you think about these longevity supplements like metformin or something like that? Oh, yeah. I'm actually I mean, I if I was, like, insulin resistant, I would 100% take berberine five hundred milligrams three times a day without question. I mean, this is what they use in, you know, Asian cultures that have been tested in clinical studies that have been shown to improve mortality in heart failure patients and, you know, have other benefits as well on insulin sensitivity. It's like your natural metformin, probably with less side effects, may even activate more pathways. So that's a very good clinically tested, supplement. Yeah. Yeah. Basically, prescription in other countries in a way. Yeah. I I do think that if you are already healthy, then you don't need to take, like, a really these, pharma pharmaceutical drugs. You can get away with it by simply taking some natural, berberine powder, and it's gonna have, like, almost as as good of an effect. Yep. Yeah. That's good. Well, yeah, thanks for, coming to the podcast, and, we're gonna start wrapping it up. Where can people learn more about you and the Longevity Solution book? Yeah. So they can go to, doctorjamesdenik.com. That's my website. You know, the longevity solution, it's available on Amazon and Barnes and Noble, so they can, you know, pick up the copy either going into a store or just ordering it on Amazon. Mhmm. Well, how has been the initial launch been? How has people reacted? Yeah. I mean, it's it how we package the book is a little more scientifically dense at the the first half and then more so, like, quick strategies and then five simple steps to longevity. So we we wanted to bring the science in and tell the story and have good storytelling, but also have good evidence, and then package it up in an easy way to say, okay. What are the five things I need to do to live longer? And so I think people kinda like that. And the visual, like, the graphics, the images, Victory Belt did a really nice job on the book. Mhmm. Mhmm. Yeah. It's a it's a it's a, you know, decent it's a good looking book, and, the graphics are pretty pretty, detailed. Yeah. But, yeah, people can definitely check it out in the in the show notes as well. So, James, thanks thanks for coming to the podcast. And, when is your next book coming out? Yeah. I don't have a release date. I'm working on a few. So we'll I'll I'll keep you posted. Alright. Looking forward to it. The my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or a habit you wish you adopted sooner that improved your body and your mind? I would probably say I've always I've always exercised, probably, honestly, the spirulina chlorella data and research and taking it before I consume food. I think is what per personally is gonna give me the greatest chances of living longer just from the research I've looked at. Okay. That's that's that's quite a bold statement. It's a it's it is, but I'm actually doing the research on the substance. I've published several clinical papers, and I've done an entire review, and I've looked at all the studies. And simply from an evolutionary aspect as well, I'm pretty confident that it that it will contribute to my longevity. Yeah. I think it's somewhat underrated or it's, like, miss it's overlooked. Like, a lot of people don't really consume it, and it does. It's it's a it's a it's a really even, like, it's not expensive. It's very cheap, and, it's nutritious at the same time. Exactly. It it's literally I think it is the most nutritious substance on Earth. Like, gram for gram, nothing's gonna give you more vitamins and minerals than than spirulina. Well, yeah. There you go. It's a good good note to end the podcast. Keep them keep them wanting for more. There you go. Alright. Well, yeah, thanks for coming podcast, and, looking forward to your future work. Thanks so much. Alright. That's it for this episode of the BodyMinds and PowerMind podcast. If you wanna support us, then I would greatly appreciate it if you could leave us a review on iTunes and the other social media platforms. You can now order my new book Metabolic Autophagy that covers a lot of the same topics that we talked in here. It's a collection of certain lifestyle habits and practices that prioritize longevity as well as performance. To support this podcast, you can also become a Patreon and get exclusive video lectures from my biohacking boot camp that covers circadian rhythms, intermittent fasting, autophagy, resistance training, biofeedback, and many more. But other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.