NAD, NMM, NMR, NR, NADH, nicotinamide riboside. What is this mysterious molecule and how does it work? How does it affect your body? If you want to know how to become more energized and youthful, then check out this video about how to increase NAD plus. I'm gonna tell you what it is and what are the benefits. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide or NAD is a coenzyme that's found in all living cells. It's required for carrying out many vital chemical and biological processes in the body. NAD has two major roles. One, help turn nutrients into energy, and two, assist proteins that regulate other biological activities. NAD plus is required for converting the food you eat into energy and use it for muscle contraction, nerve functioning, etcetera. In his 1930 Nobel Prize speech, Euler Cheplin said that NAD plus is one of the most widespread and biologically most important activators within the plant and animal world. Basically, without NAD plus, you would die. NAD plus can be produced from many precursors such as nicotinamide riboside or n r, tryptophan, nicotinic acid, which is vitamin b three, nicotinamide or niacin, and nicotinamide mononucleotide or NMN. NAD has two forms, NAD plus and NADH, which both govern electron transfer reactions. NAD plus is an oxidizing agent that picks up electrons from other molecules and thus becomes reduced. NADH is a reducing agent that forms from reduced NAD plus, and it can be then used to donate electrons to other molecules, thus becoming NAD plus again. Electrons of NADH can store energy, which gets converted into ATP in the mitochondria during a process called oxidative phosphorylation. A higher NAD plus to NADH ratio creates more readily available energy around and makes the cells produce their own energy more efficiently. An abundance of energy from food raises NADH and lowers NAD plus levels. NAD plus plays a key role in regulating metabolism and circadian rhythms through sirtuins. Sirtuins are a group of proteins that are often called longevity genes because of their benefits on aging and longevity. They protect against DNA damage and promote telomere length. Circadian rhythms govern sleep and wakefulness cycles, and many metabolic processes are linked to this. Disrupting circadian rhythm suppresses the NAD plus dependent SIRT one gene, which then lowers the availability of NAD plus. Thus, you suffer from poor energy and other mitochondrial dysfunction. Basically, NAD plus helps with all of the metabolic processes inside your body, and it has many benefits. NAD plus is needed for energy production and skeletal muscle homeostasis. Not enough NAD plus causes chronic fatigue, exhaustion, and atrophy. Low n a d plus impairs brain function, increases brain degeneration, inflammation, body fat, fatigue, and muscle loss. N a d plus protects the cells against oxidative stress with the help of sirtuins. N a d plus replenishment improves lifespan and health span through mitophagy and DNA repair. Aging can be thought of as a multifaceted accumulation of energy depletion and DNA damage. Losing NAD plus is a crucial aspect of this. With age, your NAD plus levels decrease across many tissues, which will affect SIR2 in activity, thus lowering your vitality and energy levels. This NAD plus decline is most likely due to a defect in biosynthesis and increased energy depletion. NAD plus biosynthesis with supplementation has become a potential target for preventing age related diseases and antiaging. The loss of NAD plus is thought to be caused by the accumulation of oxidative stress and DNA damage that happens during aging. At the same time, less NAD plus causes more oxidative stress, and the more oxidative stress you experience, the lower your NAD plus is gonna be. So here's how to increase NAD plus levels naturally. NAD can be synthesized from the amino acids tryptophan or aspartic acid. Animal protein tends to be a more bioavailable source of NAD precursors as well. Vitamin b three or niacin supplementation can also increase NAD plus levels. Fermented foods like sauerkraut and kombucha have b vitamins and can increase NAD plus. The fermentation process produces NADH and lactate, which creates NAD plus. Ketone bodies lower the production of reactive oxygen species in the mitochondria by increasing NADH oxidation into NAD plus. Glucose depletion results in increased NAD plus by promoting AMPK and SIRT one activity. The ketogenic diet promotes NAD plus levels because of fatty acid oxidation and glucose depletion. Fasting and calorie restriction increase NAD plus and SIRT one levels, which have many antiaging benefits, and it dictates cell survival. Exercise also increases NAD plus and sirtuins as do heat saunas. All of those things, they have one thing in common. They make your body produce more energy from energy depletion. Despite your body being under higher energy demands during exercise or fasting, you you'll still be able to recreate that cycle, so to say, and resynthesize NAD plus because of this increased energy demand. But too much NAD can also have some problems. Too much NAD plus may disrupt your sleep cycles and cause circadian rhythm mismatches. It can even create interrupted hunger and appetite patterns. Here are some of the things that decrease NAD plus. Chronic inflammation and oxidative stress lower NAD plus. Circadian rhythm mismatches deplete NAD plus. Consuming too many calories raises NAD h and lowers NAD plus. Higher blood sugar and insulin raise NADH and lower NAD plus ratios. Alcohol lowers NAD plus and can cause chronic fatigue. You can't take NAD as a supplement directly because it would degrade before it gets absorbed. But there are a few NAD precursors like nicotinamide riboside or NMN that have been shown to raise NAD levels. The first clinical trial on NR showed that even just one hundred, three hundred, and one thousand milligrams of nicotinamide riboside were shown to significantly raise any levels in the blood. Combining two hundred and fifty milligrams of nicotinamide riboside with fifty milligrams of pterostilbene does the same. Doses of two thousand milligrams a day have been administered for twelve weeks, which appears to be safe in humans. However, it doesn't seem to improve insulin sensitivity or whole body glucose tolerance in obese men. Chronic NR supplementation is well tolerated and elevates NAD in healthy middle age and older adults. So it does seem that NR is pretty safe, and there are no real side effects. I've been experimenting with a brand called Elysium Health. Their product is called Basis, which contains two hundred and fifty milligrams of NR and fifty milligrams of Plerostilbene. You can get a free month supply of Elysium's Basis if you purchase the six month or one year subscription. That's an additional month of free NAD. Link is in the description. So in conclusion, NAD is an essential molecule that you need for to stay healthy and to be vitalized and energized. The problem is that as you get older or if you're suffering from some sort of illness, then your energy levels are gonna just drop and decrease, which in turn makes it harder for you to stay healthy. That's why consistent exercise, taking saunas, fasting, not overdoing the calories, and not over eating carbs can be a good way to balance your energy levels. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.