If you want to know what's the difference between different fasting methods, such as the sixteen and eight method, the Warrior Diet, and one meal a day, then check out this video. I'm gonna compare these different fasting routines and look at their pros and cons. Let the demons begin. There are many different ways of doing intermittent fasting, and the most popular ones are the sixteen and eight Lingay's method, the Warrior Diet, and one meal a day or OMAD. With the sixteen and eight Lingay's method, you fast for sixteen hours and eat within eight hours. Usually, you skip breakfast and have lunch and dinner. With the Warrior diet, you fast for twenty hours and eat within four hours. Usually, you eat a large dinner comprised of a few meals. OMAD, you eat only one meal a day within one to two hours. Usually, you fast for about twenty two to twenty three hours and eat your calories in a single meal. Most people fast for fat loss, increased autophagy, better gut health, and just general well-being. So in the rest of this video, I'm gonna compare these different fasting methods in the parameters of those results. The first interval fasting routine I heard about was the sixteen:eight lean gains method treated by Martin Birkin. It's prioritized for muscle growth and resistance training. Here are the pros of the lean gains method. It's a great routine to start off with if you've never done intermittent fasting or are under adapted. It's relatively easy and doesn't require almost any effort. You just skip a single meal and you get used to it quite fast. You give enough time for your body to exit the post absorptive state of digestion and actually go into a faster state. It's not going to interfere with resistance training or muscle hypertrophy once you become fat adapted. You're not going to lose muscle. There's more than enough time to consume all your calories within eight hours and activate muscle protein synthesis several times. You can effectively maintain higher levels of brain functioning and focus without having to think about food. Here are the cons of the sixteen eight method. It's probably not enough to trigger significant autophagy and clean enough hosts. That's probably the biggest flaw of this. You need to fast a lot longer to get autophagy. You may still maintain sugar cravings and hunger during the fasted window. It can be done wrong with frequent snacks and overeating during those eight hours. Fasting for sixteen hours isn't actually fasting for sixteen hours because it takes some time for your body to digest the food that you ate last and to actually enter into a fasted state. Usually, it's gonna take about four to six hours. And when you think you've been fasting for sixteen hours, then in reality, physiologically, you've been fasting for about fourteen or twelve hours. Disappointing. So that's why I think the sixteen and eight method should be somewhat of the minimum daily fast that you should stick to as the giver digestion of enough time to rest. You can also fast for eighteen hours, and I I think there isn't any significant difference between fasting for sixteen hours or fasting for eighteen hours. They're both somewhat similar, and the difference is only maybe you go into deeper ketosis and you burn a bit more fat. The Warrior diet is a fasting protocol created by Ori Hofmekler. You're supposed to fast for most of the day, then work out and have a big dinner. The window is about twenty hours of fasting and four hours of eating. Here are the pros of the Warrior diet. You can burn fat quite easily and go deeper into ketosis. Fasting becomes very easy, and you lose hunger almost completely. It's great for training before starting extended three to five day fasts. You can have large meals without worrying about calories that much as long as you still stick within your daily caloric allowance, that is. If you exercise fasted, you can get increased autophagy. Your digestion and gut health may get better because of fasting for longer. Here are the cons of the Warrior Diet. It's more difficult to progress in resistance training and strength. Some people compensate for fasting that long by consuming too many stimulants and coffee. They may also binge eat after breaking the fast. If you eat the wrong foods, you may lose muscle and get weaker. If you eat too close to bedtime, you'll jeopardize your sleep, which is no bueno. For muscle growth, then the sixteen and eight method or eighteen and six fasting, that will be probably better than the Warrior diet because you just have a wider gap to consume protein and trigger muscle protein synthesis. But for maintenance, fat loss, or just doing some form of lower repetition resistance training, then I think the word diet is perfectly sustainable and it's, possible to do it. Madness. One meal a day or OMAD is a pretty simple and effective fasting routine. You fast for about twenty two to twenty three hours and eat your food within one to two hours. Here are the pros of OMAD. It's very easy to lose fat because you have such a small time frame to eat. If you fast for twenty three to twenty four hours, you'll probably start getting into actual autophagy that has a much greater effect on your health than just increased basal autophagy. After proper fat adaptation, you become immune to hunger and cravings. It frees up a lot of mental faculties and willpower by not having to think about eating. You give your digestion really good rest and keep your digestive organs working properly for longer. Your body becomes more efficient at absorbing and retaining the nutrients from food. You can eat more carbs while staying somewhat keto adapted during the fasted state. Here are the cons of OMAD. It's quite difficult to build strength and muscle, although it's possible. You may find it difficult to eat all of your calories in such a small time frame if you're not trying to lose weight. You have suboptimal rates of protein synthesis by being able to spike it within such a small time frame. If you eat too much food in volume, you may get bloated and feel awful. If you eat too close to bedtime, you'll disrupt your sleep quality. Fasting that long all the time may cause metabolic adaptation and cause too much stress. I've been doing both OMAD and the Warrior Dots interchangeably for three to four years and have seen great results from it. OMAD and the Warrior Dots, they're definitely not optimal for muscle growth or resistance training, but they're still very effective for maintenance as well as fat loss. If I were a regular person who doesn't really care about their health or who doesn't train that much, then I would just stick to the warrior diet or Umads because there isn't real a huge reason to be eating any more frequently. But I think that not everyone has to fast if they don't like it or it doesn't suit their lifestyle. At the minimum, I would still recommend to stick to a daily time restricted eating schedule and try to consume all of the calories within at least eight to ten hours. And there is some research showing that it's actually very beneficial for both circadian rhythm and the other metabolic benefits. All of these methods, they have their pros and their cons, their strengths and their weaknesses, and there isn't no definite answer that which one is the best one. The person who is doing any given routine is a lot more important than the routine itself. If you want to know how to optimize and deconstruct all of these fasting routines, including resistance training, extended fasts, food combining, and meal timing, then check out my Metabolic Autology Masterclass. It comes with thirteen plus hours of video material, a four week meal plan, and a workout routine. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell is all about my name is Seem. Stay strategic. Stay empowered.