A lot of people I've seen, or should I say a repeated pattern of the data from around the world around me, is that people, with mercury toxicity can be very focal, borderline OCD, and can have digestive issues or liver issues. Brain fog is a massive one for them or nerve issues, energy production issues, hydration issues. I mean, there's a whole list of things. You just have to walk around the corner and see all the people standing out in the road drinking and smoking at the pub. They have a like minded social circle that aren't into health. We need to have our tribe, and I don't necessarily like that word tribe, but we do need to have great people around us. To live in solitude, would be very boring on a very pretty planet, and I think to have those relationships as well for absolutely critical for me. Body mind empowerment. Get stronger, faster, smarter, quicker, friendlier, more helpful, more driven. Everything the body needs. Control your mind. Welcome to the Body, Mind, Empowerment Podcast. I'm your host, Seamland. And our guest today is Tim Gray. Tim is an entrepreneur, speaker, and biohacker based in London. He founded the Health Optimization Summit to bring together the different industries and brightest minds in healthy living, fitness, and biohacking. Tim, welcome to the show. Thanks for having me, Tim. Yeah. It's I'm glad to have you on the show, and, we're good friends. So it's good to catch up and to see what you've been up to. Yeah. Thank you, mate. Yeah. Well, last we met at the, I think it was in the Bulletproof conference in LA. So, what were you what what have you been up to like since that time? I've been traveling around The States a fair bit, meeting friends and speakers and just having some getting some natural sunlight in because we've had a shortage of it here in London. So, yeah, it's been it's been an interesting journey. I think I've been in The States more than I've been out of it, this year. Oh, yeah. It must be quite difficult to deal with a jet lag, or how is it? No. That's the beauty of being a biohacker. You get to learn to optimize these things. Oh, yeah. I'm happy to talk about that in a bit. Yeah. If if you might if you might your country are running properly, then, you can deal with a lot of these things. Definitely. Definitely. Can you, like, give us a brief, backstory as well of how did you get into biohacking and how did you end up with creating the Health Optimization Summit? Yeah. I'll give a real quick skip through history, because I don't want this to be about me. I want it to be about valuable takeaways that people are gonna have from today. But, essentially, I was a 200 mile an hour business guy into in business. I got ill about eight years ago, something like that, and the doctors couldn't help me. I was just getting more and more infections and getting nealer and nealer and nealer, and it was a spiral out of control, really. And it got to the point where I'd been on antibiotics for, like, three months, and I was having issues that you shouldn't have. Know, as a 32 year old. And then one day, the doctor shrugged his shoulders and said to Tim, I don't know what to tell you. So that's when I came home and I started researching on my laptop. And I had my head down for two or three years researching all of these things and all the things I uncovered along the way. I then realized that, you know, that optimizing my health was more important than having a a a super career and and whatnot, which I always thought was the ultimate goal in life, and that life is much bigger than that. And it's about relationships. It's about health. It's about sharing. And while, you know, optimizing your health can be a self focused thing, self motivation is the biggest motivation. The key thing is what you do with it afterwards and sharing it to the world. After hearing about Bulletproof Coffee, after a few years of being in that, you know, in the research mode, I realized that there was something called biohacking. So I started listening to, obviously, Bulletproof Radio podcast, learning a few bits and pieces, and I realized there's a whole community out there like me. And I ended up getting to know that community quite well and going to the Pasadena Bulletproof Conference twenty seventeen. And then started a meetup group, just expecting five to 10 friends in London, you know, similar mindset, and says people that drink and smoke. You know, just having a solid group of friends, and that group's 400 people quite quickly. But the thing I kept on coming up against was people were saying that, biohacker, they didn't understand the word necessarily. And it's quite a I mean, it's a strong term, if you know what it means. And it means a lot of important things. But for outsiders, you need to explain it. So when I was told my mom once that I built this group of 400 people in biohacking, she asked me what biohacking was. And when I explained it and spoke to several other people, I realized that the goal was health optimization for me, not transhumanism or implants and things like that. And so I relabeled it, and that's when it grew. And it's now around about a thousand people in the group, of which over 120 turn up every month on a Sunday morning. Yeah. Which, we're apparently the biggest group of biohackers that meet on a regular basis, on a monthly basis rather, even bigger than some of the main the main places. So natural progression was from speaking to loads of cool speakers, just through having friends, not through any, you know, goal. I decided I wanted to work on a summit, got to know the summit guys from around the world, and then decided to partner with Bulletproof Upgrade Labs and PaleoFX to bring the health optimization summit to London. Yeah. It's quite a interesting story. And, I I I I've also, like, spoken at your, meetup once, and it was, like, truly, like, a lot of a lot of people showed up, like, over a 100 people on a, like, a Saturday Saturday, afternoon in London, which is quite interesting. And it comes to show that, yeah, you've done a good job and then, like, building a community and trying to bring bring them together. Like, what what do you think what do you think is maybe this, you know, reason why people, gravitate towards, your, group or meetup? You know, what what is the reason that they kinda come out? Because when I built it, I built it with a genuine intention of creating a like minded social circle. It wasn't about selling to people. It wasn't about anything else. It was about a like minded social circle of people with shared interests in optimizing their health. And, I think, you know, if you just have to walk around the corner and see all the people standing out in the road drinking and smoking at the pub. They're the like minded social circle that aren't into health, you know, and they gravitate. There's people everywhere. And the thing is, it's like we need to have our tribe, and I don't necessarily like that word tribe, but we do need to have great people around us. To live in solitude, would be very boring on a very pretty planet. And I think to have those relationships as well for absolutely critical for me. Not for my own validation, but for understanding that this is one life that we have, and it's an important journey to build that community. So I labeled it. The logo was Biohacker London building a like minded social circle, and people gravitated to that, through a genuine place. And that's why I think it's done well. And then just being very honest in my language, being very open and trying to include people the best I can. Yeah. It's yeah. It's so true that, people, as, like, social animals, they just naturally want to be a part of a certain group. And, like, the reason, like, the mainstream culture isn't, you know, optimized for health or, they don't include biohacking that much is because it's somewhat not that common. It's not popular enough for, like, the majority of people to, start picking it up. So, you know, if if if we were to live in, like, a different dimension where where biohacking would be, like, the coolest thing to do, then, everyone around us would be naturally wanting to do, or they would naturally want to take care of their health. And just the problem is that the mainstream culture is somewhat, too far away from that. It's changing, though, Sim. It's changing. I mean, biohacking is in the press more and more and more. Mhmm. You can see the trend of it picking up just like the ketogenic diet, for instance, was, you know, very small a few years ago. And then people realized, actually, it's not the diet bigger than that. It's about health. It's about really optimizing yourself. And, like, you know, people such as yourself spreading awareness around these things is is amazing. And the same with what the Biohacker Summit guys do over in in Helsinki. You know, they're really they're in their niche, strong niche of biohacking, and, they're showing how solid it is, and I appreciate that. But the point is, it's about bringing more awareness to people so they can understand what biohacker is. And I feel like the label of health optimization really says to people, actually, you can optimize your health. There is lots of information out there, and it's about being brought back to the awareness. And then obviously, that's not just the biohacker. It's the things like ketogenic diet or the paleo mindset or, you know, actually how important fitness and movement is to your health or or, obviously, the different supplements or testing to make sure that you know what supplements you need and everything in between. It's about awareness now. So I think that biohacker term is growing massively, and I think the more that people talk about it actually being a health optimization thing, the bigger that the term biohacker will grow. So it's a cause and effect and a symbiotic thing in my opinion. Yeah. Yeah. I do agree. Like like me, personally, I do like the term biohacking, but I think, like, the the average person may kind of become more fearful about it. And maybe, like, the health optimization thing would kinda gauge way drug the person into understanding what that it goes deeper. Yeah. Yeah. Completely. And I I think that the the press is picking up on it a lot, and it's talking more and more and more. But I think that the medical community is listening to biohacking, very much so now because it's quantified. A lot of it is quantified. There's a lot of cases where people chuck pills down their throat and just hope that they'd be better as a result of this magic bullet. And I've been there. I'm not gonna deny it. But the point is is when you get more and more advanced than this from further down the rabbit hole, you actually where you can look at specifically what you need on the cellular level to supplement. And then it goes from having thirty or forty pills to having three or four pills depending on what you need. And so so I think that's where a difference is. And I think why I say about the medical world is because they are noticing things like the ketogenic diet with Don D'Agostino's work, for instance. It it cannot be knocked. I mean, it is backed in the science, and it's saying it optimizes health, which is why ketogenic picked up so much. And it's the same with biohacking. I think it's not far behind. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's true. You did mention that you overcame your health issues and, kind of biohacked yourself. So maybe, like, can you give, like, a few examples of, what were some of the issues and what did you do to improve it? I mean, I'm I'm still working on the odd health issue, and we all have some things going on depending. But, I mean, I started with kidney stones, which I was forming kidney stones at a massive rate, which is actually quite scary. And that was very stressful for my adrenals, I think, because that really was beginning of a cascade. Kidney stones, which I was just told, once you form them, you form them. That's it. I found out that it was about oxalate production, endogenous oxalate production, and fixing the gut, which was a big part of the protocol. And obviously, getting on the antibiotics to help with the kidney infections and urinary tract infections, obviously, made the gut even worse. So figuring out that you need to cut the loop and and stop running in the hamster wheel and actually figuring out how to optimize the gut was a big part for me. Another part was, I had seven amalgam fillings in my mouth. And while they, you know, they say that you amalgam is safe in the mouth, they won't put them in someone that's pregnant because it could be damage damaging to the baby. Also in places like Germany, they actually talk about I think they've actually removed amalgam from everyone's mouth. Well, for me, I had thrush around the filling in my mouth. And when I researched thrush and metal fillings, it came up with amalgam illness, which is mercury toxicity. And I've tested in many, many ways, and I had very, very high levels. So understanding the mercury chelation process, how to get it out of my cells and out of me, and then replacing what nutrient deficiencies I had as a result of having that in me, has been a key part of the journey. And then all the other bits and pieces, such as immune support or energy production and working on my mitochondrial health, which is low energy production, around met methylation, so MTHFR, gene variation optimization, which is a mouthful. Mhmm. And also testing the ketogenic diet, which is a big one for me. I had very high levels of, arabinose and what some people call candida and different types of yeasts Right. From so many antibiotics. And then I tried everything, all the different things and herbs to kill off this yeast levels and all the, antifungals. Nothing worked. And when I went on the ketogenic diet, I did an organic acids test beforehand. I started the ketogenic diet nine months solidly, testing myself religiously for my ketone levels, and then nine months later tested again for the organic acids test with tests through the process, and it nailed it. And they didn't come back as well. So, I mean, I think for me, you know, you can try and kill off all of these things that are going in in your body, or you can actually try a very clean route, which actually works. So that was another one of those things as well. Mhmm. Well well, it's a it's it's quite fascinating that, the mercury fillings are, you know, they're so common and, most people have them, but actually, you know, there there's a solid science showing that they're gonna be really harmful for your health and, even even, like, without you even knowing it. So Well, I mean, I'd I'd love to touch on this right now, actually, because there's a few things that I've learned in the last month or so that I think since I last saw you. And I think we may have touched on it briefly at the upgrade conference. But, so Mercury being a big part of my journey, and I think it's very misunderstood or not, there's not a lot of awareness around it, is that mercury, when it's in your mouth, is constantly lining your gut with mercury. Now, mercury is used in certain injections because it's a natural antibiotic. Well, it's constantly killing off certain gut bacteria. The whole time it's in your mouth. It's literally topping up your gut the whole time. So it's almost almost lining your gut, in my opinion, with mercury, with metals, which is killing off certain gut bacterias, which means you don't digest your food a certain way because you're not getting certain nutrients, which means that you're gonna have deficiencies, which means your body's not gonna work right. And if you think about that with minerals, we can't work without certain minerals. It's just our electrical system doesn't work. Also, mercury also stops certain enzymatic reactions, which enzyme enzymatic reactions are absolutely critical to life. Like, it breaks enzymes, and I've been testing proteolytic enzymes recently, break down proteins into their amino acids. And there are processes along the way, such as peptides in between there. But really, if you're not getting the amino acids as well, then how is your body going to be building itself if you're not going to get the right amino acids? So there's several approaches of several areas of why mercury in the body is so bad for us. And yet we don't necessarily understand it. All I know is that by getting it out and testing it over the last month and energy increase significantly as a result. Yeah. Yeah. It's so I I myself don't have, like, any mercury fillings or something. But what what would you, like, recommend to someone who has and, who maybe experiences some of these symptoms? Yeah. I mean, like, a lot of people I've seen, or should I say a repeated pattern of the data from around the world around me, is that people, with mercury toxicity can be very focal, borderline OCD, and can have digestive issues or liver issues. Brain fog is a massive one for them, or nerve issues, energy production issues, hydration issues. I mean, there's a whole list of things. And I think when researching different things online, they seem to list out about 200 things. Take this supplement, you're going to fix this 200 things. I'm not saying that at all, but I do think that mercury does shut down a lot of, a lot of processes. I mean, to take it back one step is early days of figuring out that I had high levels of mercury. I did a cause and effect chart of every symptom and everything that I had and put them into a chart, and every time it could be traced back to mercury. And so I was like, well, actually, the top down approach is to fix the mercury to see the cascade all come into line, which I I feel really did happen well, and I continue that document ever since. So, if you've got mercury in your mouth or if you've had a high fish diet, and I mean, not wild caught fish like you probably do with a spear in the sea near your home. I mean, like, if it's farmed salmon, or tuna or whatnot, it's generally been fed with very, very poor fish feed feed, which is caught, apparently, from the bottom of the Baltic Sea, which is very high in mercury because there's so many small little fish that they put together, then they compact it and dry it and feed it to the farm's fish. Doctor. McCullough, I think you did a podcast with very recently, has got a great piece of content on his site around that specifically. And there's a film around it. But basically so if you're eating farmed fish, you're also getting a different type of mercury to the amalgam. And so you're topping up your body. So I've seen many bodybuilders that are tuna by the gallon, that they're high in mercury levels. So the way to test for it so doctor Christopher Shade from Quicksilver Scientific does a tri test, and that checks hair, bloods, and urine to see that your your mercury level's there. And it can tell you the different sources of mercury, where it comes from, and how to chelate it. I like, doctor's data hair mineral analysis test, which was recommended by doctor Andy Cutler. That tells you how much mercury you're excreting all the heavy metals in your hair. It also tells you how many minerals you're excreting as well, or how many high level minerals that you're not excreting. So from that, you can work out whether or not you have mercury toxicity. Because if you have, say, 10 deficiencies in minerals, you shouldn't have 10 deficiencies in minerals. It says that something's screwing up with your with your, the way that you're processing these things. Mhmm. So it says that you've obviously got mercury because mercury makes you hold on to things or not hold on to things. So that's the way of doing it. So hair mineral analysis test by doctor's data gives you a very good indication. And Andy Cut has got a book called Amalgam Illness that goes into this. I mean, it's an incredible book. It's a scientific journal, basically. I I implore anyone to read that. There's another book, which is a great guide, called The Mercury Diaries, which is a very good guide to this process. And he's, Danny is a good friend of mine now through getting to me, and luckily. Mhmm. Is there a is there a specific protocol that you followed, like something or something? Yeah. I do. I mean, Andy Cutler talked about the half life of alpha lipoic acid and DMPS and EDTA. So alpha lipoic acid, which is obviously very needed, part of our diets, actually, for some people, you have you can have a hundred milligrams and it will knock you on your ass because it increases glutathione production, which means that you start chelating the mercury. Mhmm. Alproloperic acid is a dual bond chelator, which is like two hooks on it, I guess, compared to some things like sulfurous food, which is a one hook, which is why some people with high levels of mercury feel bad with cruciferous vegetables. So alfalfaic acid's half life is actually three hours. So Andy Cutler's protocol is to take alfalfaic acid in a tiny dose, say five milligrams, ten milligrams in a test, every three hours, round the clock for three days, day or night. And people find themselves improved very, very quickly. So Andy Cutler did a whole protocol around that. Doctor. Christopher Shade is the newest school, Quicksilver Scientific. And he looks at, basically speeding the liver up by using bitters, having some alpha lipoic acid at the same time, but also catching the mercury pushing the mercury out of the liver and inking it in the digestive tract at the same time. So it's the push catch protocol. I've tested both. I reckon that from three months of Quicksilver, chelation, for the gut, especially with bloating and energy, I found that three months of Quicksilver versus about twelve to eighteen months of Andy Cutler protocol, you you can get the results in three months. I'm not an affiliate. I don't get commissions for it. I just truly believe in it, and I've tested it very closely. So yeah. And I've I've followed this up with him in our analysis test as well. Right. Right. Yeah. I would imagine it, like, the quicker approach would be better. You're gonna suffer a little bit, but you're gonna get it over with faster. Yeah. Yeah. Definitely. Easter, what about, like, fasting? Does that help with detox of Mercury? Yep. Yep. Well, in my opinion, I mean, like, if the if the gut is under a heavy load and the liver is struggling, the more and more food that you're eating is the more that your body is struggling to process the energy. So I think fasting is good around regardless, as you know. And there's so many processes that are involved in fasting, but I do think it's about cleaning up the gut more than fasting. And fasting means that you can clean up the gut. It means that you can go in and put things through that's gonna capture the like, if you imagine that it's filled up with food and you take a supplement to help clear the the mercury or any toxins in your gut, is just gonna be diluted with all the crap in there. Whereas if it's clean and sterile and you're taking something to capture all the mercury in your gut on the way through, then it's gonna be much more effective. Mhmm. Like, personally, I like to do that. Yeah. Yeah. I I don't like I have a lot of, knowledge about detoxification and such, but I would based on, like, my understanding of fasting, I would say that fasting can be useful because you're not putting in, like, the, like, additional stress on liver and digestion. But at the same time, fasting itself wouldn't be, like, the best thing, in terms of the effectiveness in sense. You wouldn't need to stimulate the liver's detox pathways with the different compounds like alpha alpha lipoic acid and glutathione and so on. So fasting is only, like, one useful thing, but it's not, like, a kind of the end all solution. No. I mean, to put fasting to the extreme, it's obviously, it becomes catabolic. You end up breaking down and you die. But I think, an area within this is a lot of people that do fasting specifically. And there's an area, in my opinion, that's kind of pushed to one side almost is that the hydration and the mineral side of things when you are fasting. People say water fasting. Yep. Water fasting is good, but they still get knackered and moody. Why? Because they've got no energy, because their body is literally struggling using adrenaline to get going because they're so deficient in the minerals, and their electrical system doesn't fire. So therefore, they become knackered, and then they get stressed. And therefore, they go, Oh, no. My water fasted, and my fasting is horrible. I can't do that. I can't do that. Okay. Well, add some proper minerals in, and I don't mean one or two, like a full spectrum mineral. Yeah. And you find that becomes easier. And then that supports the whole process of detoxification opposed to just stressing the body to the max and collating on top of that, which is just bonkers. Yeah. That's true. That's true. Hydration is really important. And, that was, like, that was one of the points of your speech at the Biohackers, at the Bulletproof Conference, in LA. So you talked about, like, the five fundamentals you should focus on before you go into, like, the rabbit hole of biohacking or something. What what what can we, like, talk about what were the main points of that speech? Yeah. Yeah. So, I mean, this is the problem with the abundance of information out there. And and I remember when you and doctor McCullough met actually at the upgrade conference, and he went and he he's like, I think the words were something like, anyone that's written a book on metabolic autophagy, you know, it would be great to do a podcast with, or something along those lines. And it's just like it was it was like and and I think the point is is that these things are needed when you're looking for one, two, three, four, 5% improvements in an area. So if you're specifically keto, understanding these things to refine to make it perfect is important. But for me, I think so many people get stuck down the rabbit hole. They need people that are super down the rabbit hole, and they need people that are less in the rabbit hole. And I think that's where I sit with these. So number one is sleep optimization. Mhmm. If you haven't got your sleep down, there's no point doing anything else. Dalai Lama was once quoted on saying sleep is the best meditation form of meditation. Well, if you can do a bit of both, get your sleep perfect and then do meditation, like, you're gonna you're gonna win it. So I do quite a few different things to optimize my sleep. I have done for many, many years before I could even track it with my Oura ring. And, actually, many of the things are listed in the biohacker handbook, the biohacker's handbook, if you if you, if you know about you guys. So, I do between fifteen and eighteen things, and that doesn't mean I spend ages lining it up every day. Most of the things are in place for bed. I mean, obviously, if you have an Oura ring, you see how how long it takes for your heart resting heart rate to if you eat before you go to bed one night and then see how long it is that your resting heart rate to come down and your heart rate variability to go up, you know how long, generally, your body takes to calm after eating. So you know how long before bed you should stop eating. So that's one of the things. There's the chili pad for body temperature regulation in bed. There's a complete blackout blinds because I'm a night owl, and I like to be a night owl. So I block out the light in the morning, so it doesn't wake me. There's, red light rising, full light stacks, that's my bed light. Mhmm. So these are the types of things that I would do, to optimize my sleep. And there's so much research out there around sleep optimization, Matthew Walker's book, or the biohacker handbook, to give you further detail. But get that nailed before anything else. Because if you have a bad night's sleep, how bad do you feel the next day? So, therefore, it's immediate. Yeah. I I I totally agree. Like, sleep is the kinda most underrated, but it's the most biggest bang for your buck as well. Like, your focus is gonna improve. Your mood is gonna improve. You're gonna improve with weight loss. You'll have like better stress and and so on. So, yeah, it's I would put it on like the number one seat as well. Well, just to put it to the extreme, go without sleep for three nights in a row, see what happens. Yeah. You know, you go you go for three or four days without hydration, which is number two, see what happens, you know? These things are immediate fixes. And so, while it's great to do a lot of these biohacks, if you haven't got these things down, then there's no point. There's just no point. So number two is hydration optimization. And I think this is a multi layered thing, and I'll be quick on it. But I think because people's food quality generally isn't as good, that it's not so high in the mineral content, it's not necessarily a rotated crop, and it's got toxins in it. And then our digestions our digestive system aren't as optimized because we haven't got the gut bacteria, because we've had antibiotics before, and because of various enzymatic issues such as mercury, we don't necessarily get the minerals and nutrients from our food as we should. So sure, you can fix the gut, which you intake, you know, anywhere from three to twelve or eighteen months, depending on how unlucky you are. But you can bypass a lot of that by getting the minerals from a proper mineral supplement almost immediately, which means you get your electrical system firing immediately. And that, for me, was a massive win from chronic fatigue, and brain fog, and headaches, and all of these things, because it bypasses so many things. Sure, you still need to fix the gut and you still need to hydrate, but the water quality these days doesn't have the minerals in it either. So people are drinking more and more and more and more water. It's all about consume, consume, consume more water. People are carrying around a bottle of water with them everywhere they go. We were meant to be dipping our heads in streams and drinking from the stream from fresh fresh water going through rocks, which is high in mineral content, and having maybe three or four gulps a day, and eating food but high in minerals. So if you think on an ancestral mindset, we're not doing the right thing. Yeah. But when someone's earning money from it, unfortunately, we're consuming more and more and more. I mean, even doing it now, and I'm I'm optimizing my hydration. So, hydration is number two. I'm a big advocate for, something like Hypertonic or Isotonic. My favorite brand is Toten Sport. Quicksilver do it. Quinten Hydration do as well. Sell Nutrition, there's there's a few brands out there. Hypertonic is twice the concentration of isotonic. Isotonic is the same, concentration as your blood in terms of mineral balance. So it's a really good top up. And people that are adrenally fatigued, I I highly recommend it as my number one fix. Mhmm. What about, like, regular salt or, something, like sea salt or pink Himalayan rock salt? Yeah. That's good. They're good as well. I mean, that's really gonna help massively, very quickly. Like, sole solution is when you have a, like, a glass jar and you put a a layer of salt in the bottom of it and then let it soak up, into the water so it gets to saturation point and then use a plastic teaspoon a tablespoon every day of that. People find massive digestive health benefits from it. They find that their energy production picks up because they're remineralized. Mhmm. By the time we get to 70, I think there was a quote I heard that we're 30% dehydrated in terms of minerals from the inside out, which is why our skin becomes dry and horrible because we're just drinking so much water and flushing out more and more minerals opposed to having minerals go in and and topping us up. So, yeah. Yeah. That's true. What about number three? Number three is oral and dental optimization. So, again, that ties in with the mercury side of things. If you've got mercury in, have it taken out safely. So a holistic dentist generally does that. And also, if you have any root canal filling or any extractions, they might have a cavitation. Mhmm. So if you have a cavitation, it's worth having it looked at and cleaned out properly. There was a documentary Root Cause recently, which went into a lot of this. It's recently been taken down from Netflix. I'm not quite sure why. But, I think it's because it's controversial. But I believe that for me personally, my brain switched back online within hours of having my a jaw issue from a cavitation. So, yeah, so, penicillin oral optimization. Number four is obviously, light, sunlight, and grounding optimization. So being out in the sun, grounding with the Earth, getting the positive photons from the sun and the negative electrons from the Earth, and being a bio human circuit board between the two, which obviously, you know, like supercharges our water, makes it become fourth phase or EZ water, which then helps fuel our mitochondria for more energy. So that's a really important thing. And obviously, in the hot weather, we need less food, when we have a lot more sun. Why? Because we're getting antioxidants from the sun and grounding at the same time, opposed to just relying on food. And this is based on Doctor. Jack Cruz's work, who is I really recommend looking into that. But also sunlight, making sure that we see sunrise for the blue light to wake our brain up and reset our circadian rhythm. And then honoring and respecting sunset as the natural light, where the sun is redder and not having blue light like these devices on our face like this while we're in bed at 10:00, and wondering why we can't sleep. And, you know, I guess respecting the sun and it's, you know, and our circadian rhythms as a result is is absolutely critical, to health because that ties into number one, which is sleep. Yeah. For sure. Like, see, like the yeah. You mentioned, like, respecting these circadian rhythms. That's, like, also very true. Respecting, like, the day and night cycles and everything else of respecting the balance of life in a sense of not being in this very, you know, hardcore mode all the time, which would resemble, like, wakefulness and sunlight, but actually going into, like, the recovery and restfulness where, you know, where's where where there is there is no sun, there is no fire, there is, like, moonlight, and, everything is like sleeping. Yep. Yeah. That's a well said. Really well said. I mean, we should be in a cave with a campfire near the end of it, having some natural light not too late at night. We should wake up when the sun comes up. And yet some of the most successful people I know that work until two or three in the morning that sleep so horrendously, because they've got blue light in front of their eyes. They don't respect. And I think respect is the absolute critical word in all of this, respect the sun and how we've evolved to be. So, yeah. Yeah. That's true. That's why it's number four. I mean, like, there's some quick wins there, but it because it ties into number one, sleep. Sleep is the winner. Yeah. For sure. I mean, because obviously your body repairs at night what the damage is that you've done through the day from your sleep, from all the sunlight and energy you've collected in the day. Yeah. So that's how they tie in together. And the last one, yeah, it's oxygen or air and breathing. Obviously, Wim Hof is doing very, very well in this space and the awareness around it and the results that we're getting is incredible. Well, that's because we're not mindful about how we breathe. And obviously, for our whole engine to be firing correctly needs a certain amount of oxygen. And most of us aren't mindful of that, and we don't, again, respect it enough. So Wim Hof breathing exercises, people are doing it daily and they're finding health benefits from it. That's probably because they're starved of oxygen, so therefore their mitochondria aren't firing correctly, which means they're not healing correctly, in my opinion. Mhmm. I think, there are alternative ways around it, such as hyperbaric oxygen therapy, which I'm known for being a big advocate of. Mhmm. I love I love it very much. I mean, I can meditate for an hour in the chamber and have 97.7% oxygen, like, administered at double the atmospheric pressure, which means it floods my cells with oxygen, which means I heal from the inside out without having to do lots of Wim Hof breathing exercises every day. But really, we should be in outside of a city that isn't smoky, with clean air, breathing properly with good postures, doing running after an animal to kill it once a week, doing high intensity training, you know, and then jumping in a cold lake because there's no warm showers to wash, which is the cold thermogenesis. Again, it's mimicking a natural environment in an unnatural world is everything biohacking or health optimization is pointing towards. Mhmm. And we're seeing it more and more and more. Every single thing that we are doing is mimicking a natural environment in an unnatural world. Yeah. But it be Yeah. It's it's almost like, mandatory or it's needed to survive in that modern world in a sense. That's why, like, biohacking is, you know, like, almost like a mandatory thing and necessary for, you know, being healthy as a as a modern as a modern person in this, urban environment. Well, it should be it should just be health. Yeah. For sure. We've gone we've gone we've gone, sickness, biohacking, health optimization, health. Mhmm. And we're understanding that, you know, like, sure, five gs and things like this is great for our phones and it's great for our day to day lives, but then we moan that we're ill. You know, all these technologies are incredible. Like us speaking right now on computer from one country to another and doing a podcast that thousands of people will be listening to as a result is incredible. Absolutely incredible. But we have to understand how to reverse the issues that are brought as a result. And we're just starting to learn these things. Biohacking is perfect. Biohacking in the workspace, which I think is something that's becoming more and more predominant now, with the Biohacker Summit guys, especially, is like because we're starting to understand the importance of this, and it's rolling out. You know, so it it's bigger than any one of us individually. And I think that by understanding these and infiltrating the world with these biohacks without labeling them as biohacks, it becomes health. And then we're all mindful of it. So, yeah, that's where it's going. Yeah. But what about, nutrition? You didn't include nutrition into that list. So, like, most people will, like, maybe, like, start off from nutrition, actually, instead of, like, oxygen or hydration. Mhmm. Yeah. I mean, I while, nutrition is really important and it is in the top 10, But it's not an immediate thing. I'm looking at things that are immediate for quick wins to, if you've got health issues, what do you turn what do you do to get it right and to get your health back as quickly as possible? And again, it's it's a self motivation that comes from my journey. But there is obviously methylation or MTHFR, gene variation optimization, which is also in the top 10, and liver support, and food and, whatnot. And so there are 10 things I could list out. But realistically, I mean, everyone is starting to realize the importance of the food that we're putting in our body. And the sugar, like the whole sugar thing, that everyone is starting to realize, which is why stevia and xylitol and every other type is coming out. I don't really need to chip on about that because lots of people are talking about how to optimize your diet. I mean, for instance, yourself as well. You're doing very, very well in that space. And I think, right, it's putting the awareness out there. I don't need to continue to do that because I feel like a lot of people are becoming more cognizant of what they're putting in their bodies. But they're forgetting about those fundamental five things because they've kind of been under the radar because everyone's been focusing on the other areas, in my opinion. But we all have our own bias. Right? Yeah. But it's a good point. And, I I like yeah. But, like, probably nutrition would be already, like, like, people would take it, for granted already in in some sense. So they they wouldn't they wouldn't even start to pay attention to, the thing that you mentioned. And they may, like, work on their nutrition for so long. They think they're, you know, dieting wrong. They're eating too much or they're, like, exercising too little or such. But the truth is that their their problems their health problems are, like, caused by those things that you covered in a sense. Well, I mean, in Matt Maruca from, you know, Matt Maruca, he was actually the same. He was chasing the paleo diet, this diet, that diet, all these different supplements, supplements, and he wasn't getting healthier. And then he heard about sunlight and healing and Jack Cruz's work. And all of a sudden, his health starts picking up significantly. I mean, everyone needs something different. Everyone does. We're all different. But, you know, it's not just all about diet. It's just not. And I think that getting these things right will really set you up. And then focus on your diet along the way. I mean, it's not something cut out the sugar. Have a high fat diet, low carb, more natural, more paleo, more ancestral style fasting, mimic what it would be like as if you lived in a cave. You know? And that and, you know, like, for instance, I'm like chasing after a chasing after an animal and killing it, leaving it to rot a little bit for a few days in the cave while you got through it, would give you natural bacteria for your gut. You wouldn't need to buy fermented cabbage. You know? Yeah. You know, the natural sunlight, the fasting, all these things, eating a few berries or a few bits of corn, but not a whole loaf made up of thousands of bits of corn. You know, it's ancestral living is what it comes back to, not that I wanna chirp on about that because that's not my thing. Right. Right. Right. But what do you eat at the moment? At the moment today, I'm fasting completely because I'm I'm testing proteolytic enzymes to the max right now, which is a really interesting journey. And I implore anyone to look into proteolytic enzymes, systemic for breaking down bacterias and viruses and, and helping your body to heal. I used to eat probably 80% 60% to 80% meat with a few little vegetables, a bit of salad on the side. But, I've recently cut it down to be about 20% meat and tried to eat as many vegetables as I can, green vegetables. I obviously like avocado, but I'm cutting it out at the moment because I'm testing a low histamine diet, which I found to be quite good so far. Yeah. It's a very, very random mixed diet. It's always low sugar. It's always low oxalate. I try to be very low grain. I don't really often eat bread unless I'm in The States and I'm, you know, switching off. I like to live on the ninetyten rule, which is similar to Ben Greenfield, where he goes, you know, I'm strict for 90% of the time, but for 10%, you know, I I let go. I let my hair down, and I enjoy life. Because it reminds me of a saying, and this isn't an excuse to let my hair down by any means, but someone once said to me, about a joke about the doctor, and he went the guy went to the doctor and said, doctor, doctor, I wanna live forever. He said, Okay, cool. Do you drink? No. Do you smoke? No. Do you have unprotected sex? No. Do you jump out of planes? No. Why do you want to live forever? You know, ninetyten for me. So while I like to mix it up randomly depending on different diets for different nutrients, looking at what I need on the cellular level and making sure that I eat for that. So it's not about one diet or whatever, but it's generally, generally low carb, high fat, and nutrient dense stuff. I mean, we've talked about this, you know, one to one. I remember you opening my eyes to eating pork belly because it's so damn nutrient dense and tasty. So, yeah, that's one of my things now. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's it's true that, I think, like, following somewhat like a cyclical manner in your diet is really, like, also important, for, not only, like, mimicking the ancestral, way of living, but also, you know, promoting this sort of a diversity in your digestion and, like, giving your digestive enzymes a break as well, so to say. There are different digestive enzymes for breaking down either proteins, carbs, or fats. And you're, like, hammering all the time for one lever, so to say, you're hammering only the protein and or you're hammering only the carbs, then eventually, you're just, you know, just, kinda draining your own digestion. And the way you kinda circumvent that is to cycle in in and out of those different ways of eating. So that's that's another way of, like, optimizing your gut as well. Yeah. I mean, I think this is a is a very good point. And I think with something I've I've I mean, I've been studying proteolytic enzymes heavily, very heavily for the last, you know, month must be month, six weeks, maybe longer. Mhmm. And understanding how they break the proteins down into their amino acids is is absolutely important. And because I heard the other week that the gut bacteria is only responsible for around 20% or the icing on the cake of the digestive process. So, therefore, enzymes and the process of running through the digestive system is massively important. So I've been testing one proteolytic enzyme a day, two, four, six, eight, 10, now 10 on an empty stomach. My mental clarity has shot up massively. I know when I look on a cellular level, I'm deficient in certain amino acids. That comes down for a certain reason. So I am really, really interested to look after doing this test of the proteolytic enzymes, how the amino acid profile in a cellular level looks for me. So I think, you know, this is really good for the diet part and for optimizing the gut and clearing out all the old things. And I think to round off on the enzymes, and I think it is part of the digestive process, whether or not you're high fat or not, it really does break the things down into what your body needs. And if you haven't got those enzymes coming from your pancreas correctly or coming from your stomach correctly, you're not going to break down all this juicy, lovely meat and vegetables you're eating in the first place, which means diet is irrelevant. So, I mean, it's an area that should be focused on. I think if there's anyone out there that has got things like, cysts or, issues like that, then proteolytic enzymes are known to break them down very quickly because they're breaking down the proteins that surround around bacterias and biofilms. And once that breaks that down, it's exposed to the immune system to do its job. Mhmm. So, I mean, it's an area to explore, definitely. Yeah. I I think that was one of also, like, the key things that helped you to, you know, progress in your keto diet as well when you did it, like, helping to break down the fats that you actually consumed. Yeah. I mean, I think with keto, this is an area that was missed. It's it's very heavily missed is the ox bile. I like ox bile tablets from New York Ecology. I mean, so many people start on the keto diet and they go, wow. I was really high in keto to start with. I was fasting, and now I'm, yeah, it was amazing. And then, like, after a while, you stress your liver, and you can't your liver's not creating the bile that you need for it. So therefore, you're not digesting the fats, therefore, your ketone levels aren't going up. And then you're in low carb limbo. You're in between the two, opposed to three in one. So by adding in ox bile, you've actually got the right digestive enzymes to break down the fats. Now I think with proteolytic enzymes, they're slightly different to ox bile because they are specific ones, whereas ox bile is obviously more specifically for fat, in my opinion. But it really does work on the ketogenic diet if you're struggling to get into ketosis. I mean, it flushes you, I'm not gonna lie, for a few days if you add them in because it really does start moving stuff through, and it's almost like, it's like a conveyor belt. But, you know, after three, four, or five days, it really is magic. And there's someone I've helped recently that added them in was like that for nearly a month, and I had to make sure that they kept very well hydrated. After a month of doing the ox bile and their digestive leveling again while being on the ketogenic diet, their hormones suddenly came back into line for the first time. Mhmm. Because as you know, like, the cascade with the hormones and where it comes from, if you're not getting enough fats, then that's not gonna work properly. So the first time, she's like, I feel like I'm really in an amazing place, and all I have changed is the ox bile in my diet. I mean, it's it's a significant area, and I think that's an area that was missed at the metabolic health summit we went to in January together, that they don't talk about supporting the liver when it gets stressed from doing too much high fat, low carb. Yeah. That's true. Yeah. Like, the, that that that's like even with the processed foods, you know, you're not getting the digestive enzymes, so you have to just focus more on, like, the actual real foods, that come come, like, together with a package of all the vitamins and nutrients as well as the digestive enzymes. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely spot on. Yeah. You're the first person I've heard that said that because of the processed food, that there's not the right enzymes, but you're exactly right. And that's a a critical area. If you don't break it down because you don't have the enzymes in the food, you gotta get it from somewhere. That's why this is such such a big win in terms of, proteolytic enzymes. Yeah. That's true. But, yeah, we're looking forward to your, results with that. Maybe can you talk a little bit more about the the Health Optimization Summit? Like, who are gonna be speaking there and, what are you planning on doing? Yeah. So, I mean, my mindset is that I wanna bring awareness to, biohacking and health optimization by bringing the smartest minds from the health, fitness, medical, wellness, nutrition, and biohacking spaces into the same place for the first time ever in history. Biohacking is very similar to that, but as I say, it's further down the rabbit hole. I want to bring awareness to biohacking, under that label. I think, I've got people such as John Gray, who is the author of Men are from Mars, Women and from Venus. He's coming along. He is, all about gender roles and hormone optimization and relationships and community. So he'll be speaking about that, the importance of that. We have Dave Asprey, founder and, founder of Bulletproof Coffee, and the father of biohacking. We have, Luke Story, who is, a well known podcaster, the lifestyleist, who's gonna be the MC for the event. And, wow, people like Aubrey de Grey, who is in longevity. We're speaking to Ben Pakalski, for, body composition. We have Daryl Edwards, who's movement as a medicine, and with his research behind how the immune system improves through, high intensity and random movement and, I guess, like primal play, he calls it. Wow. I mean, the lineup is massive. I'm gonna have a quick look on my screen here because, I'll run through them quick fire for you. We've got Harry Adelson, yeah, who is the full body stem cell guy that looks after Dave Asprey. We have, Gerard Pollock, who is the guy that's, behind the fourth phase water coming along. Christopher Shade from Quicksilver Scientific. We've got Quantified Bob, who is one of the the early, guys within the quantified self movement. And, obviously, quantifying what we're doing is really important. So he's gonna be giving a talk on that. Doctor. Andrew Hill around neurofeedback and optimizing the brain. James Carroll around the science behind red light therapy. Doctor. Marcia Winters, which is integrated oncology. Doctor. Scott Sher on metabolomics into cellular health, and, hyperbaric oxygen therapy, plus many more, including our one and only Seamla. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's it's good, that you invited me, and I'm happy to speak with all these different people. And the the lineup is really impressive, and you've done a good job of, really, kinda networking and bringing them together. Like, we we went, you know, traveling to these different events together. And, yeah, I've seen I've seen you kinda always trying to make the best of, inviting them all to London. So, you've been successful so far. Well, I think I think, I think a piece of this is I've been doing this to enjoy it. I've been doing it just to build, build my own health, maximize my own health, and building friends. That's it. And then when it came to building a summit, they were in place. It wasn't that I was building the friendships to do the summit. Regardless of what people may think, it looks strategic. It really wasn't. It was just enjoying the ride. So when I've met someone, I've been telling them about what I'm up to with passion, and and they've shared the vision, which has been incredible. So I'm I'm absolutely flattered to have so many amazing people on board, such as yourself, Sim. I mean, it's it's it's such a fun ride as well. It's such a fun ride. Yeah. That's true. Yeah. So So that's September, this year, 2019 in Central London, next to the O2 Millennium Dome. It's over two days. I'm just working on getting Wim Hof. It's my dream. I got the venue especially for Wim Hof to be there with an air outside, so I'm hoping I'm hoping we can confirm it. That's true. That would be, like, a dream come true. Yeah. Yeah. That's true. Yeah. Like, let's let's hope, Wim Hof sees this or, someone else tells him. Yeah. Yeah. I I hope so. I mean, I I did it. I brought that venue just for you. I mean I mean, that would be the icing on the cake. I'm flattered to have the people I have on board. They're all incredible. Yeah. That's true. And so yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well well, it's been good talking with you. Before I ask my last question, like, where can people learn more about you and your work? So, follow me at, Tim Biohacker. On Instagram. I'm also page, on Facebook as well. Tim@healthoptimization.com. Optimization with an s, not a zed, because I'm in Britain. Okay. Yeah. We're gonna leave all the links to the show notes as well and, to the, summit so people can check it out. And my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or a habit you wish you had opted sooner that improved your body and your mind? Wow. I hate to say it, but it's sleep better. Like, literally, like, respect sleep. Get it right. Focus on getting that right, and so many other things follow as a result. So many other things. Yeah. I wish I'd I'd wish I'd respected my sleep as a as a in my twenties, and optimized that properly, but we didn't have the data or the technologies to do that other than, oh, yeah. I felt like I slept eight hours. You know? That's what I would do. And also pick up books and podcasts and listen and read and and, you know, devour the information to become your better self and join in the movement and the community and join your tribe because, you know, this is where it's at. This is where the future is going, everyone being together and and trying to make health health more prominent in our lives opposed to, you know, nasty things that are going around. Yeah. That's true. It's a good message, and, I hope, that we together achieve it. I hope so too, mate. Alright. Well, yeah, thanks thanks for coming to the show, and, I'll see you around. Thanks for having me, Tim. See you soon, mate. See you. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out Tim's Health Optimization Summit event, and all the links are gonna be in the show notes. You can also use my code SIMLUND to get a discount on their tickets. I'm also gonna be speaking at Health Optimization Summit, so definitely come check it out. It's in London on the September. Thanks for listening. My name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.