So you've probably heard many different kinds of tips and advice about intermittent fasting from different people. Some of it is good, but some of it is quite bad. Check out this video about the worst intermittent fasting advice out there. They're horrible. Number one, juice fasting. Drinking different kinds of smoothies and juices will make you consume quite a lot of carbs and sugars, which will stop the autophagy process and stops most of the benefits of fasting as well. I have nothing against people who like to drink juices or make smoothies, it's just that they end up consuming quite a lot of calories and it's not doing them any benefit. Fruit and vegetables are primarily carbohydrates, fructose, glucose and fiber. They'll raise insulin and blood sugar which kicks you out of ketosis, inhibits autophagy, and may make you hypoglycemic and more catabolic. Truth be told that because you're gonna get kicked out of ketosis, you would lose a lot more muscle on a juice fast than on a strict water fast because ketones and autophagy are muscle sparing. Fasting out of ketosis also makes the fast more difficult and catabolic. It is true that some of the polyphenols and compounds stimulate autophagy like broccoli, curcumin, ginger, and elderberries. But when you juice 300 calories of fruit, five celery sticks, and five beets to just get a few cups of juice, then you'll end up consuming too many calories and carbs that would inhibit autophagy. Juice fasting for several days would probably make you lose some weight because you're consuming so few calories. However, it's definitely not quality weight loss, and there are better ways of doing it. Number two, just drink water. Drinking just pure water is also somewhat bad advice for intermittent fasting. You're gonna end up flushing out a lot of the electrolytes and minerals that help you to fast for longer. Hydration is very important and vital for life. But if you're going to the bathroom too often to urinate, then you're gonna experience mild headaches, and you may even get the refeeding syndrome. Pissed off. Number three, become dehydrated. There's also the danger that you may become dehydrated, whether that be accidentally or voluntarily because dry fasting has become quite popular, and it's said to be more effective in terms of autophagy. Although mild dehydration affects similar pathways related to autophagy regulations such as AMPK and mTOR, there's still no actual evidence to show that it works. If you do juice to chew dry fasting, then you just have to make sure that you hydrate yourself properly after breaking the fast and before starting the fast. Chronic dehydration is still very unhealthy even if it does burn just a little bit of more fat or gives you more autophagy. Number four, drink a lot of coffee. Most people drink way too much coffee too frequently at the wrong times. This can cause dehydration, gut problems, addiction, insomnia, chronic fatigue, and mood issues. Coffee doesn't break a fast, and it actually promotes the effectiveness of the fast by increasing ketosis and autophagy. However, it's not something you should drink too much. At the most, you should stick to one to three cups of coffee a day and, optimally, to just a single cup. Number five, artificial sweeteners are okay. They can still raise insulin via the cephalic phase response. Sights, smells, and tastes can stimulate the gut to release insulin and start digestion. This may just interfere with the fasting's physiology. Technically, having a little bit of Diet Coke or some sugar free chewing gum isn't going to break a fast, and it probably won't affect autophagy in the long run either. It's just that most most people, they develop additional sugar cravings, They fall off the wagon. They start eating, and they start overconsuming calories. So in most cases, it's easier to just avoid it. Number six, snacking during the eating window. If your goal is fat loss, then having a few snacks like a piece of broccoli or a handful of almonds doesn't really have a huge effect in terms of the final results. As long as you still create a caloric deficit over the course of the entire day, then you're gonna be just fine. But if a goal is autophagy or stem cell activation, then that's probably not the case. Snacking in the fasting window is just generally bad advice because it kinda defeats the entire purpose of the fast, which is to abstain from eating both physiologically as well as psychologically. Oh, this cock is. Number seven, jumping straight into a fast. If you've never done any kind of intermittent fasting before, then jumping into a long fast right away is gonna be quite difficult. You would need to build up your fat adaptation first. Physiologically, you would be fine because you're not going to die by not eating for three to five days. It's just that most people, they need to learn how to manage their hunger and emotions much better, especially if they're not eating. This sort of a no style approach to fasting isn't that sustainable because it may just make it harder for you to stick to it in the long term. So you should always think about how can I make it more sustainable and how do I not fall off the rails and start binging immediately? Number eight, fasting too long too often. There's also the tendency of wanting to fast all the time just to get more autophagy, more stem cells, and live longer, etcetera. But more isn't always optimal, and it's not definitely useful in some cases. Signs of too much fasting include exhaustion, muscle loss, hormonal imbalances, hair loss, frailty, slow metabolism, low sex hormones, and obsession with eating. That's why it's important to nourish yourself properly and actually eat. Number nine, break your fast with whatever you like. Breaking your fast with processed food, a whole lot of grains, gallons of milk, raw kale, and a pounds of meat isn't the best idea because you may run into some digestive issues. Eating whatever you like can also become an obsession and an eating disorder. To not mess up breaking the fast, you want to start with something that has more digestive enzymes and nutrients, such as fermented foods, apple cider vinegar, bone broth, or fruit. Number 10, drop your calories a lot. Fasting itself won't slow down your metabolic rate. However, eating at a serious caloric deficit for too long will. To avoid metabolic adaptation, you want to progressively reduce your calories and try to eat as much as you can while still losing weight. You should also cycle days of low calorie intake with higher ones because it keeps the metabolism up. Can I have that Milky Way? Number 11, eat right before going to bed. Most intermittent fasting schedules are structured around skipping breakfast, maybe having some lunch, and then eating mostly dinner. That's what a lot of people find easier and more sustainable. I don't think that there's nothing wrong with eating later in the day as long as it doesn't interfere with your sleep and it doesn't become additional stressor. It's just that if you eat too close to bedtime, then you're probably gonna see some negative side effects, and it's gonna interfere with the results. I recommend that, at minimum, you want to stop eating for at least two to four hours before going to bed and, optimally, up to five hours. Number 12, you don't need to exercise. It doesn't matter what your goal is, whether that be antiaging longevity or muscle growth or fat loss, you should still exercise. It's actually more important than fasting. Most of the modern diseases are caused by physical inactivity and excess consumption of calories. Intermittent fasting can fix the food, but you still need to be physically active. Just doing intermittent fasting with no resistance training will accelerate age related sarcopenia and muscle loss. It will also slow down your metabolism and makes it harder to lose fat. 48% body fat. Number 13, you have to train fast aid. There is no evidence that fasted training has a significant benefit in terms of both fat loss and antiaging. It may be true that it's going to increase fat oxidation a little bit because you'll be tapping into your body fat stores, but fat oxidation in the context of eating doesn't necessarily mean that you're gonna lose body fat. It just means what kind of fuel substrates are being used at the Krebs cycle and what kind of fuels are you using to produce energy. You can burn a lot of fat during exercise, but you may not end up losing body fat because you're not eating at a caloric deficit. Working out fasted all the time may also lead to muscle loss. Fasting is a catabolic stressor, and you'll be oxidizing more amino acids and glycogen at higher intensities of exercise like lifting weights. That's why it's not always the best idea to be working out fasted, especially with resistance training, because you'll just end up losing some more muscle. This applies to both longevity and body composition goals because both are somewhat relevant and you need to have muscle for living longer and being healthier in general. If you want to know how to optimize training, intermittent fasting, nutrition, and meal timing for both muscle growth, autophagy, and longevity, then check out my book Metabolic Autophagy. So this is the worst advice about intermittent fasting that I've seen. And if you want to add something to the list, then comment down below, and I'll make sure to add to the next video. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.