I I think the biggest thing to avoid is inflammatory foods. I I think sugar isn't that much of a threat to the body compared to in inflammatory foods. And, of course, sugar can be inflammatory if it's used. But fats, bad fats, and bad protein is way more inflammatory than sugar. The other thing too is if you take proteolytic enzymes on an empty stomach, let's say when you're fasting, it's a great idea because they'll actually go into your body, go into your bloodstream, and actually start breaking down old undigested proteins, which might be accumulating in the cells or even creating inflammatory or allergic responses. Do you want to know what it is? Body mind empowerment. Get stronger, faster, smarter, quicker, friendlier, more helpful, more driven. Everything the body needs. Control your mind. Welcome to the BodyMind Empowering podcast. I'm Ho Simland, and our guest today is Matt Gallant. Matt is the CEO of BioOptimizers and has a bachelor's degree in kinesiology. He's been a strength and conditioning coach for multiple pro athletes, and he's a self defense instructor. Matt, welcome to the show. Yeah. It's great to be here. I'm a big fan of your show, and, we met we met at the Bulletproof Conference, and here we are. So Yeah. Excited. Yeah. It was great to meet you in person. And, like, it was in the April, so it's been a few weeks. And what what what are we up to, like, since that time? Yeah. I've been been busy and focused. We're, you know, really diving into some exciting new, ingredients and research and, doing a lot of tests. So I'll I'll talk more about that later. But, you know, I've been doing keto for twenty six years on and off. But right now, I'm I'm on. I've been on nonstop for four years. But, yeah, I started experimenting with keto when I was 16. First first, it was Atkins. I'd gained some weight, and I heard about Atkins. But then a few months later, I discovered the anabolic diet by Moro de Pasquale. And that's still what I follow today, which is a cyclical keto. You do five or six days of keto and then one day of carb loading, which is really anabolic for muscle building. So we can talk about that, of the benefits of that. But, yeah, that's, what I've been up to. Yeah. Like, I also remember, reading the book by doctor what was his name? Like, Di Pasquale or something. Yeah. Yeah. Just Just one second. And, like, the anabolic diet or cyclical keto diet has been around, like, for decades. Like, in the, fifties already bodybuilders were using it. Like, Vince Jirondo, stick and extract was a cyclical keto diet. And, yeah, different different versions of it are popping all the time. But Yeah. I think bodybuilders in general no. I I don't consider myself a bodybuilder. I mean, I I probably built fifty, sixty pounds of of lean muscle mass since I've been working out. But, you know, bodybuilders as a as a group are probably some of the most hardcore I mean, you can call them biohackers. Mhmm. They're just willing to do anything to get a result. Yeah. Which a lot of times is to sacrifice their health, and I think that's that's where I don't identify with them. But their willingness to experiment with their bodies and try things, I think, is as extreme as it gets. So they're they're good it's a good place to learn a lot of things from. Yeah. Like, it's so true. Yeah. They're self experimenters, but you don't really want to be that guy who is pushing the envelope, so to say, because who knows what's gonna happen. And and you you wanna kinda look and, oh, okay. What's the results based upon them? Let them let them be the guinea pigs. But like you said, though, Vince Duranda, what he would do, which was interesting, again, it was a cyclical approach. He would get guys on really high fat diets for about three weeks three to four weeks, and then he'd switch them over into a vegetarian diet for about ten days. And, was getting great results. I mean, arguably, Vince was, you know, a decade ahead of his time when he was training people. So, yeah, he he was a genius. Definitely way ahead of his time. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. For sure. But, when I was talking, like, with your business partner, Wade Lightheart, a few, months ago, on this podcast as well, and he was saying that he's doing a vegetarian diet and you're doing keto. So, how do you how do we get along with each other? We get along great. You know? Yeah. It's it's a great question, and we've actually, like, debated it pretty deeply. So first of all, I I I think the number one consideration for everybody when you're doing a diet is is it sustainable? And sustainability is, a really big topic because, you know, the spiritual side of a diet, which for me, there's no real spiritual side to a diet, but for Wade, there is, becomes his number one consideration. Right? So sustainability also means, you know, can I psychologically handle, eating like this for the rest of my life? Because I'm not interested in doing things that are not sustainable, like doing something for 12 knowing that I can't sustain it. I've never been able to really do that. And even as a coach, when I used to train a lot of people, that was always my approach. So there's that side of it. I think we both mastered the diets because I think both diets require I mean, the general concept's really simple. If you're vegetarian, eat vegetables. If you're keto, avoid carbs. But, you know, this is what we'll get into today. The mastery is in the details. So for an example, with Wade, he eats enough protein. Like, he under his his his awareness around protein and his commitment to making sure that he gets enough of it on a daily basis is critical because when he doesn't, he doesn't feel as good. He'll lose strength. He'll lose muscle. And the same thing goes with keto. You know, there's a lot of refinements that I think most people can make to make the diet work better for their bodies. So I think that, you know, we've both been on these diets for a very long time. Wade's about eighteen years. I mean, like I said, twenty six. So, you know and what's great too is these days, the science of these diets is getting, fleshed out. Right? The the the research that's coming out, our understanding of how to make these things work is, light years ahead of twenty six years ago where, hey. Just eat cheese and the Atkins bars. Right? Yeah. That didn't work that well. For sure. Yeah. It's so true that, your diet is going to gonna change your perspective on the world as well. And like you mentioned, Wade is kinda more mindful about, how how much protein is he getting and making sure that he gets enough of the essential nutrients and such versus someone on keto is just more mindful about, okay, I I shouldn't overdo the carbs or something. I'll just pay attention to, the carbohydrates and avoid them. And, you know, the same applies to, like, different diets. Like, a body builder is also very kinda mindful about meal timing and protein and and etcetera. So it's, yeah, kinda fascinating how your diet is going to change your perspective of the world and, kinda the way you move or navigate the world and, move through it as well. Yeah. I think and I think that's where fasting actually, I think the biggest benefit of fasting is what you just said. I remember because I do a lot of fasting as well, and we can get into that. But I remember the first time I did, like, a five day fast. You know, you you really realize, first of all, how much mental energy people spend more I was spending thinking about food. Right? I mean, at the stand that that the average person wakes up, they're hungry, they eat. They're already thinking, what am I gonna eat for lunch? What am I gonna eat for dinner? They spend time eating, then they spend time cleaning the food, then they spend time thinking about the food, then they repeat that process for lunch and repeat that process for dinner. You know, again, I just spent time with my parents in in Canada, and, you know, that's their process. Right? Like, what are we getting for lunch? What are we getting for dinner? When you start fasting or even just eating one meal a day, which is what I do, like, you just realize, wow, how much how much energy and mental, thinking is being spent thinking about food, preparing the food, eating the food, cleaning the food. So yeah. And when you start fasting for days on end, you have to go to a different place, and it changes you, you know, because really, at the end of the day, our nervous systems are designed to keep us safe. Right? Mhmm. And the reason most people struggle with fasting is they have not overcome that biological response, which is telling them you're going to die unless you feed me. Right? Yeah. They don't understand that, no. You you can get past that. That's just ghrelin telling your brain to eat. And it's in a way, it's an illusion. Right? Like, we know we can go ten days and twenty days, and I know two people that have done forty day fast. So, again, that that response, that ghrelin response, just telling us we're hungry is just an illusion, but it's our bodies just trying to keep us safe. So there's something really powerful and empowering about being on a multiple day fast and, realizing that, you know what? I am safe. And and it just changes it changes your nervous system. It's it's quite profound in my opinion. Yeah. It's so true that, fasting is going to change the way you kinda relate to food and you kinda learn how to intuitively differentiate between, like, psychological hunger and physiological cravings and just eating for boredom and such. And I like what you said. I like that you kinda overcome your fears as well. So the only way you overcome your fears is to plunge into the unknown and go into the chaos where you haven't been before. So, yeah, for most people that or the biggest kinda source of, let's say, uncertainty and angst is not going without food because it's so kinda used to the or so, very common for people to just eat and never never ever go into, like, a fast estate. Yeah. Even my mom, you know, my parents, my brothers and I joke, you know, the joke is 04:30PM for life because they eat at 04:30PM their dinner like clockwork. Right? Like, when they're at home, it doesn't you know, five minutes late is a big deal. And, we went to Montreal. My brother was graduating becoming a doctor. So we were off schedule, but for them not, like, waiting for an hour was such a huge mental deal. I was like, you know, we had to, like, oh my god. Do we gotta feed them because they're panicking? So, yeah, it's it's it's it's really interesting how people relate to food. But I think in terms of mental energy, one of the things I try to do as an entrepreneur and just to be more successful in life is to free up mental energy. And I think that's the big benefit of fasting in terms of I mean, obviously, there's all the health benefits which are amazing. Mhmm. But, you know, cutting my mental energy by 80% thinking about food is is huge. Mhmm. Yeah. You you you mentioned you're doing a one meal a day. So, can you dissect it? Like, what what what is it and, when? Okay. So, yeah, let's go deep here. And and, again, this is my diet. It's certainly not for everybody. It's pretty extreme, on multiple levels, but I've this is what works for me. And just just to be clear, let's just determine what my goals are. My goals are, one, to con to continuously build lean muscle mass, which I have been for the last four years. I I build about four to eight pounds of lean muscle mass a year using, DEXA scans. And to continually get leaner, but on a slow pace, I'm not into extreme, weight loss. I've done that. I've lost 64 pounds in fourteen weeks once, that was a big mistake. So, you know, every year I lose, you know, four to eight pounds of fat. I gained four eight pounds of lean muscle mass, and my other goal is maximum health and energy. So anyways, those are the the goals. Mhmm. And in order to do that, what I found that works well for me is, again, number one, it's a cyclical keto. So Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, I eat one meal a day. It's keto. Like, usually, almost like carnivore. I mean, like, Monday, so it's a pound of rib eye. Tuesdays, I'll eat some salmon and a little bit of veggies. Today, I'm gonna eat a pound of, ground lamb with a little bit of goat cheese, and then tomorrow, I'll eat a big salad. So one meal a day. Usually, I work out at four, and then I eat at at six. Mhmm. And then I stop eating Thursday night. So Thursday night's usually my last meal until Sunday morning. So that gives me about a sixty hour fast. Yes. So I get the autophagy. And, you know, not that it's magical, but for me, it's a great way to manage a calorie deficit. Like, if I wanna lose body fat, all I have to do is is do that sixty hour fast, and I'll lose about a pound of fat a week. If I start eating on those days, then my fat loss will diminish, obviously. And then Sunday is designed to do several things. It's a massive calorie day, and it's a massive carb day. Mhmm. So when you're depleted, when your body's completely depleted of carbs, and we're never completely depleted, but, you know, we're we're highly depleted. When we start eating carbs, they're go they're gonna be shuttled into the muscle, especially the more muscle mass you have, the more carbs you can drive in there. So instead of experiencing gluconeogenesis where the carbs get turned into fat, they get driven into the muscle. But the other thing that happens is insulin obviously goes through the roof. And because we've been fasting and eating keto, we're quite insulin sensitive. Mhmm. And very few people know this outside of bodybuilding circles, but insulin is one of the most anabolic hormones Yeah. On the planet. And most pro bodybuilders use insulin to actually like, they'll inject insulin to maximize the anabolic response. Mhmm. So there's a huge anabolic response. Also, the stress of the high calorie day will increase growth hormone. And, again, that's the original anabolic diet design by by Deepa Squali, which is let's stress the body with a lot of calories, a lot of carbs. Let's get the insulin high. Let's get the growth hormone high. And, that's where the muscle building comes in. But there's some other benefits as well. One is psychological for me. You know, I like being able to go and and go to restaurants and and eat fun food for that one day. And the other benefit is metabolism. Right? So by doing that, we crank our leptin as well. And, I know a lot of guys that have been doing, this cycle diet approach. And there's a great book written on this topic called Cycle Diet by Scott Abel. And Scott is one of the top bodybuilding coaches of all time. And, you know, he doesn't do keto, but what he does do is a six day calorie deficit with a one day of massive calories. And he's been doing that for a couple decades, and it's a great way to stay lean and to preserve and even gain muscle mass. Mhmm. Because if you just keep your calories low all the time, your metabolism will get slower. And even potentially, your body will get catabolic, which means you're losing muscle mass, which is not never a good thing. Mhmm. So so I feel like I'm getting the best of all worlds by doing this approach. Again, I get the keto benefits. I get the energy benefits from keto. I get the autophagy for sixty hours, plus plus the twenty two, twenty three hours a day from Monday to Thursday. And then I get the muscle building effects of the massive carb load day. So it's it's been working well. Again, for me, this is what works. This is very extreme to the average person, all of it. But, Yeah. That's what I do. Yeah. Sounds sounds really awesome. And, I'm I would also say it's really dialed down and, like the, original anabolic diet and the steak and egg diet, they're also very similar, but they don't incorporate the fasting. So you definitely, like, would your your your example is going to definitely have, like, a higher level of autophagy. And, and, yeah, like you said, you're all getting, like, the best of all the worlds. You're getting keto benefits. You're getting the, increased leptin benefits, increased metabolism. And as well, like the like you said, the the anabolic effects of insulin are really something to not mess around with. And there's a reason why bodybuilders eat a bunch of carbs and to maximize the antibody response of eating all the time. So yeah. For for, like, most people, I would say, doing it in a cyclical manner is just so much better than chronically elevating insulin with, like, high yielding frequency and such. And I I feel like on the keto circles, it's been, like, the insulin is so villainized and said that it's such a bad thing, but it's actually very useful if you activate it at the right time and if you use it for, like, muscle growth because you can't really build muscle that much or that effectively without the anabolic stimulus, whether that be from insulin or amino acids and such. Yeah. Exactly. I mean, ultimately, our bodies, if we just look back, obviously, in the past, our bodies are designed to fast and to feast. Now let's just go back to the caveman days. And this is a good segue into some other things we can talk about. But we just go back to those, you know, tens of thousands of years ago. Obviously, if we just go if we just look at winter and summer, winter, we would, you know, kill animals and eat as much as we possibly could because, you know, you don't know when you're gonna kill an animal again. It might be a week, might be two weeks. So let's just say again, you killed an animal. You would eat as much as you possibly could, maybe 10,000 calories of meat and fat. Mhmm. And then, you would probably fast, you know, not willingly, but, you know, you would be fasting for potentially days, again, because there's no fruits and vegetables in in northern climates. And then summer rolls around, and, obviously, there's fruits in abundance in in certain places and vegetables. And we would probably feast on on fruits. So our bodies are designed, in my opinion, to go back and forth. However, I think one key point when people have to look at these diets and and say, is this for me, Is look at your DNA. Right? And there's a lot of levels to this. So I'm gonna just start with the big picture, which is which zone are are you from? So for an example, I'm Canadian. I think you're Northern European as well, and my genetics are almost all Northern European. And, you know, we're designed to obviously do very well with high fat diets because of the climate. Right? If we look at our again, what our diets would have been like tens of thousands of years ago, even thousands of years ago, that's what we had to deal with. Right? And there's a lot of epigenetic changes that happen. Right? And just just to define epigenetics for those of you that don't know, it's, you know, our environment, what we eat, what we feel is always turning on and turning off certain genes. And there's a great book on this topic by my friend Dawson Church called The Genie in Your Genes. It's, it's actually being used as a as a reference guide in in universities as a study guide. It's a great book. So if you understand epigenetics, that's a king. But in in not that long ago, I believe it was last year, there was a mind blowing experiment they did with worms that they found that epigenetics were passed on 18 generations. Mhmm. So so what does this mean? It means that, you know, what your, you know, what your ancestor ate, you know, really like a thousand years ago is on some level affecting you today. And a lot of that is, you know, a lot of the genes which we can get into if we really wanna get nerdy around, how our bodies are gonna metabolize certain fats, saturated fats, even fasting. Because, you know, right now I live in Panama, and, obviously, it's a tropical climate. There's fruits all year long. There's vegetables all all year long. And the genetics here are different. People metabolize cards and even starches, very differently than I would. Mhmm. So and, again, a lot of that is just adaptation and epigenetics that have been passed on for a very long time. And and if you look at people too with Mediterranean genetics, there's an abundance of food all that's all year round. Right? Olives and different, things. So these people, for an example, don't typically do that well with, fasting. Right? And it can be a stressor. So a good friend of mine, when he fast, his HRV drops, his heart rate goes up, like, it's obviously a stressor. For me, I have the opposite response. Mhmm. You know, tracking with the Oura ring and some other devices. When I fast, my HRV goes up, my heart rate goes down, like, my body likes it. Mhmm. So it's a really a key point, and we can get deeper into that. But the DNA part, the ancestral part is a huge, huge key in really understanding what type of diet is optimal for our bodies. Yeah. So true. Yeah. Like, the, ancestry and genetics is it has, like, this huge effect, even, like, the, things that you you can tolerate in terms of, like, allergens and such. You know? Like, there's a reason why certain populations don't do well with dairy and, don't don't do well with glutems, for instance, because they haven't, like, been exposed to it in the past. So they are definitely, like, kinda keeping in mind that all these diets are actually affected by your past epigenome, and at the same time, you are affecting your future genome as well. So it's a kinda kinda, kinda interesting point to have to always keep in mind that, okay. What I'm eating right now, it's going to affect my offspring in the future as well. So, yeah, I would think I would think that's why it's important to kinda maintain this sort of a resilient metabolism that is still able to, you know, kinda tolerate different kinds of nutrients, just because you don't know what kind of a future there's gonna be in, like, in a few decades or, like, one hundred years. Yeah. That's, yeah, that's a good point is to think about, think about your your ants your your kids and your offspring. But, you know, even eating out of season, there was a really interesting study done eating cherries that I'll just reference here. And, there was a downregulation of a couple of genes, b m a BMAL one and CRY one. And, basically, you know, if you think about even our our our minds can tell, hey. This is summer. Right? There's longer days. The the climate is warmer, and our our bodies can obviously tell when it's winter, it's colder. The UV rays from the sun are different, set of UV rays. And, obviously, our body has a very deep intelligence. So even eating stuff out of season has been shown in studies that it it it doesn't get, processed the same way, which is really fascinating too. Mhmm. So even eating with the seasons, and and I know that some people think like that. There is some actual signs that seems to indicate that there's something to that. Yeah. I've I've also seen, like, some studies or heard about that, feeding mice, like, off off season fruit or something is gonna result in, like, more fat gain just because it's, like, off season or something. Yeah. It's crazy. So the other big consideration when you're thinking about your personal optimization of your diet, is really what you ate as a kid. So, okay, we looked at the DNA from the ancestors, but, you know, and and this is a personal opinion, and and theory, although I think, I feel pretty confident in it. So and that's what you ate as a kid is one of the main, creators of your gut biome. And, you know, because gut biome is very difficult to to change, because, you know, when you're talking about colonizing and stuff that's been colonized, I think what you ate as a kid was a huge part of it. And you're just just from personal experience, and I've talked to a lot of people, and I've looked at a lot of people. And what I've observed for an example is, you know, I didn't grow up with rice. So I used to go to Japan a lot, and when I would eat rice there, I would get constipated. Like, I don't have the gut biome to eat rice. But, you know, my dad is a potato farmer. You know, my grandfather was a potato farmer. So I grew up with potatoes. I can eat probably, like, two pounds of potatoes and feel awesome. And that's a really interesting thing too. Even with blood sugar, and this there's been a lot of tests with this, where different people will eat different foods, which if you just looked at the glycemic index and the carb levels, theoretically, they should have a certain glycemic response, but they don't. Mhmm. Right? So then the question is, well, why is that? And I think the the logical answer is the gut biome because, you know, your gut biome is gonna eat the food. Right? It's going to actually break down a lot of the food that you eat, which I'm gonna give you another, piece of evidence on this theory, which is when I did my biome test you know, when you do a biome test, you send them a a piece of fecal matter, and then they analyze it. They tell you based on the gut biome we found, here's the foods that you should eat a lot of, and here's the foods that you should avoid. Mhmm. So what I started doing in and more for nutritional insurance is on Thursdays, I create this, you know, two and a half, three pound salad. Okay? Mhmm. And it's loaded with all of the foods that my gut biome has and wants to eat. Mhmm. Now what's what's happens when I eat it is really fascinating because I eat it my number one, my weight doesn't go up and, like, the next day, and there's almost nothing that comes out the next day. It's like my body, even though I'm eating, you know, an extreme amount of of vegetables Mhmm. My body just devours it. Right? So it's things like watercress, arugula, which again, for my body, I've got just the the biome to just devour through that. And I think that's a big consideration too. So is is what did you eat as a kid? You know, is it probably a strong indicator to certain foods that you can, enjoy a lot of and even certain foods to avoid. So that's another big thing to look at. Yeah. Yeah. Like, for so as a kid, I was used to eating a lot of, cereal and, ramen noodles. So what does that mean what does that mean for me? Well, you know, I eat a lot of cereal too. I mean, I I I really did, surprised that I read diabetes. But, you know, I and I still have a very strong sweet tooth. So my, actually, my ability to eat sugar, you know, even Wade will comment like it's it's impressive, which I do on Sundays. Right? Like, when I eat carbs, I eat a lot of sugar. So I probably have a lot of gut biome that can, very efficiently eat sugar. So you probably have the same thing as well, where again, and we have to be mindful of the health consequences of cranking our blood sugar too much. But, you know, I've actually measured my glucose response and, again, my body is able to just devour sugar because and I think it's the gut biome that I built as a kid. Yeah. I I I I see that as well. So, like, for instance, I can, you know, tolerate, like, gluten and, carbs and everything, like, the sugary and incidence spiking very well. Like, I don't have any blood sugar issues from it, and I don't feel, like, in a brain coma the next day. Like, I feel just fine and perfectly, like, alert and focused even if I'm having, like, something that has gluten as such. Because in the past, like, you or, like, there is again, like, this very narrative that, okay, you must avoid bread all the time because you're gonna get brain fog. You're gonna get, like, all these different gut disorders, etcetera, which may be true for some people. But, again, in my own example, I don't feel indifference. And that's why I also like to incorporate, like, this, let's say, bad carbs on on certain days on, like, on those that maybe, like, these refi days just so my body could have and maintain the ability to handle and and, just so my kinda change the, the metabolic response as well. Yeah. Just just to shift gears here, I I think the biggest thing to avoid is inflammatory foods. Mhmm. Like, I I think sugar isn't that much of a threat to the body compared to in inflammatory foods. And, of course, sugar can be inflammatory if it's abused. But fats, bad fats, and bad protein is way more inflammatory than sugar. And, if you think about, for an example, like, one of the biggest upgrades I've made to my diet was to eliminate a one protein. Right? I mean, once in a while, I might have it, but a one protein is the protein from most of the cows around the world. So most of the cow based dairy products, cheeses, and milks Mhmm. Come from are made from a one protein. And, I had kind of intuitively moved away from that, but then when I learned about a one protein, I'm like, well, let me try a two. And I started doing that, and I had no issues. So I can eat sheep and goat and, you know, all of those types of dairy products and have no problems. And I've talked to a lot of people that thought they were lactose intolerant, but it it it appears it's really it was the protein that was an issue. Mhmm. And I think it's the same thing with bad fats. Right? You know, inflammatory fats, you know, obviously, vegetable oils and other things, rancid fats, are are way more of a threat to your health than, sugar. So, again Yeah. You know, sugar, will create some insulin resistance if it's chronically elevated. But Yeah. I think, ultimately, optimizing your fats and your proteins based on are they inflammatory or not is is a real big key. Yeah. Yeah. I totally agree. Like, although sugar is gonna spike your insulin and it's may, like, rub rub rub rub rub rub rub at your out arteries and such, it's it's not gonna stay around for, like, too long if you do it, like, just briefly, if you consume it briefly because you will just burn it off for energy and you your body doesn't, like, store sugar, as something that can't be removed easily. Like, it will just be burnt off as glycogen or just burnt off for energy. But, like, fats and proteins, your body can really easily store them for longer than just twenty four hours or such. You you you actually store the fats you eat in your adipose tissue, and, you make up the cells. Yeah. Exactly. Like, the cells are gonna be made up of the bad fats that you ate. So, that's, like, a huge huge difference in terms of, like, the food quality and such. Yeah. And it lingers around, you you know, and I think a lot of body fat. Like, it's inflammation. Right? I mean, of course, there's body fat, but, you know, when I when I coach people, there's weight loss, but then there's inflammation, and it's always interesting to see. It takes about three to four weeks. And, you know, when they start when they start eliminating bad fats and cleaning up their protein, there's a massive reduction in this inflammation, not just body fat. Mhmm. And you can you know, and once inflammation is reduced, the other thing I've noticed, is that it seems to get literally two or three or four times easier to lose body fat. Yeah. So when people again, if if I coach someone and they're eating, they wanna do a spike day or refeed day, I I'm still really mindful. Again, eat the carbs, but I I try to tell them, hey. Be mindful of the inflammation because that's going to linger the entire week. Right? Again, the carbs, you're gonna burn them by Wednesday if you're working out. But the inflammation is gonna hang around. Like, so if you're pounding a lot of, again, a one protein and other bad fats or too much of it. And, again, you know, I'm mindful that the the poison is in the dosage as Tim Ferriss said and for our body. It's really important mindset. But, yeah, inflammation really lingers. And, I think it's a really interesting factor in fat loss that we haven't really broken down, but I I've just seen it over and over again with myself and with other people that once the inflammation drops, fat loss becomes easy. And when if there is inflammation, it's like the calorie equation of calories in calories out doesn't seem to apply the same way, you know. So that's really interesting. Yeah. So sure. Like, if you're inflamed, then you're more likely to be storing the calories you eat as fat as well and more more do it more easily. Yeah. Yeah. I I I think so. A 100%. Right. But what what would be, like, some of the tests that, people can do if you're gonna assess what's their, like, optimal diet then? Yeah. So first of all, I think, there's the Cyrex test on in on in on the sorry, allergies. So that's one of the better allergy tests you can do. So Cyrex labs dot com, is in my opinion probably one of the best foods allergies and sensitivities. Because again, there's probably so let's just talk about what an allergy is. It's basically your body being threatened by undigested proteins. Mhmm. So it means your body is not able to break down that particular protein into amino acids, and that's very threatening to the body. In fact, there's a great book that came out, not that long ago called The Longevity Code, and they believe that the number one killer of supercentenarians is an agglomeration of protein into the cells. So protein over time is a killer, you know, in inside of our cells because the cells just stop working the way they should. Mhmm. And we'll get into what I think is a great solution in a sec. But the point is that even if you do an allergy test like Cyrex, you're going to see a range. Right? So some stuff, I mean, some stuff, you know, you're going to the hospital and your your throat closes. That's an extreme allergic response. But a lot of things are gonna have a low level allergic response, which are still going to create a lot of inflammation and problems. So the Cyrex test is a good one to do. Another great, again, kind of biofeedback thing that's simple to do is if you eat food and it feels heavy in your stomach, or you're getting too much gas, or you're getting acid reflux. Mhmm. Those are always signs that you should probably not eat that. Or if you wanna eat that, make sure you take enzymes like Masymes or Gluten Guardian or CapEx Mhmm. In order to break that down. There's something in there that your body's struggling to break down. The other thing too, which I'm really excited to I I I I predict that in the next twelve months, I'm actually talking to a company, that has a biofeedback device to help them integrate that in it, is HRV immediately after a meal. Right? So HRVs are heart rate variability, which if something's good for us and our bodies were calm and relaxed, there's a bigger variance between the heartbeats. And if something is stressful, that variance drops. Mhmm. So what I want, is okay. You know, I just ate, you know, a plate of of of cow milk, of cheese, and, you know, see my HRV drop, right, in the next hour or two. And actually start creating kind of a diary, a digital diary of my response to different foods. I I think that's another great way to see, how our body is responding. Because I because I do look at that, and for an example, on Sundays, which I would eat a lot of food. If I eat certain foods, my HRV goes down. Like, I I see that response. Mhmm. So those are ways to do it. The other the other great tool, which we can open up a can of worms here, is really kines applied kinesiology, muscle testing, which a lot of chiros and nutritionists and some naturopaths are are big into. I've been doing, applied kinesiology for about ten years. I've I mean, I've probably done literally hundreds of thousands of muscle tests and calibrations. So in a lot of ways, that is the best test because it kind of accounts all the things that we may not even understand. Right? If I just muscle test, is it in my highest and best interest for me to eat this food, and I get a no, well, there's probably some, again, unknown reason that I don't understand yet that is indicating I should not be eating that. So I'm a big, big fan of applied kinesiology, muscle testing, on the food level. And even calibrating food so you can create a scale, for example, saying, hey. From zero to a 100 where a 100 is the healthiest food I could eat for my body, this food calibrates above fifty, sixty, 70, and you can find that number. So I've gone to that level where I've calibrated different fats and different proteins and even different types of, refeed food to try to minimize the inflammatory response, and, it's worked very, very well. So those are, I think, are my my tools to to help people find the right stuff. Well, yeah, look. It looks like you have it all, planned out and, dialed down with the what you're eating. Would would the like, the kinesiology test, can it be used, like, after a meal as well? Like, looking at, how much your muscle strength you have after eating something. But no. You can actually test it, like, you can test it even before you eat it. Like, so if you're looking at different foods, because it's because it's a nonlocal response. Back in the seventies, John Diamond, who was kind of one of the main guys who taught kinesiology, what they would do, they would just kind of put food on their chest and then muscle test, and people would go strong or weak. So we do we do that with aspartame and different things. But, what we found in the last little while is that I can just think about a food. You know, I can think about, you know, let's say again, I can think about cow's milk and hold it in mind. And even though I might not even eat it, even though it's I might not even hold it Mhmm. My body will still have a strong or weak response. And, of course, you can hold stuff to your chest. But as long as you hold it in mind, it it works very, very, very well. Mhmm. So but it's a skill and you have to practice and, you you know, you you get better at muscle testing. But I think muscle testing in food is a great way to learn muscle testing. You know? Yeah. Because it's it's almost like your gut bacteria are sending you the signals. They're telling you don't eat it or, with the opposite. But let's talk about, like, the enzymes now. What what would be, like, some enzymes that you yourself use, to to improve your diet? Yeah. So I think I think enzymes and probiotics are the two most important, I mean, let's call them nutrients that you can consume that will enhance any diet because they're really the workers. Right? If we look at, food as just, you know, we'll let's take a let's take a metaphor. Right? So if we take food and we look at it as a tree and we wanna build a house, first, we have to chop up that wood into planks, right, in order to build the house. So what does that chopping is the enzymes. Right? So the enzymes will take protein, for an example, and disassemble them into either amino acids or fatty acids or, glycogen. Mhmm. So from that point, then our bodies can use it. And then going back to allergies or even food sensitivities, let's take gluten for an example. The reason gluten is extremely inflammatory for some people is because there's an enzyme called DPP four in the intestinal lining that a lot of people don't have a lot of genetically or none. So celiacs, for example, practically have no DPP four in their intestinal lining, which means that they cannot break down gluten, which is actually a protein, into amino acids. So we have an enzyme called gluten guardian, which is DPP four, and it it can break down the casing of that protein, and then your body can use the aminos. Mhmm. So and continuing with the tree metaphor, so first, you have to break that down. But the other thing enzymes do, and they do 25,000 different functions in your body from thinking to blinking, is they actually will reassemble those, planks into whatever your body needs. Mhmm. So, again, they're really the workers of your body. If you're just eating food and you're not breaking things down, first of all, you're going to have some serious health problems. Mhmm. But your body is not gonna be able to build the proteins it needs, the neurotransmitters it needs, the fatty acids that, you know, your your cells need. I'll give you an example. A good friend of mine, he's he's 77 now. Name is Frank. And I he started taking Mass Times around five years ago. So he was on antidepressants for decades. Mhmm. Right? And if you think about one of the main reasons I believe, and and again, this is my opinion, that, a lot of people have depression issues and other brain related issues is just a lack of neurotransmitters. Mhmm. And neurotransmitters essentially a protein and amino acid that your body can make. So if you're not getting enough amino acids from your food, your your body's gonna struggle to make certain neurotransmitters. And as soon as he started taking MassSymes, he got off all his meds and hasn't been on since. Mhmm. So again, that's just one example. But the other thing too for antiaging, I mean, if we go back to the protein agglomeration, the protein accumulation in the cells, I think the two big things that will fight that is fasting and proteolytic enzymes. Mhmm. So we've designed, an enzyme which has more protease per capsule than anyone else called massymes. It's been around for fifteen years. And it what it does, it has different types of protease, which will break down the protein into aminos. And then we have actually another ingredient called AstraZyme, which will bring, you know, up to 66% more aminos through the intestinal tract and actually help rebuild your body. And that's one of the main reasons why Wade, who's a vegetarian, is able to eat sixty, seventy, 80 grams of protein a day, which kind of defies common even defies what most people in the industry would believe. Right? You can't be two hundred pounds and eat 70 grams of vegetarian protein a day. But he does I think you I think you won, like, the Canadian championships with that as well or something. And he won Yeah. He won. Bodybuilding. Yeah. Yeah. He would. In in natural bodybuilding, which is even more impressive. Because, again, most vegetarians, for an example, have seen it many, many times, and Wade seen it many, many times. They'll lose, like, 20 pounds of muscle usually in the first three or four months. Like, if somebody goes 100% vegetarian, they'll start losing that much muscle mass unless and again it's because a lot of vegetarian proteins are actually very difficult to break down. Right? They're actually difficult to disassemble. So that's where proteolytic enzymes are really helpful. The other thing too is if you take proteolytic enzymes on an empty stomach, let's say when you're fasting Mhmm. It's a great idea because they'll actually go into your body, go into your bloodstream, and actually start breaking down old undigested proteins, which might be accumulating in the cells or even creating inflammatory or allergic responses. Mhmm. So that's the enzyme side. And then we're we we're just launching, this July a new product called CapEx. And this is designed for people on keto, paleo, or low carb diets. So first of all, it does three things. One is it dramatically will improve fat digestion. It has four different lipases. It has HCL and dandelion root, which actually stimulates bile. Mhmm. And bile is really powerful to break down fats. Mhmm. So you're gonna break down the fats you eat into a lot more fatty acids, which is what you want. Then we have several other ingredients such as l carnitine, Inno Slim, seven Keto DHEA, and which will help transport the fatty acids into the mitochondria, into the liver, and like InnoSyn, for example, will stimulate AMPK and other things and other, enzymes that will help break down the fatty acids. So I would say it's the most powerful non nervous system stimulating energy booster I've ever tried, and other people that have tried the samples have said the same thing. So what you do and and I made the mistake twice. So the first time I got the samples, I it was, like, 4PM, and I took five capsules on a empty stomach. And that night, I think I fell asleep at, like, four in the morning, you know, which was interesting. So then I and I said I decided two weeks ago, I'm gonna recreate that experiment. So I took five capsules around three or 4PM, and I same thing, it took me according to my sleep monitor, it took me two hours and fifty five minutes to fall asleep. Usually, it takes me twenty. Mhmm. And again, there's not a nervous system response. It's that we're getting so much fatty acids into the mitochondria, and we're helping the mitochondria burn those fatty acids. We also have co q ten. Mhmm. And we have things that make the mitochondria actually get bigger and stronger. That combination of feeding the mitochondria and making the mitochondria stronger, it's just, incredible for energy. So that's the second thing it does. And the third thing it does and and, again, I don't wanna make any crazy promises here, but, a lot of the ingredients have been shown to help with fat loss. So, again, it I would say it's it's a minor fat loss enhancer assuming you're in a calorie deficit. Right? Mhmm. Again, we're not gonna say that it's this crazy fat burner. I don't think there is any crazy fat burner. But theoretically, a lot of the ingredients have been shown to help with fat loss. For example, seven keto DHEA has been shown to increase your your basic metabolic rate by as much as, you know, 5%, which is about a pound a month. So again, in a calorie deficit, that makes a big difference. Right. So that's coming out in July. You you can click, SIMS link, to to get a bottle. But so just to recap, we have different types of enzymes. We have gluten guarding, which if you're having refeed days or you're eating bread or pasta, that's my go to. I I I consume quite a bit of gluten guarding on Sundays. If you're kind of eating a normal diet and and you're really into maybe in bodybuilding or eating a lot of protein, mass times is incredible. Mhmm. And now for people, again, on keto or people that just want more energy or people on in paleo or low carb, CapEx is the answer. So, again, it's just different blends of enzymes to really maximize the nutrient breakdown. And it's not as breaking things down, it's the passing them through your intestinal tract and then the assimilation. Right? Because, again, the enzymes will help rebuild other proteins, like, you so you think about it again. It cuts the wood down into planks, but it then actually reassembles it. Mhmm. So when we're talking about building muscle or you know, and even if you're not a bodybuilder, you you really want to prevent muscle loss. Like, muscle loss is a very negative thing. It's a catabolic thing, which if you think about even your organs are made out of protein, you you don't wanna be catabolic. So even if you're not you don't wanna build muscle mass, that's fine. But, yeah, at the very least, you want to preserve your muscle mass, for a lot of reasons. And and when you get older, the people in their eighties and nineties especially, a lot of what kills them is actually the lack of muscle mass for a lot of reasons. One is they they don't have the muscle to maintain their balance, so they fall and, of course, their bones are brittle, and they break their hips. And usually, that's the beginning of the end. You know, I I know a lot of elderly people that that's essentially what happened. They fell, broke their hips, and then, you know, not very long after, they passed away because they can't move. Right? So it just becomes a spiraling descent. Mhmm. So it is my point is that I think, enzymes for antiaging on multiple levels is really critical because you wanna clean the cells of of the proteins as well as preserve your muscle mass. Yeah. That's a great, rundown of all these, enzymes. And I do agree a whole lot that improving improving your digestion is going to, help to achieve, like, whatever goal you have related to diet, whether that be muscle growth, whether that be fat loss, just general well-being, depression, and as well as, like, you mentioned antiaging because, like, you if you have a lot of these unbroken down like, let's face it. Like, I would imagine, like, almost ninety percent of people have some form of, like, a digestive, issue or something. Like, at least it's, like, suboptimal, and, they just Yeah. Benefit for some, like, digestive aids, whether that be just, like, some increased hydrochloric acids or some, digestive enzymes and and and such. And the few things that you mentioned was that, I wanna point out more, like, that if you take those enzymes, like, in a fasted state, then you help to break down those, like, nutrients that are floating or there's undigested nutrients in your bloodstream. So, in theory, you can also, like, accelerate autophagy and these other Yeah. Benefits of the fast faster because your your body won't really go into autophagy if it hasn't burned through the nutrients that are, you know, that you ate the last time. So if you're eating something food and you're fasting, but your body isn't breaking down the nutrients that are in your bloodstream or the nutrients in your gut, then you probably aren't gonna get the autophagy benefits either because, you know, there's the signal is there that you have, like, food, and we're not gonna go into autophagy. So, yeah, using those enzymes is definitely something to kinda burn through that kinda stored energy much faster and, go into the self e ing mode after that. Well yeah. And I and I just talked to a doctor, last week, and, I gotta be very careful what I say here. But let me just put it to you this way. He's a big fan of using our enzymes, on a on a fasted state to help break down in his opinion, it helps break down, other things in the body. For example, potentially things like tumors and even, you know, cancer growth. Because, again, when your body is not eating and you're fasting, autophagy kicks in. It's not just eating old nutrients, but things like tumors. So, again, the two guys that I know that fasted for forty days, one of them had this massive tumor. And he fasted for forty days, and it was gone. So why is that? Because, again, the body can take all of its enzymes and all of its natural healing capacity and start breaking things down. And the doctor that, I talked to, he's a big fan of using proteolytic enzymes like mass enzymes Mhmm. To help accelerate that. So, again, when you do fast, it's a great idea to take, for example, wake up and take five or ten capsules in an empty stomach. Let's assume you're eating at dinner, then your your body's going to have accelerated autophagy. Or if you're fasting for longer periods of time, take some multiple times a day. And even before bed, a a lot of people report, better sleep and less sleep, you know, waking up more refreshed with higher quality sleep, which is really, you know, the game, by actually taking mass signs before bed, like, three, four, five capsules. And, you know, I I've been tracking my sleep since the Oura Ring came out. And one of the things that certainly wrecks sleep is having pro having food in your belly. So if you ate even if you ate, let's say, at six or 7PM, but you're eating food that, again, is not maybe optimal for your body and your body struggle to struggling to break that down, by taking enzymes and actually breaking it down, you're going to have better sleep than having maybe proteins and fats that are lingering around in your gut. Mhmm. And then your your the blood pools around your stomach and all of the other things that happen when we're trying to break food down. So you can usually have better sleep in in my experience. But Yeah. My take and so. I I had some additional thoughts while you were talking that, you know, for me, example, like, I don't have any digestive problems. I don't have constipation or SIBO or, low stomach acid or such. I can pretty much digest anything and feel pretty well and do no problems in that regard. But I still think, like, even then, like, for healthy people, using some enzymes would be, like, a very strategic and very clever thing because, first of all, like, you you do get digestive enzymes from, real food, and, that's gonna help to break down those those those calories and those nutrients. But the problem is that Well, let's be let's let's be clear. Right? You're only getting enzymes from raw organic, like, unpester like, no pesticides, no fungicides Yeah. Food. Like, uncooked, raw, you know, absolutely organic. That's the only time you actually have enzymes in food. Rest of the time, as soon as we cook it or spray it, the enzymes are gone. So Yeah. Yeah. For sure. But, there's also that your body also has, like, this reserve of enzymes, but that that reserve is somewhat limitless. Like, there's only, like, a certain amount of enzymes that your body can produce itself. And if you run through your enzymes, you run through your own or own body's enzymes, then you're gonna essentially, like, accelerate aging as well because, like you mentioned earlier, those enzymes govern, like, everything starting from blinking and, thinking and, digesting and everything. So using digestive enzymes even as a healthy person is like an antiaging strategy because you're preserving your own body's enzyme reserves, and you're gonna put less stress on the digestion even if it's, like, healthy food, like organic, etcetera, etcetera. Minimizing minimizing that effect is, like, something that, like, everyone would benefit from, and, that's I think it's it's something that's really effective. Yeah. 100%. And, there's been all kinds of really interesting experiments and research done with, proteolytic enzymes and recovery in sports, and, basically, doubles the speed of recovery. So if you're working out, proteolytic enzymes is a no brainer. And here's here's an interesting pro tip, which, very few people know, and that's actually to do your protein drink and mix mastosomes in it and sip it while you're lifting. This if you're looking to gain muscle mass or actually, improve performance, sipping basically, you're sipping a predigested amino acid drink at that point. And you'll actually taste the protein change into amino acids. Like, it takes about maybe fifteen, twenty minutes. You'll see all the bubbles coming out. But as soon as you lift, as soon as you you you stress the muscle, your muscle wants to start recovering immediately. Right? There's an immediate responses. I mean, yeah, it keeps going for forty eight to seventy two hours. But so if you're having, the the right amino acid mix in your bloodstream as you're lifting, There's some research that's shown that you can get better gains. So Yeah. Yeah. That's one little trick. And, one more little hack that some people use, if you have cheap protein like cheap steaks that you wanna tenderize, Maazan's is great for that. You can take a couple capsules and open them and put it on the steak Yeah. And, you know, wait maybe an hour to maybe ninety minutes, and it'll actually tenderize the steak, wash it, spice it, and cook it. So I've I've done that, and some other people have done that. Yeah. Well, I'll I've seen the video on your website as well, like, literally the enzymes or the mesosyme capsules are breaking down steak right in front of your eyes, and it's quite Yeah. Yeah. That was that was, a little longer than yeah. But, it it will actually completely incinerate protein into aminos. Right. So, yeah, I know it's great. And, I think, you know, like you mentioned that, usually, after 35, people's digestion really starts going downhill, and it could be a variety of things. It can be hydrochloric acid, issues. Your body's not making as much stomach acid. That's a big one. The second one is a a reduction in enzymes. That's a big one. Obviously, gut biomes. So we have a single strain probiotic, which is really designed to kill bad bacteria in the gut. You know, so that could be another issue. Again, if you have certain gluten sensitivities, gluten guardian. So, you know, our goal is to be the digestive company and to create, all the different types of solutions that based on what you need to optimize your diet. So you've got everything from, again, hydrochloric acid to p three o m, which is probiotic, to mass enzymes, which is great for protein, and then CAPEX now for fat. You know? So so it's great. Yeah. I'm I'm a huge fan of your products as well, and I don't use them every day. But if I do use them, then I don't know if it's okay. There's something, like, difference in just, like, the speed of, digestion or something. But but, yeah, it's it's a good good, practice for definitely someone who has any issues, then, I would imagine that those would be, like, something that I would recommend for, those to try. But, yeah, I'm I'm also I'm I'm also gonna try that protein shake trick, adding the enzymes into the protein shake, and, we'll see what happens. Yeah. Actually, the the craziest one of the craziest I think it was the craziest weightlifting workout everyday was me, Wade, and another guy, and we we said, okay. Let's try to do 300 sets. So we trained pretty much nonstop, I think, for over three hours. But Mhmm. We made that drink, and we were able to to just maintain maintain our drive, throughout that time. So, yeah, it was it was basically, like, just nonstop super setting for three hours. Wow. This is a crazy experiment. But, you know, sipping the amino acid drink is is a great move. Great. Great. Well, it's been good talking with you. And, before I ask, my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? Yeah. Buyoptimizers.com is the website. So you can just go there and, you know, see all of our products. And, again, we're you just you can opt in, and there's a lot of great content that we're producing on a weekly basis. So, yeah, buyoptimizers.com is the best place. So b I o, the Bi and then Optimizers. Okay. Yeah. We'll, leave all the link in the show notes as well. And, like, yeah, what's my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or a habit you wish you had up to sooner that improved your body and your mind? I would have to say, really, I mean, neurofeedback. I've been I've been a huge proponent and and fan of neurofeedback for the last, four years. Wish I would have done that sooner. I I don't know if I could have done it sooner. I I probably would not have had the the money or the even the awareness of it. But, you know, in an alternate parallel universe where I I would have had the money, that that would have been it. I actually started using entrainment CDs in my, early twenties, and I did find it effective. But Mhmm. Neurofeedback in order to control your mind is, probably, again, one of my favorite tools, and I have a system here at home. There's some commercial systems. Like, you expect some massive growth in that space in the next few years. You have companies like, Be Medic, which produce medical grade systems, and there's some other systems which are, you know, more beginner levels. But it's really exciting time where, again, we can train our brains to to go into different states, whether it's alpha, theta, delta, gamma, you know, even flow states. Mhmm. So that's probably been one one of the biggest things, I guess, for the mind, which also they just said resilience that you build, which your resilience is really critical because, you know, you and I or me and another person could be doing the same thing, and they're completely stressed out doing the exact same thing I'm doing. Right. So so if you wanna be able to be resilient and handle more things in life without creating stress, which creates cortisol, which does all kinds of bad things epigenetically, you know, meditation is really a great place, but neural feedback is probably the best tool to teach you how to meditate very, very, very quickly. Because literally every single second, your brain is getting feedback. You're going the right you're doing the right thing or you're doing the wrong thing. Right thing, wrong thing. Right thing, wrong thing. So it doesn't take that long for your brain to figure out, okay. That's what produces alpha. That's what produces theta. That's what produces gamma. So that process is is really powerful. Yeah. Yeah. It's so true. Like, meditation kinda teaches you how to become or, like, let's say, a meditation teaches how to become more self aware. But with biofeedback, you're gonna get, like, more, like, quantifiable data as well and, like, actual But you're you're you're becoming aware of the biofeedback. Right? Yeah. You're creating this incredible, instant, you know, loop. Again, you're loop that every single second you're learning from. So yeah. I think that's the ultimate too. I mean, just to just to finish with this, I'm really excited, and I would say we're five to ten years away from having technology, using, obviously, some next level blood monitoring and and machine learning where everything we eat, going back to what I was saying earlier with HRV, but the next level of that where we eat food or we do an exercise, and we're really getting instant, you know, next level insights. For example, like, you just ate best and your your inflammation went up 20%. Mhmm. Are you gonna eat that again? Probably not. Right? Like, were you or are you gonna eat less of it? So I I know that, you know, that kind of feedback loop is coming around much deeper metrics than just heart rate and things like that. And our and I can't wait for that to happen. I think that's gonna really revolutionize health in general. Yeah. You're looking forward to it, and it's, exciting time coming. Alright. That's it for this episode. If you want to try the Biooptimizers digestive enzymes and the Keepex new formula that they have, then head over to the show notes, and you're gonna find a link over there. I think virtually every person can benefit from taking some digestive enzymes and using them strategically to either improve their digestion or to just promote longevity and anti aging, because they do are helping a lot with many different kinds of ailments and even just optimizing general muscle growth, fat loss, and even like cognition. So I highly recommend them and they're the top digestive enzymes on the market. You can also support the show by leaving us a review on iTunes and tagging us on Instagram and the other social media platforms. But other than that, thanks for listening. My name is Siems. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.