We do have some animal model studies where they were able to give out of season fruit to both rats and both monkeys, and they found that they gained more visceral and, the different, lipogenic, like fat forming enzymes were upregulated compared to when they ate that fruit in season. But a lot of people live and die by these kind of templated formulas, and they have the same amount of nutrients every single day. And we know from adaptive thermogenesis, we know from controlled feeding studies, the body adapts to what you do. Right? If you lift weights, where you walk the same pace and the same distance and time every day, your body quickly adapts. So, you know, have oscillating your calories is good to keep your your metabolism from just adapting and then possibly slowing down. Body, mind, empowerment. Get stronger, faster, smarter, quicker, friendlier, more helpful, more driven. Everything the body needs. Control your mind. Welcome to the Body Mind Apartment podcast. I'm your host, Simland. And our guest today is Mike Mutsul. Mike is the host of High Intensity Health podcast and YouTube channel. He's also a MS in clinical nutrition, an author, speaker, and a functional medicine consultant. Mike, welcome to the show. Sam, thanks so much for having me on. It's great to be here. Yeah. We actually met, like, a few weeks ago and, in the MediWell Hill Summit in LA. So what have you been up to, like, over the past, month or so? Yeah. Great question. What have I been up to? Well, we processed our first turkey in the backyard. So we, it's Thanksgiving is big around here in The US, and my brother-in-law didn't want to have, our turkey. He had some other ideas, so we let these turkeys get bigger and bigger. And, we have backyard chickens and two pigs and stuff like that. And the turkeys just started because spring is coming here in Seattle. They started fighting like crazy. So we have two male turkeys and one female. And the two males were going nuts over the female. It was weird. So we had to process the turkey, one of the males. And so that was interesting. Like the last weeks, we've been eating a lot more meat than normal because it's he was massive. He was like Right. Not massive, but, you know, he he lived a lot longer than he probably would have, if he was in another farm. So that was interesting, just like going through that. So I'm working on a video to, like, share with people kind of that journey. And, it's really kind of changed my perspective, around meat consumption, you know, because it it takes a lot of resources to grow animals and it's a lot of time. And then, you know, once you kill them, they go through rigor mortis and you need to let that, you know, you need to brine them and let that So it was just The whole process just had me think so much differently about food, which was kinda fun. So that's been unique. And, you know, like you, I do a lot of research, you know, here at home and Nice. Like to, like, help people interpret studies and and, help them find kinda salient points from research that, you know, because some people, they don't know how to go into PubMed or find that, you know, how you can look at a study, then look at the referencing studies, and then pick it's like this whole rabbit hole in this network of, like, trying to figure out how, you know, how we can manipulate our biology in a positive way to influence our health. So that's what I've been up to. Yeah. That's for sure. Like, there's definitely a lot of, you know, most people, the only nutrition advice they get comes from the social media channels like YouTube, podcasts, Instagram, and so on. So they never actually, you know, go into the real studies. So we Right. We as influencers, so to say, have quite a lot of responsibility in terms of, giving people the actual, like, advice and making sure that it's quality and it's actually, like, true to a certain extent or at least it's that what the science says. Totally. That's such a good point, you know, and, like, we all have our biases. I know you love autophagy, and we both share a mutual interest in keto. And so I I try to although I am very biased, I try to, like, remove that as much as possible and not get too overexcited or too to oversell something, a concept or a belief or an ideology, and try to step back. And I I really do like to listen to, like, the calories in calories out folks to see what they're saying and to, like, say, okay, am I right or am I wrong here? I think it's good to, like, hear both sides of the story, and that challenges our own beliefs and causes us to dig deeper and learn new information. So I I encourage all people listening or watching this, because we get into these bias bubbles, and we only seek out information that reinforces what we already want to hear and know more about. So it's really great to listen to people that have opposing viewpoints. Obviously, if they're rational and sane and if they're if they are too drawing upon science. So, yeah, it's a it's an interesting way to just continue to learn and evolve. Yeah. Yeah. I totally agree. And I'm I myself as well. Like, although I'm I am listening to a lot of the top influencers and the top people who are in the low carb space and so on but I'm also listening to all the other people who are doing the opposite like a high carb approach or something so I don't want to enclose myself or or become close minded because of following a certain dietary strategy. I just want to make sure that it's I hear all the voices and opinions, and then I will make my own research and all my own conclusions. Totally. It's such a good point. Yeah. How would you, like, define your nutrition then? What kind of a band what kind of, band camp would you want to put yourself in? Yeah. That's a great question, Sim. Well, you know, it really depends on my exercise program that I'm doing. So right now, I'm training for a powerlifting competition, my second one. I'm just kinda getting into this. I've been lifting weights for a long time since I was 14 years old. I used to be this skinny little kid and older siblings would beat up on me and throw me downstairs and all that. So I wanted to like put on more muscle to like combat that. Right? But I recently got into powerlifting. So I'm having I just started training for this upcoming event in May. So I started having more carbohydrates. So I still do a lot of fasting and everything like that, but I don't fast for longer than twenty four hours just right now because I found just with me and some other people are so different. You know, I I'm kind of like a hard gainer, kind of a skinnier body type. There's some people that look at weights and they put on muscle. Right? And so for If you're that type of person, maybe you can do thirty six hour or forty eight hour fast every week and still put on muscle. But me, I lose strength and everything. So specifically right now, I would consider it more carb cycling is what I'm into. So it's pretty low carb most days, but on days where I'm doing heavier, you know, whether it's yard work, cutting down trees, doing things like that, whatever, I'll have more carbs on those days. But on days where I'm relatively, not inactive per se, but not really lifting a lot of weights and so on, just having recreational activity, that's where I'm very kind of strict keto, under like fifteen, twenty grams of carbs during that day. So I like to have that flexibility, and I think that's an important point for people. You know, certain gurus, they eat one way only, right? I have less than 20 grams of carbs or I'm zero carb. Okay. That's great, but you're not that person. So I think it's really good to customize things. And there's days where, Sim, and I'm sure you've had this too, where you're really active and you have maybe more carbs, like 80 grams of carbs. Guess what? If you test your ketone levels, you're still in ketosis. At least if you're physically active, I found that for myself. So I like to custom tailor thing custom tailor things and and and that's just my approach. And But keep in mind that I haven't been obese before. Like in college, I was a little overweight because I was eating like crap and partying. Right? But outside of that, like I've been pretty fit for a long time. I don't have diabetes or disease. Disease. So if people are listening to this and they've been overweight for their whole life or they have diabetes or they have autoimmunity, they probably should be pretty strict for a while until they get that under control. But once you kind of get to a certain baseline level of health, I think you have a lot more flexibility. And I think that's the cool part about this because as we get into spring and summer, we have things like blueberry, polyphenols, raspberries. There's a lot of great compounds. And you talk about them in your wonderful book, about how these polyphenols enhance autophagy and they have health benefits. So if we have this very strict mindset that I only eat zero carbs, right? You're like, well, you miss out on what what nature is providing for us. And some people have such bad gut health from antibiotics and lack of breastfeeding and c section delivery that they just can't even tolerate those polyphenols. And I get it. Zero carb might work for them, but I like to work people towards this flexible approach because I think it's, you know, the only diet that has stood the test of time is eating seasonally. And there's a time and a place for, for meat and eggs and all butter and ghee and all that. And I think there's a time and a place for berries and root vegetables and tubers. And I don't think if you're a hungry hunter gatherer, you would ignore the berries because they have carbs. Right? You would just eat them. And so that's just my approach, and people have given me crap about it, but that's just what I try to do. And and here's my bias again. I have a lot of blueberries in our backyard. I've planted raspberries. So so that's my bias. I'm just throwing it out there. So that's my approach. Yeah. I'm a I'm a huge fan of the metabolic flexibility as well. And, you know, although I wish I could eat keto for the rest of my life all the time because it's so easy and, so kinda simple to stick to, but I still know that I will benefit from changing it up every once in a while and incorporating that flexibility and, you know, cycling between different food groups just for the sake of you're not developing any intolerance to them. And, also, I like cycling between these different training regimes as well. So it's a definitely good idea to always know that the only constant is change, so to say, that you shouldn't expect to stay for the same diet and eat the same foods for the rest of life all the time because, yeah, like I said, the seasonality, those things will definitely change, and your own body compositions change as well. Your, metabolic requirements, everything changed. So, yeah, that's the only constant that you can kinda rely on that that, things will change, and you better, like, be able to adapt to it, much faster. Sam, couldn't have said it any better. So eloquently said. And I think a lot of people, what they do is they get these macro calculators, and there's nothing wrong with that initially. Like, you're learning your body, how many calories do I need, and all that sort of stuff. But a lot of people live and die by these kinda templated formulas, and they have the same amount of nutrients every single day. And we know from adaptive thermogenesis, we know from controlled feeding studies, the body adapts to what you do. Right? If you lift weights or you walk the same pace and the same distance and time every day, your body quickly adapts. So I think by oscillating your calories even, forget carbohydrates for a moment and fat, just your total caloric volume. And, you know, in bodybuilding fitness, we call this a cheat day. Having a cheat day where you have a lot more surplus of calories. And I think that and and I don't have I wish and I don't know of any studies at this point that has controlled for this and and thrown this in there because I think it would be hard to actually isolate out from other confounding variables. But I do believe, and and people have shown this over time, you know, have oscillating your calories is good to keep your your metabolism from just adapting and then possibly slowing down. So I know it's hard for folks listening because, you know, I I found this mostly, and this isn't a knock on women, but I found that women are very regimented. They like to have a a plan, a protocol, a system, and so they like to follow their macros to a tee. But I like to encourage my clients over time to just kinda get rid of that and just have a little bit more flexibility built into the program and understand that on certain days, if you have, you know, that change, it's overall gonna be good for you in the long run. Mhmm. Yeah. Definitely. Like so what would you say are the best times to eat, like, a more keto template and sometimes to eat, more more carbs? Yeah. This is beautiful a beautiful question. I think it's kind of right now. Right? As we get out of winter into spring, the ground is still cold. There's not a lot of you know, vegetables and fruits growing. So I think it's a great time to do a little bit more fasting, a little bit more keto, definitely during the winter too because if you're a hunter gatherer, like, you're not having blueberries. You know, because so as much as we both love polyphenols, I pick on the people that January 1, they have their acai bowl berry smoothie with kale, and it's like, all that stuff is being flown in from South America. Like, how healthy really is that for us, during that time of the year? So I think there's a time and a place for that. Again, like, we give our daughter she's six years old. If she wants a blueberry smoothie, we're not like, you can't eat out of season fruits. You know? We're not like that hardcore, but we just don't make it a staple, in in our personal diet. So, I think, you know, to answer your question specifically, late fall, winter, early spring, great time for keto. More carb cycling as things start blooming and are coming into season. I wish I had randomized placebo controlled studies to draw on for this, but we do have some animal model studies where and I don't know exactly the methodology that they use, but they were able to give out of season fruit to both rats and both monkeys, and they found that they gained more visceral and, the different, lipogenic, like fat forming enzymes were upregulated compared to when they ate that fruit in season. So I think there is some element, and I don't know what it is. Is it circadian clocks and our circadian biology knows that it's winter? Is it our microbiome is changing due to the daylight? There there must be something going on. And I know some people that are very left minded, kinda, you know, logical and analytical are thinking like this guy has now gone off the deep end. I'm clicking off. But just hold on. I've noticed even with my chickens, you know, for example, just using birds because they don't have you know, they can't volition me. They they don't know that it's January and January. Right? They just know the days are shorter, so they're going in. They're fasting for longer periods of time. They're eating less, and they're spending more time, you know, in the chicken coop. Right? So I've noticed that animals respond a lot to light and dark cues. Whereas humans, we kinda do the same stuff. We go to bed at the same time in the winter, in the summer, you know, we're we're because we have lights. We have Wi Fi. We have artificial ways of, like, circumventing nature's, rhythms. And so I think there must be some element that we don't yet know about of circadian biology that then influences our own biology and causes our our metabolism to to shift in a little bit. So I do encourage people, you know, again, as much as we both share the mutual love for polyphenolic compounds for how they do affect things like autophagy signaling and nutrient sensing enzymes, AMPK, PGC one alpha, I do suggest, like, taking it easy on them when they're not in season in the winter, like, as we film this right now. Well, yeah, I do know, like, the how important the circadian clocks are, but I didn't know that, you know, actually eating fruit out of season can make some mice gain weight, which is quite interesting and really bizarre. Is that right? Yeah. It's quite crazy. Maybe it has to do with, you know, the the organs themselves have, like, different circadian clocks, and, they all kind of function based upon the cues you get from the environment. So it's it may may make it sense because fruit itself kinda contains a little bit of light and electrons inside it that comes from the sun. So that can that maybe play a bit of part, which we're really interesting. Well, that's so you you bring up something that's super fascinating that I've been diving deep in. And thanks to, you know, people critiquing me online talking about like grass fed meat, there's no real difference. And I've wanted to like dive deeper into this. And, you know, yeah, we can talk about omega-three fatty acid profiles in the meats and the differences between grain fed and grass fed meat. But But I'm kind of interested, like, what you're speaking about is the different potentially, like, epigenetic signals that we can't really measure or see or talk about. And so certain studies have shown that we actually absorb and our gut microbiome absorbs the micro RNA from the food that we eat. And so if we think about our cells in our body, we often hear about our nucleus, we hear about DNA, we hear about genes. But kind of the in between so basically, I know you know this, Sim, but for everyone else listening that doesn't have a degree in biology, basically, what genes do is they make proteins. That's all genes do. And those proteins can be enzymes. Those proteins can be building blocks for other molecules and so forth. And the in between, the the DNA, the gene, and the protein is RNA. So that's kind of the message. So your gene, basically, your genes make a copy of themselves, and that's translated into the the language of protein. And so that mRNA, that intermediate between the protein and the DNA, we absorb that from the food that we eat, and it's not yet totally sussed out. Is the RNA from the food that we eat, is it affecting our microbiome? And then that's affecting our biology. Or is the epigenetic signals or and or the RNA that we is that are we internalizing that? And is that affecting our own gene expression? So I think you hit on something, Zim, and that's that potentially we're absorbing molecules that are independent of their macronutrient composition, carbs, fats, proteins, and even DNA. We're getting this epigenetic signal somehow, from our food. And so I think that really speaks to food quality because, you know, it's that's why I am a stickler when it comes to grass fed versus pasture raised and all that because we know, for example, we just spoke about circadian clocks and light exposure. When people go and just buy conventional, at least in The US, it's probably better in Europe, you know, where you are or other parts of the world. But when you go buy traditional conventional chicken, for example, the chickens are living on concrete and basically a bunker. They never see daylight. So their circadian clocks are all screwed up. They're eating, you know, genetically modified junk food, water that's enriched in plastic and probably fluoride and chlorine and all that. They're con in a confined environment. What I'm trying to say is, you know, the the genetic switches that are turned on are probably not favorable. Right? And so when we eat what we think is protein, because we're looking at a lot of people are focused on on their macros, proteins, carbs, fats. But what about the epigenetic signals that that that comes with that protein? And so there is studies at least that showing that when we eat plants, and so it's not yet sussed out for animals, but when we eat, for example, like lettuce or plants, we do absorb that microRNA, that that epigenetic switch. So I think it's it's interesting. It it shares with us and it provides this element of food quality that sometimes is lost in the narrative of any diet, right? Where we just focus on the macros and the calories and everything. That's important. Absolutely. Right? But, what ultimately affects our metabolism is the genes that are turned on or turned off, our epigenetics. Mhmm. And if we are absorbing these epigenetic compounds, I e, the mRNA, the transfer RNA, the exosomes, the these things that are measurable, like, we can we can measure these. And either we absorb them or our microbiome absorbs them, and something happens. I think that's really interesting, something that we should think a little bit more about. Because, for example, this whole notion of pre slaughter stress, and people are like, what's that? There's literally if people wanna nerd out, you can go to it's a journal inside El Xavier called Meat Science. So if you just type in Meat Science Journal, it's a journal all about meat scientists. Where where meat scientists are looking at the composition of meat, how they give, for example, one study actually showed where they gave pigs swine, they gave them omega three fats. It led to, like, changes in the composition of the meat. But what they look at is pre slaughter stress, and this is a major problem for animals because it affects the acidity of the meat. So if an animal is very stressed out going into the slaughter, it can affect the comps and it can literally damage the meat so much that they have to throw it out. So there can be a big loss. So the business side of agriculture is looking at ways to make, not only just to appease to maybe vegans and the anti meat and the peta crowd, but to make their meat quality taste better for their consumers by not having so much pre slaughter stress. So animals, you know, are shipped all around in trucks and then they're fed into where they get gassed or killed. And if they're very stressed, again, it affects the meat quality. So I think, you know, that that's an interesting aspect to kind of look at. And it shows that the meat what they found is that there's different chain the gene expression is different in the animals that are very stressed versus animals that are more humanely processed. So I think that's just another thing to think about. You know, if if we eat an animal that is very stressed out, that lived a very stressful life, its death is very stressful. I mean, gosh. What about the cortisol? What about the adrenaline? What about this the epigenetics? Which is are we absorbing that? And and just as a small sidestep, if you look at communities where they eat a lot of fast food, obviously, the the animals from, like, McDonald's and stuff like that, the the chickens that that go into making fast food, they're probably very stressed. We see more violence in those communities. Is it a nature nurture thing? Is it a food thing? We know the food quality is very poor, but I have this subtle theory. And if you look at inmates in prison, there's a lot of violence there too. But if they change the food quality, violence goes down. So Wow. Is it just the macronutrients or the micronutrients, or is it these epigenetic signals that we've kind of glossed over and overlooked? Because up to very recently, we didn't have, you know, good methodology to measure these things. So I think it's a conversation that in the next twenty, thirty years, we'll be like, oh, duh. That makes sense. But right now, it's it's not on people's radar, unfortunately. Yeah. Well, man, you I think you just, blew so many people's minds. And thanks for sharing this information because, most people aren't even aware of these things. And, yeah, definitely, like, I do think that there will these that will be, like, a quite a significant difference between, those, types of foods that you consume and on the epigenetic level as well. And the kind of the, like, food quality is something that, really matters, especially if you want to optimize your health and nutrition to the fullest. So, yeah, this I didn't expect that you would, you know, go that deep into it, which is quite cool. And Sure, bud. It's like grass fed got taken to another level. Yeah. I think there's more to it, you know, be and and I say this because animals have personalities and, you know, I'm not saying that I grew up on a farm or anything like that, but we've had chickens now for three years. And and, I I noticed that they're sensitive to stress, and they pick up on it. Like, when we processed our turkey, so we we got both all three turkeys in September. I've picked them up, put them into the chicken coop because turkeys like to sleep up high. And so I've picked them up a 100 times, maybe more over the last six months. But when I picked this turkey up to go kill him, he knew that it was coming. And his foot and it makes me almost tear up just thinking about it because his foot was shit his foot has never shaked. In fact, on Thanksgiving, we did a video when I held him for thirty minutes while we filmed the video and got it ready. He didn't shake at all, Mhmm. But he could pick up on my stress cue because I was nervous. I was like, damn. I gotta kill this guy. Gotta slit his throat. Like, I was like, how is this gonna go? And the blood gonna get everywhere? I'm like, I was just nervous. I want it to go very quickly. Right? But he was shaking like crazy. And it was like, how in the hell did he know? But I I I didn't pick him up any more aggressive than I did normally. And like I said, I've picked him up a 100 different times. And I have on video his, I was holding him and my wife was recording his foot. He looked like a jackrabbit, his foot. And he's never done that in a 100 times or more than I picked him up over the last six months. So animals pick up on this. Right? And so, like, the the mediators and the molecules and the hormones that are causing that stress response, they're real. Like, they're they're probably measurable, and then we killed them and we eat them. And so I I just think, people gotta think about that. It's it's not like you gotta change your diet your diet drastically, but just have that on the back of your mind when you're purchasing your food and think about food quality. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's like, difficult situation for anyone who has, like, animals and so on. But, how how are you gonna explain it in a sense, that, you have to kill these animals in order to, you know, feed your family? Yeah. So I've thought about this a bunch of different ways. And and I so I had my daughter watch because I want her to be sometimes she'll say, ew, you know, dad, that that meat tastes gross. I don't want it. Let's sort it out. And I'm like, an animal died for this. Like, no, you're eating that or we're saving it in the fridge. So I want her to make that connection that, like, cows and lamb and beef and chicken, it doesn't just, like, come out of the chicken tree. Right? Like an animal had to die to get that onto your plate. So I'm trying to ink that into her head so she doesn't waste. But this is how I look at it, Tim. I care about these animals. I give them the best life possible. Filtered water. I collect rainwater from our roof so that they don't get, like, the pesticides and, you know there was an article in the the Seattle Times where they tested the water. It was crazy. So there was cocaine, methin methamphetamines, antidepressants, antibiotics. Like, every drug possible is in the Seattle municipal water supply, which we drink, unfortunately. So I set up these, which is it's this is illegal, what I'm telling people, so don't report me. But, it's illegal to collect rainwater in the state of Washington, which is insane. Like anyway, so I have rain bottles, these 55 gallon drums to collect water. I feed that to our animals because I don't want them drinking the crap from the municipal water and so forth. And we have filtered water in our home. But, so here's the thing. With with humans, like, the the vegans will say, well, you're killing an animal. You're depriving them of life and so forth. And I I understand that. But animals don't go on to have great grandchildren and grandchildren. They don't develop careers. They don't go to college. Is is their life gonna be any better if I let them live for twenty years? Right? I is the quality going to improve? And my my thought is no. Yeah, they might have fun, but for animals, every day is the same. They wake up, they eat, they drink, they poop, they fight, they play around, they go to bed, and they repeat. It's like Groundhog Day every single day. So I've I've thought to myself, if if I were to let these turkeys or these chickens live forever and never eat them, how much more enjoyment will they get out of life? And some people might say, well, that's rude of you to judge how they would enjoy life. But it's it's not like with humans, we we do stuff. We travel. We have children. We like, our life quality should get better as we age. Right? And with animals, it's it just kinda stays the same. So that's how I rationalize it. And when I do kill them, because we have eaten chickens as well, I just make sure that it's very quick and they have a good life, and that's it. And and so people can judge me however they want, but look, if you were, I think and I kill them and they have a much more humane and enjoyable life than they would have if they were on another farm. And so that's that's what I can control. So that's the way that I look at it. And the other part is the finances associated with it. So vegans will say, oh, gosh. Well, here you are killing these animals. It's like, okay. I'll let them live for twenty years. Are you gonna pay for the food? They'd be like, well, I'm not paying for who's gonna then who's gonna pay for the food? These animals eat a lot of food. It's not like their food grows on a chicken food tree. Like, I have to go to the chicken store and buy non GMO organic chicken food. That stuff's expensive. Like, for all our animals, it's over a $100 a month. So if I let these animals live for twenty years, what vegan or pet a group is if someone wants to give me the money to pay for the food, I'll gladly not kill them and let them live and die of old age and and so forth. But it costs money too. So that's the other aspect of it. At least that's how I've looked at it. Maybe people are are looking at it differently. So that's how we do. Yeah. It's a different definitely a very complex, topic and, definitely not not, that, we can delve too long on this podcast. So, maybe we'll, switch topics for a little bit. And, let's talk about, maybe, like, intermittent fasting. You've been quite into that as well recently, and it's been it's been pretty popular on social media as well. What are your, like, thoughts and experiences with it? Yeah. So fasting, I mean, it can be wonderful. You know, I think, for people that are trying to improve blood sugar health, I think it's the best one of the best things that you can do. But there's so many side benefits to fasting, which which is different than just continuous energy restriction or calorie cutting. And so that's what I love about this. And, you know, so at first, like, you know, when fasting kind of became really popular in 2015, 2016, I was doubtful like everyone else. I thought, you know what? I need to preserve my muscle mass. I'm not gonna do this. But several conversations with doctor Jason Fung and other people, I realized, and friends that were doing it and experiencing great results, I was like, okay. I'm gonna try this. And, what I tried first was time restricted feeding. So that is just compressing your feeding window, due to kind of my background and research in the circadian biology world, and I I noticed some really good results with that. Then started doing more longer fasts, like a three day fast, you know, over fifty hours every quarter. So I just have it on my calendar. It's just there. It's just what I do. So I found that to be very effective. And what I've noticed personally, Sim, is just increased mental clarity. I mean, that's the the biggest thing for me. Is it the neurotransmitters that are increased associated with fasting? There's one neurotransmitter that was recently shown, orexin a increases. We know dopamine, norepinephrine, all these different neurotransmitters increase. Or is it the do I have some glucose hypometabolism in my brain that was being ameliorated from the ketones being made when I was fasting? I'm not really sure what exactly mechanistically is associated with the mental clarity, but so many people, and I'm sure you've noticed this as well, report that. So that's one of the the main reasons why I do it. And I just found that, like, I I was doing, like, you know, a three day fast here or there, a two day fast here. So what I've decided is just like to make it a little bit more consistent. Like some people have their cheat day on Saturday or whatever, Friday. I don't know. You know, consistently, I found it like so every Monday I fast. And so I just came up with this. I bought the domain Metabolic Monday, like a year ago. And I was like, I sat on the idea. I was like, well, people even care about this. I don't know. And I just like threw it out there on social media and people are excited because, you know, Sunday used to be meal prep. You know, you'd be cooking chicken all day. You'd be putting in Tupperware containers. Then, you know, you have and it's like such a waste of time. Like, this is your day off to enjoy with your friends and family, to get outside and your meal prepping. I'm like, what if you could just have this more flexible approach where you just, like, eat earlier, eat at 04:00 and then fast all day Monday? You don't have to worry about meal prepping for the week and doing all that. Or at least you can do that on a work night instead of blow your whole Sunday meal prepping. And then plus, you can kickstart the week in a better mood. Know, if you have a food coma or you're just eating and you're bogged down low glucose, like and like with anything, like, in life, momentum begets more momentum. Right? So if you start your week, like, really in a funk and it's like you're lethargic and tired, your whole week can be screwed up. And so I just found that my work productivity was much improved. My energy, my productive output, my contribution to the world improved when I just fasted on Monday. So that's what I personally do. And then like I said, I throw in that, over fifty hour fast. I struggle at just me personally, I struggle after fifty hours with sleeping. That's just I don't know what it is. So I have a hard time with that. I commend people like yourself who have done five, seven day fasts. I think that's amazing. But I just personally can't sleep after about hour forty eight. I have a really hard time. Hope maybe that would change with time, but I just think it depends on body composition, your activity. So when I fast, I don't change my workouts. I try to do the same stuff that I normally would do. So that's interesting, but that's where I personally find. And what I think is interesting for people to understand, especially the naysayers out there, is there is a metabolic difference. Long term studies have shown this one. It was a research group at University of Colorado Medical Center, where they had two different arms of the study. One arm was a continuous energy restriction, so called calorie cutting. For twelve weeks, another group was inter it was alternate day fasting. Right? Mhmm. They looked at these individuals after the twelve week study and then three months later, and there was definitely a difference in body composition and also muscle mass. And the group that did the alternate day fasting had more lean muscle mass, lost more body fat, and didn't regain as much fat compared to the group that just did the continuous energy restriction. In fact, they gained more visceral fat and lost more muscle mass. So I there and this is where the calorie cutting, the SECO crowd, the Lane Nortons of the world bless their hearts, but they they think that it's all the same. And I think and here's the thing, Sam, and I wanna pose this question to you. And it will sum up the studies that I was just referencing. I've done a lot of research into this. There to my knowledge, and I could be wrong, I hope I'm wrong, but I don't think I am. There's no hormonal independent mechanisms that can sense nutrient signaling. And so what I mean by that is, it's virtually impossible to separate, to differentiate hormones from energy. Right? So if we think about just burning fat for fuel, it's not that there's a dearth of energy. It's that glucagon is increasing, insulin's low. Right? There's a hormonal Right. They're synonymous. So the SECO crowd, the calories in, calories out, will say, oh no, it's not about hormones. It's all about nutrients. Mhmm. But check this out, and you know this. When you eat let's just say we eat a 100 grams of fat right now. Let's just say we have coconut oil, 100 grams of fat. Once the fat is digested, it's not like there's a molecular tag on the fat that we just ate that says and the body says, oh, yeah. Well, that fat is exogenous and then we have endogenous fat here. Once you absorb these nutrients, there's no way to differentiate if they came from gluconeogenesis, lipolysis, if they came from our food, they're in the body. So I was like, the body how does the body know if there's a deficit? It's hormones. It has to be there. Or it's nutrient sensing receptors, AMPK, PGC1 alpha, mTOR. Right? But even those ultimately are connected to their associated hormones, mTOR and insulin, PGC1 alpha and so forth. So I was like, that that to me was an And again tell me if you think I'm wrong on this. Oh, well, no, no, I think, you're completely right that, there is definitely like a matter of context that, the food that you eat, it, doesn't, you know, get absorbed based upon just the macronutrients and so on. In case it gets gets absorbed based upon the environment it gets put into so to say into the hormonal milieu in in that that you can call it that whether or not you have higher leptin or you have higher insulin, like, everything is gonna change how that food or those calories get absorbed or as burnt off or stored. So, yeah, definitely, a lot of, hormones are in play. And, I do think that calories still matter, but, you know, how those calories get expressed and, what what matters or what happens to them, that's ultimately based upon the hormones and everything else that's going on in the, like, particular individual. And even, like, the circadian rhythms and all of those things matter because you can eat the same food, like, for instance, carbs. You can, eat them post workout, and they're gonna have, like, a completely different response if you had eaten them while sitting on a couch, so to say, because the the the carbs would be used for more muscle glycogen versus if you were sitting and being sedentary, then those carbs would be used for more for, more easily for fat storage. So there's definitely a lot of context that has to be kept in mind. That's such a beautiful point. And so, yeah, we know, for example, in the post workout window, the body is much there's a lot of insulin independent mechanisms to absorb carbs, you know, so that's a beautiful example. So, yeah, I mean, again, if anyone listening knows of a particular thing that I'm missing and again, the the question here is I'm not saying calories don't matter like you. I, full agree with calories in, calories out. It does matter to a certain point, but the main premise that I'm trying to, you know, put out there in the universe is that there's really no hormone independent mechanism Right. Through which the body can partition nutrients. And so therefore, if you're in a calorie deficit and you're trying to get into a calorie deficit, what you're doing is you're ultimately affecting your hormones. And I I emphasize hormones because a lot of the calories in calories out groups say, oh, all the keto they call them key tard. Right? They call people like us key tarded. Say, oh, they just focus on insulin. It's like, well, yeah, we insulin is one of many different hormones, but it's just one hormone. We talk about glucagon. We talk about leptin, ghrelin, adiponectin. We talk about a lot of hormones in this in the context of the ketogenic diet. And it's not just all about insulin, but that's just one of many different hormones. So I think it's interesting. And so I think, ultimately, what we're doing is we, yeah, we need to think about calories in context of hormones. And then the difference is and the bit this getting back to fasting, why I get excited about it, why I recommend people doing it, is it's a great way to resensitize the hormones involved in energy distribution and partitioning, particularly insulin, glucagon, and leptin, and also probably ghrelin, which is involved in appetite signaling. And so one of the largest and longest ever studies done in humans, a controlled feeding study of this kind, Carol Ebeling and David, Ludwig just posted this in, November 2018. They found that there was a hormonal differences, in individuals that ate high carb versus low carb, and the ghrelin and leptin changes, in addition to body composition and energy expenditure was different. And so a lot of people will say, well, yeah, but these metabolic ward studies show something different. Well, okay. We have we have, yeah, twenty weeks versus ten days in a metabolic ward. Like we know that ten days on a keto diet, like you're still not totally fat adapted, right? It can take six months. Some people take a year, right? To really kind of Because we're talking about changing your mitochondria, we're changing cell membranes, we're changing, you know, monocarboxylate transporters and stuff like that. There's a lot of metabolic switches that need to be altered. So these controlled feeding studies in a metabolic ward for ten days, I I would put bet my money on a twenty week real long term study just personally. So anyway, I think it's interesting. Yeah. That's for sure. And there's definitely like, an epigenetic change as well from both keto and fasting. So I would imagine that in the past, humans would enter into ketosis only like during times of, you know, famine and starvation. So the kinda reasonable perspective or a reasonable option from the perspective of evolution would have been to down regulate the hunger signaling and make the person or to make the people more able to bear caloric restriction and not kinda cause that much damage versus on the other hand, eating carbs, that kinda signals the body that, you know, it's it's the environment where there's food is abundant and there's no need. There's actually, you have to do the opposite. You have to eat as much as possible, and it's kinda reflects in the in the way that those studies, kind of found as well. Yeah. That's such a great point, you know, and and I think epigenetics gets lost in an narrative. Although, you know, we're hearing much more about that in lay press. A lot of people don't really think about that. And that's what, you know because I know you asked kind of how you got into this and I was talking about chickens earlier. I, you know, when I first heard of Keto in '22, that was 2003, there was a bodybuilder fitness model at the gym that I worked at who was keto and he had a lot of like breath acetone was really high. He was eating a lot of protein too. And I, I just had this stigma associated with keto. But then when it started to really kind of pick up in 2015, you know, Jimmy Morris book came out and a buddy of mine, Alessandro Ferretti was talking about it and how it changes heart rate variability. And I was like, this is kind of interesting. I'm gonna learn more about it. But it was specifically the epigenetic effects that beta hydroxybutyrate, the main ketone made by our own liver. Mhmm. How how BHB affects gene signaling. Then I was like, oh my gosh. This is something this is not a fad. This is something really powerful because glucose and and these other protein, yeah, they change network biology. They might change change nutrient sensing enzymes. But because beta hydroxybutyrate is so structurally similar to another short chain fatty acid called butyric acid made by our microbiome, so high fiber foods when we, stimulate the growth of bifidobacterium, for example, they make the short chain fatty acid that also functions very similarly, and potentially might, you know, interconvert with beta hydroxybutyrate in the body. That to me was really exciting because, I I went to this, American Association for Cancer Research, AACR conference in 2008, and the whole conference was all about epigenetics and histone deacetylase inhibitors. And this was like the next wave in cancer therapeutics. They were focusing on garlic, sulforaphane from broccoli seeds. They were focusing on curcumin and beta hydroxybutyrate and butyric acid were talked about a lot. And I was like, this is so cool. You know what? I need to learn more about this. So I've been following that research forever. And then when I made the connection that when we're in ketosis, our body's making this histone deacetylase inhibitor that literally changes the way that our genes are expressed in a powerful way. I was like, oh my gosh, this is what these cancer researchers were talking about and so excited about. And they were spending millions or billions of dollars trying to develop drugs that do the same thing that ketones do. And I was like, I'm like, wow, why not just have people fast or eat a ketogenic diet? Or if they're new to this, maybe take exogenous ketones initially to try and like get into it. But I that's what got me so excited. And then since since I made that connection in 2015, I haven't been the same since. Right? I've been diving into this and interviewing people and all that. So Yeah. It is really interesting how, fasting, you know, promotes this and as well as like the keto diet itself that how can you mimic similar responses by still being able to produce ketones while eating and so on, and how how can you, yeah, apply it to every other life. So it's definitely a lot a lot to a lot to research to do in this field and some exciting times to come. Absolutely. But But you mentioned that metabolic Monday. So, how does it work or how how do people, can do it? Yeah. So it's super simple. I mean, you know, I'm a pretty low key guy. I don't have any rules and everything like that, but I just created this kind of arbitrary guidelines. Look, six pm in your time zone, that's when you should cut off eating. Earlier the better, but most people can do six. And because the thing about fasting and time shifted feeding that can be challenging is it can get into your social networks, and kind of make you feel like an outcast of sorts. We're not trying to ostracize people and have them go to dinner parties and like stand around and not eat. Right? So I think you can still be social with your friends and family and cut off your fitting window by six and then 6PM on Monday. So you're just basically it's it's what If you have black coffee, and maybe we can talk about this, I don't think black coffee is gonna keep you out of ketosis or down regulate autophagy. If anything, it might enhance it personally, but I would love to hear your thoughts on that. Green tea, if you wanna have tea. The thing is you don't wanna have a lot of other foods. Right? So some Redmond real salts or Celtic sea salt of sorts, water, stay hydrated. But you don't need to piggyback. You don't need to have exogenous ketones. You don't need MCT oil. You know, all those things have their place, but we're really trying to get the body to dig into its own body fat stores and kind of kickstart, proteolysis and, you know, lysosomes and, you know, autophagy and all that good stuff that you talk a lot about about change of hormones. And if you really want if you're you know, if you have a lot of weight to lose, we can have some people go in into 6AM at least or to make it thirty six hours into Tuesday morning. But I just like to have people just be very consistent. So I I did the math. You know, if you look at the calorie restriction studies and its association, with longevity and suppressing cancer. This has been known since, like, 1918, where if you restrict food from animals, they, and even if you inject tumors, one study this was, like, the first study ever on calorie restriction, so called intermittent fasting, where they had two different animals and they, calorie restricted one group and then the other group could eat ad lib. They injected tumors into both. The tumor expression in the group that was intermittent fasting was cut by like seventy percent. Wow. And so since that time, right? And so this has been known and reproduced in many different studies. And what they've actually shown is that, it's around a 20% calorie restriction is linked with longevity and anti cancer. And for a lot of people cutting their calories and figuring out what is it, 10% or 20%, how much should I? That's challenging. And I think if we look at energy expenditure, it's more of a long term or sorry, energy intake. It's more of a long term play than just like every single day. So I thought, okay, what if you just fasted for like, and cut your calories like 15% over the entire year? How could you do that? I was trying to think of an easy way. Well, if you just fast one day a week, that's like 54, 52 days a year, that's roughly like 14%. So if you just are very consistent about that, because some people say, Oh, I did a seven day fast or I did a five day fast. And they do it once a year because they get excited. So I was like, If you were just consistent, you're kind of getting to that sweet spot of around 15 to 20% energy restriction for an entire year. So I was like, if people could just be very consistent with that, one day a week. And it doesn't have to be on a Monday, but it kind of flows. Metabolic Monday, it sounds cool. So I just started That was the premise of, like, just getting people to be consistent. And then if any other time restricted feeding or any other feeding window compression or any other long fast sprinkled in throughout the year, it's just icing on the cake. If you're just consistent with that one day a week where you're getting at least 24. And so that's kind of the impetus and the premise. And so, yeah, rules are very basic. It's water, salt. If you wanna have black coffee, cool. If you wanna have green tea, fine. You just don't wanna have a lot of creamer, a lot of stevia, a lot of sugar, you know, things like that that as you know very well and have written about in your great book, you don't wanna have those things because we want to get our body to start to burn up some of these aberrant proteins that are in our cells and different fatty acids and glucose. So Yeah. That's that's so cool that, yeah, you you don't necessarily you know have to fast for seven days in a row if you do it only once a week or once a year so to say that you would be much better off by having these slightly longer than twenty four hour fasts more frequently because the frequency aspect is much more important so to say than doing it really intensely once and then eating, like, garbage the rest of the year. So that that's definitely, like, a much more sustainable way of going about it. And, you know, once one day of fasting isn't gonna be that difficult for most people at least, and they can still, you know, push through it to a certain extent. That's that's really, yeah, a good idea. And and I would imagine that the society itself would also benefit a lot if it went more viral and more popular because you as you said earlier that a lot of people spend so much time on meal prep and everything. So, a lot of resources as those time gets simply wasted on creating food whereas in reality, you would benefit your health and longevity by simply fasting and not eating. You bring up such a great point, Sam. And and so we all have friends or people in our family, people in our our networks that, like, they do a big athletic event one time a year. They're like, I'm gonna do a marathon. Right? So they, like, train for a little bit. They do this one big event, and then they don't do anything for the rest of the year. And then we we know other people that every single day or or three days a week, they go to the gym. They're very consistent. Right? And if you look at their body composition, you know, it's the people that have the most consistency usually that have the the, you know, the most vibrancy and health and and so forth. Same with people in their business. Right? They're very consistent in their business. Their business grows. Right? Where other people, they do a big launch, and then you don't don't hear from them for a year. So I was thinking with fasting, it's gotta be the same way. Right? So I was like, it just makes sense that you just be a little bit more consistent. And I think it's impractical Sorry. It's not practical for people to fast every single day. So I was like, just pick one day where you're really the busiest. For a lot of people, it's Monday because you're like back to work, you got kids, you got all this stuff. And I'm like, how nice is it to free up all that time? Because, I mean, we all love food. We're, as Rob Wolf has said, we're wired to eat. Right? So if you can just take that bandwidth away and just focus on what you need to do. And for some people, that could be reading books, that could be learning a foreign language, that could be learning to play new instruments, that could be exercise. There's so much time that is freed up when you're not worried about food. And you and I both know, Sam, what do people complain about? They don't have time. I don't have time to eat healthy. I don't have time to go to the gym. I don't have time to learn a new language. I don't have time to do all this. Well, it's like, alright. You I just freed up, like, an extra three to four hours every week by by not having to worry about food man so I think it's a fun thing to do. Yeah and especially if you you know sum it up throughout the entire year then you're gonna get like an additional month where you can do other stuff besides eating and imagine all of the fat burning benefits as well and caloric restriction benefits so it's really cool. Yeah buddy thanks man. Yeah but you know the same principle applies to like exercise as well and physical movement that you do have to kinda not only, you know, you you should exercise in in an intense way in some shape or form, but also it's, important to kind of incorporate some physical movement throughout your entire day as well and, you know, do some gardening and, grow your chicken and everything else. So that would be like another way of making healthy lifestyle easier and almost like putting it on autopilot. You bring up a great point, and that's a a beautiful side benefit. I I know there's a lot of people out there that are like, I'm zero carb. I me eat meat only. Totally cool, man. I totally get it. But one of the side benefits of like growing vegetables, growing berries, having chickens, like you just said, is it forces you to get out. So it's like there's many benefits. You get better food. You're entraining your body's circadian biology because you're out during the middle of the day getting light exposure to your retina because let's face it. People can be indoors now twenty four hours. You you don't even need to go out. You can order your groceries. You can, you know, date online. You don't even need to go to a bar or coffee shop to meet a spouse. Right? You can just order it on your phone on Tinder, Bumble, or whatever. Right? So I think it's nice to just get back to your roots and get outside a little bit. And even if you live in a condo or an apartment, you can put some plants, some rosemary, some, you know, garlic. You could do onions. You can grow chives. You can grow a lot of things in boxes and in planter boxes. And, so having that, you're necessitating being outside and being in nature. And and so there's, like you said, the side benefits of that continuous movement. You know, a lot of people, they they do their booty bar class or their workout, their you know, and then that's it. They sit around all day, like, I'm I'm good. But we we you and I both know that it's that continuous energy. Just fidgeting, just sitting here fidgeting increases thermogenesis and helps you body burn more fat for fuel. So Yeah. Excellent. Yeah. Yeah. We we also grow, some of our own, vegetables and some of our herbs. And, you know, I can I can skip the potatoes or the tubers? I can buy them from the store because I don't eat them that often, but I do like to grow, like, these, herbs, like rosemary and thyme and parsley and those things because, yeah, they're really more they're more nutrient dense and, you know, you get more of these micronutrients that you don't necessarily get from other other foods, and they're pretty pretty damn amazing. Absolutely. And so I and like you said, I mean, you know, there's a lot of anti nutrients in different vegetables. And so I do see, you know, the impetus to go on a carnivorous, zero carb diet for a lot of people. But I don't think there's a lot of, like, toxic nutrients in, like you just said, tarragon, thyme, parsley, oregano, rosemary. I mean, I just see that as just it's just it's all bonus. It's all helpful. You know, we know that they help to diversify our microbiome. Diversity is linked with more stability. We know that even if you cook meat, for example, the data is mixed. I'm sure you've looked at this too, the an the advanced glycation m products and different the RAGES, the receptor for advanced glycation m products in our body. And so there's some speculation about, you know, how meat is cooked and all that sort of stuff. So I don't worry too much about that. I just, if I'm going to cook burgers on a grill or whatever, I put rosemary in there, a little garlic, maybe a little turmeric, right, to potentially offset some of the advanced glycation advanced glycation end products that can be formed through the cooking process. So I think even if you're a zero carb person, you can benefit from these polyphenols. Yeah. Definitely. You know, not, like whole foods are definitely the worst at, But, what what what what about some supplements? Do you take any supplements as well? Yeah. So I I go back and forth a lot on this. I personally, I like melatonin. I think there's some good research out there. There was an animal model study that showed that if you continuously take melatonin, however, that it might affect the photoreceptors in the retina. So I don't like people to take too much, but there were some interesting studies, and I'm sure you've looked at this too, Sim, how melatonin may potentiate autophagy. And so for people, like if I travel in different time zones, I'll leverage like one to three milligrams of melatonin when I get there. I do like that. I like myo inositol. This is a B vitamin. It's found in various different foods, but it's surprisingly powerful for how it affects blood sugar stability, blood sugar health, particularly in women with polycystic ovarian syndrome or more androgen like phenotypes, they can benefit really well from myo inositol. I take magnesium, I take taurine. I do like omega three fats in fish oil, and I try to be very science based about recommending this for people, and and have people look at their omega three index. And this is now a test that's been actually funny, I used to sell this test to doctors back in 2009, and doctors back then were like, what? Why do I need to look at this? And now more and more data's coming out, thanks to Bill Harris, and has looked at the correlation between the low omega-three index and higher risk for sudden cardiac death. You know, the death where you have the marathon runner or the basketball player that ate organic and ate healthy and dropped dead of a heart attack. So that would be like a sudden cardiac death. And what scientists have kind of figured out is that cell membrane fluidity plays a big deal, plays a big role. And so if we have more long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids from EPA and DHA, the main fatty acids you get from, say, krill oil, fish oil, or grass fed beef, for example, and wild caught fish, you can still get great omega threes from them. That affects the the pliability, the malleability of our cell membranes. And I think, that's important. Studies have shown that's important. There was research in inmates that actually when they gave them fish oil and showed that their aggression scores decreased. And actually there was if you just one study of it was in Europe actually. They they looked at many different prisons. I can't remember the total pool of data, but it was a large subset and they found that over seventy five percent of inmates have an omega-three index lower than four percent, which is very low. Actually surprisingly, most people probably listening right now that are not familiar with this, they might have a low omega-three index below four because most people do. That's like the average. But if you increase your omega-three index around eight percent or even ten percent, your risk of, depressive behavior, your risk of, aggression, and even sudden cardiac death drops. So I I know people are like, oh, fish oil. You don't need it. It's whatever. It's like, well, maybe you don't, but you should probably spend $49, you know, when you do your labs, test your omega three index and just figure out for yourself if you need fish oil or not. So I found with me, mine was around 6%. So I don't supplement too much. I just take, like, one or two very clean capsules per day. I like Berberine, Berberine Hydrochloride. I think, you know, if you look at where, so called autophagy mimetics kind of are are trending, metformin AMPK activators, berberine hydrochloride is really powerful. You know, I know you write about it in your book, metabolic autophagy and so forth. So, that's one that I periodically take. When I had a continuous glucose monitor, I was really surprised at how effective berberine was at keeping that glucose very constant, very low. And as a response, the body helps to, you know, you make more ketones as a result. So for people chasing ketones, I think that can be helpful, but I don't take too many supplements. Those are kind of the handful that I draw from. What kind of a brand are you using with the berberine? Yeah. Berberine. Well, so here's my bias and just, you know, keep that, in context here. So I have my own brand and started my own company called Mioscience. So I've worked with manufacturers for the past thirteen years as a consultant. So I've just partnered with people I really trust. I've been to these facilities. I've seen the raw material procurement process. I see how they third party test, how they build and make things. So I do offer my own berberine through Mioscience. But, what you wanna look for is berberine hydrochloride. So some people say, oh, I take berberine leaf or berberine root. That might be helpful, and I'm not picking on whole food at all, but I I do like to draw on clinical studies. And all the studies are, for berberine specifically, use standardized berberine hydrochloride as the form. And so that is the particular form that has been shown to be most effective at least in human clinical studies. So that's what I recommend. Dosages, you can start at six hundred milligrams a day and work your way up. I will say if you wanna be very evidence based, the research does show that fifteen hundred milligrams per day is what's been shown to be effective for affecting triglycerides, for affecting blood sugar, for affecting waist circumference. There was one study that showed that it literally lowered you know, visceral fat within the waist. So I think it's effective, but you need to be kind of cautious initially because it is very powerful. Right. Yeah. And so, you know, if you're having blood sugar swings all the time and eating, you know, not being, you know, testing even your own glucose, you can be potentially hypoglycemic when you first try this. So always, you know, work with a practitioner if you have one. Exercise caution. Mhmm. Yeah. Definitely. Like, berberine is like a really powerful thing. And, if you do take it, then you can notice it's like a drop in blood sugar even, like, within minutes, and it's really something that you can definitely, like, add even on, like, keto diet. But especially, like, if you're eating carbs, then you can also have it, like, post post eating, and you can drop your blood sugar faster. So So it's really useful, and it's, like, more natural than metformin or or something like that. Right. Yeah. But, yeah, it's been yeah. It's been really great talking with you, and you dropped a bunch of knowledge bombs. And I'm sure, like, people learn a bunch of, new information about it. But, where before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and, your work? Yeah. Thanks, Tim. It was awesome chatting with you, man. I feel like not too many people like, we we covered a range of topics and, you know, I know that you can you can hang and, you know, you're on similar, you know, wavelength. So I've learned a lot from you and wanna thank you for your work. But yeah, my main website is highintensityhealth. Like you, I put up YouTube content pretty consistently. So that's like YouTube and Instagram. Like, if anyone wants to connect and say, hey. You know, I watch on Symalon. Just send me a note. I'd like to, you know, hear from you guys. So, yeah, highintensityhealth.com is the main site. Yeah. It's a great podcast, and, you have some awesome guests there as well. Thanks, buddy. Yeah. And, my last question is that what's this one piece of advice or a habit you wish you adopted sooner that improved your body and your mind? Oh, man. This is so good. There's so many. But, you know, just for me, it's honoring my body's circadian rhythms. You know? There was a lot of days and nights where I would stay up late when I was writing my my first book, Belly Fat Effect. Like, I would, like, have a bottle of wine, you know, sip sip on a glass just to, like, stay up all night. And I thought I was like, yeah, I'm working hard. I'm hustling, man. I'm like, this is how you, like, make it to the next level. And, you know, I would my sleep was all over the place. And I remember when I was 33, 34, I started to notice I was getting gray hair. And I'm like, man, I look older than I really am. I used to look like Everyone always thought I was way younger. Like, oh, you must be 23. And so I realized that I was aging way faster because I was just, like, burning the candle at both ends. Like, I used to for this consulting gig, I would fly to Toronto. I'd fly to, you know, Chicago. I'd be all over the place living in airplanes. Some years, I would fly 80 round trip flights around the country. Mhmm. And, my circadian biology was so screwed up, man. Like, I would just always tired and everything like that. And, I shouldn't have been. And and but it but it makes sense because I was screwing up my circadian biology. So if anyone's listening, the way that you mitigate that is just to really treat like I know a lot of people treat their macros and their nutrition like to a tee, but we need to treat light exposure and honor our sleep wake cycles just like we do our macronutrients. I'm very passionate about helping people understand that because so many people are eating great, but they they have the phone in their bedroom. They're on the phone at night, all that bright light. And so, just make sure that you're getting out. You're getting your retina exposed to morning light. So, like, before we got on this podcast, I walked my daughter to school. So it's good for her circadian rhythms because I was noticing that when we weren't walking or when we would drive her at her other school, we used to drive. She would sleep in all the time. Now she's up at the same time every day because we're exposing her retina right to that bright light in the morning. Even when it's cloudy, the penetration of that light is good to entrain your circadian clock system. So that was a long winded way of saying, like, there's one thing I wish I would've known earlier, is being very consistent with my light exposure and my sleep and wake cycles because that plays a huge impact on so many different things, blood sugar, health, and mostly just energy and aging. Yeah. Yeah. That's a that's a good answer. And, yeah, that's something that I think we all wish we know the sooner, like science in general, that that's okay in biology is, like, actually so central. So everything that happens, like, your health and general, like, cognition even. Totally. Yeah. Great point. Yeah. So yeah. Well, thanks for coming to the podcast and, looking forward to seeing you in the future sometime soon. Sounds good, Sam. Thanks so much for having me on. Congrats on the book launch. It's amazing book. If you guys haven't checked it out yet, you definitely gotta do. One thing I'll just say, Sim, what I really learned about was the different ways to stimulate autophagy. And you talk about like, like a low insulin, in relation to mTOR. So if you wanna like for those of us that wanna put on muscle but still get the benefits of fasting, like, you introduced a lot of new concepts that I haven't heard anyone talk about. So I wanna commend you for doing that. And so if folks haven't yet gotten the book, definitely check it out because it's a great book. Alright. Thanks, man. Thanks, buddy. Alright. That's it for this episode of the Body, Mind, and Pullman podcast. If you wanna support us, then I would greatly appreciate it if you could leave us a review on iTunes and the other social media platforms. You can now order my new book, Metabolic Autophagy, that covers a lot of the same topics that we talked in here. It's a collection of certain lifestyle habits and practices that prioritize longevity as well as performance. To support this podcast, you can also become a Patreon and get exclusive video lectures from my biohacking boot camp that covers circadian rhythms, intermittent fasting, autophagy, resistance training, biofeedback, and many more. But other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.