I'm convinced you should not eat more than eight hours a day. You need to give at least sixteen hours or put your gut complete rest. Unavoidable. It's just a consequence of aging. But that's a lie. And if you're engaging in these strategies on a regular basis, you're going to prevent every almost every single degenerative disease, like cataracts, like Alzheimer's, like diabetes, obesity, heart disease, cancer, diabetes. So, you know, this stuff works, and a miracle of fasting occurs in the refi. Body mind empowerment. Get stronger, faster, smarter, quicker, friendlier, more helpful, more driven. Everything the body needs. Control your mind. Welcome to the BodyMind Department podcast. I'm your host, Simmelan, and our guest today is doctor Joseph Mercola. Doctor Mercola is one of the pioneers in alternative and functional medicine online. His website, mercola.com, is one of the most popular health websites on the Internet, and he's written several best selling books like Fat for Fuel, Super Fuel, and the upcoming Keto Fast. Doctor Mercola, welcome to the show. Well, thanks for having me. Great to be here. Yeah. It's good to see you. And, we saw or we met at the upgraded conference, a few weeks ago in in Los Angeles. So what have you up to since that time? Oh, I've been recovering. That was, like, the best event I was ever at in my life. It was just, like, 10 Christmases condensed into three days. It was amazing. Unbelievable. I met a lot of cool people like you. So Right. And I met dozens and dozens of great people. It is clearly the probably the best event in the world for people like us. Yeah. Yeah. It's, it was really, phenomenal and, really well organized, and everything kinda well was really smooth. Yeah. But, how did you get involved with, like, alternative medicine and started to write a blog about it? Well, that's a long story. I don't know why I wanna go there, but why don't we go to something else? Because, I mean, I could talk about an hour about that, but eventually, I got disenchanted. I didn't start out. I was a drug prescribing doctor, prescribed thousands of people antidepressants, and then I saw the light through a variety of circumstances and have have been, really focusing on natural therapies for twenty five years, since in the mid the early nineties. So nineties, you know, since twenty five years at least. So that's that's a while, and, my passion is technology. It has been. I took my first computer class in 1968. So I was, an early online. My website, mercolo.com, is actually has been the most visited natural health site in the world for the last fifteen years. But, my website existed before Google, two years before Google. That's good. So, yeah, I was an I was an early adopter. That's good. Yeah. Like, I think, you you do expose a lot of kind of misconceptions and, controversies about different health topics. And, lately, you've been talking a lot about, like, five g and EMFs. So, can you, like, give a brief overview of how do how do those things affect our health? Yeah. Well, it's a real important, element. It's my next book that comes out, in the 2020. I'm just about finished with it. I'm doing the fine tuning phase now, so I've it's really freshened my mind. But the the central, concept and idea is that we're exposed to these frequencies, and they tend to cause oxidative stress and damage in our body. So this much very similar to exposure to X-ray radiation. Different mechanism, but not that different. Fundamentally, they're pretty similar, and that is not what the wireless industry and almost all the public health authorities and federal regulatory agencies want you to believe because they're been essentially, captured agencies through the wireless industry and you're just not being told the truth or we're not being as a as a culture. So, the damage it causes almost virtually identical to X-ray or ionizing radiation even though it is non ionizing radiation. There's not enough energy in that those frequencies to break covalent bonds and DNA directly. They do it indirectly through creating severe oxidative stress through a mechanism of actions that essentially catalyzes the production of peroxynitrate, the hidden free nitrogen species that virtually no one knows and probably understands, that then catalyzes or creates the formation of carbonate free radicals, which just is every bit as dangerous as hydroxyl free radicals. And that causes the same damage to their cell membranes, your proteins, enzymes, stem cells, mitochondria in your DNA. Mhmm. Yeah. Like, as I understand it, there's there is already, like, quite a lot of decent research showing that five g is, you know, linked to very like, excess oxidative stress, more inflammation, and even, like, cancer and those other things. Well, there's there's I'd like to correct that because there really isn't a lot of research on five g, and that's primarily because it's not been deployed yet. And then we have to have almost a research grade equipment to generate those frequencies. So there's virtually no research on five g, and that is really the big dilemma is that this is an an an an an untested experiment. There is are no safety studies. Zero. Absolutely zero safety studies on this. But there are you are correct in that there are over 20,000, nearly 30,000 studies showing going dating back to the fifties and sixties, showing the damage from exposure to this non ionizing radiation. Yeah. Yeah. That's correct. But, how can people, you know, protect themselves against five g? Like, it's it's I think it's quite inevitable that it will happen, but how can people protect themselves? There's almost there's very little way to protect yourself when you go outside your home cocoon. And and five g isn't deployed formally. Only it's in in test market, so it's it won't be deployed fully for a few years, but when it is, the entire planet will be saturated with these frequencies. Not just your local neighborhood or community or city or rural because they're they're beaming it down from space. They're gonna have thousands and thousands of satellites, unlike four g. So and not only what does it affect us, but affects all plant life and animal life and insects and birds. So we are looking at a a really a prescription for environmental catastrophe. And, you know, it's just I I I'm not sure what the solution is other than the there are things you can do internally, like increase your magnesium, because magnesium is a calcium channel blocker, and that's the mechanism of how these things work. And, you can definitely spend your time at your home and your office in EMF shielded environments, and it's relatively easy to shield from five g and these other frequencies. You can use measuring devices that are expensive to to to determine if your shielding is effective. Mhmm. And, that's not hard. It's just hard to be outside because they're gonna be pervasive. They're everywhere. Everywhere. You go to any public space, you're gonna be bombarded with these frequencies. Yeah. What about, kinda strengthening your own body's antioxidant system and, like, defense system? Yeah. Yeah. There's no question. That is useful. And the the type of strategies that you're promoting and, you know, I'm really amazed to meet you. I was we were at the Quicksilver booth and we were talking about their new, I think it was Autophagy activator, which I was highly stiff I was and still am highly skeptical because I don't think Chris Shade understands Autophagy like you and I do. But, smart guy. I love Chris. He's a good friend, you know, but, I still question that stuff. But, anyway, I was really impressed with your knowledge of autophagy and then realized you had written this book, which I'm gonna read after I finish my the book by David Sinclair that's coming out in a few months, life life extension. He's the guy that, discovered resveratrol Nice. At Harvard. And, so that was a tangent. The initial thought was what can you do to stay healthy? So, basically, living a lifestyle like you you and I promote, which is, you know, having these regular cycles of eating and not eating, feast and famine, and really activating autophagy on a regular basis because autophagy activation will radically improve through hormetic mechanisms, primarily through nRF two, but many other pathways, an increase in the production of hormetic antioxidant Mhmm. Defense mechanisms, basically, through stimulating the antioxidant response elements. Genes are are turning them on, switching them on in your DNA so that you don't it's it's so much better. It's orders and orders of magnitude better than swallowing antioxidants. I mean, which is really a foolish strategy that's been disproven. Mhmm. I mean, I take a few, like, some tocotrienols, a small doses, maybe maybe a hundred milligrams of vitamin c divided equally throughout the day. But I take very few antioxidants, but I take a lot of things to stimulate antioxidants Yeah. In my own body. And I think that's a far wiser strategy because your body knows best. Now when you try to indiscriminately suppress free radicals, which can be highly beneficial, you run into problems. So, you know, and I think just the fact that you're you know, the key thing is sleeping at night in an EMF free environment, as best you can because that's when the repair mechanisms will occur. And, then strategies to increase NAD because NAD is, really the fuel for an enzyme called PARP, which is short for poly ADP ribose polymerase. And that's the enzyme that repairs the DNA damage, which is probably one of the most serious threats from the the EMF exposures. And, this PARP is a really intriguing enzyme. It's the pride the primary consumer. I'm sure most of your listeners or viewers know that it's the primary consumer of NAD plus. Mhmm. And it does it because it NAD has ADP within the molecule. Many people don't know that, but it does. So a subset of NAD plus is ADP. It's embedded right in the molecule. And what PARP will do is suck out that ADP molecule from about 150 NAD plus molecules and create this polymer matrix that facilitates DNA repair enzymes to come in and repair that DNA break, either the single or double stranded break. Mhmm. So if you have a lot of those breaks, your your NAD levels are gonna plummet, which is just a prescription for metabolic catastrophe. So implementing strategies to augment NAD, which you can do with fasting, as you know, very well know, will increase NAD levels by 30%. I just was reading Sinclair's I didn't know the mechanism, but Sinclair was talking about in his book or talks about in his book, and and it's actually by increasing a m, the rate limiting enzyme for the salvage pathway of NAD, which is NAMPT. Mhmm. So it increases. I I was wondering how it does. I mean, it's pretty well documented. It increases levels by 30% when you fast, but mechanism is the salvage pathway, which makes perfect sense. Right. Right. Yeah. It is quite fascinating that you you necessarily don't want to to, like, avoid all oxidative stress and avoid all free radicals because your your body actually thrives on it through the through the mechanism of hormesis. And fasting is one of the best ways of, you know, triggering hormesis as well. And I would imagine, like, you know, exercise and saunas and cold and those are the things also, like, promote energy and I gotta talk to you about this because I don't I did not share this my maybe I did. I don't know. It was because I gave two presentations of both. I don't know if you were both. But the do you do you talk about heat shock proteins at all? Yeah. I do I do cover them. Yeah. Okay. So what is what is a heat shock protein do? It, stimulates also, like, these antioxidant pathways and, causes hermetic stress. That's that's, like, my my, simpler understanding. Your take on it. Well, that's what I thought too and said because, you know, you hear all these benefits of heat shock proteins and it's when people talk about them, they just talk about them like everyone knows what the heck they do. Well, I'm not that smart to know what they do, so I'd look it up and I did a pretty deep dive on heat shock proteins in PubMed. And it turns out that 30% of the proteins that your body makes, that's almost one third of your proteins. The moment they're made, they're misfolded. Mhmm. And you know misfolded proteins are not a good thing. So the mechanism that your body has evolved to correct for that misfolding are heat shock proteins, which is why they're so powerful. That's its primary benefit. But and you would be intrigued with this because heat shock foldings are actually a subset of autophagy. They're they're like cousin strategies. Because what happens when the when they when the proteins the proteins are so misfolded they can't be refolded correctly, so they're essentially damaged beyond repair, then what happens is the c check proteins facilitate the ubiquitization or the adding of ubiquitin molecules to that protein, and it activates what's called the UPS or the ubiquitin proteasome system. And that really targets the destruction just like autophagy. So they're parallel pathways. And it it really is so intriguing, and I never got that. And so the big lots of things stimulate heat shock proteins, but probably the one of the biggest ones is heat, you know, which is why I'm such a big fan of sauna. Near infrared sauna, not far infrared, but near infrared sauna. Big difference. Right. You get PBM for the biomodulation with the near and you don't get it with the far. Mhmm. Yeah. It yeah. The body has kinda developed all these different mechanisms to, you know, protect itself against all these environmental stressors. And it's kind of interesting to see how about, you know, as we move closer to the modern world where we're exposed to, like, more there's not a non natural stressors, like, in the example of EMFs and such, how our body is gonna potentially maybe adapt, and, how is our physiology gonna change. It's it will be interesting to see. Like like I said, it's an untested experiment. Oh, yes. There's no question. So, yeah. What so that's pretty good. Any other question about email from the otherwise, we can go to my new book, which I think is kinda fun. It comes out next week, actually. Yeah. I think we can, yeah, carry on with, the Keto Fast book because we mentioned fasting already. So I think people are more interested in that. So it's it's one of the strategies you can use to help repair some of the damage from from EMF exposures. So the there's a lot of confusion about this, though. And the first step before you consider fasting because there's no question fasting is a powerful strategy, and it's been used universally since as far as reported history and almost every major religion incorporates that as part of a spiritual practice. So that's kind of a clue there's probably some good health benefits to it. So the the the question and I was well, I was so intrigued and fascinated with it that I was I wrote Keto Fast initially. The intention was to guide people through how to do a five day water fast and the reasons why that was so useful. But when I started digging into the literature, I realized that that's probably not a good strategy because it's the twenty first century. As a result of that, we need a modification because we're exposed to about 80,000 toxins, mostly fat soluble, and they're stored in our fat cells, and they're liberated when we start burning fat, which happens when you're water fasting Right. Over a long term. And since you're not having any food sources, you're having to rely on stored nutrients and proteins to really, fuel the detox system to modify, the toxins properly so that your body can excrete them. And it's not done very efficiently at the levels of exposure that the twenty first century leads us to. So it probably worked great even in the twentieth century, certainly the nineteenth and before then because the amount of exposure these chemicals were pretty limited except in rare industrial, scenarios, industrial contaminations and such. But, now just about everyone has massive exposures. I mean, it's just unavoidable. It's almost like the EMF. I I mean, you'd have to be a pretty much of a a hermit living in the wilderness somewhere to to have that type of exposure. So, you can basically safe to assume that you're you're loaded with them. And as a result of that, I think multiple day water fasting, although metabolically clearly provides enormous benefit, isn't the best strategy. And, additionally, it's hard to do. I mean, you and I are pretty motivated, and we could do just about anything. But for most people, it's gonna be a small minority of people who have that willpower and self discipline to to Mhmm. Interinitiate a program like that. So the compliance is low. But then, you know, it doesn't work as well. And then here's the other third issue why it's not as good is that you can't do it as frequently. Mhmm. You cannot do a five day water fast every month if you weigh what you and I do. It it will make you worse. I'm convinced it will. Now for some people who have a 50, a hundred, two hundred pounds of lose, they need to do it once a month or more, but that's not us. So for the the the healthy, it's a it's a different strategy, which is why it came up with a lot of How does the keto fast kinda look like or different? Well, it's, you know, basically starts with intermittent fasting. You know, you restrict and compress your eating into at least eight hours. And as I was doing another podcast, I realized, actually, I I it wasn't podcast. It was my own question and answer session that I was, doing, to questions of people out of my site. Yeah. I realized that you sleep for eight hours. Right? That's a no brainer. I mean, unless you're, like, really foolish or ignorant, you know, that's the basic human need. It's about eight hours. Might be 07:30. Might be 08:30. And, of course, it varies depending on your circumstances, but, essentially, you gotta give your body the opportunity to sleep that long. If you don't, you're gonna get damaged. Well, similarly, the converse of that, if you you really shouldn't I'm convinced, should not eat more than eight hours a day. Mhmm. You you you need to give at least sixteen hours or put your gut complete rest. Now I like to extend a little bit better, longer, like maybe eighteen hours, and that might be wrong. You know? I don't know. It's but it's somewhere between sixteen and eighteen hours. I don't think you need to go longer than six hours. So some people eat on a four hour window, some in a two. I think it's a little bit extreme, especially if you do it every day, which is what I advocate. I recommend doing this every day. I I don't think there's and I could be wrong in this, but I don't think I am. I I think this is the strategy that we're designed to eat. Especially and you'll appreciate this, especially before you go to bed. Yeah. I just learned this because I've been devouring these PubMed articles on, NAD and its cousin, NADPH, which is every bit as important as NAD. Every bit, the battery of your cell, the store the the it stores the reductive potential to recharge your antioxidants once they donate their electrons and neutralize a free radical. So what happens is that NADPH you know what the biggest consumer of NADPH in your body? Like, PARP is the biggest consumer of NAD plus. NADPH, what is the biggest consumer of that? Maybe ATP or something. Nope. There's actually, Tyler, there was only one guy I've ever asked that they answered it correctly, and it was it was Tyler LeBaron, molecular hydrogen guy, who's a he's just a brilliant guy. But any but he's a biochemist. So it actually is the creation of fat, fatty acid creation. Wow. So he said, well, what does that have to do with anything? It has a lot, especially with sleeping and your timing for sleeping. Because if you are eating calories, beef right before you go to bed, normally, you know, the best time to eat the most food is when you're gonna use it. Like, you're gonna go out and do some hard farm work or do a heavy workout. Well, it's a little bit different for a workout because we we can talk about that too, about timing your IGF and everything. But the normally, if you're gonna do a lot of hard labor, you wanna have fuel on board. But if you're gonna eat right before you go to bed, you're sleeping. That's you're not you're that's the least amount of time you're or the time you're using the least amount of calories. So what are you gonna do with those calories? Well, not only is it gonna create increased oxidative stress in the electron transport chain, create more free radicals primarily through superoxide, hydrogen peroxide generation, but, also, it will consume NADPH because it has to store those calories as fat. As a result, it has to create fatty acids. So your NADPH levels go way down, and your ability to recharge your antioxidants and repair the damage, the cellular damage during the nighttime is radically reduced. Mhmm. So that's the best explanation, and I actually figured that out myself. Now maybe some other people figured it out, but if they have, I haven't read it or heard anyone say it before. As far as I know, I'm the first one to identify that as the reason why you shouldn't eat three to four hours before you go to sleep. Well So it's and there and it may be there are probably other reasons, but to me, that's probably one of the most profound molecular biological justification for that. Justification for this. Right? Yeah. Yeah. I do remember you mentioned that that the developer conference, and I I didn't know about it, like, that specific mechanism. But, I would I would also suggest that, you know, yeah, in general, you you you will feel if you eat, like, a bunch of food before going to bed, then it's gonna be simply uncomfortable for your digestion and, you know, you're gonna get bloated in such a yeah. It's gonna interfere with the general health. And, I direct energy to break you down your food and your gut's not gonna be at rest. So it's just a bad strategy, and it's so simple. So it doesn't cost you anything. Yeah. Yeah. And, and, also, like, the a lot of the autophagy process also gets activated or processed during deep sleep, so to say. So if you interfere your deep sleep, then you may may not even get, like, that much autophagy compared to the amount of fasting you do. So that that's another vote. Well, I wanted to dial I'm probably gonna interview you on my side too, but I wanted to dialogue with you. Maybe it's a good time to do it because we started a little bit discussing this a little bit. It what is the the frequency of autophagy because I was thinking up until I mean, earlier this year that activating autophagy every night or every day was a good idea, and now I'm not convinced that that's the ideal strategy. And and and by activating autophagy, I mean, not only they're meant fasting, but taking polyphenols, which also activate autophagy, like resveratrol and fisetin and berberine and curcumin and a whole variety of other strategies that you can activate autophagy with. So and I was doing it on a nightly basis, and I think, you know, I'm thinking this is probably not good. And it should I'm thinking it probably should be once or twice a week that you should do that. And I'm wondering if you because you wrote a whole book in this. I'm wondering what your your thoughts are on it. Yeah. I do think that, a lot of people jump on the bandwagon bandwagon of autophagy and think it's, like, the best thing all the time. But the truth is that you nest there are actually, like, a lot of, studies showing that autophagy can actually promote, like, tumor cell fitness and cancer cell survival. So there's always a matter of, what what's the optimal dose for my specific lifestyle and with my specific, like, training conditions and and other other things. So, yeah, I think, autophagy is a good thing, but you want to not overdo it, and you definitely would benefit from, like, balancing it with the, you know, the anabolic sites and on anabolic pathways like mTOR and those things. Yeah. So that that's that's where that's where the, you know, the people So you you don't think daily activation is a good idea then? Yeah. It depends on the day. Like, for instance, if you're trying to actually if you're, like, on workout days, you're trying to recover, then on those days, I would say that it's actually better to use stimulate like mTOR and, those things because Mhmm. You would, you know, promote, more insulin sensitivity and promote muscle growth, which in turn can actually lead to, like, greater health span and longevity in an indirect way. Yeah. So the the converse of that activated autophagy is inhibiting autophagy. And when you inhibit autophagy, of course, you activate mTOR. And, let me tell you how keto fast approaches this because the because I still didn't finish your your question initial question, the answer to it. Then we're not on a tangent, but an important one. So the base the foundational baseline strategy for keto fast is that you're intermittent fasting restricting your eating window to to six or eight hours, and you do that for at least a month. Most people watching your site are probably doing that, so it's not a big deal, and they can do this immediately. So once you've done that, say just to simplify things, say you're eating from 9AM to to 3PM. That's six hours. So you do that, you've done it. So it's 3PM, you finish your day, you go to sleep, you wake up, it's 9AM. At when you for that meal, you're gonna have anywhere from three to 500 calories based on your lean body mass. One meal. Mhmm. And it couldn't be hot and here's the thing. I I very low carbs, less than 10 grams, and relatively low fat and mostly protein, actually, but still lower at least half the dose of protein you would normally get in a day. Right. Why protein? Because you need protein to help fuel the detox system. Mhmm. And the other component of the protein, though, is you have to be careful, and you don't wanna have amino acids that stimulate mTOR because you're trying to inhibit mTOR. So that would be restrict, you know, really low levels of branch chain amino acids and low levels of glutamine. Those are the primary ones that activate mTOR. Mhmm. So and that's easy to do vegan proteins like chlorella or you know, we have a vegan protein powder I use, chlorella or even bone broth Right. Which has virtually no branched chain amino acids, and it it is almost a perfect protein for detox day because it's gonna give you primarily glycine, proline, hydroxyproline. So you do that, and then you don't eat for twenty four more hours. So, essentially, for forty two hours, you're only eating three to 500 calories. And here's the here's the anabolic kick to it. So the next day you wake up, you know, it's been forty two hours since you've eaten. So what do you do? Do you eat right away? No. You go and do your strength training workout. Why? Because your growth hormone levels are really high. Now your growth hormone receptors are relatively inhibited, which means that the high growth hormone levels that you have doesn't increase IGF one. So it's it's it's really intriguing. But that's when you do you're you it's like you've gotten an injection of growth hormone. You go and do the the the your strength workout, you you crush it, you know, and you just massively crush it. And, you push the limit, but you do it in a fasted state, then you come back home and then you feast. Then you have your branch chains and, you know, you know, everything else and, lots of carbs, healthy carbs, your fruit, and you feast essentially for that one day. And, you know, that's when you're hitting the anabolic, pathways and, you know, fully maximizing, growth number. I do it twice a week. I guess someone like you who's younger and healthier could probably do it three times a week. But then but then if you do it three times a week, you're not doing the partial fat then partial fasting three times a week might be a bit too much. And here's the danger of it for for at least for me. Every time I do a partial fast, I will lose, like, four pounds. Wow. Which you know, so I've gotta build up. And I and, like, when I'm traveling, it's just hard because I usually almost always partial fast when I travel because the other thing that it does is when you partial faster, ketones key ketones. Ketones will go up quite dramatically, and and high ketones are a very protective reflex against ionizing radiation. So when you travel at 35,000 feet, which would be, like, 10 kilometers, I guess, for your European audience, the, the difference is that you're going to have this ionizing radiation exposure so that you're gonna cause some DNA damage, and the ketones will help repair that for a variety of mechanisms, primarily through activating the n r f two and, increasing NADPH levels, which is pretty interesting. It actually increases NADPH quite dramatically when you're fasting. So, and NAD, of course. So it it's just a good thing to do when you're traveling. And if you're if you value your DNA. Yeah. I always, when I'm traveling, then I'm always, yeah, fasting and keeping keeping myself. It also helps with the circadian rhythms once you're gonna land on the new timezone. That's another benefit. That that is right. And I'm not surprised that you are fasting because you're a pretty bright guy. How old are you anyway? I'm 24. 24. Oh my gosh. That is just crazy. You're you're just crazy smart for 24. I wish I wish I had a fraction of your knowledge at 24. I've had good influence. I was stuck stuck in the middle of the conventional paradigm. I was I think in '24, I just started medical school. And, I was fascinated with health. I was one of the only students in my class who was the only one who wanted to be a wellness doctor. Everyone else wanted to treat disease. So they called me doctor Feiber back then, but, you know, I my my understanding of health was probably far less than 10%, maybe less than 5% of what you have right now. So I I wish I would've known that when I know now. Boy, jeez, we could help change the world even faster. But, you know, you you you don't do it at the pace you can, but, yeah, you're you're you're way so far ahead of the curve. Well, I'm good to hear that. But coming back to the keto fast, yeah, it's it's I think it's a really kinda unique way of going about it, and that's actually something somewhat different that you hear a lot of people talking about Mhmm. That, you know, for in your example, you say that it's actually better to have, like, somewhat moderate higher protein Mhmm. And from bone broth and those other things. So, that's a that's that's yes. It's true that you you will actually be able to maintain more lean muscle mass, but you're not gonna over activate the mTOR pathway with these, bone broth and, these things because, yeah, you Collagen too. And you just and let me just interject that it has to be organic because, if it's not, glyphosate tends to be concentrated in the connective tissue so that you can get really high levels of glyphosate. And a lot most of the collagen bone broth powders are from China, and they're loaded with glyphosate. So there's a cost. Yeah. Yeah. For that, for sure. But, what do you think about, like, similar approaches, like the fasting mimicking diet of, Walter Longo? I'm just gonna mention that. Yeah. Because, you know, the the the I I I mean, I'm pretty good at putting things together, but, clearly, it was the the work came out of some other novel thing thinkers in this area. And, certainly, Balter Longo out of, USC is one of them. And he's probably the most well published researcher in this area. Enormous amount of work, just just not justifying, but providing the research basis and and justification for this type of intervention. I I and, actually, he was one of the people that helped convince me, that five day water fasting was a good idea primarily because of the compliance issue. But then so his approach was a five day partial fast, which is actually more calories than I advocate. His first day is 5,000 calories and the next four days are 700, which you know, so it's not customized for the person, you know, because 700 is different for a hundred pound woman versus a two twenty five pound male, you know, which is kind of odd, but that's what he's chosen to do. Mhmm. And, you know, it's very expensive. It's his his diet is the Prolon. It's, like, $300, and they I know half of it is supposed to go to his research, but still a lot of money. Yeah. So, I have What do you think about the food choices? Like, as I understand, if the Prolon is, like, somewhat higher in carbs and very low in protein, it's like the opposite. Yeah. I don't I disagree with him, and that's you know, and I and I haven't had a chance to dialogue and debate him on that. And there may be value for his approach, but I personally, I've noticed that I think this works better for people like you and me who need to really wanna focus on preserving our lean body mass and are not so much interested in activating the, autophagy benefits to to treat chronic degenerative diseases like almost, you know, ninety four percent of the population needs to do. So when you're optimizing health phase, I think that this is a better strategy. But the but the really important point here, and I kind of alluded to earlier, is that you can do keto fasting twice a week. Right. Now I don't do it twice a week unless I'm stable at home and I can keep my weight up. Because when I'm traveling to lose weight, and I have a and I I I encourage anyone to establish their base weight that they do not wanna go below. And if you're below that weight, you don't partial fast, which is there's four contraindications to partial fasting or keto fast, underweight, eating disorder, breastfeeding, or pregnancy. So you don't do this because there are times in life when you have to be anabolic and then or you shouldn't because of psychological disorders. So so if you're if you don't have the right way, you can't do it. So but keto fasting, normally, if you're not traveling and doing this other, you know, partial fast, then you can do it twice a week. So that's over a 100 times a year. Mhmm. Mongo, I mean, at most you can so let's say you do it once a month, which is still pretty extreme. Mhmm. You're gonna get five times 12 at 60. So that's still a lot, but you're gonna still get more on partial, on keto fast. And who's gonna spend $300 12 times a year? That is that's, like, $30.30 $3,600 Yeah. Just for those partial fast. And it's not that much food. So but the other thing, though, is that most people won't do it once a month. They're gonna do it once a quarter. So once you get to the healthiest so your your your your levels of autophagy are not gonna be that active. And even and even on day one, you're if you're taking a thousand calories, it's a sort of a transition day. So you really I don't think you're activating autophagy that much. You're getting some. And and I haven't studied his program carefully enough to know how much he's integrating the intermittent fasting in the in the prosthesis window. I suspect he is, but I don't know that for sure. Yeah. I think, yeah, he he advises people to do the Prolon fast for, like, once a month or so or, like, once every two months and the other days you don't really have, like, a really strict fasting regimen. So Yeah. Yeah. Which I think is is not gonna be, like, worth it for most people in a sense that they're not gonna activate that much autophagy and, they don't do it that frequently either. No. Because there is a benefit to having a base level of autophagy. I think it's pretty minimal when you do, you know, an eighteen hour or sixteen hour overnight fast. Yeah. But you're getting some. There's some benefits. It's sort of a basal level. And then you really wanna pump it up once or twice a week to really get rid of the extra garbage. Yeah. That's for sure. And especially for, people who are trying to maintain more lean muscle mass, then, yeah, not necessarily having to go for, like, these longer fasts every that often is is not gonna be, like, the most optimal thing. And, that's where Yeah. So I think for athletes, for someone who's competing, it makes more sense. But even if you're a really competitive athlete, you may you know, might not be the greatest strategy. Although, I think you you know, certainly your training season, you can when you're competing, it might be something different. But there's no question when you when you deprive your body of food on a on regular intervals, you're going to improve your overall health and you and you improve your athletic performance. Yeah. But, you you mentioned that, you're not the fan of, like, these extended fasts anymore, like, longer than several days. So, would you see, like, any potential, like, situation where you would advise for someone to do it? Oh, sure. There you know, there's that that's not an absolute. That's just I'm not a fan for most people, but there are certain can k excuse me. Cases where people are seriously metabolically damaged, like morbid obesity where they might be two, three, four hundred pounds overweight, then it might make sense because what you need to do is overcome years, decades of metabolic damage, and that isn't done easily. You could do it with partial fasting, but it just take a lot longer. Mhmm. And and maybe that's what you the toe in the water, but, you know, for those cases and here's the other thing, when you do these extended fast, normally, you can't do many activities. I mean, you're really not supposed to work out. You're supposed to kind of hang around and and, you know, just sit around, not do much work because you're in recovery mode essentially for a long time. And, you know, there are clinics in North America that do this, like the TrueNorth Clinic out of in California. They fasted fifteen, sixteen thousand patients for, you know, five to forty days or more. Mhmm. And, they do it in house, and they don't have them do anything. They just hang there. They don't do anything. They just read and maybe take a little walk, and that's it. So it's it's it's impractical for most people to do to integrate into their life if you're gonna, you know, if you have a busy schedule, it's not gonna work. Right. Right. And most people, they simply like to eat that much. So they they will still want to have something during the day. Yeah. Well well, in partial fasting, you're you're not eating once or twice a week, which I think is a good strategy. And here's the cool thing. When you're doing it, you're still eating that one meal. So you're it's actually you're getting substantial calories. Three to 500 calories is a substantial calorie. So you you get that satiated feeling. And then normally, in a regular day, you would eat one or two more times, you know, to in your six hour window. So you're really only for four or five hours you're not eating. And then you're in your regular scheme, so it's it's like you're hardly missing anything. Right. So you're not really being deprived at all. Yeah. Would you consume, like, any specific foods as well that, actually stimulate autophagy, like cruciferous vegetables or, some berberine or something? No. That's that's a really great thing. So cruciferous vegetables are loaded with glucosinolates, and there's lots of different glucosinolates. The the most famous one is glucoraphanin, which is in broccoli and, cauliflower. Maybe cabbage too. No. I think cabbage has a different glucosinolate. So and that that glucoraphanin is converted with by myrosinase to sulforaphane, which is a really, really valuable molecule. That, man, I am just so jazzed about sulforaphane, primarily because it's been the most studied. It probably all these glucosinolates and, are have similar benefits, but we they haven't been studied like sulforaphane. But it base basically, it activates n r f two. It it upregulates this enzyme, the rate limited enzyme for the creation of glutathione, which is magnificent. So it has a lot of great benefits. And, it actually you know, the other thing it does sulforaphane does? You'll love this. It increases heat shock proteins. Nice. Yes. So it's like a hermetic stressor then. Yeah. It is. But, you know, here's the other thing. So when you do that, you do that when you are when you're seeking to activate autophagy once or twice a week. So I I would take broccoli I take broccoli sprouts. I think resveratrol, vicetin, a lot of other polyphenols, the curcumin, quercetin, probably, I think taro stilbene. So there's a wide I think I probably take almost 10 different polyphenols on the days I'm gonna try to activate. I take them, like, right before I go to sleep on the on the partial fast day. So I've got, you know, like, coming up on thirty hours of fasting on me already, then I'll take them in the morning before I eat. So I just got another four or five hours before I, you know, eat my first food. So, you know, I'm really activating those pathways. Mhmm. And it's it's it it just seems to me the right frequency. You know, you punch it once or twice a week. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's something that you would actually take during only the keto fast days, and you wouldn't take them, like, on the refit days. Yeah. And and, interestingly, I didn't come to this appreciation till after the draft of the book was submitted because it was an evolving process. You know, I was learning as I was going along, and I kinda realized that taking these polyphenols every day is probably not a good strategy. And there's some people like, Stephen Gundry who we we share similar principles, but he I don't think he appreciates that back yet. Mhmm. That you can't be activating these pathways polyphenols all the time. And I think you develop I mean, nature is full of cycles. It's up and down. You know? You it's it's rare where you're gonna take you wanna do the same thing continuously. I mean, there are some things you wanna do, like, sleep every night. You wanna drink enough water. But, you know, with respect to food and supplements, you gotta be really careful. Yeah. Yes. It's so true that, I do agree that polyphenols are great, but they're also, like, hormetic dose and, too much is definitely not good. And all the time either is gonna simply you're gonna go into, like, the catabolic side for too long and, like, suppressing the mTOR pathway for too long as well can can lead to some, insulin resistance and other ailments. So, yeah, you you wanna say, you know, respect the balance side. Yeah. So some of the other two of the other polyphenols I forgot about. Actually, a few few more would be EGCG from from green tea, and then there's, the one of the most intriguing ones I found was from pomegranate peels, which which is full of the lagic acid and the laggrytannins. And when you eat them, your microbiome converts into urolithin a, which has profound benefits. But most people think no pomegranates are useful, but they eat they're eating the fruit of the seeds, and almost all the polyphenols are in the peel. Mhmm. So you can find stuff on Amazon where they powdered up the peel, which is very, very bitter, very similar to berberine. You know, I mean, it's almost as bitter, probably even more bitter than berberine. So you wanna put it in a capsule. Right. But that would be good. And then, coffee is another great polyphenol that would activate it, and raw cacao would do it also. Raw cacao beans or nibs that are pull probably have one of the highest concentrations of polyphenols in any any food product is cacao cacao nibs. Mhmm. Yeah. I I do consume those things as well, quite on a frequent basis. But what what do you think restricted to autophagy, David. Yeah. That's for sure. But what do you think about, like, what there's there's a lot of, like, controversy and people are discussing all the time in the world that, what breaks a fast, so to say, like, what do you what do you consider that breaks a fast? Well, this is not that hard of a question. It's calories, you know. Now you can still have I mean, so potentially, the partial fast is breaking it, but it's only 500 calories. So, I mean, you could take a little bit of food and, you know, just walk a little bit and you essentially would burn it, so you're not really breaking it that much. But but from a theoretical perspective, anytime you have a calorie, you know, you're impairing autophagy. So you might it might go a little bump up because you just consumed it. It goes back to where it was shortly. But if you wanna optimize this, no calories. Anything that's how do you know? Look at the label. It's it'll tell you if there's calories on it. Yeah. Yeah. I do think that, autophagy itself, you know, it it doesn't work like an on enough switch that if you take, like, a cup of green tea or something, then the one one to two calories is gonna immediately stop autophagy, and you won't get into, like, for direct next day, it's it's it's, like, really gradual. Be a little nicked. And if you're in a multiple day fast, a green tea was not gonna do a darn darn thing for it. It won't you won't even notice it. Yeah. That's for sure. I wanted to guess. You need probably at least 50 to a 100 calories before you're gonna have a a significant dent. Yeah. That's for sure. And it it it depends on the calories too because if you're eating branched chain amino acids, you know, 50 calories of those is gonna be a lot different than taking, you know, some polyphenols. Yeah. That's true. Like, drinking some Gatorade or something is gonna or or have, like, a much bigger interfering effect. You're gonna you're gonna insulin's gonna go up and boom. You're gonna put the brakes on, autophagy. Yeah. Because that will be activated. Yeah. So you do mention that you eat, like, carbs as well. So, maybe maybe a breakdown. Like, what's what's your, like, refit day look like then? I have a lot of fruit. I I live on a property. I just purchased an acre next to me and then converted it to a regenerative agriculture farm. So I've got, like, a lot of blueberries. Right now, we're harvesting blueberries. I'm I'm harvesting about a gallon of blueberries a day. Oh, wow. And I've got mangoes coming up in a few weeks. Got plums, Japanese plums, cherries, apricots, avocados. So the avocado is obviously not a carb, but so I'll have those healthy fruits in the citrus, like tangerines. So I'll have those, and then I I I'm a real big fan of yams, sweet potatoes. So I try to have maybe three, you know, come over half a pound, half pound, three quarters of a pound of of those on those days, like, two medium to large ones. Mhmm. And I just love those. I cook them up. I put them in a steam convection oven. It's nice and soft. I got some raw butter on there, some good good healthy salt, and, you know, I feast on that. So, and I actually even have those on days that I'm not activating or activating seeking to activate on tour specifically. On on my on my post trip my post workout days, I'll have specifically high food time concentrations of branch change like a whey protein concentrate, which is one of the highest densities of branch change food food sources. So I'll have I'll have those days. I'll have that. I don't eat that that on any on the other days, but I will have a bit of glutamine and, I'll have those carbs. So I think it's healthy. Mhmm. I like carbs, but, you know, on the partial fast days, once or twice a week, I'm not eating any of that stuff. Yeah. That's true. So you're not afraid of, like, protein, and you're not afraid of carbs for longevity either then? No. No. I've I probably have over a 100 grams of protein a day, and I was protein phobic for a long time up until probably late last year. And then I start because I was, you know, Ron Rosedale, I'm sure you've encountered before, kind of was a mentor for a long time and a lot of various exposed me to the insulin, made me help helped me understand initially in 1995, gosh, twenty five years ago, that, insulin was dangerous. And believe me, no one back then knew that. So, you know, he really catalyzed my journey along along the nutritional landscape. And then he had me believe that excess protein was damaging because of the mTOR. And when he introduced it, it was a foreign concept to me, so I just believed him because he was a very smart guy. But then I started researching it and and and, I I don't agree with him. I I think it's this you need the cyclical component to it. So I I'm not afraid of of protein. As I said, on the keto fast days, I will have maybe 40 probably less than 50, probably maybe 45 grams of protein. But in the other days, I'm over typically over a 100. But that's not a, you know, that's not high branch change. A lot of 30 grams of that is is collagen protein, so which does very little to activate anabolism Mhmm. Or RENTOR. So, you know, it's kind of like a safe protein. You could you can get away with a lot of that, those collagen. You know, most everyone watching this is deficient in these these, these specific amino acids because we're not eating head to toe Mhmm. Or tail to toe, which is the connective tissue primarily, but also the organs. So the connective tissue is loaded with the these these amino acids, proline, hydroxyproline, and glycine. And I love glycine. I think that's a a supplement most people should be taking, for a lot of reasons. Glycine will increase any DPH. Mhmm. But it also helps protect against the damage from glyphosate, which is, you know, a universal exposure. And, it's a precursor for glutathione. It's not the rate limiting one, but if you don't have enough glycine, you won't make enough glutathione. And, I mean, glutathione is the bomb. You've gotta have glutathione. So anything you could do to increase your glutathione production, not swallowing it exogenously or taking some glutathione supplement, I would never I mean, never, but I don't think hardly anyone's gonna need to take external glutathione. You just increase your own production of it. Mhmm. Yeah. And that's where, like, fasting is the ultimate detox, so to say, from all of the doing it the right way, if you do it the right way. That's for sure. Yeah. I I I also agree, yeah, that, the activation of mTOR isn't bad in the context of doing this cyclical fasting and such. You you would benefit from activating mTOR, but you you have to make sure that you're gonna go into the catabolic side and do actually fast as well because imagine that doing the high high protein bodybuilding diet, you know, six times a day and speed stimulating protein mTOR that way. That's definitely not, like, the best way of going about it. And I'm afraid, like, most people simply adopt this very extreme viewpoint of either either all in or nothing at all. So Yeah. You're right. Absolutely. And you're you're a pretty wise guy to figure this out at such an early age, but you're absolutely correct. Is that is this cycling in and out that is the key. It's the key one of the keys to life is just not doing things continuously. You know, there's phases of life. And interestingly, you know, it's it's it doesn't really relate to the keto fast, but it's a good example of what nature's evolved to do. And we've got it's it's hibernation where bears and and whales, they don't necessarily formally hibernate, but they will not eat for six months or more Wow. Where they're traveling to their breeding grounds or feeding grounds. And, it's extraordinary that they develop the physiology to allow them to do it. It's primarily the ability to burn fat as their fuel. They're not eating anything. Yeah. So powerful method. Yeah. Ketosis is powerful. But do you have, like, any final tips or something that we didn't cover in relation to, like, keto fast and fasting? It's a good question. Well, just to understand that, you know, there is great value we do, and this is regular discipline. The the, you'll get enormous benefit. And if you wanna live if one of your goals in life, and I suspect most of the people on your channel are are optimized for the strategy, is to live healthy to a 100. They have all the function that you do at your age of 24 and flexibility and mobility and no frailty, high bone density, and and and really a high functioning of your your, nervous system in your brain, then you wanna do these things regularly. You know, it's interesting. You can live you know, cataracts are the most common surgery in the world is cataracts, and it's usually due to oxidative stress in the lens of your eye. Mhmm. And I just interviewed, Chris Canobie, who is an ophthalmologist, actually retired ophthalmologist because he decided to stop his practice and just research his thing. He's kind of like the twenty first century Weston Price guy. And he was telling me that he's only seen two people in his life and that were over 90 hit that crystal clear lenses. So it it is possible. You know, typically, we and, we used to think that cataract development or the darkening and the opaqueness in the eye that in your lens that requires a typically a transplant or an implant, is, unavoidable. It's just a consequence of aging. But that's a lie. And if you're engaging in these strategies on a regular basis, you're going to prevent every almost every single degenerative disease, like cataracts, like Alzheimer's, like diabetes, obesity, heart disease, cancer, diabetes. So, you know, this stuff works. And, you know, if you wanna live long, I I wrote through my first book, Fat for Fuel. This keto fast comes out April 30, and then my EMF book comes out next spring. So to me, that's the trilogy. Now that's not the, of of steps that you want to implement into your life if you wanna live to be 100 and then reap the benefits that will be available when technology, through its exponential advancement, has the tools and resources to provide us with the next steps. But you're not gonna make it unless you've really integrated these these challenges. And and the import it is so cruel crucially important because the odds are being stacked against you more and more every day. And as we mentioned earlier, you know, you've got these five g satellites that are being coming up. You are gonna be essentially bathed every time you go outside with this, potent oxidative stress inducer. And and every you know, almost all the food being produced in every restaurant is processed food that's designed to get you unhealthy. There's no other way. I mean, you've gotta make your own food or have someone you know prepare it for you because otherwise, you're gonna get unhealthy. So, these are the strategies you need to do if you wanna live long and healthy and not suffer. And although it may take some time, effort, and energy, and resources to implement, I mean, it's gonna, you'll reap the benefits by by not being down, by not being sick, by not coming down with diseases or health complications that that are gonna lay you up and cause you needless pain and suffering. So that that's my that's my pitch for this for the program. Yeah. It's it's quite amazing. And, it's you have to kinda yeah. Like you said, the prevention is is the best medicine, and, it starts with just taking care of the fundamentals and following this sort of a cyclic cyclical manner in, your health and nutrition. Yeah. Because your body was designed to stay healthy. It wants to be healthy. I mean, every and once you start to study this at a deep level as you I'm sure you do when you're reading PubMed, you realize it's just an amazing miracle of all the designs that we have to keep us healthy. And it's just shocking that people can still retain a fraction of their health with what they're doing to sabotage. Not typically intentionally, but nevertheless, they're still doing it. Yeah. But if if you if you understand it and implement the programs that I recommend and you're advocating, I mean, your body will self repair and you will stay healthy, and it'll it's a good thing. Yeah. Yeah. Keto Fest is coming out April 30. And, where where can people get it? They can get it pretty much any place you buy books. It should be. My last book, Fat for Fuel, was the number one book in Seoul in The United States by, Nielsen ratings. Nice. Nice. Yeah. Even even the fiction books too. So I'm hoping that we'll we'll reach that level. It was the first time I've ever done it with any book, but, Keto Fast may or may not reach that level, but it it should be pretty good. And it's available anywhere. You know, Amazon is a typical strategy, but there's any place a book that that sells books should have it. Nice. Looking forward to it. And, before I ask, last We have a we have a website, ketofast.com, where there's some other bonuses that you can get to by going there. Okay. We'll put all the links in the show notes. And, where can people learn more about you and your work? Yeah. It's mercola.com, nercola,.com, and we've been around since before Google. So it's twenty two, twenty three years now. Nice. And the it used to be that you could just use Google to type in a health question, and pretty much you would be guaranteed that one of our pages would be in the top two or three articles. But Google has, designated us as fake news now, so we won't find our articles on Google. So I would strongly encourage you if you found what I've mentioned interesting or intriguing to sign up for our newsletter. It's free, and you'll get a direct line. You can go also go to our website at mercola.com, and we do have a search and you can access all those articles. So it's interesting. Like, people write and ask me friends will ask me write write and ask me questions and, you know, he's hard to remember everything. So, like, one friend this morning asked me his daughter had a UTI, was doing cran cranberries and mantles. Is there anything else I can do? So I pull it up. Yep. I've just wrote the question on my website, and it reminded me, oh, I forgot. Chicken is the number one reason why people get UTIs. Don't eat chicken. There's a lot of reasons for it because, you know, when you bring it in, if you unless you bring in a cooked chicken, but if you bring in raw chicken, it's just loaded with bacteria. Mhmm. And it's impossible to keep it noncontaminating your home. So simple things like that. You know? And that's just one example. I mean, just put think about any health condition. You have to go to your site and type it in, you'll you'll get the answer. Mhmm. Well yeah. Yeah. Over the course of the years, you've probably gained a lot of, you know, knowledge and such. So my last question is my last question is, like, what's this one piece of advice or a habit you wish you adopted sooner that improved your body and your mind? That's a great question. I don't know that I would do one. I was ignorant of the value of sleeping, so I I've come to appreciate that largely through Matthew Walker's work. And and it's rare why I don't lead give my body the opportunity to sleep at least eight hours, sometimes nine if I need it. So that would be one. And then, you know, I fell into the the low fat myth in the seventies, you know, like everyone else pretty much. And so understanding the value of ketosis and then cyclical ketosis Mhmm. Has been an enormous benefit to me. I I just wish I would have known that when I was younger. I mean, I just cringe. I mean, if I knew what I knew now, I could be as healthy as you. You know? Yeah. I still have a full head of hair, I'm sure too. But, the, you know, you do do what you can when you do it. But, so those are probably the big ones in exercise. I was placing too much excess emphasis on cardiovascular exercise. And when I first met you at Bulletproof, I didn't realize how fit you were, and I started watching some of your videos. And it's very impressive what you can physically do with these, like I think you're doing one, you know, upside down or not, but push ups, inverted push ups and Right. You know, some other gym gymnastic skills that you're pretty gifted at. So, you know, those are the those are the things you wanna do, functional body movement, strength training. You don't wanna do long endurance running. You know, it's just you need maybe do a little bit, but, you know, I did it for forty five years, and I just regret it. And it was Right. I was trying to be healthy and doing the best I could, but it was the wrong strategy. Yeah. Let's hope let's hope that the fasting and keto fast will gonna heal it now. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, we could be. Again, that's that's the key strategy to focus in on. Your body has in it with the gift of repair and regenerate. And one of the other benefits of keto fasting is to activate your stem cells, especially when you're in the you know, you've done that strength training. So not only are you activating mTOR, but you also have activated stem cells to do that Yeah. Repeat job. Yeah. So Yeah. That's that's important. You have to actually feed to, gain the benefits of the fasting. Yeah. As long as he's told me this, and it was really important. It's really one of his best words of wisdom is that the miracle of fasting occurs in the refeed. It's not in the not eating. It's in the refeed. Wow. That's a good point to end the podcast. And, yeah, thanks for coming to the show, and looking forward to your, keto fast book and the next book that you're gonna write as well about EMF. So I'm looking forward to reading your book too. I mean, it's it's it's it's a beast of a volume, and I and I would not let you give me the hardcover book. I said give me the electronics. I didn't have, like, room in my luggage to carry a five home book pack. So it was good. Yeah. Well, yeah, thanks thanks, and I'll see you around. Alright. Alright. I think in my Keto Fest, one of my recent articles, one of our commenters said, hey. You should interview this guy. It was you. Really? Yeah. I said I said, you know, I think I know that person. And I looked at your I clicked on the link of Look at this. He sounds and looks like someone I just met. Then I realized, oh, it's you. That's cool. Alright. That's it for this episode of the BodyMind department podcast. If you wanna support us, then I would greatly appreciate it if you could leave us a review on iTunes and the other social media platforms. You can now order my new book Metabolic Autophagy that covers a lot of the same topics that we talked in here. It's a collection of certain lifestyle habits and practices that prioritize longevity as well as as performance. To support this podcast, you can also become a Patreon and get exclusive video lectures from my biohacking boot camp that covers circadian rhythms, intermittent fasting, autophagy, resistance training, biofeedback, and many more. But other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.