Do you ever wonder why people age and they start to look older? You know, there are several reasons for it, and most of it has to do with the accumulation of these dysfunctional and damaged organelles inside the body. This, in turn, makes your entire body more dysfunctional and accelerates aging by downregulating some of the essential life sustaining processes inside yourself. If you want to know how to slow down aging, then check out this video about how to avoid lipophus accumulation. Now if you're wondering, lipo, what? Then don't worry. I'm gonna explain what it is and how it accelerates aging and how you can avoid it. One of the main wear and tear aging pigments is called lipofuscin. Lipofuscin is a golden brown looking granule pigment that contains protein, lipid, and lysosomal accumulates. It's found in the liver, heart, muscle, and nerve cells where it deranges the processing of healthy cells. It's like garbage and clutter that begins to accumulate. Come back. Lipofuscin, or LF, forms inside lysosomes that are organelles used to break down macromolecules and other particles via autophagy. Your body does a pretty good job in cleaning hosts with regular autophagy. Unfortunately, all of the parts can't be broken down, and that leads to the accumulation of lipofuscin. Why this happens is still unclear, but the main reason seems to be oxidative stress. Lipofuscin is cytotoxic because of its ability to incorporate redox active transition metals, resulting in a redox active surface. This promotes oxidative stress and reactive oxygen species. Lipofuscin in heart cells is associated with heart disease and sudden cardiac death. Melanin and lipofuscin are considered to be hallmarks of skin aging. Skin discoloration and spots indicate liver dysfunction and lipofuscin accumulation. Those yellowish brown spots on people's hands and face are called liver spots, but they're actually lipofuscin accumulation. LF also promotes neurodegeneration and other pathologies. It's a major risk factor for macular degeneration and loss of eyesight. Here are the things that promote the accumulation of liposuction. Oxidative stress, free radical damage of any kind injures the cells and impedes their functioning. Advanced glycation end products or AGEs, proteins and fats that promote oxidative stress, aging, inflammation, and atherosclerosis, cells senescence, accumulation of zombie cells that spread inflammation and oxidative stress, high iron levels. Too much ferritin promotes lipophosphine formation because it reacts with other macromolecules inside lysosomes. More of the ferritin will also be left in the lysosomes after degradation. Zinc deficiency. Zinc is important for immune and endocrine system functioning. Thus, it supports lysosomal degradation and autophagy. Polyunsaturated fats, PUFAs, as they're called, are very easily oxidized, and they tend to be inflammatory in humans. Peroxidation of PUFAs of cellular membranes by free radicals creates liposuction. Excess estrogen. Too much estrogen may amplify lipofuscin formation. It also increases iron absorption. Birth control pills also increase estrogen. Lipofuscin promotes aging, and aging promotes the accumulation of lipofuscin. As you get older, your ability to clear out lipofuscin also decreases, and that predisposes you to more lipofuscin accumulation. It's like a vicious cycle. You get more lipofuscin, you get weaker in dealing with it, and that in turn creates more liposuction. Liposuction accumulates primarily in the lysosomes. Autophagosomes and lysosomes are not needed for forming LF, but they constitute a storage for LF aggregates. Therefore, a dysfunctional autophagy lysosomal system plays a big role in lipophosphineogenesis. Decreased and faulty autophagy promotes aging in many animals and cell models, which inevitably supports lipophoskin accumulation. Impaired mitochondrial autophagy or mitophagy also contributes to the creation of lipophoscan. It's another chicken and egg problem. As you slow down autophagy, you begin to accumulate lipophoscan. This, in turn, interferes with the autophagy process and, in turn, accelerates the generation of more liposuction. Liposuction inhibits the degradation of oxidized proteins by binding to proteolytic enzymes. Taking some digestive enzyme supplements can help to break down liposuction. Digestive enzymes are really good for both fixing digestive problems, clearing out dead cells, and general antiaging. If you take digestive enzymes on an empty stomach, then you break down these old worn out cells and proteins like liposuction. If you take them with food, then you're just digesting the food that you ate. But both ways are really good for preventing the accumulation of liposuction. The brand I'm using is Massyme's, and they have amazing digestive enzymes. Most of the age related diseases can be prevented with enough autophagy as a preventative tool. It's one of the best antiaging strategies you have to not get sick in the first place and therefore keep your body youthful for longer. Here's how to avoid lipophoskin accumulation and remove it. Number one, intermittent fasting. Fasting is a potent stimulus for autophagy and cell cleanup. Like I said, taking some digestive enzymes on an empty stomach will speed up the clearance of these dead cells and liposuction. Two, keep your iron levels optimal. Normal ferritin levels range from 12 to 300 ngml for males and 12 to 150 ngml for women. You can get too much iron from supplements and animal protein. Alcohol increases absorption of iron. Regular blood donations and menstruation can also lower iron. Getting more copper from liver shellfish and chocolate helps to balance iron overload with copper. Third, calorie restriction. Eating fewer calories causes less oxidative stress, lowers iron, and promotes autophagy. Four, consume autophagy boosters. There are certain autophagy boosting foods that can fight liposuction and incinerate visceral fats like berberine, turmeric, cayenne pepper, coffee, green tea, and ginger. Manage blood sugar. High blood sugar promotes diabetes and AGE formation, which oxidizes fats and proteins. Avoid PUFAs. Fish oil supplements, vegetable oils, seed oils, and even oxidized omega threes will cause lipid peroxidation and lipophosphine. These things will oxidize more easily in the presence of AGEs, heat exposure, oxidative stress, and excess iron. Don't smoke. Smoking promotes oxidative stress, accelerates aging, and promotes atherosclerosis. Malondialdehyde is a compound that indicates oxidative stress by smoking, but is also found in rancid and overcooked food. Malondialdehyde also causes auto oxidation of PUFAs, so smoking plus vegetable oils is literally the worst thing for your health. Cyclodextrin, a compound used in drugs that stimulate autophagy and clear cellular junk, including liposuction. Vitamin E, deficient vitamin E, promotes LF accumulation and it can reduce LF as well. Vitamin E also protects against the oxidation of vitamin E, which reduces liposuction. You should get your vitamin E from low PUFA foods, like vegetables, instead of nuts or seeds. Grudathione. Reduced glutathione leads to liposuction formation. You stimulate glutathione with sulfur rich foods like cruciferous vegetables, eggs, meat, and liposomal glutathione supplements. Creatine. Creatine has been shown to reduce free radicals and liposuction in the brains of rats. It also promotes cognition and muscle function. Feel how soft my skin is. Paying attention to your skin health, your digestion, your gut health, your brain function, your muscle mass, your body fat, and general inflammation levels is a good indicator of how well you're aging. If you're showing signs of inflammation, oxidative stress on your skin, then that's already too late. You have to implement all these changes that I mentioned and try to reverse that process. At the same time, if you don't show any signs of liver spots or skin aging, or any lipophosphine accumulation, then you should still do those strategies because they're gonna be useful for preventing the accumulation in the first place. If you want to know how to optimize the salve ache with intermittent fasting, exercise, sleep and food combining, then check out my metabolic salve ache masterclass. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.