Maybe the first time you tried intermittent fasting, you felt hangry, you wanted to quit, and you just were obsessed with eating. I can't wait to break my fast. I'm starving. But most people who have done it for a longer period of time say that it's very easy, convenient, and they don't really plan on quitting. Of course, you can over fast and fast too long, and you can do it too much, but it's not necessarily caused by the fasting itself, but by the particular individual in a particular situation and whether or not they're adapted to the fasting. So in this video, I'm gonna try to tell you, are you fasting too much? And we're gonna talk about what are the signs of too much fasting and what to do to prevent them. Number one, hair loss. There are many reasons why people may lose their hair, but most of it has to do with genetics, and they've inherited certain genes that predispose them to hair loss. Other reasons include hormonal changes, radiation, and nutrient deficiencies or too much stress. To prevent hair loss, you need primarily zinc, protein, vitamin a, b vitamins, vitamin c, vitamin e, vitamin d, collagen, iron, selenium, magnesium, and a few others. The most common ones include zinc, b vitamins d, and magnesium, which is why eating some oysters and organ meats as a supplement can be very useful. I think that hair loss from fasting can happen only if you are fasting for, like, seven days or if you're doing very long, prolonged fasting too often because it just creates this additional stress on your body. I think that there is no real reason to be worried about hair loss if you're doing daily intermittent fasting as and as long as your diet is nutrient dense. But it can definitely happen if you experience chronic nutrient deficiencies and you combine it with fasting, so you have to make sure that you get enough enough nutrients from your food. If you do notice hair loss, that is probably due to undereating and stress. Number two, sleeping problems. Too much stress can also cause sleeping problems, and it can wake you up several times throughout the entire night, or you can even not fall asleep at night. This is because your body is in a state of sympathetic dominance. To bring your body back into a parasympathetic state of relaxation, you can eat something that has some protein plus carbs. This helps to produce serotonin in the gut. And thanks to insulin, it's going to shuttle it into the brain where it gets converted into melatonin. Having this for dinner can make you sleepy and restful. I think that if you're doing longer fasts over twenty four hours, then some sleeping problems are somewhat inevitable because you are experiencing this higher amount of stress. In the short term, that's not the real problem. But if it's chronic, then you should definitely try to relax yourself and manage your stress better. You don't need to fast all the time for that long to reap the benefits of the fasting, and you should much rather value your sleep a lot more. To help with sleep, you can also drink herbal teas in the evening like chamomile or lavender. During the day, be careful with caffeine intake as it can disturb sleep very easily. This is liquid crack. Number three, digestion problems. Fasting is great for fixing some of the digestion problems that may occur like bloating or constipation because you're not putting stuff in and you're allowing your digestion to rest. However, if you break a fast and you consume larger amounts of food in one sitting, then it can actually cause digestive problems if your body isn't capable of digesting it. Getting bloated or constipated after meals is in most cases caused by insufficient stomach acid, electrolyte imbalances, and eating too much in one sitting. You can prevent that by consuming salted water during the fast to help with the production of hydrochloric acid and prevent dehydration. It may also be that you have some underlying dysbiosis or autoimmune condition, which is why you would want to work with an actual medical professional. If you're having trouble digesting large amount of food or feel bloated when eating, then you should try out digestive enzymes. They're gonna assist in the breakdown of macronutrients and improve digestion. The ones I'm using is mesosomes from Biooptimizers. You can find a link to it in the description. Number four, detox symptoms. Fasting is said to be a very powerful detox tool, but your body can safely detoxify itself even if it's not fasting as long as it gets enough of the enzymes and the right minerals. It is true that the process of autophagy and other detox pathways are greatly elevated during the fatter state. Anything that is making you lose weight and burn fat will trigger some of the detox symptoms because your body fat stores some of the toxins that you get exposed to. So losing fat in general can manifest the detox symptoms, and it doesn't have to happen while you're fasting. To prevent detox symptoms and alleviate them, you should take specific binders and chelators that'll bind to the toxins you mobilize when burning fat. Activated charcoal, bitter herbs, green tea, milk thistle, and chlorella are a few examples of the easiest to find. Number five, binge eating and fasting. Fasting can be useful for breaking some food erections and other binge eating disorders, but it can also create them if you take it too far. Binge eating after breaking a fast is more often caused by chronic low calorie diets, having too many extended fasts back to back, too much stress, sleep deprivation, overtraining, and making poor food choices. They're also caused mostly by some underlying emotional problem, addiction, or lack of fulfillment in other areas of life. You might be literally eating away your feelings. If you're stuck in some sort of a binge and fast cycle, then you could try to do a longer two to three day fast in order to kinda reset your system and reset your taste buds. But at the same time, you still have to be careful enough to be mindful about how do you break a fast, and you have to practice moderation afterwards. So the most important part is to teach yourself how to practice moderation and how to eat less and feeling more satisfied from it. Put that cookie down. Number six, cold hands and feet. Chronic dieting and calorie restriction will slow down your metabolic rate and lower thyroid functioning. During a fast, that can manifest itself as cold hands and feet because your body is short on energy. Again, I think that long three to five day fasts can and will probably low lower your thyroid to a certain extent. But during daily intermittent fasting, if you have these symptoms, then it's probably just caused by under reading and too much stress. Here Here's what to do about it. Increase your protein because it has the highest thermic effect of food, and it can raise your metabolic rate. Secondly, the thyroid needs selenium, zinc, b vitamins, magnesium, and healthy fats. Being low carb for too long can also down regulate thyroid and leptin functioning, which lowers your metabolism. To prevent that, regular carbohydrate refeeds are very useful, and they'll keep your engines burning. To prevent cold hands and feet while fasting, you can drink warm teas and beverages that keep the digestion going, like the ones with medicinal mushrooms. You should also avoid cold foods, so to say, like raw salads and vegetables because they interfere with thyroid functioning. Instead, try to eat some warm soups, broths, and stews. Number seven, muscle loss and frailty. The biggest reason why people experience these negative symptoms has to do with chronic energy restriction. If you combine protein restriction with fasting, you'll definitely lose muscle because of constantly being in a catabolic state. You need sufficient protein to maintain muscle mass, and the demand may be slightly higher when doing interval fasting. The RDA for protein is like 0.4 grams per pound of body weight, which is just enough to survive and not to wither away. However, for optimal health and performance, you wanna get at least 0.7 to 0.8 grams. About one point zero grams to 1.2 grams per pound of lean body mass would be the upper limit and beyond that isn't necessary. To mitigate muscle loss even more, you should do some resistance training as well. Only fasting without any muscle building exercises can make you experience sarcopenia and frailty later in life, which is why you wanna stay physically active throughout your entire life. So are you fasting too much? Are you experiencing any of these negative symptoms that I just mentioned? If you are, let me know in the comments. And if you aren't, let me know as well. If you want to know how to fully optimize fasting, nutrition, meal timing, and food combining for balancing katavachi with the other anabolic hormones, then check out my metabolic autophagy masterclass. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.