Know, when we look at it from a circadian standpoint, studies are now pointing to the fact that you can get leptin or insulin resistance independent of the type of food you eat just in the absence of, you know, a fully synchronized circadian rhythm. And this is how powerful this stuff is. Everyone has this. Everyone seems to have a disrupted circadian rhythm because of the environment we live in, and there's only a few of us that understand that food is is obviously very important. Don't get me wrong, but can't ignore the fact that our circadian rhythm is is very much entrained to the onset of some of these diseases and resistances that then causes us to overeat and become sick. Body, mind, and empowerment. Get stronger, faster, smarter, quicker, friendlier, more helpful, more driven. Everything the buddy needs. Control your mind. Welcome to the Body of Mind Empowerment podcast. I'm Hoss Seemland, and our guest today is Andy Munt from Australia. Andy is an entrepreneur and the founder of Blue Blocks, which is a blue blocking glasses company. Andy, welcome to the show. Thanks for having me on again, Sim. It's always, always a pleasure to talk to you. Yeah. It's, good to see you. And the last time we talked on the podcast was maybe, like, a year ago or something. But, what what have you been up to since that time? Yeah. So it's, I think it was maybe September, October time last year when we last spoke. So almost a year now, which is is way way too long. Obviously, we've been speaking on and off, off camera, which is always great and been following your, your adventures across, the various summits, that you've been involved in. So that's been, been awesome. I guess from from my point of view, we've we've been delving deeper into the research, and we we've been coming up with with more lines on our products, as well. We've been, you know, posting a lot in our light and health group about all this new literature that's coming out on, you know, how circadian clocks are are entrained through, different sort of external cues as opposed to light. So, you know, I thought it was a a a good time to reach out to you again and and talk a little bit about, you know, these new, new studies and and what, what what else we've learned really, in that last sort of ten month period. Yeah. For sure. And, good to talk with you. But, if anyone wants to, like, listen to the previous talk that goes into more detail about how blue light affects your physiology and how it affects your sleep, especially then I'll leave the link to that show in the description. But, maybe, like, just for, you know, the new listeners, can you give, like, a brief overview about blue light and how it affects your health and sleep especially? Yeah. Absolutely. I think it's always good to start off with with the basics. So, you know, as as mammals and and every single mammal on Earth has something called a circadian rhythm. Okay? So what that means is that our bodies, and every cell in our body is, basically in sync or should be in sync with the rotation of of the Earth and the spin of the Earth. Now what or or how our bodies get that information primarily from the, I guess, the orbit of of our planet is that it it it basically takes cues from light and dark signals. So the way you entrain your circadian rhythm is you, your body, will release a hormone called cortisol when it's time to get up. You'll go and watch the sunrise or be outside, I guess, from an ancestral point of view, and that light will tell your brain it's daytime, and it will send messages to other cells in the body to say, right. It's daytime. We need to produce the hormones to be active and and alert during the day. Now when it comes to the nighttime when the sun sets and we watch that, the cues of darkness and maybe the reds and oranges of of sort of ancestral campfires told us that it's now time to relax, not to produce cortisol, and to allow, serotonin tryptophan to basically be turned into something called melatonin, which makes us feel sleepy, want to go to sleep, and and have a really good night's sleep. Now that's all very well in an ancestral world, but the issue that we face today is that we're exposed more than ever to artificial light. So what that's telling our brain after dark is that it's still daytime. It's still midday. It's still, you know, early morning, and it's saying keep cortisol levels high, and you don't need to produce melatonin. So we're struggling to sleep, struggling to get off to sleep, not maybe not having the best quality deep restorative sleep and and REM sleep, which helps with, you know, that clear out of dead cells and and, you know, making us feel fresh and alert the next day. So, you know, we we've when you look at light, and and modern lighting, it's very different to what we had many years ago, maybe in Victorian times or, you know, times of of the early twentieth century or even up in really fifties, nineteen fifties and sixties when it was an incandescent, very dim, low lux light. We've now got these really bright LED sort of, light bulbs that we put into our house that give off a high amount of blue light. And it's with this blue light that really is the trigger from the sun as well in the mornings and and the afternoons that tell us to be alert and awake. And this is causing massive increases in, you know, in in the first instance, insomnia and people having chronic fatigue, not being able to sleep properly. And it's also then, being linked in a lot of studies to things like weight gain, insulin resistance, and and certain cancers and also neurological diseases as well. So, you know, that's very sort of broad. I know, you referred to the last chat we did back in October, and if people wanna sort of listen to a full hour on on why that is and how that is in relation to life, then definitely have a have a listen to that because it's some really sort of good explanations. We delve, you know, further and further into these topics. But I guess in a nutshell, what's happened is the advent of artificial lighting, which has allowed us to not have any darkness anymore even when we sleep, has led to a whole host of metabolic diseases, lack of sleep, and chronic illness in in in our industry today in our in our environment today. Yeah. It's it's so true. And, you know, I've seen some, people say that after the invention of artificial lights, the kinda average length of the, you know, human sleep has decreased by about two hours or something. And just because of the, you know, the ability to be awake in the night and, be, you know, constantly under these blue lights. And, yeah, like like I said, those kind of disruptions in the circadian rhythms, they're linked to a lot of diseases. And, even even in the kind of presence of sufficient sleep, you know, even then the, the disruption in the circadian rhythms and the blood exposure itself has, like, a negative effect on your health, especially when it comes to, like, blood sugar management and, even, like, satiety signaling and so on. So it's not just that the blue light is make is making you sleep worse. It also has, like, a independent effect regardless of the sleep, quality. But but at but at but at the same time, the but the the blue light itself will definitely jeopardize your sleep quality. Yeah. Absolutely. And and you had a, a really good, point then about, you know, the satiety and the and the feeling of of being full and things. And and there was a study, I posted in Enlightened Health, a couple of days ago. I I tagged you and a few other people in it to have a have a look. But it was all about how a disrupted circadian rhythm has now been proven, to to basically affect leptin signaling. So, you know, a lot of your listeners will understand the role of leptin. I mean, I I've described it very, very basically, but, you know, when when we gain body fat, we have a hormone called leptin that also increases in the, adipose tissue. Now what leptin does is it tells the brain that when there's a lot of it in in abundance, it will go to the leptin receptors and basically say, you've got enough body fat. You don't need to eat as much to gain more, weight and become easy target for a predator back in ancestral times. You can stop eating. So your satiety levels increase. You know? You don't have to you you know, you have maybe a smaller meal, you feel full, and and you're totally fine. Now the opposite is true when you're very underweight and you need to gain fat. You're and you'll know it from, say, if you're cutting, trying to lose weight, you get hungry more, leptin will, basically signal to, the brain that there's not enough fat, eat some more food, and we'll store it as fat. Now the study that came out showed that basically a disrupted circadian rhythm, so you're exposed too much artificial light after dark, you're maybe working night shifts, maybe, you've, you know, you're you're not waking up till 11:12 in in the morning and missing the sunrise, independent of food can actually cause leptin resistance. Now the way that the study was talking, was that it can actually switch off the leptin receptors. So there'll be a lot of you know, say an overweight person has a lot of leptin circulating in in the blood, it won't be able to cross the blood brain barrier to hit the leptin receptors and actually say to that person stop eating. So, you know, the I guess the the way that, I guess the food literature describes things like insulin resistance or leptin resistance is, you know, an overabundance of this stuff basically impairing the the leptin receptors or the insulin receptors and flooding the system with it, and it basically needing more and more to, to to basically get that signal across, which then causes a resistance to to insulin. But, you know, when we look at it from a circadian standpoint, studies are now pointing to the fact that you can get leptin or insulin resistance independent of the type of food you eat, just in the absence of, you know, a fully synchronized circadian rhythm. And this is how powerful this stuff is. It's it's, you know, having just a and everyone has this. Everyone seems to have a disrupted circadian rhythm because of the environment we live in, and there's only a few of us that understand that, you know, food is is obviously very important. Don't get me wrong, but, you know, you can't ignore the fact that our circadian rhythm is is very much, you know, and and trained to these, you know, onset of some of these diseases and resistances that then causes us to overeat and become sick. Yeah. It's such a underrated topic, and it's a new new field of research as well. But especially, like, maybe maybe, like, the reason why they disrupt the the disruptions of circadian rhythms cause these issues has to do with, like, it's causes simply, like, more excessive stress and inflammation on the body if it has to kinda catch up on the, circadian rhythm of the environment, so to say. If you're out of sync, then you're kinda lagging behind, and that's just causes more oxidative stress. And, oxidant stress in excess is just causing, more damage to your body, and that's where all of the diseases also, you know, start off from. Yeah. And that's that's that's so true as well. You know? The the amount of inflammation that's been causing the body from a a disrupted, circadian rhythm is, yeah, causing and and wreaking havoc at a mitochondrial level. And, you know, when you, when you actually look at melatonin, a lot of people, when you say, what is melatonin, they will say to you, it's the sleep hormone. Mhmm. And that's a partial truth. Okay? So melatonin is also a very, very potent and powerful antioxidant. So when there's inflammation in our body, whether it be from, you know, in the environment, maybe pollution, maybe, you know, a lot of exercise, maybe you've eaten some bad food or whatever it may be or or general disease that that could happen. You know, melatonin is the most powerful antioxidant that actually goes and and, you know, neutralizes a lot of this information or helps repair it. And, you know, it's not just about using, or creating melatonin in the body to to aid sleep. It's it's that powerful antioxidant effect it has as well. And, you know, a lot of, a lot of people and and it's still up for debate, you know, what what is the main purpose of sleep in a human. And, you know, I guess what we know so far in a very broad sense is it's apoptosis, autophagy, the clearing out of adenosine, and the, you know, growth and repair, they always say. Mhmm. Now why would our bodies want us to secrete melatonin at that specific time of the day? And it makes complete sense to to me that it wants to be secreted at that time of the day to aid the body in clearing out all the waste product, all the, damaged and, dying cells to keep us, healthy and keep inflammation low. So, you know, it's not a coincidence that, you know, nature, you know, does this kind of thing. And and, you know, there's always, you know, more than one function for some of these hormones as well, and and melatonin is is is one of those, I believe. Mhmm. Yeah. And, also, like, in order to produce melatonin at night, then you also need to be exposed to morning sunlight. And, the the following the proper earlier circadian rhythm is somewhat of a crucial part and actually getting a good night's sleep in the evening, so to say. Yeah. Exactly that. And and the the problem you have is people look for that sort of one stop fix. And, you know, people can't just come to to to Blue Blocks, buy blue light blocking glasses, wear them after dark Mhmm. And then expect to have this perfect night's sleep if you're not adhering to the laws of the of circadian biology, which is you need to be up with the sunrise, letting your eyes and skin see that that sunrise, whether it be for a few minutes or thirty or forty minutes or most of the morning depending on what time you can allow, because you need to produce something at that time of the day called serotonin. Okay? And then that, in in conjunction with tryptophan, which is produced in the gut through, IR and UV light at that time of the day as well, will then later on go, and and be synthesized and and translated into melatonin. And it's really interesting as well. Like, I've started to to look a little bit at food in relation to, you know, this kind of response as well with tryptophan, being later turned into into melatonin. And, I've been I've been speaking quite a bit to Chris Masterjohn as well who who uses my glasses and, is very, very interested at the moment in in sleep and circadian rhythms, which is which is really good. It's good to see these guys, you know, getting a little bit more involved in circadian side. And, you know, I found that by listening to Chris's work that, I actually improved my deep sleep scores, using using my Oura ring by actually having a small amount of sort of sugary carbohydrate before bed. And I was really intrigued. I was trying around with these playing around with these things, and I spoke to Chris. And I said to him, I said, why why do you think that that's the case? And he explained to me that that carbs actually push tryptophan into the brain. And what that does is that actually then can translate into your melatonin after sunset, and it also suppresses the waking signal in in your brain as well. So it actually allows you to relax and drift off to sleep. And, you know, I've been having this much, like, another, like, before bed. Something like that. Then, yeah, it's been perfect. It it's like a tryptoph tryptophan tends to compete with the other amino acids, in the brain to cross the blood brain barrier. So if you take the carbs, then insulin is is going to enable the, other amino acids to be shelled into the cells, and that enables tryptophan to reach the brain. So, yeah, that that's the, like, that's the reason the perfect combination for a good night sleep is some protein and carbs because, that's, you know, increases serotonin, which then gets converted into melatonin and carbs themselves, you know. They cause, you know, drowsiness a little bit, and they cause, like, this small like, a small hypoglycemic crash is actually a good thing if you time it at the right time and, you don't overdo it. So you raise your blood sugar and you drop down, and that small dip just makes you feel, like, very tired, and you just want to want to fall asleep after that. Yeah. And that's that's spot on. I think it's worth also sort of saying as well as as we're we're probably on the same page here that we're not suggesting a very large protein meal before bed. Yeah. What we're talking about here, I guess, is is a smaller protein meal with with maybe a smaller amount of, of of carbs in there. We'll explain a bit I'll explain a bit why in in a in a bit, but, you know, the the way that that Chris has explained it in in a lot of his writing and and to me is that, you know, protein is actually in too high a quantity before you go to bed. So we're talking one or two hours before you go to bed here. Actually, stimulates the waking signal, in in in the brain as well as opposed to carbs turning it off. So if you I guess if you balance it, you probably want to have more carbs than than protein before bed. I typically only have a very, very small amount. And what you find as well is protein is a lot harder to digest as well than than some of these carbohydrates. And when we're, you know, preparing to sleep, we don't wanna be eating too much after dark because digestion will then take control, rather than autophagy and your apoptosis and and your clearance of of adenosine. You know, we all know and and you talk about it, in great detail and and explain it so well on on on the autophagy side of things and, you know, the fasted state. And and, you know, when you actually look at it from a circadian standpoint, you know, eating your largest meal before bed is is really gonna be hugely detrimental to your health. Now the way I understand it, and and there's been some recent studies on this as well, but it's basically shown that, you know, light, which is the, basically, the potent stimulator and then trainer of the, central master clock, which is located in the hypothalamus, supracharismatic nucleus, that goes without saying. It's it's it's a proven fact. But when you actually look at your peripheral clocks, what a lot of the academics were doing is they were looking at things like leptin, ghrelin, glucose, and these types of, these types of things that would actually be pivotal in in in training each cell in your body independent of light. But what they found was they that none of these, hormones or, or stimuli were actually present in all the cells, which led them to to insulin. So insulin is is is found like, IGF one, receptors are found in pretty much every cell in in the body. And they have now or these academics have actually looked at IGF, one, and insulin being a potent and trainer of all of our peripheral clocks. Now what that means is that, the time we eat is very much, circadian, in in respect to we have got to make sure that all our peripheral clocks, like in our liver, kidneys, etcetera, are all in sync with the master clock. Now I was always led to believe that your biggest meal should be the first thing you do upon waking. But actually, when you actually when I've delved a little bit further into the literature here, their suggestion that the most optimal time for one to eat is about four hours after the cortisol response in the mornings. So you'll wake up, get your cortisol response, watch the sunrise, and you should actually be waiting for around about four hours. And this is to do, very broadly speaking, with, I guess, the period genes in, each of these cells being utilized by, I guess, the insulin response at that time of the day to physically entrain those specific cells. So it was very interesting when I started to read a little bit more on that that, yes, the general, I guess, mantra of having that biggest meal first, and then having smaller meals throughout the day is very true, but not having it too early is also another, another aspect we need to look into. And when you actually look at some other studies that that we've been reading as well, they did one, about five or six years ago. It's a really interesting study, and I've I've sent these over to you prior to us talking. So I think, you know, a lot of people wanna delve deeper into this. But they took, two groups of people, gave them the same calories, same macros, same exercise plan, same bedtimes, everything. Okay? But the only difference was meal timing. So one group had their last meal before 3PM, and the second group had their last meal after 3PM. And what they found was it was like a weight loss, study. The group that had their last meal before 3PM actually lost a hell of a lot more weight than those that had their meal later on in the day. So, you know, this also sort of led me on to talk a little bit about in in my group, a little bit about intermittent fasting. And the default intermittent fasting protocol that I I see probably ninety percent of people do is that they will have, you know, fasting period in the morning, and they may start eating maybe about one or 02:00 in the afternoon and stop eating maybe about 08:00 at night. Now this is just like from a circadian point of view, the worst thing you can possibly be doing because of all the stuff we basically just, just described. You're you're gonna basically desynchronize your peripheral clocks with your master clock. You're gonna disrupt your sleep, and you're gonna have a hard time, you know, you you'll lose weight initially because you just will. That's just just the laws of thermodynamics. But eventually, you'll hit a storm, wonder why. And, you know, what I what I try and teach a lot of people, it's just flip that over. Have your largest meal about, you know, 10:11 o'clock in the morning and and stop eating before 3PM and have that fasting period, you know, from 3PM through to, you know, eleven the next day. And, you know, a lot of people think, oh, it's really hard to do. But when you actually entrain your clocks properly, it only takes a few weeks of this. And you start getting up and watching the sunrise, and you start having your meal when you get the insulin response after the cortisol response, about three, four hours afterwards. Actually find it's really easy. You know, you eat when you're hungry, which is always around about that 10:11 o'clock. Have, you know, three or four meals or or one meal or however many you want in your period before 03:00. Then you're not hungry in the evening, and then you're recording ridiculous sleep scores, in terms of improved deep sleep and, you know, improved REM sleep. And all you're having as as your light sort of snack before you you go to bed is, in my case, I I just have a very small banana, maybe half a banana. And you can have a little bit of protein as well if your goals are are more aesthetic in nature. But, yeah, it's really interesting. All this stuff is coming out with meal timing and, I guess, insulin as a, in trainer of of most of the the the sales clocks. Yeah. Yeah. Like, you know, when you are waking up in the morning, then the cortisol, it's also gonna make make make it easier for your body to store the food that you're eating as fat. So you don't want to be eating, like, when you're stressed out or with high levels of cortisol and, like, miss or, you know, eating eating food and suppressing that cortisol response will also kinda make you miss out on all the benefits of cortisol. Like, cortisol isn't bad all the time. Cortisol actually makes you burn fat and, triggers your body into this into this state of, higher ketone production as well. So you don't want to be suppressing cortisol all the time. And that's why kinda leveraging that small time frame of, let's say, ignition, you can igniting, like, your own body's own fat burning mechanisms is such a, like, a, you know, easy way to kinda implement this idea of time is leading. But when it but it but when it comes to, like, early early versus late time is leading, then I think that the research also showed that there isn't, like, a huge difference in terms of, like, final health outcomes if you actually do it in a time restricted manner and within the same hours. Like the study that you mentioned, yeah, it's true that the group that ate earlier in the day before 3PM, they, like, lost more weight. They had better blood glucose control, etcetera. And they also had, like, this expression of sirtuin genes, which are these longevity genes. But the the group that they were compared to, I believe that that group wasn't even intermittent fasting. Like, they were eating throughout the day. They weren't they weren't, you know, you know, skipping breakfast, etcetera. They were still eating at the same hours and that Yeah. Just, you know, within a larger time frame. But another group or, like, another study, actually took they took, like, 16 men, and they put them on two of these different time receivers, schedules. One group, eight, you know, from, eight p 8AM to 2PM, And or, like, the the same group, but they for one first the first week, they ate from, 8AM to 2PM. Then the second week, they didn't do any any fasting at all. They ate like like a regular person. And the third week, they ate from, 12PM to 6PM. So they, you know, ate ate their calories within six hours, and they fasted for, like, eighteen hours. And there wasn't, like, no no difference in terms of, body composition, no difference in blood sugar regulation, etcetera. So the idea I think the main point is still that, it should be, like, the the biggest effect comes from the suppression of the food intake within a certain time frame, so to say, the constituent. And, you know, I I do agree that you don't want to be eating a whole bunch of food before going to bed, and you probably want would want to stop eating, like, four to five hours before going to bed. But I think, like, the small nuances, aren't that huge in terms of if you eat, like or if you stop eating after 3PM or after 5PM, etcetera. Like, you know, there's this buffer zone. I think that in most cases, most people, they if they just stick to the some of the principles that you mentioned, like waiting at least, like, four hours before eating after waking up and stopping eating, like, four hours before bed, then I think, like, the there's not gonna be, like, any significant difference. Completely. Completely agree. And and, you know, I guess we we generalize quite a lot when we're sort of relaying some of these, some of these facts and, you know, you just gotta experiment, you know, as as an individual, what works for you. You know, take these principles, not as gospel in terms of, right, it's 3PM. Don't eat another bite afterwards. Like, you know, like like I said, I'll have a banana about, you know, six, 07:00 at night and then go to bed about half nine. But, you know, just making sure that that large meal isn't isn't right before bed and and, you're you're having it about two, three hours, four hours after after you wake. And, you know, it it's really interesting you talk about cortisol, and and we know that there's a there's a great need for cortisol, in in respect to context, in in health and and wellness as well. And, you know, at least the two points that I was gonna make, and I'll stick with the first one, which was food related, and then I'll come on to the next one, which is exercise related. And, I guess what we're doing is, you know, cortisol is is is is risen by the, I guess, the the presence of blue light. Hence why when the sun starts shining through your, your window in the morning, you wake up, get that cortisol response, and that's a really good thing. Makes you feel alert and awake. But, you know, as I loaded alluded to at the beginning of the of this conversation, you know, blue light from an artificial source also raises cortisol. And like you suggested just a minute ago, you don't want to be eating food with with very high chronic and high levels of cortisol. So the fact that we're under artificial light all day and all night, We are, you know, actually eating, probably a 100% of our calories with our cortisol levels very, very high. You know, we'll get up in the morning. We won't go and see the sunrise. We'll sit under artificial light and eat breakfast cereal or something like that. Then we're gonna go lunch. We're gonna sit in an office cafe under artificial light and eat a lunch. And then what we're typically doing then is in the evenings, we're going home, and the way that the the culture here in Australia, US, and and The UK is, you'll have your largest meal before bed under artificial blue light again. So, you know, you're you're eating under chronically, exposed blue lights and then chronically high cortisol levels. So, you know, there's only so much you can do in terms of, shifting your macronutrient change to a more favorable, maybe ketogenic, carnivore, paleo type, setup. But then you hear of these people hitting stools and hitting, problems with their their weight loss. And, you know, maybe it's these little sort of circadian hacks that one could do if they're having a hard time overcoming a a weight loss plateau. Maybe they need to look at it slightly differently in in so much that, okay. My my diet's on point. I'm following everything Sim Land and Luis Villasenor and Rob Wolf is telling me, but I've only lost weight up into this point, and now I can't. So maybe they need to listen to what Jack Crews and Chris Masterjohn and Andy Mann is telling you, which is, you know, maybe sort out your circadian rhythm, maybe not eat before bed. And maybe these little changes at an n equals one level will will help. And this brings on, I guess, the second point you mentioned, or I was gonna mention when you suggested cortisol. And, you know, it all comes down to circadian, rhythms again. And, you know, the the time you wanna work out, and and correct me if I'm wrong here because this isn't my forte, I would suggest would be when cortisol levels are higher in the body, which would mean maybe a circadian, I guess, slant towards exercising in the morning. So maybe a good routine for someone that wants optimal health, both from a physical, mental, and circadian perspective is to get up, watch the sunrise, do your exercise, then eat, then stop eating before it gets dark, and then have your fasting into those, like, late afternoon and early evening periods. I think it the I think it depends on, like, what type of exercise and, what's the particular goal as well. Like, cortisol is, yeah, it increases alertness, and, that can be useful for maybe, like, some form of a cardio workout. But, the circadian, like, like, I've seen, say, from the circadian perspective that, like, your muscle contraction and strength tend to actually increase later in the day, like, in the afternoon because your kinda nervous system warms up, so to say. And you also have to be less prone to injury because your, you know, muscles are, you know, all loosened up and, warmed up. So, yeah, it depends on, like, what kind of a workout. And, I think waking up in the morning and, you know, starting to move your body is, like, super important from a circadian perspective again, like, to get your lymph flowing and, you know, movement and physical exercise are another, like, signaling factor to the circadian rhythms. And doing it in morning with, like, the right, morning light morning sunlight. That's like a good good recipe for starting the day, I think. Yeah. Absolutely. I I couldn't agree more. And and it's funny. It's like how we like, I haven't got the understanding you do on on, I guess, the biomechanics and, nutrition side of things, but it's it's very interesting that my training is is is very similar to that. So I'll do you know, I'll get up in the morning, watch the sunrise, and I'll move I'll walk the dog and, you know, just do something light and and sort of cardiovascular. And then I work out, I guess, later in the day, so normally between 12PM and 2PM. The reason I do that is that I'm one of the unfortunate souls that has to work out in a gym under artificial blue light. So what I did was I actually, did a little experiment, you know, just just in my own time, to test the, I guess, the, intensity, and component of blue light in the lights in my gym. And to be fair, this is this is typical of any fluorescent or LED light and actually tried to match it as close as I possible as close as I possibly could to the amount of blue that would be present in in in sunlight at that time of the day. So what I found was the LED lights from, the gym and and, you know, in my house as well were very similar to the amounts of blue, sort of ratio wise, to around about midday to a clock. So I thought that, yeah, I can go in and train, have my my yellow blue block blocker glasses on during the day as well, but also mitigate to somewhat the damaging effects of actually training under the artificial light by training at that specific time of the day. And, you know, this is another another reason why, a lot of bodybuilders are now turning to, blue light glasses when they work out and where, because a lot of them train in in the evening when they're exposed to, you know, train three times a day. You know, train in the mornings, in the afternoon, and in the evenings, they're exposed to this artificial blue light, which is wreaking havoc with their sleep because, you know, they're training at eight, 09:00 at night and then coming home and trying to sleep and having a hard time. And we we were approached about six months ago by a guy called Chris Gethin, who's will will be known to a lot of your, listeners as a very prominent trainer in The US, a Welsh guy. And, you know, he was training for he basically lets himself go and then does these comeback videos and and training routines where he's, like, putting himself through the paces and eating all sorts of, like, random stuff, but getting himself back into into shape. And he wanted to to do it, this time, but actually looking at it from a more biohacker y sort of holistic sort of way, and he's been adopting sort of infrared saunas, you know, lot red light therapy, and also, wearing blue blocks blue blockers, for when he trains, after dark. And, you know, again, this is all n equals one, but the feedback we're getting from Chris is that he he's just hasn't felt stronger in the gym than he has done in previous comebacks, and he's he's only getting older. And he he puts that down to an an exceptional quality improvement in his sleep, and and he tracks his his fitness with Oura Ring as well. And he's been sharing some of his sleep scores, and his his deep sleep's gone through the roof. Just by changing when he's training, by if he has to train after dark, he's covering up a lot more of the skin. He's wearing his blue light blocking glasses, getting an amazing sleep after these after these sessions or or better sleep than he was getting. And then that's giving him, you know, a knock on effect of having more energy to to train better, than in in the next day. So it's really, really interesting that sleep is such a powerful component of of, I guess, sporting output. And, you know, we've we've also worked with a lot of, a lot of famous athletes. We're we're very lucky that they've all approached us, which is really good. And and it's usually these professional athletes that, and and sort of out of the box thinkers, I guess, like yourself, Sam, that that fall into these, sort of alternative, ways of thinking, before the masses do because, you know, we're always looking for those small improvements. And, you know, we've worked with, as I mentioned in the last year, I think, the Australian national football team to manage jet lag. Mhmm. We've also worked with a guy called Jordan Henderson, who anyone who follows football knows he's the captain of Liverpool Football Club. He wears the glasses because after dark, he came to us and he was just like, look. After training, I'm knackered, but I can't fall asleep. And I was like, what what do you do, Jordan? And he said, well, I come home and we watch TV, then I go and play on on my Xbox. And then that's normally about midnight, and I can't sleep. And I've got training the next day, and I was like, well, there's your problem. You need to manage the light. And he kind of got it, a little bit because Steven Gerrard, who manages Rangers, utilizes our glasses, and he spoke to Jordan, told him to come speak to us. And we're like, look. No one's telling you to give up your beloved computer games. Like, do it. It's downtime. It's cool. But just wear these glasses. And and, yeah, he was basically tried those for a few days playing his games. He was like he goes, it's it's good and bad, he goes. He goes, he goes, I can I can I I can play my game? It's not a problem. I can see it, and I'm getting a really good night's sleep, and I'm feeling better when I'm training. And, ultimately, they've won the European Cup, so it must have may maybe maybe not put it all down to that, but it did something. But he's saying that he couldn't play on this computer game for more than a couple of hours because, you know and, normally, I told him it's because you're producing the melatonin. You're you're gonna fall asleep. Exactly. So, you know, it's there's so many sort of ways that sleep can impact performance, and it's not just about the physical output as well. It's a big, big thing at the top level. And even even with the everyday person that wants to lose a bit of weight or or focus in the gym is is that word I've just said, focus. Yeah. The cognition and reaction times, they all decrease after, one night, just one night of sleep deprivation. And, you know, you can kind of say, like, a messed up circadian rhythm from lack of sleep is very much similar to to jet lag. When you get off a a long haul flight flying from Europe to America or something like that, or when you've had a few drinks and you're feeling a little bit drunk, it's that kind of feeling. And, you know, you you know, you can sort of get by, but, you know, you're not quite you. And, you know, if you're you're sort of playing professional sports like or even amateur sports like you, football, cricket, rugby, things like that, You know? And you're be you're given tactical advice of what to do or or you have decision making to do, within any sport, could even be tennis, I guess. Yeah. That that that sleep deprivation, through too much blue light or eating at the wrong times of of day is gonna really decrease your performance. So, you know, this this goes for for any sport, any amateur professional that's looking to improve output, cognition, learning ability when it comes to a new sport that it all comes back to sleep. Yeah. Yeah. So true. And, like, you know, they say that, you know, the actual growth happens during rest and, you know, even memory or attention happens during, you know, sleep and also, like, fat burning primarily happens during sleep as well. So one of the biggest reasons I think that people hit weight loss plateau is that they're getting suboptimal sleep, and they don't sleep, you know, long enough. You know, I I've even heard, like, people like Michael Phelps or Roger Federer. They sleep, like, 12 or something like that just just because they're, you know, so physically active and, they need that all to sleep. So, yeah, like, a lot of people, this just, you know, part of the reason has also to do with maybe having the poor values or the wrong values, having poor habits, like, you know, playing video games later in the night or, you know, sleeping in, etcetera, or just, you know, over caffeinating, etcetera. The all of those things, you know, play a part in, how good your sleep actually is. Yeah. And that's that's another good point. And and one I I mentioned, I did a, sort of quite an informal talk at, when I was in Copenhagen a couple of well, about eighteen months ago, actually, with the guys that run the biohacking circle over there. And we were talking a little bit about caffeine and led me to do a little bit more research on it when I, when I got back to Australia. And I guess both tie in really nicely to what you were talking about with with Federer, and Michael Phelps sleeping twelve hours a day. So, you know, we we both know that there's two types of sleep. Okay? Like, how to get to point a, which is being awake, and point zed, I guess, right at the end of the alphabet, which is, going to sleep. Now the first one we've spoken about is circadian. So you get up in the morning, watch the sunrise, go for another day, dark use, stimulate melatonin, feel sleepy, go to sleep. Very, very basic. But there's also something else called sleep pressure. Now when we have any metabolic process, whether it be breathing, organs working, exercise, running a marathon, playing tennis, swimming, whatever it may be, we use something called, adenosine triphosphate, so ATP, which people, you know, know that you get from eating food transferred into ATP energy. You can move, and and do what you need to do. Now the byproduct of adenosine triphosphate is something called adenosine, believe it or not. And what happens is when we're running metabolic processes, adenosine builds up in the brain. The more adenosine that builds up in the brain, the more sleep you're going to need to then clear out that adenosine byproduct, waste product from your brain. So, you know, if you're sedentary, sitting around on the couch, you're not gonna have as much adenosine build up in the brain as, say, someone like Michael Phelps or Paula Radcliffe who are running, you know, marathons and swimming, you know, long, long distances. So, they're they're gonna need more sleep for that reason. Now one of the most potent suppressors of adenosine receptors is caffeine. So the way caffeine works is it blocks or impairs the ability of the body to communicate with, the adenosine receptors, which basically is telling your your body, oh my god. The like, adenosine's going up, up, up right. I need to sleep. Mhmm. So you drink caffeine, blocks that. It's not telling the brain that you're tired. It makes you feel alert. You you get a buzz. And in some people, there aren't high metabolizes of caffeine. You know, that can last for up to six hours. So, you know, people having a a cup of coffee or even or or a Coke or, even a Diet Coke, you know, if if people don't want the sugar, like, that is full of caffeine. You have that at three or 04:00 in the afternoon, and you you ideally wanna be going to sleep at half nine to 11:00 at night. That caffeine is still going to be blocking or impairing the communication between your body and the adenosine receptors and telling your body, like, oh, I can be awake and it's great. And then couple that with blue light, and you just got, like, a whole shitstorm of, like, major issues of of being completely out of whack circadian speaking. Your sleep's gonna suffer. Your insulin, blood glucose levels levels, leptin are all gonna become resistant and out of whack over time. And there's only so much diet can do to reel those issues back in, and it's a whole package. You know? I I hate it when the food people sit there and say, it's all about food. And I also equally hate it when the biohackers turn around and say, it's all about light. And it it winds me up. Why can't it be about both? It's about everything. It's about what you eat. It's about your your your non native EMF and EMF environment. It's about your your temperature queues, cold, you're warm. It's about light. It's about food. It's about exercise. It's a whole suite and lifestyle thing. And, you know, part of, I guess, my mission at the moment is is really trying to bridge the gap between what my community believe is is the be all and end all, and food isn't important, and light is the best thing ever, and this is the new diet that you need to follow. Just light, and you'll be fine. With, the the food world that think food is is everything. And The the one industry that I'm seeing it uptaken in in the most is the ketogenic people. Now maybe it's because I was I was heavily involved in it years and years ago and, wrote wrote a small book on it. It's on Amazon, but that was another lifetime ago. But they seem to pick it up. Like, Louis Villasenor, didn't need to approach him, came to me and start speaking about light. Was speaking at the moment to to Rob Wolf, on the paleo, keto side, about sort of how to educate people more about light and and how important it is in combination with food. And Craig and Maria Emerick as well, came to us and and spoke to us about our glasses. And now they're talking about blue light glasses and light management in relation to circadian rhythms and health in combination with keto. And it's really good to see that, I guess the way it way it happens is, you know, keto and paleo are very much out of the box thinkers as well, but it's good to see that that gap is really closing up. And it's something that, unfortunately, people like Jack Kruse who are like the pioneers in this kind of, you know, light, way of thinking are very much close to to the fact of working with food people to try and get a joint message across. It's more a case of just let's bash them, tell them how, you know, they're doing it wrong, and we don't care about them. Let's work together. Like, you guys have such a knowledge on nutrition and and exercise, whereas we have such a good knowledge on how light works. And there'll be other people out there like Nick Pino who are are very, like, queued up on EMFs and five g and the issues that's gonna have. And there'll be other gurus out there that that will be very, very, you know, well educated in other specific areas that we need to look at well. And I I just wanna make sure everyone works together to build up this, like, perfect lifestyle where you've got your specialist in life, specialist in food, your specialist in in in exercise, etcetera, etcetera, that all come together and start talking about each other's research and how important it is in in creating the overall perfect lifestyle. Yeah. Yeah. So true. And I completely agree with you that it's it's never this, you know, single thing that is going to fix all of your issues and make you healthy. It's it's it is a holistic approach in a sense that it includes everything that we talked about, like nutrition, circadian rhythms, sleep, exercise, you know, things like colds and other other environmental hacks, so to say. But, yeah, it's a holistic lifestyle that, you know and you can't really you you shouldn't, you know, just focus on one single aspect because, yeah, you know, it it it won't even matter. Like like, if you even if you think that, for instance, nutrition is the most important part, but you're still unhealthy, then it doesn't really matter because you're not getting the results that you desire, so to say, or that like, any other approach, like, if you're, like, a hardcore exercise or just, you know, focusing on light, then you're not seeing results, then you're just you know, there's something wrong in or there's something missing and you're not seeing the actual holistic picture, so to say. Yeah. It's so true. It's so true. One one thing I was gonna say as well because I I know that people will comment and and write this in in when you post this this video, so I wanna rebut it before it's even asked, is a lot of people would say, well, our ancestors wouldn't have eaten their largest meal at the beginning of each day. And people always come back with that, and it's like, yeah, they they wouldn't have done. Number one, like, we probably wouldn't know when they ate their largest meal of the day, but two, they probably did eat it late at night. Now the thing is with our ancestors, and I'm talking like palaeoethic times, is that our ancestors would not have nature would not have wanted our ancestors to be completely shredded, like a 5% body fat bodybuilder, because they would have to go out and and hunt maybe for days, maybe for weeks to find food. So they would need to run off ketones to for fuel. Maybe they would have some carbohydrate from tubers and things like that, but they would eat before they went to bed because they wanted them to gain weight. They wanted them to put on a decent amount of weight so they, you know, would would have enough fuel to then go and hunt the next, you know, woolly mammoth that they would have eaten back in the day. So, you know, I I just thought I'd had to throw that one in there because all people always say that, like, our ancestors wouldn't have eaten. They would have, you know, just eaten whatever, but it's a completely different era. You know? They they're eating for survival. And, you know, as as we know, nature doesn't want us to be either overly obese, and it doesn't want and nature doesn't want us to be absolutely shredded, they will. And that's sort of somewhere in between to keep us alive. So, you know, it it goes without saying that, you know, yeah, what our ancestors did to a certain point is is lessons for us in terms of how to live. But, you know, it's also the same principles of what our ancestors used to live by that actually causes a lot of issues into in today's thinking. So, you know, if we completely follow what our ancestors did and eat massive meals before bed, that's gonna be bad news because our ancestors didn't eat under artificial light. They didn't eat things like cheeseburgers or, or or even, like, you know, a massive amount of, you know, meat before bed every single night. They might have done that maybe for two or three nights, and then they may have gone without any any source of of animal prey for for a for a period of time. So, you know, that that's sort of the rebuttal to that that, you know, yeah, they would have done, but they would have gained weight because nature would have wanted them to to keep them alive. Yeah. I think, well, hunter gatherers probably, they ate completely randomly, and that's that different at at different times every day for, like, on one day, they might have, like, their biggest meal in the morning. On another day, they have it in the evening, and then it went, like, two days without eating, etcetera. It's just that what's, you know, you and the problem or or the way they got away with it is that they were under, you know, constant calorie restriction, and they weren't overeating in a sense. But in the water modern world, we have, like, somewhat of a different situation, and we have to, like, keep in mind other variables. And I think that trying to emulate the lifestyle of ancient hunter gatherers isn't the most optimal thing for humans either. Like, it's like you said, they were just trying to survive, not thrive, and they don't they didn't have, like, the, you know, they didn't have any other choice what to do and to do, like, just eat whenever they could and, vice versa. Like, in the modern world, we just have to make sure that we do what's best for the modern human, not for the ancient human because we're not the same species almost anymore. Spot on. Yeah. Absolutely spot on. I think exactly the same way. Alright. What are so many, like, anything else you do to, like, optimize your sleep in addition to the other things that we all already talked about? Yeah. Absolutely. So, like, we we know the the ones that we we describe, light, food. One of the biggest ones for me actually, biggest real really massively improved my sleep, was was the introduction of of lavender, to my sleeping environment. And I always thought, oh, it's an old wise tale, like, this isn't gonna help me sleep, and, oh my goodness. It really did. I I have a, like, sort of an essential oil diffuser and and also create a natural spray for my pillow. And, yeah, literally one night of doing that and, you know, my my REM sleep went went right up, with with the Oura ring tracker. And that was that was amazing. I I believe it may be something to do with, stimulation of GABA, and and then also the relaxation, sort of effects of of of that, particular plant. So I would highly recommend that. I found that I originally tried it by buying a lavender plant, and I find it didn't really give off that much smell. So it must be when you crush them or something, maybe that that helps it when when you turn it into an oil. But we just got, like, organic essential oil and put it into, like, a normal diffuser, and had that coming out in the room, and that that really helped my sleep. And, another thing that really also always improves my sleep is is the temperature of of my room. I need it to be cool. It's it's okay at the moment because it's it's it's winter here in Australia. So I've got a very cool room that's about maybe between ten and twelve degrees. So it's it's probably a little bit on the cold side, but we've got a duvet to obviously pull over. But I find that I sleep so much better when it's cold. The the I I guess it's it's the cooling of of your body temperature, to allow for sleep. You don't want a high body temperature before you go to bed. Having said that, I know some of my friends have have improved their sleep by having a hot shower before bed or a warm shower, relaxes the muscles and causes that relaxation. You know, they're not having a shower and going straight to bed, but maybe they're coming home from work and having a nice warm shower, which, you know, maybe using some, you know, organic lavender products in the shower to to stimulate sort of, you know, the GABA as well. And, you know, that's worked for a lot of people. But it's playing around with things because a lot of people always come, come to me saying, like, how do I improve my deep sleep? And it's something that I've been working on for so many years just for myself, and I've done so many things that didn't work for me. You know, I tried glycine before bed. Did did absolutely nothing. Yeah. I've had some people that say taking, you know, four, five milligrams of glycine before they go to bed is is really helpful. Like I said, a banana before bed for me, and I'm out like a light and having, like, really good REM and deep sleep works for me. Like I said, my friend has hot showers, and and they're fine, but I need a nice cold room. The lavender, that seems to work. I also tried binaural beats. So having specific frequencies of sounds going into my, brain, which stimulated sort of delta waves, which are associated with deep sleep. Did nothing for me. Yeah, whereas whereas some people have that on and having, like, you know, deep sleep scores go from, like, 10 to 30% in, like, one night. So you really have to, and a meditation as well. That's another big one. That helps for me being very relaxed and and mindful. But you almost have to have a a list of maybe 10 to 20 different things that people have tried, and you just have to experiment with them yourselves. Like, what works for one person is not gonna work for another. And, you know, if you're in a very stressful job or you, you know, you're stressing and worrying about something, that's gonna impact your sleep. And you need to then think that, well, is is a cold room gonna be number one on my list? No. It won't be. If I was very stressed and, and highly strong, I'll be looking at meditation. I'll be looking at relaxation techniques. Maybe the binaural beats to start with. If you're in a very relaxed state anyway, and you're chilled out and, you know, you're still struggling to sleep, maybe it's the blue light that's causing the problem. Maybe you're eating too late to bed. Maybe you're eating the wrong things before bed or in the wrong quantities. And, you know, it's it's it's about playing around, Sim, and and we we we alluded to it earlier that, you know, we're we don't wanna say, like, right. These are the three things you need to do to improve deep sleep. You know, we were saying the same thing about you don't need to eat any food after specifically 3PM. It doesn't work. Generalizations, and there's so many different, I guess, tools in the toolbox that one can use to, improve their sleep scores. They really have to look at their own lifestyle and their own problems and and really think to themselves, how am I feeling? Why do I think I'm not sleeping? And then look at the, I guess, the the solutions in the toolbox to fix those individual problems. Yeah. Totally. And, that that's a good point that everyone else reacts differently to, these, you know, hacks and these strategies, especially, like, when it comes to nutrition and genes and, you know, everyone has to do their own experiments to see what works for them. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. People people, unfortunately, are looking for a recipe card of here's the perfect life. And and we know it doesn't work. And you only have to look at, you know, these these sort of blue zones and, you know, you look at, like, the Hunstuf versus, you know, Maasai in in Kenya, and, you know, they both lived to really high ages, but they've owned a very different lifestyles. And it's just like, well, I need to follow this one. And it's like, well, you're not you haven't got the same ancestry and DNA as those individuals. Like, you need to figure out what works for you. And and a lot of the general principles that are out there will work for people, but, you know, you need to look at it a lot more, you know, sort of objectively and and subjectively in in a certain way in in so much that, you know, if you're, you know, of of African descent, with your ancestors that live in Kenya, then maybe a a more carnivorous type diet is for you. But if you're Scandinavian who has a long ancestry of eating, you know, seafood, in in their diet, you know, that's probably the the the the type of of diet you should be following. And, you know, you look at it not just from a diet perspective, but from sort of other other genealogical perspectives as well from exercise and circadian rhythms and things like that. But, yeah, you've you've got to and it's hard, and and people just want the easy fix. It's human nature, but it is hard. You've gotta put in the hard miles. Like, you know, Sim and I aren't sat here going like, what we didn't wake up one day and go, we know the answer to everything. This is how we gotta do it. Bang. Our our views will will start from research, and they'll get stronger and stronger in certain areas. Then we'll feel like, oh, my sleep's perhaps not that good, and we start researching that and improve it. Then we might be, well, you know, the exercise isn't getting me the results I want. How what am I doing wrong? So people just need to have that open mind of listening to these shows, listening to the amazing guests you'd have on, and then taking bits from each of those shows and being like, right. I can make that work for me. That actually resonated with me. You know? And and and build your own, I guess, optimal life that way is is is my advice anyway to people. Yeah. It's it's awesome awesome advice, and, it's a good good point to start wrapping things up as well. Thanks for coming to the show, and it was great to talk with you again. Where can people learn more about, you and your work? Yeah. Absolutely. So, look, I'm I'm very active, on Facebook, more than any other platform. So, you know, I'm more than happy for people to connect with me personally, or or at least sort of follow me on there. I think I'm reaching near the 5,000 friend requests now, but you can still follow. I I have my profile open. But I I post a lot in light and health. So that's a group on Facebook because it's about 5,000 of us in there. We got some real strong minds in in that group. People like, you know, like like Chris Masterjohn is in there every now and again. You've got Luis Villasenor, who I mentioned, is is a member in there. You know, from a circadian perspective, you know, got people, like like myself that are commenting. People like, you know, Tim Gray, who you had on the other day, sort of weighs in every every now and again, along with a few others that that are in into the sort of exercise and fitness side of things as well. So I wanted to make that light and health group a little bit more, you know, not just about it's it's our little, you know, esoteric sort of, like, light group. We believe this, and everyone else can go away. I wanna people in their way. And Doris Lowe, another great person that's in there as well, always thinks from an evidence based perspective. And, you know, I'll post stuff, and she won't agree with it, and we can talk about it, and it's it's great. It's such a fun place to learn. And also the web excuse me. A bit of a dry throat. Also the, also the website, like blueblocks.com, which you'll link to, I guess, in the show notes as well, has has a lot of blogs. I'm gonna start actually based on this conversation we've had. I've been inspired to write another blog, a little bit more on the food and circadian, rhythms and and things like that. So we'll we'll get those out. And then just just jump on the website, join the mailing list, and you'll get access to all the blogs and latest articles that are coming out. So those are probably the best places to, to start with, with with looking myself up. And, also, I've been on, quite a few podcasts as well in the last sort of twelve months. So just googling my name and podcast, you'll find some other ones on there that have, you know, maybe looked at. I did a really good one with Lacey Lacey Phillips, actually, that talked more about hormones and managing hormones. If you have any female listeners, they found that very helpful. We'll talk about thyroid function and, you know, sort of more women's hormones, which is very interesting. So, yeah, there's lots out there. But, yeah, it's been an absolute pleasure. You know, the last time we talked, my question was, what's this one piece of advice you adopted sooner that you that improved the body and your mind? But I might change it up and ask, like, what's this new habit that you, wish you adopted sooner since the last time we talked? Yeah. Definitely. And I I I think one for the big one for me is, is definitely meditation, definitely for the relaxation. I know we haven't really touched much on it in this conversation because I'm really only been doing it for for sort of several months, but I've found that it's really clear and focused my mind and also manage my stress levels a lot as well. So, yeah, I I would suggest it's it's meditation for for me and something I'm gonna be delving a lot lot deeper into in, you know, the the the months and years to come. Alright. That sounds good. And, well, it's been great talking with you, and, looking forward to your future work in this area of new research that I think we all are kinda excited to learn more about. Absolutely. Thanks, Sam. It's honestly it's always a pleasure to talk to you guys and and your amazing community. So, yeah, thank you for having me on again. Yeah. I'll see you around. Alright. That's it for this episode. If you wanna get yourself one of these blue blocking glasses from Blue Blocks, then head over to blueblocks.com and use the code SIEM for a 10% discount. That's blublox.com, and the code is s I I m. Other than that, you can also leave us a review on iTunes and other social media platforms. Check out all the links in the show notes. Thanks for listening. My name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.