Fasting is really popular at the moment, and that's for a good reason because a lot of people see great results from it. You can do it for many reasons such as fat loss, diet adherence, productivity, curing some health issues, or just convenience. But there are some situations where you don't want to fast and intermittent fasting doesn't suit everyone. In this video, I'm gonna tell you who shouldn't do intermittent fasting. I'm gonna walk you through the various situations where you may not want to do it. I can't do it. This doesn't have to mean that you stop intermittent fasting altogether. You just have to change your eating approach a little bit and adjust it So you can still do it. Just modify it. Some negative signs of too much fasting include chronic fatigue, low thyroid, headaches, muscle wasting, sleep problems, binging, hair loss, hormonal dysfunction, and mild depression. That can happen to either because of fasting for too long, too frequently, not getting enough of the essential nutrients from your food, being too stressed out, not sleeping enough, and mental conflict with yourself. First, let's talk about should you fast with low thyroid. Low thyroid functioning is most commonly caused by too much stress on the body. You'll lower the thyroid hormones as a means of self defense. Hyperthyroidism is caused by too low amounts of thyroid hormones in the blood, and it usually happens in people who've had Hashimoto's disease, thyroiditis, or have had their thyroid removed. To prevent getting a low thyroid from intermittent fasting, then you have to make sure that you get enough calories during your eating window. A slow metabolism isn't caused by time restricted eating. It's much more caused by just reducing your overall calorie intake and thus experiencing metabolic adaptation. But you can safely avoid that by just still eating more calories, getting enough of the essential nutrients, and not starving yourself for too long. If you already suffer from symptoms of low thyroid or hypothyroidism, then it may be indeed a good idea to stop fasting for a little while as to allow your body to heal and recover. Instead of going for another two to three day fast, you would want to just stick to the daily time restricted eating and consume your food within a certain time frame. Anything less than sixteen hours of fasting or fourteen hours or twelve hours of fasting is still fine. That's not gonna cause any serious damage to your body, but going for longer than twenty four hours isn't probably a good idea. Secondly, what if you're trying to build muscle and bulk? Should you fast when trying to build muscle? In mainstream fitness advice, it's recommended to eat very frequently, up to four to six small meals a day to avoid the catabolism of fasting. However, intermittent fasting can help you to actually build muscle in many ways. Short term fasting has been shown to increase luteinizing hormone, which is a precursor to testosterone. In a study done on obese men, luteinizing hormone increased by 67% after fifty six hours. The same study found that men who were working out saw a 67% increase in gonadotropin releasing hormone, which led to a 180 boost in testosterone. Occasional extended fasts increase nutrient partitioning and can help with absorption rates. Cycling your food intake is probably one of the best ways of maintaining metabolic flexibility. The best thing about doing intermittent fasting while trying to build muscle is that you're gonna stay healthier and a healthier body is naturally going to be able to build more muscle. It's also gonna make it more easier for you to maintain leanness and not go through these long periods of cutting and starving yourself. Starving. The only thing you should do is increase the eating window and stimulate more muscle protein synthesis during that time because that's just going to increase anabolism and make you more build muscle. What if you're growing another living being inside of yourself? Should pregnant women fast? There are studies showing that Muslim women who fast during pregnancy give birth to smaller children and their light weight they're shorter and have less body weight, but the differences are still somewhat small. Whatever the case may be, the mother should focus on being as healthy as they can be to promote the health of her child in the future. Quality food, stress management, enough movement, and sunlight are all essential. Whether or not it's safe to fast for a pregnant woman depends on the nutrient density of their diet. If they're not getting enough of the quality nutrients for child development, then for them fasting may not be a good idea because they'll miss out on some of the key essential nutrients. But if someone is eating a very high quality diet and they are getting all of the essential nutrients, then for them fasting is much safer and some form of time restricted eating can be a good benefit for both the child as well as the mother. I wouldn't recommend fasting any longer than sixteen hours when you are pregnant. And usually, on most cases, just stick to confining your eating window within twelve or fourteen hours at max. What about children? Should children do intermittent fasting? A growing child needs adequate amounts of IGF one and mTOR to promote the proper development of skeletal muscle, bone strength, jawline, brain growth, and the right hormones. That's why it's important to make sure young kids get quality proteins and fats from whole food sources. However, when you look at the body composition and health of most children today, then you can see a growing concern with diabetes, obesity, insulin resistance, and other problems. Fasting can cure a lot of those diseases, but it's still not going to compensate for an unhealthy lifestyle. Children should learn how to follow their hunger better and develop a better relationship with foods instead of going for snacks, eating sporadically, and just, you know, binge eating. You don't have to enforce time restricted eating or fasting to your children. Just make sure that they're not gonna snack, they're not gonna eat junk food, and they're not just, you know, eating out of boredom. Put that cookie down now. Just give them specific meal times that they have to stick to like breakfast, lunch, and dinner, and not force anything on them. What about old people? Should the elderly fast? The only problem with fasting when you're older is that you may be more predisposed to muscle loss and sarcopenia. This makes you more prone to metabolic diseases and more aging. As you lose muscle, you're more predisposed to bone fractures, insulin resistance, neurodegeneration, and cardiovascular disease. To circumvent sarcopenia, you'd have to keep lifting weights, eat adequate amounts of protein, and avoid sedentarism. Increasing protein intake can also be a good idea to negate some of the leucine resistance that occurs. I wouldn't recommend anyone who's over 60 to fast any more than twenty four or forty eight hours because it may just lead to irreversible sarcopenia. And the problem is that it's much harder to recover from that and actually build muscle afterwards. Whereas if you're younger, then you can safely fast for longer without no consequences because you can just rebuild it. At the same time, that, again, depends on the quality of the person's diet. If the person's diet is high quality and nutrient dense, then they can get away with more versus someone who eats a poor diet or doesn't get enough of the essential nutrients, then for them, it's gonna be much more difficult. Here are some additional situations where you shouldn't do intermittent fasting. If you have nutrient deficiencies like anemia, loss of electrolytes, vitamin a deficiencies, vitamin b deficiencies, etcetera, then you need to focus on eating a more nutrient dense diet. Restrictive diets like keto, vegan, or carnivore may make things worse. Fasting isn't going to necessarily make the deficiencies worse. It's just much harder for you to overcome those deficiencies if you are fasting and you have a smaller eating frequency. That's why if you are deficient in some nutrients, then it's better to kinda extend your eating window as to give us more opportunities to absorb them. Two, you're a competitive athlete. Your athletic performance may be slightly hindered if you fast for too long all the time. Some form of time machine eating is fine like fourteen and ten or sixteen and eight, but any longer than that can just lead to progress plateaus. Three, you have mild depression. If you show signs of depression or apathy, then it might be that fasting is either causing you too much stress or you're deficient in some nutrients. Four, you tend to overcompensate with food. If you're the kind of person who fasts all day then overeats at night, then fasting may not be the best option, at least not fasting for that long. Overcompensating happens to people who tend to diet hard for too long. They're nutrient deficient, they're stressed out, and they have a bad relationship with food. Again, you don't have to stop all time restricted eating altogether. You just have to maybe extend your eating window and add an additional meal because that's gonna actually help you to maintain more self control when you are eating. Five, you have a sensitive stomach. If you react negatively to a lot of foods or can't handle large meals, then it's better to spread out your meals more. Six, you have type one diabetes. Type one diabetics may go hypoglycemic during a fast, especially if they also take insulin. However, some studies show diabetics improve their fasting glucose and have to take less insulin. Generally, you could still restrict your eating window a little bit and fast up to sixteen hours quite safely. Just consult your doctor first and break the fast whenever you start feeling worse. Seven, you can't sleep at all. Fasting may interfere with your sleep. If it overstimulates cortisol, you eat too close to bedtime and you get digestive problems from it. In that case, try eating your food earlier and further away from sleep. And lastly, if you don't like to do intermittent fasting, then don't do it. It's just that most people find it very convenient, and they actually like it after they get used to it. Do it. So in conclusion, we find that although there are some situations where you may not want to fast, you can still do it by modifying your approach, extending your reading window, maybe improving your diet, fasting with less, but you can still do it in some shape or form. You don't have to fast for too long all the time. You can still practice some confinement and reap a lot of the benefits from it. If you want to know how to do intermittent fasting that optimizes nutrient density as well as longevity, then check out my book, metabolic autophagy. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, and notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered. Do it.