Ladies and gentlemen, we are here live with Sim Lund who is definitely rock star status in the biohacking scene. 26 years old, author of seven books, each of them about, this fat. He he is working on reducing the font sizes, and has become an expert on the the human metabolism, really understanding how the pathways work, and is here talking about resilience or as we prefer to to discuss it, antifragility. We'll we'll get into that. But first of all, you know, in terms of resilience, in terms of stress hormesis, how do you think about these things? Well, I think it's essential for just surviving the chaotic nature of the world. So, like, one of the things that we can't be sure of is that, you know, uncertainty is out there, bad things are gonna happen, and, we can't really do much about it. We can only control our own, responses to those things. And, one of the ways of preparing for these negative events in advance is to just practice, you know, becoming stronger by stress and, practicing this, these hermetic activities that strengthen our body and, strengthen our mind, keep us healthy, and, yeah, more resilient against the stress. Okay. So so your your body of work, the the real message that you're trying to share with people is understand about stress and use it to your advantage. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Like, you know, there is a misconception about stress that it's only bad that you wanna avoid it. But, well, the truth is that, you know, of course, too much stress can be bad. Chronic stress is, associated with many diseases, but there can also be, you know, you know, silver lining. It's can be a positive thing. So, it matters only like, you know, the amount of stress you experience, when you experience it, and how are you able to recover from it or whether at all. So everything has this, everything has its benefits and its negatives and everything has the right dose of something. Like Like, too much exercise can be bad, but too little exercise is also definitely harmful. So you have to find what's the optimal amount of stress and how do you recover from it faster and, yeah, not not be wiped out from it. Okay. So so, one of the core principles that you're just talking about is finding the balance between not enough and not too much. Yes. That's one of the principles. Yeah. What what are the other core principles? Well, I would say that maybe the principle would be that you always you can't like expect to run a marathon if you haven't trained for it, before. You could try but you're gonna experience a whole more negative side effects, compared to if you have, like, practiced or trained for it in advance. So maybe there is stress is always like subjective. Something that is harmful for let's say, someone let's who has practiced a lot of exercise or who has, you know, built up the stress resiliency, something harmful for them, may not it's it's definitely gonna be much more harmful for someone who is not used to the stress. So everyone has the level of stress, resilience and adaptation. Mhmm. And, it's a matter of the individual or the subjective, person who is experiencing the stress. Yep. And so, the way to understand your own stress level is to just be self aware and feel it. Do you have any, techniques for knowing what is the find finding the right balance? Well, of course, there are some biomarkers that you can look at, you know, all these comorbidities and, you know, elevated blood sugar, hypertension, cardiovascular disease. Those can be the signs of, too much stress, especially. And but at the same time, you're more predisposed to getting those, comorbidities as well if you're experiencing not enough of these beneficial stressors, like, because, like, exercise is, of course, one of the best, known ways of reducing your risk of all diseases and being just healthier. So we can go, both ways. But general, I would look at just your own physiological biomarkers and, you know, maybe like the easiest thing to track, on a daily basis is like the heart rate variability. You know, that's a good example of indicating the state of your nervous system. If your heart rate variability is high, then you're recovered. You're able to, you know, experience more stress. Whereas if your heart rate variability is low, then your stress resiliency is, also lower and you're vulnerable, so to say. Nice. Nice. So, so, you know, that would, I guess, be via the Oura ring, a very familiar brand in the biohacking circles. Yes. Any other important, fundamentals about the stress? Yeah. We talked about it before as well that, there's a every well, we talk about stress resilience and, like this, ability to deal with stress, but we, often not talk about, like, antifragility. So antifragility is, the ability to gain from stress whereas fragility being fragile is that you're not able to tolerate any stress at all. You're gonna break into pieces immediately when you experience some, pressure or tension. But antifragile things, they grow, they get stronger from it. And a resilient thing by definition has no effect on the stress. Yeah. And, Nassim Nicholas still talks about it in his book as well that the resilient things are indifferent towards the stress. They don't really They don't get stronger. They don't get stronger. They don't get weaker. They're just, you know, indifferent. And and for the audience, Nassim Taleb fits into my, list of people who should be remembered in one thousand years, which is a very short list. So if you haven't come across his work, I I personally recommend it. It's good to hear you you're recommending it. Also, a fellow Lebanese, by the way. Yeah. Okay. So yeah. So the the concept of antifragility, is the exact definition of something which gets stronger by stress. Yes. And we're talking stress from exercise, stressing your muscles, your Yeah. Your physical system, stress from fasting, from stressing your, Yeah. Yeah. And is examples can be like heat stress, saunas Yes. Cold Cold stress. But also, like, you know, all the psychological stress. You're not you don't get anxious. You don't lose your, grip your grip on things, and you you have a pretty, like, a lot of great way of, dealing with, like, chaotic environments. You stay calm when the ash hits the fan. Yes. And, you know, the the way I like to think about that, is getting outside of your comfort zone. Yeah. If you're inside your comfort zone, you're not stressing yourself, get out of your comfort zone. Don't go too far out. That's when you get into the panic zone. Yeah. It's also about flow states. Yeah. Like, I would imagine, like because, like, a flow states happen when you are maybe encountering some, difficult situations like, you know, skateboarders, they get into the flow state, Navy SEALs or, like, warriors and, they do experience flow states and it may help you to kind of navigate the stressful event, better. But, yeah, being in a flow state necessarily doesn't have, like, you know, it doesn't affect the stress response system that well, but it may be in a way that if you enjoy the thing that you're doing, even if it is stressful, then you experience less of the negative side effects from it. Like if you enjoy taking a sauna, then it's not gonna be harmful for you. Whereas if you like start to panic inside the sauna, I mean, this is this is too much this is too much heat, then, you may actually just freak out. You're you're not experiencing the harm from the sauna. You're experiencing the harm from the way you react to the sauna, like the panic and the mindset about it. And Nice. Hans Saldier is one of the, like, stress founding fathers of stress science. Who is? Hans Saldier. Okay. Like, from the previous century. And, he has a quote like, it's not stress that kills us, it's our response to the stress that does. So it's always like we we we tend to tend to make things worse for ourselves if we overreact to the stress or we panic and lose our control. And and that's, for me, it sounds like a pretty easy mindset shift. Enjoy Yeah. Enjoy the stress. Learn to, you know, thrive on Like, what what I found the most beneficial impact come from is to remind ourselves that it can make me stronger. It can I can leverage this hormesis and antifragility and that, I can get it get stronger from it? Whereas if you think that it the stress is, you know, making me age faster, it's making me lose my some somehow, like, this is a healthy functioning of the body, then then of course, you're gonna think about it that it's harmful and you wanna avoid it as much as possible. Whereas if you know that it can be positive, it can be beneficial, then you have an entire different approach towards life. You're not trying to conserve. You're not trying to avoid discomfort. You're, seeking it. Not Yeah. Maybe not necessarily. You could definitely seek it but at least you're not, freaking out about it when it does happen. Mhmm. And that's especially relevant for the, more anxious people out there. For sure. Okay. Like, I think we're in the downward stretch of the interview. Tell us about this documentary that you're working on. Yeah. We've been working on with about like just stress and hormesis generally. How do you, get stronger by stress and, especially use these different biohacking methods to do so. And, yeah, it's hopefully, we'll reach a wide audience and, yeah, we're working on it for, maybe like a few months already and it's, so far What's the cold? It's probably gonna be stronger with stress, but Stronger with stress. Stronger by stress. Stronger by stress. Very nice. It's not final. It's not concluded. Work in progress. Yeah. Keep following Simland for, updates on that. I'm sure we'll we'll be kept updated. And, you know, in wrapping up, one thing I like to ask people is what is the most powerful idea you would want to share with our audience if you have to choose one? No pressure. Yeah. I think I'll I'll take the one that I finished my presentation with as always by Sun Tzu. He said, it is better to be a warrior in a garden than a gardener in a war. So it basically means that, like, you know, this war or chaotic events, stressful events, they're gonna happen anyway. And if you are a gardener in your life, then you're not really prepared for the war. Whereas if you're even in your everyday life, you are a warrior, like you're training your stress adaptation, you're exposing yourself to different stressors, even like, you know, the physical stress, but also like the mental stress, you're not living a very, like, safe, life all the time, you're engaged, like, proactively in the stress of life, then, you will also just be more able to deal with, the actual stress in, when it does happen like some chaos. Beautiful. Okay. Just before we cut out, could you just repeat that one more time? The, quote. Yeah. The entire quote. Yeah. Just the yeah. Just the, Yeah. It's better to be It is better to be a warrior in a garden than a gardener in a war. Thank you. Thank you, Sim. And cut.