Most people in responsible, positions know that it causes problem, and certainly the wireless industry does. No question about it. In many ways, seeing it's just like the tobacco industry. They knew that their product caused cancer and death and disability and knew it was addictive, yet they claimed up until, like, the late nineteen nineties testifying before congress that it didn't that it wasn't addictive, that it didn't cause cancer. But then they finally were called out and, you know, the the truth was no. It's no surprise that you don't know about this because you've been cleverly manipulated by a very sophisticated wireless industry strategy that far exceeds the cleverness of the tobacco industry. Do you want to know what it is? Body, mind, empowerment. Get stronger, faster, smarter, quicker, friendlier, more helpful, more driven. Everything the body needs. Control your mind. Welcome to the Body Mind DeParland podcast. I'm your host, Simland, and our guest today is doctor Joseph Mercola. Doctor Mercola runs one of the largest and oldest health websites online, mercola.com. He's He's also a best selling author, speaker, and physician. Doctor Mercola, welcome back to the show. Well, thanks for having me, Sim. Appreciate, the opportunity to be here and share some exciting information about EMFs. Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. This time we're trying to do it like like another follow-up episode, since the last time we talked. And the last time we talked, you just published your last book, Keto Fast. So, what have you been up to since that time? Well, lots of things. You know, I think I've published probably 16 books or so, and I've made the decision not to write any more books for quite a while, and instead write peer reviewed papers. And, you know, one of the recent ones I completed, I still have submitted for publication, is on blood flow restriction training and the exciting benefits that has to improving longevity because, I mean, you get it at a deep and profound level, but most people in the, longevity movement don't understand the importance of maintaining high quality muscle mass. It is it has really fallen by the wayside. They'll they'll, superficially acknowledge it, but they don't really promote it as an integral part of the therapy. Yeah. Yeah. Definitely. Like, muscle mass is really critical for just metabolic flexibility and, functionality throughout your lifetime. And, like, for older people, you know, definitely, like, blood flow restriction is, like, awesome biohack in a sense that you load your muscles with, you know, heavy stimulus without the actual heavy loads or the heavy weights, so to say. Yeah. Yeah. So you can get because the problem with you're right. With elderly is that they, are unable to really do the the high load resistance training that you can when you're younger. And and many disabled people or injured people have the same scenario. So with this blood flow restriction training, you can really radically, well, not radically, but but allow your body to achieve similar benefits of high load training with the low loads and get almost identical benefits. Yeah. Yeah. We can have a completely another podcast Oh, yes. Yeah. Topic. So we're gonna keep it, that for this moment. So your upcoming book, it's gonna be about five g and EMF. Am I right? Yeah. It is. It's actually coming out in February. It's called EMF'd. EMF apostrophe d. Wow. That's that's a good title. And it talks about how five g impacts your cellular health, which which is, something that most people don't appreciate. Certainly, general public, probably your audience, is wiser because, you know, they have access to your material. And by the way, your book Metabolic Autopagy, is just crazy good. I mean, that really is one of the best books on the on the subject. So if anyone hasn't, gotten that book, I strongly encourage them to do that and read it really carefully because it's just it's a primer for molecular biology as it's related to health. You do such a good job. Yeah. That's what they say. Rumor rumors go. So, five g and EMF, you know you know, yeah. A lot of people may have heard that these EMFs are dangerous for their health, but they're not really sure how or why. So, let's let's kinda unpack it. You know, what's what's maybe current state of research about five gs and EMF? Well, you can not all EMFs are harmful. Certainly visible light and sunlight specifically is an EMF, a type of EMF. And really, exposure to that, I I I think we both agree, is really an important part of staying healthy and improving your longevity. So you that so we you know, it's just not a general blanket statement against all EMFs. But the the newer, EMS related to technology that's been developed in the last century or so, provide some problems. And, basically, you can divide them into two types of radiation. One is ionizing radiation. The other is non ionizing. Those are the two primary divisions. And there's really not much controversy that ionizing radiation, like x rays or gamma rays, is harmful to biology. I mean, no one's gonna disagree with that. And these are very short wavelengths with lots of energy and enough energy so they can actually directly break the covalent bonds in DNA. Mhmm. So no no dispute there. The dispute becomes a non ionizing ratio, the type that's in your cell phone or your Wi Fi router, that they claim doesn't cause biological damage because they're only looking at thermal effects, the ability of your those wavelengths to cause heat. And, many people aren't aware that the frequency that your cell phone or Wi Fi uses is really a form of microwave radiation. And, of course, it's in the same frequency range. And that's important because we know that microwaves are used to heat heat food or heat other items. So, and that's the primary focus that, conventional science has taken to determine if these exposures from these wavelengths are problematic. Unfortunately well, fortunately for one side, that they they really don't cause much thermal heat damage to your body. That's pretty well proven and documented, but that's not the way they cause biologic damage. It's it's somewhat similar to ionizing radiation, except because the wavelengths are longer, they don't have enough energy, and they cannot break the DNA bonds directly like x rays can. But the way x rays, I mean, that's one way x rays cause damage. The other way is that they spin off hydroxyl free radicals actually within the nucleus. They're easily able to penetrate all those tissues. And, the hydroxyl radical, which has caused most of the damage, doesn't live very long. It lives like a billionth of a second. So, the ones that are created in the mitochondria where most of them are created don't live long enough to travel to the nucleus. So they can only really cause mitochondrial damage. So the x rays, however, spin off those those hydroxyls right in the nucleus. But what the ionizing radiation does is it in the mitochondria and all cell throughout the entire cell, the exposure to these wavelengths, causes the formation of another oxidative stress, that ultimately is nearly as pernicious as hydroxyl, which is carbonate free radicals. Mhmm. And it does that by increasing nitric oxide, not nitrous, nitric oxide and superoxide, which almost immediately combines to form peroxynitrite, which then spins off to carbonate free radicals in the nucleus and causing the damage. So the actual mechanism, biological damage is pretty similar. So then you might say, well, what's so what? You know, what's it? You know, is it cancer? Yes. It definitely can increase the risk of cancer. But there are also other symptoms that people get. And if anyone is watching this knows of someone or maybe even themselves personally that has an arrhythmia, typically that would be like atrial fib or atrial flutter, They absolutely need to look at their exposures to EMF because it's clearly documented that exposures can to these EMFs can increase your risk of rates of arrhythmias. But they also increase, neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer's and Parkinson's, ADHD, which is, somewhat similar, and then autism on the other spec on the other side, which is at the beginning. So and they increase the rates of infertility. So, the subtitle for this book, actually the title was initially going to be the existential extinction event. Because if you've got people that are being born, up to one third to one half of them coming down with autism, and half of the elderly population with neurodegenerative diseases, and then a good, you know, seventy five percent of the rest of the population infertile, I mean, that's a prescription for social collapse or Yeah. You know, or human collapse. It's and we're heading in that direction unless we start to wake up. Mhmm. And fortunately, there are things that you can do to mitigate against that. Yeah. It's so definitely, crazy to think about it because, you know, it's such a new phenomenon in the human environment. Like literally, just just to even even I myself, whom I like a millennial or very young, I I don't I have I I spent a lot of my childhood without, like, technology or these, EMS. And I spent a lot of time in nature. And literally, like, it's it's only, like, maybe last, I don't know, ten years where it's become, like, a more promote predominant parts of our lives. And, the the exposure kinda exponentially increases all the time. And, I would say that you you mentioned that it's almost like, being in a microwave all the time, constantly. So even if some people even if some yeah. Even if some people would think that microwaving their food isn't necessarily that bad, I would still think that they would agree that being constantly in a microwave is definitely another good idea. Yeah. Speaking of that, you do really do not want a microwave in your house. I I mean, there's no reason for it because even when it's supposedly it's shielded, but the safety levels of that radiation exposure are literally orders, many orders of magnitude beyond biological safety. So do not use that. But I think another aspect of the exposure to this is it affects a biomolecule that both you and I are passionate about, which is NAD plus And when you cause the DNA damage to the mechanism I mentioned earlier in the oxidative stress and the DNA breaks, you cause an enzyme which was previously called PARP, poly ADP ribose polymerase, which creates ribose polymers that causes or allows the DNA repair enzymes to go in and fix those breaks. But every time that gets activated, you're sucking up 150 NAD plus molecules because, you know, ADP is actually integrated as part of the NAD molecule. So it just takes it, strips it right out and converts it back to nicotinamide. And, you know, the end result of that is you develop it is literally the single biggest source of NAD consumption in the body. So we know even without that exposure as you age, that's a huge problem is is to keeping your NAD levels high. So I mean, this is a great way to keep your NAD levels high without doing any precursors or expensive supplements. Right. Right. Yeah. Yes, Yeah. It's really important in a sense that NAD essentially governs almost, yeah, virtually all physiological processes and including repair, and these things such as, you know, the oxidative stress you experience from EMF and, you know, all the other, sources of stress in our life, then it's going to just, deplete your NAD pools even faster, so to say. Yeah. Yeah. So that's, you know, just by by slowing down the leaks, you can have radical improvement of your health. I mean, NAD is just, you know, I think we're both in agreement. It's one of the most magnificent biomolecules out there and, you know, really Yeah. Focus on optimizing those levels if you want to stay healthy and live long. There's no question. What are, like, other sources of, you know, this harmful, EMF? In addition to microwaves and, like cell phones. Well, the most common sources that we have are your WiFi router. And, you know, many people become concerned when those who are aware of EMF potential damages, they're concerned when they see a cell phone tower outside their home. And, yes, that can provide some challenges, but it's nothing compared to the Wi Fi router in your home. Yeah. So the the Wi Fi router in your home and your cell phone are the two biggest threats. And thankfully, they are the ones that you have most control over. Mhmm. I mean, it it's really easy to do the minimum, which is to turn off your Wi Fi router at night. Ideally, you would take it the next step and not have a Wi Fi router. You would have cables. And, you know, I think you even remember, and certainly many people listening to this, that, you know, twenty years ago, no one, no one virtually connected to the internet through a wireless. It was all wired connections. This wireless is relatively new. And I think what, expedited it was the introduction of the iPhone. That was less about fifteen years ago. Yeah. So, we did not connect to the internet via wireless. So, you can easily do it. And you know, this five gs, which we'll talk about in a minute, it is just an attempt by industry to capitalize on this and make loads of money because everyone understands, and I agree that we need higher bandwidth. We can do so much more things with higher bandwidth. But we don't need it wirelessly. You can get every bit of bandwidth you can and less expensively with fiber optic cable. Oh, wow. But they they refuse to do that. Wow. So Yeah. I was under the impression that or yeah. Like, the five g is faster than the Internet we had in the past. Well, four gs is up to by a hundred hundred times. I mean, it is significantly faster to orders of magnitude. Yeah. Yeah. And, you can say that it's as fast if you just use a cable. Yes. You can get five gs speeds. I mean, five gs speeds have been available for a long time on fiber optics. And the innovations in transmission and the cable technology is actually easier to implement in wireless technology so that you can you can get higher and higher speeds on the fiber than you can with the wireless. Yeah. And not pose a risk. You know, there was actually, as we're recording this, there was a meeting in Europe that, the wireless industry was successfully able to prevent or keep their ability to deploy five gs despite the amazing threat at about 27 gigahertz that it poses to the entire weather forecasting forecast of the planet. So you have 27 gigahertz is like the frequency of water vapor coming up, and it's essential to monitor that for predicting storms and hurricanes and tornadoes. And the five gs implementation is going to prevent that. So it's going to radically impair our ability to predict weather. It's crazy. And then you combine that with SpaceX. SpaceX just last a few weeks ago got additional or sought is seeking additional permission to launch 30,000 more satellites. They already had permission for 12,000. So they're going to have 42,000 satellites in low Earth orbit broadcasting five gs Internet all over the world. Oh, wow. Great. That's 20 times more satellites than exist up there now. That's insane. Yeah, it is. If you think about it, it's like it's and not many people know it. I mean, it's in there if you look it up online, but, you know, it's just most people are there. There must be, like, already, you know, I've heard some case studies about, the harmful effects of five g already. Why is it why isn't the public or the government aware of this? Or why aren't they doing anything about it? Well, the public and the government are two different entities. And the government, most people in responsible, positions know that it causes a problem. And certainly, the wireless industry does. No question about it. In many ways, it's just like the tobacco industry. They knew that their product caused cancer and death and disability, yet they knew it was addictive, yet they claimed up until like the late 1990s where their CEOs of all the major tobacco companies were testifying before Congress that it didn't, that it wasn't addictive, that it didn't cause cancer. But then they finally were called out and, you know, the truth was no. Well, that they were able to defer the knowledge of the truth, wide acceptance of the knowledge, for five decades. And this is despite the fact that the surgeon general, the CDC, and the EPA all recognized and warned the public that smoking causes cancer. Well, that is not the same with the wireless industry. The wireless industry, thanks to their very sophisticated and clever strategic interventions, has essentially captured all the federal regulatory agencies, which the tobacco industry never was able to do. So you have the regulatory agencies that are, delegated the assignment of protecting the public are not doing it because they've been bought out by by the wireless industry. And you've got the chief lobbyist of the wireless industry, Tom Wheeler, who was appointed by Obama to be the head of the FTC, the Federal Trade Commission or the I'm sorry. The FCC, Federal Communications Commission, in The United States for four years. I mean, that's like the the most egregious example of the Fox guarding the head house. So it's no surprise that they've been able to act these legislations. And, in 1990 in 1996, they passed this act that was just crazy that essentially prohibits any local governmental agency, like your city or even your state, from prohibiting the installation of a wireless antenna on the grounds of health. Wow. I mean, it's just shocking that they're able to influence the government that much. So I know it's a long winded answer, but it's important to present the backstory to provide that people can understand it's no it's no surprise that you don't know about this because you've been cleverly manipulated by a very sophisticated wireless industry strategy that far exceeds the cleverness of the tobacco industry. Mhmm. And the truth will be eventually known, but sadly, tens of millions of people will die prematurely as a result of these exposures. Right. Yeah. It's, you know, the wireless industry or the telecommunications industry is definitely much more influential than the tobacco industry anyway because, like, they're controlling the media or there's a con controlling communications literally, and, that has, like, a much more profound way of, influencing, the And especially, you know, what we you know, as we're recording this, it's, right before Thanksgiving in The US, so late November twenty nineteen, and we're almost five months, yeah, five months past the Google censorship, which has essentially eliminated natural health sites like myself, and I'm not sure if yours has been affected, but all the big ones have been impacted and essentially removed our sites from their search engine. And Google has 90% of the search engine's use in the world. So, you know, when you're eliminating access to that knowledge, how could the average person even figure this out? Almost you can't. Yeah. Yeah. It's like literally putting them into, like, a blindfold. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's pretty pretty pretty crazy. So how predominant is five g already? Like, how are there, like, a lot of towers in The States already? That's a great question, and it's it's not actually implemented hardly at all in The United States. They've got really beta test sites. There's no city, as far as I'm aware, that has widespread implementation. It's just really there are some fake five gs's, and AT and T did the same thing when four gs was first implemented. They had this they're four gs, but it was still just kilobytes per second. And they're doing the same trick now, the quality of five gs, and it isn't true five gs. Because true five gs is literally, as I said earlier, is a 100 times faster. You're looking at bandwidth speeds of close to a gigabyte per second, seven, eight hundred megs per second. And for those who don't know, the typical four gs download speed is like ten, twenty megabytes per second. So pretty small compared to the five gs potential. So as far as I know, that's not really widely implemented from a cell phone perspective. And interestingly, it was Apple who was responsible for catalyzing that with four gs because it didn't really take off until they had four gs in their phones. And Apple, at this point, does not have five g. They'll probably launch it next year. Mhmm. Yeah. It's, I haven't seen, like, a lot of, any any, I see I've seen, like, a maybe few of these fake towers in London and other other big cities, but I haven't seen, in Estonia yet. So fortunately, I'm, quite away from this, but, probably there. Estonia itself is like a very, you know, tech savvy country as well, and they're very proud of being, like, this Internet country with everything being online and such. So I would imagine it's gonna be picked up, right, quite fast here, unfortunately. Yeah. I mean, they're, you know, they they they are their, insights on this are clouded every bit as much as in The US because of the clever cleverness of the of the wireless industry and their ability to follow similar successful strategy that the tobacco did, and that is, you know, it's basically fund, research that to dispute the findings that any any reputable scientists come up with that that challenges it. And actually, even despite that, the World Health Organization classified cell phones as a as a class two b carcinogen Oh, really? Eight years eight years ago. Wow. But you know what? They were wrong. It's a class one a. And there was study was published last year. They, the US government and their National Institutes of Health spent $25,000,000 to fund the National Toxicology Program, NTP study, which definitively showed that not four gs or five gs, because that was a study, because the study was done many years ago, just two gs and three gs caused cancer. Oh, wow. It clearly caused cancer. No question. And interestingly, the wireless industry was hot to, I guess, suppress that information. They immediately fired the head of the project once he announced it, and they replaced it with someone that tried to downplay the results. But then the Remezini Remezini Institute in Italy replicated the study and actually was able to confirm it. So it really is a class one a carcinogen Yeah. Yeah. Very clearly. That's true. And I I think, like, a part of the problem is also the people themselves that they want faster Internet and their their Yeah. Absolutely. It's like our own society or the civilization itself is driving this need or the desire to have faster Yeah. You know, bandwidth. It's enormously convenient. There's no question. And unlike smoking, which has virtually no superficial benefits, I mean, it smells bad. I mean, it just, you know, costs money. There's virtually no convenience for it. But wireless has enormous convenience. So you've got this captivating motivation to really be in disbelief and to ignore, just ignore the warnings on this and say, well, the wireless industry says it's okay, so it's probably fine. And you're not to believe it. And I was, even though I was concerned about it and posting information about it as long as almost about twenty years ago, I still disbelieved it personally and hadn't adopted strategies to prevent my exposure. They wound up actually harming me biologically until I until I became more serious about it about three years ago, which cat is actually catalyzed the writing of this book. Mhmm. So what about things like grounding? Can that be useful for, mitigating the effects of, EMF? Probably, but not so much in The United States because a subset of that, not just wireless radio frequency exposures to your cell phone and Wi Fi, but there's also electrical pollution exposure, which started much earlier. That was a century ago. And, so electrical fields can be an issue. And in The United States and, well, most of North America, the utility companies don't really put a return wire back to their substations. So as a result, the ground becomes contaminated with these high voltage transits, sometimes called dirty electricity. So that can be problematic. So grounding could be potentially counterproductive in The United States unless you're and that's not true for Europe where you're at. I think grounded they because they this the utility companies don't do that. So it's fine in in Europe, but not so much in the in The US and North America. But it except if you're grounding in the ocean or water you know, essentially, saltwater Yeah. Then that's true ground. It's probably the best ground you can get anywhere on the planet is is, you know, in the ocean. Mhmm. So and I actually have a, daily habit where I walk about an hour a day in in the water on the ocean. Mhmm. And then I go swimming it, you know, assuming the the wind isn't too brisk and it's cold out. So, you know, cold thermogenesis, and we're getting to the time of the year where it's a bit of a challenge to do that. But but at least they can walk in the water on on the shore. So Yeah. But, yeah, grounding and that is useful. There's no question. I've also heard that, you know, or like the idea of hormesis, does it apply to EMF? Like, a small dose can be beneficial in small amounts. Yeah. I was at I actually wanted to discuss that with you too because, you're a big fan of hormesis as am I. I actually interviewed someone about this from my own site, Lloyd Burrell, who's an EMF educator in The UK. Actually, he lives in France, but he's from The UK. And, he doesn't have any biology training like you and I do, so he was not believing that it was hermetically beneficial. But I tend to believe it is because it's a biological principle. Mhmm. That if you are having low enough exposure, you're going to cause some damage. And that damage that you're causing will create a, response in your body that essentially protects you from future exposures. But the only way that that exposure is going to work is if the bulk of the time you have a pretty minimal exposure to these. And that is going to be as a baseline having an environment where you sleep that has minimal exposure to these frequencies. Otherwise, if you don't, you won't be hormesis. It's just it's like running a marathon every day. You know, you're gonna it's not gonna work. You have to have the recovery aspect. Yeah. It's like your body can only adapt to the stress if it has a time to literally recover and rest. But if you're chronically in the environment surrounded by these, stimulus, then, your body is never going to have a chance to fully adapt. And Right. Yeah. One one one, like, lit like, a good example of hormesis is that with EMF, I saw this study where they exposed rats to EMF around, like, 400 to 500 hertz for several hours every day. And, they saw that they did increase autophagy in their brains. And and I think, like, the reason why autophagy got activated was because, like, the EMF causes, you know, trauma and physical damage to the brain to a certain extent. And then the body just, tried to respond by activating autophagy. So it's like a healing mechanism. But I would I would say, like, it's a definite, like, a net negative because, like, you can you can also activate the top of it in the same way by banging your head against the wall and then causing a similar causing a similar trauma to your brain. So I think it's not Yeah. Which might be beneficial long, and you never know. But I I wouldn't recommend it. So Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. It's like it's like I think, yeah, like the just the vast amount of the stimulus is, too much for our bodies to handle on a chronic basis. And, I Well, you know, I I'm hoping that it's that case because we are quickly entering into the phase of human development where we're going to be essentially unable to avoid these exposures, especially with the Starlink SpaceX implementation. It's going to be pervasive. The entire planet will be bathed in these five gs frequencies. You can't escape it anywhere you go. I think, like, probably to a certain extent, people will adapt to it, in a small way, but they do still need, like, to probably take, either precautionary measures, or just increase their recovery strategy, so to say, to have times for, no EMF and, try to shield their body in some aspects, so to say, to, mitigate some of the exposure because, you know, if you put like a caveman into New York Times Square, then they're gonna get like a massive headache, and they're gonna just explode. But, a a modern person doesn't really notice that unless they have, like, maybe spend a lot of time in the wilds in nature where there's no EMF, and then they go back in the city. So there's probably some adaptation that happens, but, like I said, yeah, if you're chronically in this, then you don't have to I don't know if it's adaptation. It's just tolerance and it's it's just like you could be exposed to something chronically, and you just don't notice it even though it's still causing you the same biological harm. You just not don't appreciate it because you don't have a baseline reference. Yeah. It's like with caffeine. Like, if you're drinking coffee all the time, then you don't even notice what it feels like to be, you know, uncaffeinated. Right. Yeah. But you mentioned that, the sleep aspect that the sleep you you need to have or is very important to have, your sleep, you know, non EMF. Can you elaborate a bit about it? Yeah. Because you have need to optimize your recovery, regeneration, repair during sleep, and that's when it occurs. And it will will influence your ability to enter certain stages of sleep, like REM and deep sleep. Mhmm. So that that's one of the primary reasons. And, there are a number of strategies you can use. As we mentioned earlier, turning up the Wi Fi is really important. And then, you know, it's just shocking, beyond shocking, actually, the number of children and adolescents and teenagers, at least in The United States, who every night sleep with their cell phone on under their pillow. Yeah. It's I mean, they're just radiating their brain at night. Yeah. So that's not what you want to do. It's okay to have your cell phone in your bedroom, but at the minimum, it should be in airplane mode. Yeah. And even then, I would still put it in a Faraday bag. And you get these Faraday bags on Amazon for $5. Even if it's on. The nice thing about a Faraday bag for your phone is that if for some reason you forget to turn it off because, you know, for me, I don't have wireless in my house, so I use my phone as a Wi Fi hotspot. And that's how I get my Oura Ring data off. Right? So if I forget to turn the plane, you know, I download the Oura data, and I forget to turn it off, then it's a problem. But if I put it in a Faraday bag, the signal is like 99% muted. Mhmm. So that's that's a nice safeguard. So anyway, at at at night, put your phone in airplane mode. It's okay to have it next to you on your bed stand, but and in a Faraday bag. And then the next step would be to shut off the electricity to your room, because there's electrical current that goes through the wires. And there are some cities in the world or communities where the building code requires them. In almost all cities, at least The United States, commercial regulations or code requires it to be in a metal conduit. And the nice thing about a metal conduit is that it's a Faraday cage, so those electrical fields don't come out. And if you're building a house, that'd be ideal. You put your electric wires in metal conduit, and then that eliminates the problem. Then you really don't have to turn off your electricity at night. But most of us don't have that, and they we have these plastic shielded cables and wire electric wires in our walls. So turning off the electricity will radically reduce your electric field exposure. And, there you can do that at the the circuit breaker, which is not really designed to do it, but so it's better to get these switches. And the one I like in The US is called emfkillswitch.com, where for relatively inexpensive, you get a UL unit Underwriter Lab approved device that you can essentially press one button, and it can turn off multiple circuits in your house. So you go dark. And if you wanted you don't have to traipse through the house and go into the attic or your basement and turn the circuit breaker on. You just press one little button, and it turns it on. So, it's really convenient. And if it's convenient, more likely you're going to do it. So those are the big strategies. And then, you want to get a device to measure these frequencies because EMF is invisible. That's another thing. Smoking isn't invisible. EMF is. And you can't see it, hear it, feel it, touch it. So, you have no idea what your exposures are unless you have a device that can show you and tell you what it is. And there are probably hundreds of different devices. The one I like recommended me by Magda Habes, who is a professor up in Canada, who's a real strong EMF advocate, educational advocate, and she recommends AcoustiCOM two, which is a little device about the size of a pack of cigarettes and can give you a visual and auditory display of what your exposures are. So you can measure that in your bedroom. And and if you do these things and you still have high radio frequency exposure because you might be next to a cell phone tower or a smart meter next to behind your bedroom, and you don't know until you measure it. And then you might have to, like then you need to take additional steps to shield you even further. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Definitely. It's, I think awareness is probably the most important part for it. It's, like, educating people about it and, like, yeah, most people tend to put their cell phone under the pillow without even knowing that it's harmful. And yeah. And it's, it's even not only going to radiate their brain, but it's also going to disrupt the circadian rhythms like EMF Yes. Can disrupt the circadian rhythms and the blue light coming from these the cell phone and such. So it's a it's a daily combo and definitely something you want to avoid. Well, when they're sleeping, there's not much blue light. But, you know, that's even when it's more dangerous. Certainly, looking at the phone before you go to bed is not a good thing unless you've got it got some pretty nice filters on it, especially the iPhone. You can pretty much make it red and white. Yeah. So that's not an issue. But, you know, it's the and circadian rhythm disruption is certainly one component. But I think the the continuous RF exposure at night is probably more dangerous than the circadian rhythm disruption. Definitely. What about these devices, that, you know, say let's just say that they can block or shield the, EMF like the Blue Shield. Yeah. There there exists and I think that the as a generic category, you can call them harmonizers. Mhmm. That these little patches or pieces of material, electronic circuits sometimes that you put on with adhesive on the back of your phone or on electronic devices. And, they work at a quantum level supposedly or biologic, but affects your biology in some way. And and I I don't doubt that there are probably some measurable benefits to people, but I don't recommend them at all because Mhmm. They won't shield you from the radiation. Your biology is still being exposed to these frequencies, and you're still causing the damage we discussed earlier. So, in many ways, it gives you a false sense of security and will allow you to persist in your behaviors that are contributing to your premature demise. Right, right. Yeah. So I would caution against them. And the only devices that shield are shielding materials. Essentially, you've got to turn it off or put it in a shielding case. It's usually a type of metallic fiber, for the cloths. And the Faraday bags, I mentioned, it's usually a silver fiber. But you could put it actually in a metal case, like those old cookie tins, you know, that closes completely, and that would work too. So it's essentially creating a Faraday cage around the device that's emitting the signal. Right. Right. So, salt salt lamps and Shungite crystals don't work. No. Shungite is a good one that's commonly recommended as a strategy to remediate EMF. And, you know, I said, Okay. Well, let me test it. I bought some Shungite that doesn't do it. Anything to attenuate the signals coming from the RF. It doesn't change it at all. You think somehow it creates this magic force field around it, it doesn't. Now, it may impact your biology in some way at a different level, but I really doubt that it's lessening the biologic damage. Mhmm. Yeah. I would agree. But, what about grounding, sleeping mats? Like, I I was recently talking with Clint Uber, who is, like, founder of the Grounding Movement, and he he he has the these products like the Grounding Mats for for sleeping. I've known Clint for many years. I have great respect for Clint. He's a he's a good human being, really is. Love the man. We have disagreements on this, though. He obviously has a little bit of conflict of interest, and I I think he sincerely and truly believes it works. And he he dismisses the concerns about dirty electricity that I mentioned earlier in North America. So we disagree on that. I think it's an issue. I personally wouldn't do it. If I was in Estonia, I would do it or Europe. But I think I do ground every day, though. I ground when I swim in the morning in my pool, and I ground when I go in the ocean in the afternoon. So I think it's a magnificent strategy, but I wouldn't use the grounding materials, and I don't. I used to prior to my learning of this, and I learned about it through some pretty prominent EMF pioneers like Samuel Milham, who's an MD PhD, who wrote the book Dirty Electricity, did some groundbreaking research. He's an epidemiologist. His I think his m and I think he has an Miles per hour towards an epidemiology. Mhmm. And he essentially studied the two populations in The United States. From 1900 to 1950, there were two distinct populations, the rural areas and the urban areas. And the urban areas were electrified, and the rural areas were not, not until the nineteen fifties. So and it's when you and he he graphed all this all out. He got this he got the numbers and collected it, and and he found that there was a radical increase in chronic degenerative diseases in the urban areas until '19 that continued beyond 1950, but that that increase did not occur in the rural areas until 1950. And then it came then the instance came way up and it joined the urban area. So pretty strong compelling evidence. Obviously, correlation is not causation, but it's very compelling data to suggest that there's some concern here. So then and then, also Dave Stetzer, who actually creates the Stetzer filters and obviously a conflict of interest, but he worked with Martin Graham, who is a PhD in electro electrical engineering, I believe, and came you know, they did the the studies in the science, and they they pretty much, you know, have some very compelling evidence, which I tend to believe. And for for whatever reason, Clint Clint doesn't believe. Yeah. So I think, yeah, a lot to do with, maybe maybe, like, chronic exposure or chronic groundedness, probably isn't isn't good idea either because then it wouldn't then you just kinda divide divide the tolerance. No. No. I think chronic grounding is is is a great strategy assuming you've got a clean ground. And the the real issue is that North America, it's really debatable and controversial whether or not clean ground exists outside of in the oceans or highly remote areas of The United States in some mountain areas or something. Yeah. So I I would have no worries being grounded 99% of the day if it was a clean ground. Right. I think I think it's optimal, actually. Yeah. Probably. What kind of like a backlash have you received about this topic? Because obviously, some people think it's, you know, hogwash, but but others are just maybe having their own agendas. So, what kind of opinions have you heard about different people from different people? From this topic, none really. You know, other than being censored in Google in June, but it had nothing to do with EMFs. But, you know, I am an advocate for so many controversial topics, vaccines probably being the most controversial, but even recommending the ketogenic diet is controversial in many communities. So, I'm no newbie to these types of controversy. So, I haven't noticed any feedback on this yet. And I tend to think I won't because it's I don't know. I don't think the wireless industry is going to target me or anything. Certainly, Big Pharma has for for, you know, my exposure exposing their their, tactics and strategies Right. And, you know, evil evil deeds in in my site. So Can we talk about the Google thing then a little bit? Like, what happened and how did it affect you? Well, our it's sad in some ways because our traffic went down by two thirds. So we we used to have a million views a month, unique views a month. Mhmm. And we're down to, like, 400,000 now. So it's essentially two thirds reduction. And it's sad because the not from a business perspective because it really didn't affect our revenues much, but it it did affect our mission, which is to really spread this information to people wide and far so they know that there's another choice. And, you know, Google is part of this process with these tech firms and Facebook being another, that believe they know better than everyone else and need to limit this information, essentially censor it because they think it's a threat for the greater good. And that's how they justify it. But if you look at it, it's interesting that the companies that the websites that come up now when you type in the regular keywords, see, they essentially were not eliminated from Google. My content is still there, but it will never come up in a search. Right. You can type in my name in a topic, and it would come up. But without my name, I would never come up for a keyword. It just doesn't work that way. That's crazy. Yeah. Essentially, our traffic from Google went down by almost 100%. So the what comes up instead instead of the topics that we legitimately deserve to be highly ranked for? We were number one, two, or three for thousands of health key terms. And now, what comes up is WebMD, Healthline, and Medical News Today. Now, I don't know if you've heard of these sites before, but they are all of these sites are owned by ad agencies. Mhmm. And all of these sites use Google Ads, and they sell ads to either sell junk food or drugs. Mhmm. It is so beyond sad. I mean, it's a person sincerely seeking to identify the foundational cause of the disease, goes to the internet now and uses the default search engine, which 90% of people on the planet use, is Google, then they're going to find this crap that is absolutely never deserved to be there other than they have a really cozy relationship, business relationship with Google. And Google has other issues too because they essentially surveil you. They breach your privacy. They sell your data. It's just an evil thing. So, the way around this is that everyone should know they should not use Google or Google products. That means no Google search. The best search engine as far as I can discern out there now is one out of France. It's called quant, qwant, quant,quant.com. And to not use the Chrome browser because everything at Google will track every keystroke you're making on Chrome. They know what you're doing. And this is not arbitrary. This is truth. And in fact, even when just this last week ago, they bought this company called Ascension, and have literally downloaded millions of people's health data without any permission from them. Wow. I mean, their, violation of privacy issues is just tremendous. So anyway, you can use a browser Brave, and in Brave, it will actually, it's based on the same software, Chromium, that Google is, so it's really easy to transfer your, extensions, your favorites, your bookmarks, and, and actually select a search engine, and you can select Quant in Brave. So don't use don't use Chrome. Don't use Google Search. Use Quant and Brave. Don't use Gmail because every every character you type in Gmail is noticed by Google. Mhmm. So, and there's there's a lot of other email clients you can use, but stay away from Google. So those are the three big things. And then the what I switched to, you probably already have an Apple phone, but I never did until this year. But I had Android all the way because I was a big Google fan. And initially, when they when they first came out, I think their attentions were pure, and they really followed their model, which is do no evil. But now they took that model away years ago because they're doing evil every second. But get an Apple iPhone because they're far more diligent about preserving your and honoring your privacy. But any Apple phone is essentially using Android by default. I don't know that there's any other operating system on the phone other than Android or iOS. So if you're using Android, that's Google and they're copying all your data or they're stealing your data, essentially. Yeah. Yes. Pretty crazy situation. I I know one of those because, like, most people are using Google all the time throughout their entire day in some shape or form. And, you're like, they don't really you know, even though they may acknowledge that they that Google is, you know, stealing their data to a certain extent, then they may just deal with it or they're not gonna do anything about it because they're just very, you know, they prefer the convenience of using Google because it's so convenient and they get everything done just one place and such. So I said, you know, like a very hard switch for most people, I would imagine. Just Yeah. What what I'm working on a strategy with some other people, some Google whistleblowers and others, to create an alternative search engine, actually, that's using Quant as its primary component, but then also having some whitelisted sites. So we're in beta testing at this point, compiling something. And once we compile it, and if I get it successful, I'll certainly let you know about it. So that there will be an alternative search engine out there that you can use. And if you wanna find the truth about any topic, you can find it. You know, I'll we'll have the sites that were censored by Google in here, and we won't have the sites like WebMD and Healthline. Yeah. That's that's pretty doesn't really make any sense at all. Like, the, big pharma own websites just, selling selling or retargeting ads for drugs. Yeah. And and, you know, if if if we were to do that with supplements, we'd go to jail. But it's and it's illegal for them to do what they're doing. Mhmm. But they get away with it because they're in bed with the federal regulatory agencies. And and Google gets away with their monopoly. So it is the biggest monopoly in the world, but many people don't know that the one of their chief lobbyists is now the head of the Department of Justice. So how are you going to prosecute them when, you know, they're in bed with the federal government? You can't. I mean, these Google guys are incredibly sophisticated, incredibly smart. They are not stupid. They've they've thought this through. They know what they're doing. So they've got some pretty powerful strategies, and it's difficult to get them. But, you know, once once you educate the public about this through these types of communications, then they begin to understand how they can change their behavior because ultimately, they rely on us to follow what they're they're saying and that significant percentage of the population doesn't follow it, then, you know, they're in trouble. Yeah. That's true. When is the, EMF book coming out and, where where can people get it? P, it's gonna be in a very obscure places, but probably one of the more popular ones is Amazon. Mhmm. Amazon.com. And it comes out in February. The February, I believe, is it's targeted for. And I think you should be able to preorder it really soon, if not now. Now for those who are intrigued with this and wanna learn more, because we just literally I think I've talked two or three minutes about how to mitigate these EMF exposures, but the chapter seven in my book is really extensive, and and I consulted with some of the leading EMF remediation experts in the world to to for to compile this chapter. And I'm giving most of that chapter away for free, and you can get it by going to emf.mercola.com, emf.mercola.com. And you can download a PDF, and it will give you really what you need to do. If you already understand that the issue is, you realize that EMF exposure is dangerous and you need to limit your exposures as best you can, then this is the chapter you wanna get. Right. That's that's awesome. Yeah. Is there anything, like anything else that you would like to add or we didn't cover about this topic? Well, you know, I think to extend on the fact, usually when I'm presenting this live, I ask the audience to all stand up and then then look at their cell phone and then to see if it's in airplane mode. And if it's not, if it is, to sit down. And most audiences, 95% to 99% of the audience, remain standing. You know, it it because and these are these are not like lay public audiences. These are healthcare professionals. Okay? Yeah. Yeah. So, it's it's really important to understand that this is something you have completely under control. And one of the last things you ever wanna do is keep your cell phone on your body when it's not in airplane mode. There's just no reason for that. You're just asking for trouble. There's no reason for it. Yeah. And, you know, I've got the new iPhone. It's just got a long battery. And, since my phone is in airplane mode, it I really only charge, like, once every ten days to two weeks. That's it. Mhmm. Yeah. It's literally I lose less than 10% a day. Yeah. And that is the benefit when you're not doing it, but you gotta look at the other side. Well, I have to charge my phone every day. Not only is it inconvenient, and some people, twice a day or even more. Yeah. Yeah. So you gotta wonder, you're putting energy into that phone. What happened to the energy? I mean, if you were using your flashlight on your phone, then some of it would go there, but most people are using it as a radio frequency transmitter. So that means the energy is going out to creating these EMFs in your local environment. And all the energy that you charge your phone with is bombarding your body with pernicious radio frequencies. Yeah. It's crazy. Yeah. So, I mean, don't put your phone in airplane mode and, you know, do those things. Download the chapter because there's so many more things that you can do, that are and get a meter. The COUSTICOM two is really, it's under $200 It's on Amazon, too. And, it'll open your eyes. You won't believe what's around you, but you, you know, and you think you've done a good job, you've implemented all these strategies, and then you turn the meter on, you say, Oh my gosh, I had no idea that thing was on there. You know, you forgot about it. It was three years ago, and it's going radiating your entire household. Yeah. And, like, definitely don't want to use the phone near your testicles or something like that because for guys, it's definitely gonna lower your testosterone and, Yeah. Like, I'm talking to you in a wired connection right now, and then when I have a phone, I mean, almost I I I stay at home most of the time because I have an EMI sanctuary, but when I'm talking in the phone, it's a landline. That's actually not a landline. The equivalent of a landline is it's a voice over IP. Mhmm. But, you know, I can talk over a wire, and I don't have any RF exposure as a result of that. Yeah. One thing I definitely cringe every time I see is the, the wireless Bluetooth headphones. Oh, yes. That's those are good ones. Yes. Those are those are the worst ones, like, literally, like, frying your own brain all the time. In your brain, yes. I think that in my slide presentation, I have a photograph of Tim Cook photoshopped wearing iPods. It's to the best and it was an article published in The Verge. That there's never been any documented photos of him actually wearing iPods, or AirPods rather. You know, I mean, he's probably more EMF literate than most of us would tend to believe, so he never wears them. But if you walk through an airport, you will be shocked at how many people are wearing these things. It's it's a significant percentage. I think it's over 10%. Now they're great devices from the perspective of the quality and the convenience. I mean, it's hard to beat. It really is a very clever and sophisticated product. But from a danger perspective, it's one of the last things you want to do. But these Bluetooth frequencies, even if it's low power Bluetooth, it's still dangerous. It's very dangerous, especially if it's on all the time. It's on twelve, sixteen, eighteen hours a day in their head. Yeah. It's crazy. It's crazy. Yeah. Yeah. So insane. And people are definitely, like, I think, everyone should, like, educate themselves about these topics. And, looking forward to your book. It's probably gonna be a good one. Yes. Well, thank you, Seem. I really appreciate the opportunity to dialogue with you about this. I think it's an important topic. Definitely. And, yeah. My my last question is gonna be, you know, what's this one piece of advice or habit you wish you started sooner since the last time we talked, like, which was a few months ago. Last time we talked? Yeah. That's a good one because, you know, there's a lot that, you know, I wish I'd started when I was much younger. But I think, I don't know that I was doing blood flow restriction training when we talked last. I don't think I did. So that is, I'm just beyond jazz. And if people want to learn more about this, they can go to bfr.marcola.com and get a similar similar, it's a 30 page PDF with four or five videos I put together to tell people how to do it and the benefits and the science behind it. So I'm really jazzed about that. There's no question. But I've also started on low deuterium. And in fact, I have my you're familiar with deuterium. Right? Yeah. Yeah. So I actually have my deuterium levels tested, and I actually hold The US record now. Oh, really? Lowest deuterium level tested. Oh, nice. That's awesome. Yeah. So my actually, I was able to cut it by half. Now I think that was too much. Like, most of the things, I get obsessive compulsive. But I think it probably shouldn't be as low as I got it, and so I'm actually trying to get it back up now. Right. What you're doing then? Eating greens or No. No. No. Deuterium is is primarily in the water. I mean, if you were to my guess is because you're so optimized for your mitochondria, you're probably most people are one fifty. You're probably about one twenty, maybe one fifty, maybe one twenty five. But you're you're you're you're in a healthy range, I would think. I got it down to 77 by drinking deuterium depleted water. So now instead of drinking 10 parts per million, I'm drinking, like, 80 parts per million. So it should be picked up to higher levels soon. Okay. Well, that's we definitely have to do another podcast in a few months to, talk about BFR and deuterium and Yeah. Yeah. A lot of bulletproof things. And I'm just talking about a bulletproof too. But I put my top two dozen biohacks. Yeah. I'm sure you're going or UpgradeLab. I'm sure you're going this year. So that's where we first met last year. Yeah. I'm gonna come. Yeah. Yeah. Chris Shade's booth in Quicksilver. So Yeah. We'll meet there. Alright. That's it for this episode. If you want to support us, then make sure you leave us a review on iTunes and the other social media platforms. To learn more about the topics that we discussed in this episode, check out the show notes in the description. But other than that, thanks for listening. My name is Si. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.