Taking conventional high dose levels of antioxidants can actually negate the benefits of exercise because what we don't well, we don't really know exactly what it was. But but, again, some of the research would suggest maybe it's because we we get all this, this increased free radicals, which we need as second messengers to induce these changes. But then by taking a whole bunch of antioxidants, we're essentially indiscriminately neutralizing all the good signaling ones, the good and the bad. Do you want to know what it is? Body mind empowerment. Get stronger, faster, smarter, quicker, friendlier, more helpful, more driven. Everything the buddy needs. Control your mind. Welcome to the Body Mind Empowerment podcast. I'm Hossein Lund, and our guest today is Tyler Lebron. Tyler is the founder and executive director of the Molecular Hydrogen Institute. He's the world's leading expert on molecular hydrogen and how it can affect health, aging, and stress resilience. This episode is brought to you by KAOSU training. KAOSU bands incorporate blood flow moderation training that trick the body into thinking that it's lifting heavier weights than it actually is. When traditional weight lifting requires you to reach 70 to 80% of your one repetition maximum to simulate muscle hypertrophy, then KAOSU achieve that effect only at 20 to 30%. So it's perfect for treating injuries or use when you don't have access to heavy weights. Research about Katsu Bands also shows it lowers blood pressure, speeds up recovery from injuries, releases stem cells, builds muscle, burns fat, and prevents age related muscle loss. These things are a game changer, and I use them almost every day. If you wanna try out the KAATU cycle bands, then use the code seam for a 10% discount at kAATU dash global dot com. That's kaatu-global.com, and the 10% code is seam, s I I m. Tyler, welcome to the show. Thank you. Nice to be here. Yeah. It's, glad to finally talk with you. And, we've been trying to come up with a time where we can talk about, molecular hydrogen. So, it's been a long time coming, but, yeah, I'm I'm sure it's gonna be a good, podcast. Yeah. I'm looking forward to discussing some of the the things we found about molecular hydrogen. So, absolutely. Yeah. Like like, well, I would I would imagine, like, a lot of the people don't really know about what is molecular hydrogen and, like, like, what are the benefits and so on. So maybe can you give us, like, a brief overview of what it is and how does it work? Yeah. Yeah. Great. Yeah. That's that's that's a great place to start. So when we say molecular hydrogen, we are talking about the gas, diatomic hydrogen. Okay? So di meaning two, atomic, because if you go back to, you know, your high school chemistry, right, hydrogen is the number one on the periodic table of elements. It's the first element that was created in, say, the big bang. It was hydrogen is the first. It's it's like the father of all the elements. In fact, the sun, essentially burns hydrogen infusion to create helium. So all the other elements basically are made from hydrogen, just electrons and protons. So, that's that's hydrogen number one. And and hydrogen alone, atomic hydrogen is is very, reactive. And so it quickly reacts with another hydrogen atom to create dye or diatomic hydrogen, which is a molecule. So since the molecule, we can just call it molecular hydrogen. And so this is, has a chemical symbol of h two, so h two gas. And h two gas, molecular hydrogen is a is a stable molecule. It it's neutral. It's, it's it's not reactive. Of course, it can be when you combine with oxygen under a high temperature. And if you do that, then we have, like, rocket fuel. It's hydrogen oxygen is a very explosive mixture. So hydrogen gas is very explosive, of course. And that's why you're looking at it for an alternative energy source because it's three times more energy dense than gasoline. It reacts very a 100% very well with oxygen and, of course, you just warm water. So it's a great, fuel source. A lot of research is, of course, going in that area. But that's what we're talking about is this simple molecule, molecular hydrogen. And and would in order to administer the molecular hydrogen, talking about maybe the the, meth administration and the pharmacokinetics of it. Well, you can take hydrogen gas and you can simply inhale it just like you inhale molecular oxygen or oxygen gas, the oxygen in the atmosphere. The atmosphere has about 21%, oxygen in it, and there's the gas. Well, hydrogen in the atmosphere, just as a point of reference, has, like, 0.000055% hydrogen. I mean, it's very, very low. So it's not like you're you can get the benefits of molecular hydrogen by just, I don't know, breathing the atmosphere. It's it's a low. Right? So so you can administer hydrogen gas through just inhalation. But they've also found, and and many studies have shown this now, you can take the hydrogen gas and you can dissolve it into water. So it's like hydrogen infused water. Okay? And and then you can drink it. And it's similar, like, you know, if you take water and you infuse it with carbon dioxide, then you have, carbonated water. But in this case, when you you fuse water with hydrogen gas, the hydrogen gas does not, like, bond to the water molecule or make, like, h four o or h three o, which is hydronium ion. Or or does it does it alter the structure of the water molecule or doesn't change the pH or something. So has nothing to do with alkaline water. And and that sometimes is is, common misconception because people hear hydrogen water and they automatically think of pH or alkaline water because p p h stands for, like, potential hydrogen. But it it's confusing because of the different types of hydrogen that there are. Right. And and so when when it comes to, like, pH, well, yeah, the p is potential, but that's really a mathematical expression as as a as an exponent. In fact, it's the inverse of an exponent, a logarithmic function. So it's the negative log of hydrogen, but it's not hydrogen gas that we're talking about, but but it's the hydrogen ion, the h plus ion, which is just a proton with no electron. And so, yeah, if you have a lot of hydrogen ions, then you're the negative log of that, you're gonna have acidic beverage. But but, again, molecular hydrogen doesn't influence the THL. So it has nothing to do with alkaline, acidic water, anything like that. You can take water hydrogen gas and fuse into acidic water or alkaline water or whatever. It it it doesn't matter. The water just becomes the carrier the carrier for the hydrogen gas. And and and that's that's another common, I guess, confusion as well because people feel like, well, water already has hydrogen in it, h two o. But but again, you know, it like, water looks like Mickey Master has the oxygen and the two hydrogens on it. And and in that case, the hydrogen is bound to the oxygen, so it's not available, so to speak. Just like you can't you know, we we breathe the air to get oxygen gas all the time, but you can't, like, breathe the water, drink water to get oxygen even though water is h two o. Right? O standing for oxygen. So in the same way, you can't get the benefits of molecular hydrogen hydrogen gas from drinking water. So because the hydrogen gas just dissolves into the water and Right. It doesn't alter the water or anything, and then it's just gonna come right back out. You know? So so you have to drink if you're gonna drink hydrogen water, for example, you actually have to drink it before it comes out just like a, a carbonated beverage of some sort. Right? Eventually, the c o two will just come out, and then it doesn't have that fizz to it anymore. Yeah. Why why why would someone drink it in the first place? Like, what are the, like, main benefits and effects on the body? Yeah. So let's let's go through those. Now that we understand some of those, some of the chemistry or physics of molecular hydrogen, why would you be interested in taking it in the first place? And the research has found that hydrogen has various anti inflammatory, antioxidant, anti aging, anti apoptotic, autophagy regulating effects, a whole bunch of different areas. So maybe we should kinda go through some of this to to to understand. And and the first publication that really showed that hydrogen and gas does have biological therapeutic effects was was an article published back in 2007 in Nature Medicine. Nature Medicine is one of the more prestigious, credible, medical journals, scientific publications out there. And this is published there showing that, only two to four percent of hydrogen gas inhalation significantly suppressed the brain damage that was induced by a middle cerebral artery occlusion. In in other words, they took these rats. They bought the blood supply to the brain for a while. So then I now have what's called ischemia, and that's going to, cause a lot of problems because we don't have blood going to the brain. You don't have the nutrients, not the oxygen. You you can't clear the metabolic waste to have a you know, that's like a stroke. Right? You you you get the blockage. And and interesting, when you do resupply the blood and the oxygen and everything back to the to the brain, that's actually where most of the damage often occurs. It's called the reperfusion injury. Because now that oxygen, it's blood goes to the brain and just causes a whole bunch of oxygen to damage and destroys the cells and causes apoptosis, necrosis, and and cell death and everything. Okay? And and that's the problem with stroke. That's a problem with, like, heart attacks, because you have these myocardial infarctions, you know, you you stop the heart. You get it going again, but then you have that rush of oxygen rich blood, and that's gonna cause all these problems. So this ischemia reperfusion injury is one of the most difficult things, to battle, to combat, to to, prevent in in the emergency type situations and and situations that happen really all the time. And because of these burst of free radicals, these reactive oxygen species and everything that that cause all these damage. And and maybe it's important we we just discussed a little bit about these free radicals and and reactive oxygen species. Like, what what's really going on there? Well, you know, we we we can learn just basically an elementary example is, you know, when you cut your apple in half, right, and it turns brown, that browning is oxygen oxidizing the different proteins and the polyphenols and different things inside the apple. And so it starts to turn brown. And that happens to us every single time that we breathe, we're essentially oxidizing our our bodies. But luckily, we also have antioxidants inside of our body, natural antioxidants. So we consume the antioxidants from, you know, our apple, and and that's gonna help prevent that oxidation. And that's gonna allow us to continue going. But during these periods of ischemia and reperfusion, essentially, you use up all all of your endogenous antioxidants, and now you just destroy yourselves. And and then you can't over you can't overcome that, basically. So, when when it comes to trying to prevent or cure these problems of ischemic perfusion, there's a a whole bunch of medical research for for decades have been going into looking at various, antioxidants, all the different therapies to figure out how do you actually get the antioxidants there to prevent this damage. But it's a little difficult because in order to prevent the damage with an antioxidant, you have to actually get the antioxidant into those cells. And that's gonna be problematic because one, if there's no blood flow, well then the antioxidants not gonna get in there. Number two, even if there is nice blood flow, well, the a lot of the antioxidants, maybe they're charged, maybe they're large, they're they're they're gonna have difficult, cellular bioavailability. And that's where molecular hydrogen, really shines. Okay? And and it was it was surprising in the first place that hydrogen gas would have any biological effect because as we talked about, it would it's a it's a neutral small molecule. And if it's just a neutral molecule, there's no charge. I mean, it's so small. It's it's like it's not like there's gonna be, like, a protein receptor where it can, like, bind onto and induce this gene expression. That that doesn't quite make, scientific sense in in the way that we typically understand how science works, how how how, you know, biochemistry one zero one, you know, works, basically. And and and the fact that hydrogen gas does have these prominent effects, and like I talked about in this article in Nature Medicine, significantly suppressed the brain damage with a very low concentration of hydrogen gas lower than the flammability level. Because, you know, like we said, hydrogen gas is very flammable. But if you keep it below a four point a 4.6% concentration, it's not flammable. So going to the cellular bioavailability aspect of molecular hydrogen. So the things that dictate the bioavailability of a molecule or or or what have you is number one, the size. So the smaller it is, the yeast is gonna get through the cells or or whatever. Well, hydrogen gas, by definition, is literally the smallest molecule in the universe. It's it's smaller than oxygen. It's smaller than everything. So it's you know, it it wins, hands down, on that. And then and then another thing is it's charge. Well, it it charged molecules are have a difficult, well, they they can't really get through the cell membrane very easily, and that's because of the cell the cell membrane is, like, has hydrophobic. Right? Has this lipid bilayer. And so charged molecules or atoms or ion, they're they're not going to be able to get through there very well. They have to go through a transporter. So if you take something like, say, sodium or or or chloride or potassium, these are just one atom, but they're charged, and they have a hydration sphere, which complicates things. That's how ion channels become specific. But the point is they have to go through an ion channel. They can't just go right through the cell membrane even though it's just one atom. Right? Well, hydrogen gas doesn't have to go through a protein channel or something like this. And then when we consider, even a neutral molecules but that are polar. Right? So it has like a partial positive, partial negative charge. Like like like, water. Right? It looks like the Mickey Mouse and that's because it has a this polarity. Water is a polar molecule, has oxygen with the hydrogens, on each on each side, and and that's that, water is is neutral, but it's also polar. And similar thing, even though water is really a small molecule as well, it actually also cannot enter the cell membrane very easily. Actually, it can't really do it for most cell membranes. It has to go through what's called an aquaporin, another protein channel. So really just trying to, emphasize the fact that molecular hydrogen doesn't have any of those barriers. It it can go through the cell membrane, through the the blood brain barrier, through the, into the subcellular organelles, the mitochondria, for example, the nucleus, all these places where a lot of the damage for from the free radicals are occurring. You remember, where where do we produce most of our free radicals anyways? Well, we produce them in the mitochondria. That's the powerhouse of the cell. That's what uses the oxygen and the mitochondria, as well as other areas like NADH oxidase systems in areas. But but these these subset of organelles are are often what take molecular oxygen and convert them to cytotoxic or cell damaging free radicals. And and that's inside of the cell. So hydrogen gas can actually get inside of the cell where it has these signal modulating effects, these antioxidant effects, where where where it can help prevent this oxidative stress from going on. Okay? So that's one thing we have to consider is just this bioavailability of hydrogen, so that it it can then exert these antioxidants and anti inflammatory effects because, you know, there there's prob there's a whole bunch of great antioxidants, great anti inflammatories, great things out there, but it does you no good if it doesn't get into the cell. Right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Like, what how would you compare maybe, like, molecular hydrogen with, like, other antioxidants, like, vitamin c or vitamin e, for example? Okay. Yeah. So so that's a great question because it's not it's not it's not an easy answer. There's a lot to consider about it. And and and maybe let's let's discuss the some of the mechanisms of why it is or how it is that hydrogen gas has antioxidant effects. And that'll help us better address the question of how then does it compare to, say, conventional antioxidants. All right? Well, first, often we think of an antioxidant, we we think of a a chemical, definition, which is something, a molecule that, donates its electron to a free radical. So there's, like, a literal electron transfer going on. And and then and in that case, you know, say vitamin c, it donuts electron to to to a free radical or or something, and then neutralize that. And then vitamin c, it becomes actually what's called a prooxidant because it's missing that electron, but it's not very reactive, because it has this conjugated pie structure or, you know, it's electron. So it can it can it can destabilize this. This has a destabilized, electron cloud, basically. So it's still rather stable. But in reality, a better definition of antioxidant is simply a molecule or a therapy even that improves the redox status of the cell. And there's lots of ways to do that. Okay? They're number one, you could simply you could, say, scavenge the the radicals directly. Okay? Do donate the electrons, get rid of the radicals, you neutralize them. Number two, you could, prevent the free radicals from forming in the first place. You know, when our when our mitochondria, when our cells aren't working properly, when there are maybe senescent or they have these pathological conditions or whatever is going on, they may, be making more free radicals than they should be. And and that's a problem. So so if we could take a molecule or do a therapy that could prevent this excessive amount of free radicals from being produced, that could also be considered an antioxidant. And and then thirdly, you you because we have our bodies our body has our natural antioxidants, like glutathione, superoxide dismutase. If we could increase or maintain these levels of this homeostatic range, then that would also improve the redox status of the cell. So those are different ways that, a molecule or a therapy like exercise can have antioxidant effects. And it turns out, molecular hydrogen does every single one of those. Okay? You you have you have the possibility where, molecular hydrogen can react with, say, the hydroxyl radical, which is the most cytotoxic radical that there is. Okay. It the hydroxyl radical, it it reacts so fast, and it it is essentially indiscriminate. I mean, it just reacts with whatever protein, DNA, molecule, whatever is there, and and it damages it. Okay. And and that and and the hydroxyl radicals are known to be the well, they're they're considered to be the primary problem with this ischemic reperfusion damage going on. And, it's with hydrogen gas, hydrogen gas could essentially react with it and just form water. And and this is this is an important thing when we talk about free radicals in general, just to go back a little bit on this because it can help us understand how it really compares to say the vitamin c and other antioxidants. Although free radicals are responsible for the oxidation, a lot of the stamage, they're also responsible for a lot of the benefits of, most of your therapies. I mean, you name a therapy out there that's good for you, it probably increases slightly, transiently free radicals. Exercise. Right? Running. I mean, you're breathing more. You're you're lifting weights, whatever it is. Right? All of these different things, you are essentially increasing your free radical production. Even like a sauna, you free radicals and get heat shock proteins, you get all these things. Okay. So free radicals, they're actually known to be critical signaling molecules. They're second messengers, and that's what's gonna tell the the the the DNA to increase your your DNA repair mechanisms, your mitochondria to get more mitochondria to function better. It can promote autophagy is what we'll talk about a little bit. So free radicals are so critical. Nitric oxide is is the is like the body's most important free radical, for vasodilation. And, and and and yet that is a free radical by definition. It's very critical for the immune system. So a lot of free radicals are actually very good for us. So we don't wanna just indiscriminately neutralize all the free radicals. Well, hydrogen gas, this is another really critical area that it shines. Hydrogen gas, simply does not have the capacity to react with these free radicals. Okay? It can't react with the reactive oxygen species, hydrogen peroxide, superoxide, even even ozone, nitric oxide. All of these very critical reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, hydrogen gas simply that that doesn't react with it. It can't do it. Maybe, you know, based on Gibbs free energy thermodynamically, there's something, but but the activation energy is too high. Kinetically, it's infeasible. You put the two together, it there's no reaction. Okay? You put hydroxyl radical and nitric oxide and hydroxyl radical and hydrogen gas together. There is you can't get a reaction. You get you get water. Okay? So so those two can react. But but that's no problem because guess what? We don't like the hydroxyl radicals. It does it does nothing for us anyways. So so that's perfect. Right? Mhmm. Now, so so so again, we talked about, it's it's selectivity. Okay? Hydrogen gas is a selective antioxidant. In fact, that paper I talked about in nature medicine, the title was something like, hydrogen acts as a selective antioxidant. Okay? Because this is really, one of the things that helps us to shine. So high bio bioavailability, that's one difference with, like, say, vitamin c, vitamin e, and all these things. High bioavailability because it's a lot smaller. Hydrogen gas is neutral. Vitamin c is is, is gonna have a difficult time going through cell membrane because it's it's it's lipophilic. It's it's water soluble. So it it it can't go through the cell membrane unless it goes through a transporter, and it has to go through all these mechanisms and all this stuff. Maybe it's it's gonna take too long to get there. Well, hydrogen gas doesn't have to do that. And they have, like, vitamin e, which is hydrophobic. Well, that's gonna stay in the cell membrane, not necessarily in this go go into the cytosol, inside inside of the cell. Alright? So that has those problems. So again, bioavailability, selectivity, and now we're talking about its specific antioxidant effects. Well, one, yeah. Hydrogen gas. Okay. So it has this this this reaction with hydroxyl radical. You know, we don't know how biologically significant that is, just based on, rate constants and and and different things to consider, but but okay, it's possible. The other thing, how hydrogen gas works, well, we talked about how you can, make the body of the cells work better so that you, you have less free radicals being produced in the first place. So, that's important. So we have enzymes like the NOx systems, NADPH oxidative system, which basically just takes oxygen, converts it to superoxide, which is a free radical. And that's important for, like, inflammation, for, you know, phagocytes and things to, during the immune system to kill the the bacteria or inactivate viruses or or these types of things, that's an important process. But when that gets hyperactivated, then you start destroying yourselves. You start causing an excessive amount of oxidation and inflammation, and that's very, very bad. You don't want that to happen. So hydrogen has this modulating effect where it can essentially come in and suppress these these NOx systems, not not to the point of, making it so they don't they're not effective anymore. But it's not like that. That it's very mild. So you have suppression of these lock systems, so you don't get so much free radicals being produced in the first place. Right? That that's very critical. So you have decrease, of the excessive amount of free radicals. So we talked about selectivity. We talked about the suppression of the excessive free radicals. And then, another one, which is very important is actually has the ability to increase our body's own natural antioxidants. And this is probably the biggest one, probably the most important one, is is this entire cascade that we're gonna talk about because it feeds into essentially every other aspect of molecular hydrogen, all the benefits that we'll discuss. And this is done by hydrogen gas's ability to activate what's known as the n r f two keep one pathway. You you're probably familiar with that one. It's also involved in autophagy. So so but but for the audience, so the n r f two, keep one pathway. So n r two is a is a transcription factor that when it gets activated, it's in the cytosol, so inside of the cell. When it gets activated, then it's going to go into the nucleus, and it's going to bind to the, ARE, the antioxidant response element or the electro file response element portion of the DNA, and it's going to basically induce the production of your body's natural antioxidants and detoxification enzymes, glutathione peroxidase, superoxide dismutase. You know, actually, this this NF two regulates, about 500 different cytoprotective proteins and enzymes. So it's a big one. This is it's a very big one. And NF two regulates so many of these phase two detoxification, anti oxidation enzymes, and proteins. And hydrogen gas, can can activate this, can regulate this. And when it does so, then during your times of, say, your your your ischemic or profusion injury, your disease state, your just getting older, whatever it is, it's gonna help to bring back that redox homeostasis to where to where it optimally should be so you have, the appropriate levels of glutathione and superoxide dismutase and catalase and all these other critical antioxidants to help regulate, all your body's free radicals. Because, you know, okay, so we talk about superoxide, that's a free radical. Superoxide is so, so important for your for your health, for cellular longevity. But it's regulated. It's regulated in its concentration and its location. And when it starts getting out of its ideal location or to to out of its ideal concentration, either too high or too low, that's problematic. So so enzymes like superoxide dismutase, that that enzyme sought is able to, dismutate or or or neutralize this this, superoxide radical. And essentially keeps it into its homeostasis. It's it's where you want it, both from location wise and it's concentration wise. And so hydrogen gas being able to essentially regulates all the other reactive oxygen species by regulating all the other enzymes that regulate those. But and doing that by regulating the n r f two pathway. Does that make sense so far? Yeah. Definitely. Like, there's there's the aspect because, like, there's a miss misconception that, you know, all, all inflammation and all after this risk is bad, and then you want to neutralize it all the time, so to say, which, like you said already that it's not the best, solution. And, you know, these, these free radicals have, like, a very important signaling, factor or a signaling effect for, you know, governing many other healthy bodily processes, and you and you do need, like, a small amount of it. So you don't want to be taking, like, a massive amount of, antioxidants on a regular basis because you may just weaken the body, so to say, and, take it out of balance and disrupt the redox balance. So there is always, like, this small amount of oxygen stress that is beneficial, and, your body always gonna maintain this ability to self regulate it, so to say. And with things like these endogenous antioxidants like, n r two, the the the the body is able to stay at a balance more easily, so it's not going to be gravitating towards, one extreme or the other. So it's gonna stay at the homeostasis. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you for breaking breaking that down. That that's exactly right. You know, once it wants to maintain this homeostasis, not one extreme or the other. Because you can have oxidative stress, everyone knows that, but you can also have as equal of a problem, reductive stress. Right? Taking too much antioxidants. And and now you can just think about this. All the things I've described, now you can think about something like, say, vitamin c, vitamin e, beta carotene, what whatever it is. Taking high doses of this all the time. Well, first off, you don't have the bioavailability at the cellular level as as as, you know, very good. So maybe you're gonna be in different locations that maybe you shouldn't be because of storing there or something. You don't have the selectivity, so maybe you're gonna be neutralizing more free radicals than you should be. Maybe you're, yeah. And and you don't have the regulating you don't have much of a regulating effects in terms of, like, the m r f two keep one system and everything. And so, you know, yeah, absolutely. You know, not not everything is bad. Just like, you know, back in the day with cholesterol, I was like, yo, your cholesterol is too high. Well, now, like, you know, it's very well accepted now that you have well, you have HDL and LDL cholesterol. Right? It's better to have high levels of HDL, lower LDL. And then even that, there's problems with because there's different patterns of of LDL and different patterns of HDL. You know? And so you just and it's the exact same thing with these free radicals and antioxidants. You just keep on going down. And and and and some of these antioxidants, they're they're also not just, a passenger molecule scavenging or reacting, but they also have totally different effects in in in the body in terms of affecting gene expression. That could be good or it could be bad when they're when they're out of homeostasis. So, you know, that that's why molecular hydrogen is so attractive is because it tends to bring everything back towards homeostasis. Yeah. Is it is it because of this reason, because of nRF two, the molecular hydrogen acts like a very selectively, so to say. So it's not like a carpet pump, like vitamin c or it's a more very selective because of the being mediated through the endogenous and toxin systems like n r two. Yeah. Yeah. So that's that's probably two ways. So one, like we talked about, just the chemist the chem the physical chemical properties of a micro hydrogen cell, it simply can't react with, nitric oxide or superoxide. So it just it just it simply can't do it. It can only react with the the hydroxyl radical. But then, yes, it when it's going to, regulate everything, it's gonna go through n r f two. But this is the other big thing because you have other n r f two activators, you know, sulforaphane or, I mean, there's a lot of toxic things too that can activate n r two. N r two is not difficult to activate. Pretty much every toxin there is is gonna activate n r f two because it's toxic to the body, so the body's gonna respond and hyperactivate this. But that doesn't necessarily mean it's gonna be good for you because that toxin could actually, maybe activates n r f two too much. And and then that's gonna be bad because, high constituent levels of n r two activation leads to reductive stress, and that's gonna be very problematic. So so this is another very fascinating area with molecular hydrogen that it's it's not quite clear why it is, but hydrogen gas also seems to regulate the nRF two activation. So if you put it into the cell culture, as an example, and the cell is fine, you might see some r mRNA levels. You might see some minor changes in the in NRF two activation, but not really anything in terms of a Western blot protein concentration. You're not gonna really see any significant changes. But why should you? It's it's already perfectly homeostasis, exactly where you want it. And in in a stark contrast, you add a a a a pharmaceutical, or some other, you know, active chemotherapeutic, drug of some sort, you're gonna see changes, whether they're good or bad. Ideally, they're good, but that's not always the case. And and you don't have that with molecular hydrogen. And and so that's a critical point because let's say that you have some, I don't know, some condition or whatever, where let's say I'm I'm trying to be careful how you get this analogy because it's totally false, but at the same time, I think it teaches a good principle. But let's say you have, like, one organ that is is really struggling, where where it it's lacking the n r f two. It's lacking your your ability to have the higher levels of glutathione, superoxidase, and, you know, struggling with oxidative stress, and yet you have another organ that is fine. Or maybe or maybe it it's even a little bit higher. So consider what would happen now. If you take the this, strong therapeutic that's just gonna go into all those cells and just activate the n r f two, well, that's great. You got this organ fixed over here because n r f two is up and going and your redox status is back and that's functioning. But over here, you just upregulated this side as well, and now you have a whole bunch of other problems. And so, you know, you're you're you're yeah. You fixed one thing only to cause something else and have other symptoms, you know? And it just goes back and forth. Well, hydrogen gas doesn't have that effect. It it goes through and it's like another form of this selectivity like, oh, hi, mister or missus seller. You know, and it's like, let me let me help you out. And and if you need, the n r two higher, then it'll make it higher if you even if you need it lower. In fact, if you have levels that are too high, we actually have data showing it can it it can lower that. It has pro oxidant activity as well to bring down the the the the redox, position of so really modulating it. Wow. Okay? So so you have this you can have this in different organelles, but but not only that, you can have it in the exact same cell. And and and the more, more recent research is showing that that aging really is a problem with the dysregulation of the redox homeostasis within not only the body, but in the cell itself. So you can have one cellular compartment with too much, oxidative stress, oxidation going on, like in the in the in the, in the cytosol, right, just oxidizing everything. But in another compartment, you don't have enough oxidizing power, enough oxidizing potential, like in the endoplasmic reticulum where you fold your protein. And, of course, if you don't fold your proteins correctly, you're not gonna have, the the structure of the protein correctly. And, of course, structure dictates function. So, if you don't have the right function, then, of course, you're gonna have a lot of problems. Yeah. So it's, like an adaptogen as well that, Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So it still regulates. Yeah. Redox adaptogen. Yeah. That that's kind of one one of the, best terminology I used in an article I I wrote on its exercise in the medic effects for its, like, you know, working through this formative pathways. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Maybe, before we go into that, like, will will the n NF two activation also lead to, like, glutathione then? Yes. Exactly. Because, so so glutathione is a peptide. And so when NF two is activated, it's going to lead to the enzymes that's going to, help to produce glutathione to recirculate. Glutathione reductase, per glutathione peroxidase, all these different enzymes that are involved in that antioxidant cascade. And and that and that also helps to address because I know we talked about this also, but it also helps to address the anti inflammatory effects of molecular hydrogen. And again, these are mild, but they are multifactorial. Okay? And it's and it makes it a bit more difficult maybe to study in conventional research because typically, we we don't take something, say, aspirin or ibuprofen or something or and and we're gonna say, okay. This this molecule, this is the structure. It's gonna go, and it's gonna do this specific thing. Like, it's gonna reinteract with these cyclooxygenase enzymes, the COX two enzyme. It's going to isolate the area to prevent these prostaglandes like cosinoids, from being produced. It's very specific and it's, unidirectional. It's, one target, one organ, one disease type concept. Okay? Well, molecular hydrogen isn't like that. Okay? It it it works on all these areas. So we're talking about, like, inflammation. Inflammation is caused from this. There's so many areas. Right? You have your your genes expression, you know, and and you have your your transcription factors that regulate that and a whole bunch of proteins. So a lot of the information, like, with the cytokines, like interleukin six, pro inflammatory, interleukin 10 or interleukin four, anti inflammatory. All of these are regulated, and a lot of this is regulated by, like, NFKB, NF kappa b, which is a major, major gene, transcription factor. And when it gets activated, it produces a whole bunch of, very damaging cytotoxic, cytokines. And so the idea is, oh, we've gotta, you know, suppress NFKB somehow, which is difficult because of transcription factor. But if we do that, then you could you could be very, therapeutic. Well, hydrogen gas does do that. In fact, in nearly every article, we're seeing these down regulation of these pro inflammatory cytokines, the hydrogen gas is able to, suppress NFKB activation. And by suppressing NFKB activation, you suppress the cytokines. And by doing that, you're gonna, well, essentially, you're suppressing inflammation. But hydrogen also has effects like on the Cox enzymes, has effect on, c fos, on infat, on FOX signaling. All of these areas also lead to inflammation. Okay? And so hydrogen, effects essentially every area and transcription factor where inflammation could come, hydrogen has a mild effect on all of those, modulating them. And again, not just unidirectional, not just one way, not just suppressing, but even increasing. And and this study in the back, this the stage of kind of this hormesis idea, but, because it's a modulator, it's adaptogenic. It's not just, you know, total anti inflammatory. It's more of an a modulation a modulator of an of the inflammatory cascade, so to speak. Mhmm. Yeah. But, where do these all these free radicals and reactive oxygen species come from? Like you said, that they they're produced mostly by the mitochondria, but what makes the mitochondria, you know, produce them? Yeah. Exactly. So, so so so lots to consider with that. So, of course, the mitochondria, the way the way that it works is every time we eat food, rice is gonna go into the cells, you're gonna metabolize, your things to to just as carbon backbone. You're gonna form pyruvate. That's gonna into the mitochondria as as, well, it's gonna enter and you get, like, acetyl co a, and then it's gonna go through this, tran trigonal oxalic acid cycle. As it doing this whole process, the idea is you're you're continue extracting electrons away from the food, and then those electrons are gonna go through what's called the electron transport chain at the, in the mitochondria. And during this transport chain at at the last, at complex four, the electrons, they end up meeting up with oxygen and protons are forming water. So we make water metabolically, all the time. Every time we that's why we breathe oxygen essentially so we can make some water. And but but but the process of doing that oxygen, so oxygen is pulling these electrons during that process, pulling the electrons, you know, from complex one to three or or two to to four. It used to skip one on. But but anyway, as you're pulling through things the electrons through there, you're creating a a proton gradient. And those protons, very high concentration of protons in the end of the mitochondria membrane space, that's gonna go through what's called the ATP synthase, and you're gonna make your ATP, your denosin triphosphate. That's the energy currency of the cells. But what happens this is the part part to answer to that question. What happens is during this part of, moving the electrons, through the the electron transport chain. Sometimes when oxygen comes, it'll interact with, it'll react with one of these complexes prematurely. And then you form, by single electron reduction of molecular oxygen, you form superoxide. And then that can, that that can go through, like, the fenton process, and it can form hydroxyl radicals. It can, it it can be converted to hydroperoxide, and and then that can, also, decompose for more hydroxyl radicals or is there's a whole bunch of cascades that can happen, but this happens all the time in the mitochondria. And actually, a basal level of that is healthy for us. We we want that to happen. But if you have, let's say you're eating a bad diet, right, where you're maybe you're just not eating very good, then you have two problems with that. One, your mitochondria is going to be producing, more free radicals than you are ready for, more free radicals than you have your n r f two activation, more free radicals than you have availability in your glutathione, your superoxide dismutase, all of these things, and you're gonna slowly start causing more and more oxidative stress. Also, with a bad diet is you are eating less, healthy antioxidants to your polyphenols. And polyphenols are are good because not only are they themselves can be antioxidant, but they also end up being NRF two regulators. They're they're they're actually slightly toxic for you. And and and so because of that, they can actually activate the n r two, and that can help regulate a lot of things. So, so so, again, so bad diet, right, is gonna cause these problems. And then just as you're aging you, right, you got the cell this, like, cellular Senesense. You're gonna have, like, compromised mitochondria. And they're just gonna be producing way more free radicals and reactive oxygen species than they should. And that's gonna overcome that's gonna overwhelm the body. It's it's just like like exercise. Like, exercise is great. It's like the best thing anybody can do. But there comes a point where you can exercise too much. Like, you literally it's probably not a good idea to, you know, exercise for twelve hours every single day. Like, you literally are going to, like, kill yourself. And and and people who have, like, you know, hyped again, can you do these, like, you know, like the like, you know, do a marathon without training. Like, that you know that feeling is is so intense on your body. And that's because you're producing so much free radicals, so much inflammation. You're not ready for it. You've totally depleted your body's antioxidants. And and so it's the same problem with these compromised mitochondria that you you end up getting as as you age, as you as you get older as well. So that's part of the reason why your mitochondria is producing an an abnormal and excessive amount of free radicals. And, again, that's why hydrogen seems to have such a good, therapy for mitochondrial myopathy, so to speak. Yeah. Yeah. And, yeah, the problem is that we are, like, kind of bombarded with these additional sources of oxygen stress and inflammation in our environment, like, you know, toxins, bad food, pesticides, you know, air pollution, you know, sleep deprivation, stress, EMF, and, many other stressors, and they just kinda overburden the system and, change the balance in a negative way. Yeah. We we've only talked about just the mitochondria source of ROS. Right? But like you just mentioned, all these other external factors, environmental factors, radiation, you know, sun exposure, all these things, absolutely, that's gonna increase our our the free radicals, a lot more. And and again, that's gonna I can, over time, just overwhelm because it's chronic. It's not like with exercise. Again, if you go out and you you you exercise for, you know, twenty minutes, an hour, a day, that's great, you know, because it intermittent. It's it's a short exposure. You get this heightened level of oxidative stress, and now you're resting. Your body's gonna recover. You have your your genes, your DNA repair. All this kind of stuff happens. Now you're ready, and you can actually handle more, oxidative damage or oxidative stress later on. Okay? Mhmm. But but that's because you're doing this intermittent exposure of that. Right? As opposed to, again, all the time getting exposed. And that's what happens when you're always exposed to, the high levels of external or or internal problems. Yeah. For sure. You mentioned earlier that the molecular hydrogen is like a exercise mimetic. So, how does it affect exercise and what are some of the benefits from it? Yeah. So so we don't actually know that. This is kind of my conjecture look looking at some of the mechanisms. There there is some ongoing research to really determine if it is truly as an exercise mimetic. But what what that means is is is it's it's exercise like. And and and the reason why, I I have that conjecture, and I I post this paper in in the Canadian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology. But but basically kinda go through, some of the pathways that that exercise activates. As you know, what whether it's, like, the NRF two pathway, increased mitochondria biogenesis, you know, increasing PGC one alpha, the anti inflammatory effects, the antioxidant effects, the even the autophagy like effects of of exercise. And when you compare that side by side with molecular hydrogen, do you see the same pathways that are being activated? Okay? And and and and it and it's neat too because some studies, especially in animal studies, but even human studies too, they found that, taking conventional high dose levels of antioxidants can actually negate the benefits of exercise because well, we don't well, we don't really know exactly the reason. But but, again, some of the research would suggest maybe it's because we we get all this, this increased free radicals, which we need as second messengers to induce these changes. But then by taking a whole bunch of antioxidants, we're essentially indiscriminately neutralizing all the good signaling ones, the good and the bad. And so ten weeks later, you don't have the increased, you know, mitochondrial biogenesis. You don't have the increased, you know, glucose sensitivity or, you know, changes in insulin, a lot of different things that you totally miss out on. And because you were taking those high levels of antioxidants, you don't get that with hydrogen gas. In fact, in the in the in in the several clinical studies that have been published so far on molecular hydrogen is you're able to, exercise longer. You have less fatigue, less lactate production, or lactic acid, but that's technically not accurate. But so you have less lactic production probably because you have a better energy production from the mitochondria. You have, lower like a lower exercising heart rate during submaximal exercises. And just and you also have to recover faster. And so kind of the idea here is when you when you look at, when you look at diseases, okay, and and and the pathways that are activated with high levels of free radicals, high levels of inflammation, a lot of toxic pathways that are activated as well, you know, and and changes in gene expression. Those are actually quite similar to the exact same pathways that are activated with, what what can be considered noxious exercise. So exercise is not beneficial, but it's noxious or or harmful, which which is actually more common than we think. There's there's two ways. Right? In one on the one hand, you have, for example, elite athletes. In order to be at that elite level, you have to train, essentially harmfully. You know, your your, you know, your runner your people are running, you know, 150, 200 kilometers or more a week, for example. They're just pounding their body so hard. And and the idea is if if an athlete can do that type of training for long enough and not get injured, they're gonna get really good. Most people just get injured, because it's really hard on your body. Like, it's it is damaging to your body. It's noxious exercise. It's harmful. And and, that those same pathways are that are activated in that case are the same pathways that's going on in disease. In fact, toxic harmful exercise is a great disease model. Okay? Right. When you when you somebody does a marathon and they're not trained for it, and then they go and they go into the hospital, let's say, and they get the blood work done, every doctor's gonna think you just had a massive heart attack because your troponin c levels are high, your, creatinine kinase levels are high, your ALT, aortic, all these liver enzymes. Like, everything is just, like, way high. Like, you have some massive down there. You know, you should be in the ICU or something, but but you're just, you know, limping around instead of, like, you know, in a coma or something. And so some of these same it's it's just a good disease model. And and then the other form of harmful exercise, which which probably accounts for most people, who who, well, not most of them necessarily, but but this is the kind where people don't exercise regularly. Right? They don't exercise every day, you know, at a good time. Instead no. Instead, they are the weekend warriors. They're like, you know, Saturday comes, they go play soccer for three hours or basketball or or football or they go, you know, doing this long hike or just jump into a marathon without training or whatever. Well, guess what? If you do that, your body is so, so not ready for that kind of stress. And so, again, your oxidative stress, your inflammation, your damage, everything goes way high, just like happens in disease. So, again, when when you compare the the disease pathways and this noxious form of exercise, they're like the same. And then when you compare the benefits of good exercise, okay, beneficial exercise, that's when you're training daily. You're not pushing too hard, but you're pushing enough to get the the spikes and the stress, so to speak, right, and your body's able to recover and improve DNA repair mechanisms, your antioxidant status, all this stuff. Well, guess what? Those exact same pathways also hydrogen activates. Okay? Your NRF2 pathway, your PGC1 alpha, you know, for mitochondrial biogenesis, your enhanced bio energetics, a lot of these different pathways are also activated. So there's some really interesting parallels there. And then when we look at this, the clinical studies where we use hydrogen gas with exercise, we see increased performance, increased recovery, and and more and perhaps more importantly, we don't see the negative side effects that you can see with high dose of antioxidants or even anti inflammatory usage, during during this type of exercise. And so there are a couple of groups now though that are looking to see, okay, hey, let's let's directly compare bouts of exercise to simply hydrogen therapy, And let's see how much is hydrogen truly like an exercise mimetic. And, I'm excited to see some of that some of that research, but it's it's it's quite promising right now. So I I do I do think that hydrogen is a great thing for the exercise enthusiasts, both both those on the elite level as well as those who, you know, go out and be the weekend warrior, so to speak. Mhmm. Yeah. Totally. It's very, interesting, and I'm looking forward to it as well. So yes, you know, there are many things that can mimic some of the aspects of exercise or some of the physiological responses, like even the sauna and, like, fasting turn on, like, a very similar mechanism as you do while exercising. And, yeah. But the only difference is that you still need to, like, you know, get fit and you still need to, like, if you want to, like, run the marathon, then you can't you can't drink your way to running a marathon by drinking molecularizers and you have to actually run it to kind of linearly progress and to build up your resilience and the endurance. But, yeah, like, it it's on a molecular level, it activates, like, some of the same pathways and mechanisms. Right. Right. Exactly. Well and and one of the studies I'm aware of, they're gonna they're gonna look at, they're they're gonna just kinda test. Okay. Hey. You have the sedentary group of people. You have people who are exercising. You have another group, that are just gonna drink hydrogen. And so at the end of the study, the sedentary people should have improved essentially not at all. Right? Maybe even less. The people who are exercising, they should improve better than they did at baseline. People drinking hydrogen water, how did they do? And and and and theoretically, maybe they're gonna do a little bit better than the sedentary counterparts, but probably, obviously, not as much as, the people doing exercise. And then there's a combination group, so hydrogen water and exercise. And now let's see if there's maybe an additive or even synergistic effect. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Would it, like, speed up recovery in some way, so to say, like, or would it would it help with maybe muscle growth or or something related to that? Yeah. That's interesting. That's something we would like to look at as well. So we do have some data on, recovery. Okay? So it does seem to be able to speed up some of the recovery, so maybe not not as much muscle soreness. It's kind of equivocal, and it kinda depends on maybe the type of exercise that was done and all these things. Because, again, it it you know, just speeding up recovery is not necessarily always the best thing because you get better and stronger and faster when you're resting, when when you're recovering, not when you're exercising. Right? And so we have to we have to somewhat be be cautious on how much we really want to just like, oh, look. I actually as hard as I can, and there's there's no soreness at all. Well, then you're probably not gonna improve, you know, if it were like that. So, hydrogen, hydrogen knows the way. I know we we have to we just have to do the research on this. Right. But then with the with, like, the muscle mass and different things, it is interesting because, so hydrogen can increase like a gas gastric ghrelin secretion and and and, of course, that's that's our our hunger hormone. You know, one of the first benefits of fasting, is getting hungry. I mean, that's not really the benefit. The is is you start to get hungry often because this ghrelin, right, is is gets quite high. And and ghrelin, the stand is, you know, essentially stands for growth hormone releasing, and so you get higher growth hormone levels. And, of course, growth hormone is very anabolic. And hydrogen can also in in increase, ghrelin. And so it it it it seems that at least in some in some cases, people, could maybe drink hydrogen water, and they're gonna maybe have a better growth hormone release where they can, gain muscle mass. But but it's it's very interesting at the same time because when we give, like, with with, like, rats that have maybe some, you know, impairment or whatever and, give them hydrogen water, Well, okay. You would think, actually, based just on that alone of the increasing ground, they're gonna be more hungry, they're gonna eat more, and they're gonna gain more weight. And they especially, they have more growth hormones. So they gain more weight because they're eating more and they're maybe higher growth hormone levels, so that's just to make them gain weight. But that that's not what we see. In fact, we see that rats, these fed like a high fat diet, drinking hydrogen water alone, is equivalent to, like, a 20% caloric deficit in this in this animal study. Okay? And then when you added the two, so so hydrogen water and, the the fat the the, caloric restriction, you had a synergistic effect. Okay? And and and so you don't it it doesn't seem to be, unidirectional. That's I guess that's kind of the take home on this is, hey. You know, if you wanna get, you know, bigger and stronger, drink hydrogen. If you wanna lose weight, drink hydrogen. I mean, I don't mean to be so, you know, facetious with that. We need more data, but, that is what some of these the preclinical the animal studies are kind of trending towards as as as as this this type of observations. Mhmm. Yeah. Totally. And it does kinda make you think that it's almost like a miracle drug or a miracle molecule because, because of its, like, universal effect or very, like, like, your like, we already talked about, like, these very specific adaptations and, mechanisms that don't necessarily have a, you know, it's not it's not always the same response. It's always gonna depend upon, like, what's the individual and, what's their state what's the state of their body. Yeah. Exactly. And and that's and that in some ways, that's kind of one of the problems with more research on hydrogen and and and and be able to explain it because we talk about it. It almost sound like this Tennessee miracle, you know. Hey. If if you wish it, hydrogen can make you a dream come true. Maybe that could be the slogan or something. But that that's not that's not really not what, you know, that we don't that's not what we really have or what the data is showing. And then more of that hydrogen is just it it's just a it's a very mild molecule. So I my my imagination is that most people probably won't feel immediate direct effects, like, when they take hydrogen. And and and I know people will disagree with me because there's a lot of people I know who take take hydrogen, either inhalation or just drinking water. And there's like, I feel so much more energy. And, like, they have all these things that's, like, immediately affecting. So within minutes, they're they're feeling a a a major effect. And I I I just I just don't understand that from scientific perspective, and I don't feel that, myself. But but it is it is very fun to be part of this new area of of research for sure. Yeah. Totally. How did you get involved with it? Like, how did you stumble upon it? Yeah. So I I learned about it back in 2009. I I I learned about I heard I heard about all these crazy, wacky claims about alkaline ionized water. And there was, like, so much, like, anecdotal reports that I started, like, thinking, like, maybe there's something to do this. Like, I I wanted to, like, I I didn't think it was gonna be bad for you. So I I I bought one of those, expensive machines, and I went to town to figure out, hey. If there's something legitimate about this, like, I'm gonna figure it out because I wanna live forever. You know? Right. I was like, I was quite young at the time, but, you know, I I wanted to fig I wanted to figure this out. And then and and and then as I was going through and I kind of I learned all the stuff they were saying. I pretty much learned that everything that I was ever told, was was wrong, was false. It didn't make any scientific sense, and I had just confirmed that. And then I was just thinking about it. I was like, wait a second. When you're doing electrolysis, by definition, you are creating hydrogen gas. And and and that's when I came across that article in Nature Medicine showing that hydrogen gas has, selective, therapeutic antioxidant effects. And I was like, oh my gosh. I wonder if this is what it is. So anyway, I did some research and I ended up going going to Japan and 2013 at Nagoya University and researched in the department of neurogenetics and researched in the molecular mechanisms of hydrogen gas. And so that's kind of really how I got, you know, really into the mainstream of, getting to know the different researchers in Asia and and everything. Yeah. So what is, like, the best way of taking it? Like, well, what what's the best, source? What's the best, time to take it? What's the best dose? Yeah. So we don't we still don't know all those answers. We probably know some ways that aren't the best. So, you know, typically, when you look at, inhalation and and just dissolve it into water, you get a lot more hydrogen gas from inhalation, but that doesn't necessarily mean it's going to be better for you. And some animal studies suggest that drinking hydrogen water, at least in, like, say, a Parkinson's disease model, okay, the drinking of hydrogen water was more effective. So we can't really say, oh, well, you know, because the study was done this way, this is gonna be more effective or something. You know? Maybe that's true. Maybe it's not true. We just we just don't know. Okay? Both hydrogen hydrogen water as well as hydrogen inhalation both have effects, and they have different effects. I I suppose the most effective would be to use both Fomeca, both both pathways. You you you are changing the pharmacokinetics of of administration. Right? Inhalation is gonna go through the lungs and go right through the blood. It's gonna go everywhere versus drinking water. You're gonna you're talking about your you know, influencing the microbiome positively, or, you know, gastricrelone release maybe, maybe better effects in the liver. You know? There's so many different things to to consider about this. So, we don't we don't really know. But then when we talk about, like, best timing, same thing, we don't really know if there are best time to do it. I tend to think it's probably best to do it more of an on an empty stomach just because when you do have, a bunch of food or or whatever in the body, maybe that's going to create a lot of noise to to slow things down or or, obfuscate the signal, so so to speak. As well as if you have, let's say if you eat a bunch of food, you you you do produce hydrogen gas naturally in your in your intestines from your from your microbiome. And if you do that, then you could put possibly, well, okay. So if you have a whole bunch of hydrogen gas already produced naturally, and then you're taking, you're drinking hydrogen water, well, then I wonder if maybe the effects are not going to be as much because there's already a lot of hydrogen gas present. Okay? But but, again, we don't we don't we don't really know that because still by just drinking hydrogen water, you actually are still increasing. You're actually doubling, the concentration at the cellular level, because it's it's rapidly disperses throughout the body. And so you have this this this this tangent this spike increase, and that seems to be the most important aspect of getting a a biological therapeutic effect. And then, so so so with that then, we have to talk about the the dose and concentration. So, like, when it comes to inhalation, well, again, when we're breathing right now, we are technically breathing hydrogen gas, because hydrogen gas in the air is just such a small, small level. It has no biological effect. So how much does that need to increase in order for it to actually have a biological effect? Well, typically, the hema studies are, you know, around two to 4% and even higher than that. Two to 4% because higher than that is funable, but that doesn't mean it can't be done. It's not harmful to the body to inhale very high levels of hydrogen gas as long as you don't, you know, only have hydrogen at the, like, at the expense of not inhaling oxygen because that would be bad because we actually need oxygen. But but there's no but it's not toxic in in that way. So one of the problems, though, some of these inhalation device that I I have seen on the market is sometimes they produce such a small level of hydrogen gas. I mean, ten, twenty, 30 milliliters of hydrogen gas per minute. Well, you know, we breathe, like, 6,000 milliliters per minute. And so if you do the math on that, you're, like, less than, you know, 1%. And so that's that that's that's probably not going to be, you know, therapeutic, at least systemically, at least, you know, throughout the body. Right? So I would I would say we probably wanna have a higher, you know, level of hydrogen gas that's gonna be inhaled. And then the same thing with water. If you're gonna drink hydrogen water, you gotta make sure you get a high enough concentration because technically, all water has hydrogen gas in it because hydrogen gas in the atmosphere, so that gas is going to dissolve into the water. But it's not gonna be enough to be therapeutic. So you have to get the high enough level for it to be therapeutic. And and what is that dose of concentration at? I don't know. But, I mean, typically, you know, when you look at the human studies, you know, it's gonna be closer to, you know, one PPM, two PPM, three PPM, you know, or milligrams to liter. PPM and milligram to liter are essentially the same in dilute, concentrations. So the dilute solutions. So, you know, I I I tend to think that, it's probably better in order to get a cellular concentration that's high enough to elicit a biological effect, it's probably better to take, high doses of hydrogen, you know, at a time. Do you know? Take your take your total dose of hydrogen or or whatever, you know, out all at once as opposed to slowly sipping it throughout. Hey. Because if you're slowly sipping it You're not gonna have to take it all then. Yeah. Exactly. You're you're never gonna re yeah. You're you're going to, you you know, you're only gonna get a small amount of hydrogen gas into the body, and then and then you just excel it out, you know, and and you're never gonna reach a high enough concentration to exert a cellular effect. So, yeah, I I I I tend to think that the higher higher concentrations, higher doses, taken it this way is gonna be is gonna be better. But and then you have to test the concentration because there are a lot of products or things out there that that make a lot of claims. But, unfortunately, maybe they don't they're they don't provide what they claim. So by using that blue reagent, you can simply measure the concentration yourself. Mhmm. Is there, like, a way to overdose it? Like, what's the lethal lethal dose or, like, some where where do you see, like, some negative side effects? Yeah. So so interesting. We we haven't seen any, negative side effects, at least anything that we can really say is from the hydrogen gas. They've been using hydrogen gas since the nineteen forties, for deep sea. Typically, they use helium, but when they go really deep, some of these hydrogen, like hydroxy, you know, something gas, hydrolyx hydrolyx gas. But it's like, you know, very it's like 90 over 90% hydrogen gas. And they they use it at very high concentration, the very high pressure. So clinical studies, you know, with, like, you know, over 10 atmospheres of pressure and and, you know, very high percentage of hydrogen gas and no chronic toxic effects from the molecular hydrogen exposure. Okay? So and and like I said, it was produced in our by our intestinal bacteria naturally all the time as well. So, you know, if you were to say, hey. It's it's it has these toxic effects. Well, it's like saying, okay. Then don't eat your fibers. Don't eat your vegetables or this kind of thing because that produces hydrogen gas, and that's bad for you. But but that's not the way what what we find. And in fact, in some in some studies, preventing the bacteria from producing hydrogen gas, like doing a gene knockout study on them, actually can negate the benefits of the fiber, suggesting that in this case, some of the benefits of making the fiber are from the hydrogen gas. So, you know, I would say the main toxic effects is number one. If it's with hydrogen, it's not really a toxic effect, but some people are sensitive to hydrogen. Okay? There's just there's a sensitivity. So, you know, hey. If if you try it and you use for whatever you don't feel very good, that's very interesting. I don't know why that is the but I've heard people say that. Could could be could be correlation, causation, phallus. It could be a lot of, you know, confounds that are not directly related to hydrogen. But then also, people seem to be sensitive for, say let let's say that they, it really helps to lower blood pressure, helps lower glucose for them, let's say. And they're on medication. So let's say they take their their their insulin and they take hydrogen, and then hydrogen lowers the glucose levels back to normal, and then they take the insulin. Well, now they're gonna get, like, hypoglycemia. Right? So, you know, maybe you just you just need to monitor, you know, your your your levels all the time as you should be anyways just so you don't, like, overdose or something. And then and then, of course, you know, you don't want to overdose on, say, water. Right? Like, you know, you can you can drink too much water. If you're drinking, you know, five, six liters a day, that's that's, you know, this small person, that there's probably too much water. Not necessarily. I think it can be, you know, like, hyponitrogen is all I'm saying. Right? But that's not from the hydrogen gas. It's just the the diluting electrolytes. Yeah. And what's the difference between, these molecular hydrogen tablets and, these, machines? So the the one of the things about the tablets, and we and we've used them in several, clinical studies as well, and we like we like it because, of course, easier to do in a clinical study because everyone just has their tablets and, you know, you can we can, easily more easily control for that. They often will give you a higher concentration of hydrogen if you do it right, if you do it according to the instructions given. According to the instructions given, they can give you a higher concentration. Right? Drop it in the in the in the open glass, and then you consume it right after ninety seconds or so soon the tablet dissolves and it's still really cloudy. You drink it right then. That's gonna give you the highest concentration. So when they're done used correctly, then they can they can give you high concentration, and they're great. And and and higher than most of the machines have been. A lot of the machines, you know, are only give you between point five to, say, you know, 1.5, maybe two PPM. Sometimes there's some machines that are very expensive that can produce more. But so so so all in all, typically, the tablets give you a higher concentration. But then, of course, it's just, you know, one tablet and then it's gone versus the machine. You can just continue, you know, getting more water for you, your entire friends and family, and or whatever it is. Right? And then and then there's other problems just to consistently with the tablets. You you're always getting going to get a consistent, high dose of hydrogen. Right? But sometimes, like, with machines, you just have to be cautious because sometimes machines break down or sometimes you get you know, maybe the lactose get calcified, and maybe they don't produce much hydrogen as before, these types of things. So they're just they're just normal things you have to be be cautious of. Mhmm. Yeah. That's for sure. And and it's one of those fields where it's not so, you know, well researched yet. So so we there's a lot of unknowns yet, especially about the dosage and, and that sort of thing. So it's people can just end up, you know, buying their own things, so to say. Right. Yeah. Exactly. It's just it's it's a it's a new field, so, you know, buyer buyer beware in terms of the different products and things. Yeah. Yeah. For for for the, like, the last topic that I wanted to talk about is, the Autofatch aspect. So you already mentioned it a little bit already. So how does it affect Autofatch, and, you know, what can we do about it to optimize it? Yeah. Yeah. So yeah. That's this is great. So it's very interesting because, autophagy, of course, as you well know, is very important for our ourselves, our longevity and everything. And and there's so much talk about autophagy these days. But one thing that sometimes is overlooked is that that autophagy can also be bad for you when it when it is excessive. You know, autophagic cell death, you know, it it can be excessively activated. And now if those cells die, they don't need to die, well, then you just killed innocent cells. Yeah. And, you know, we don't we don't we don't want that. We don't need that. And, hydrogen has the ability to regulate, to modulate autophagy. Okay? So it's not just like, an mTOR, inhibitor or an mTOR activator, let's say, because those are most people familiar with that pathway for autophagy. But there there's a lot of ways, that regulate autophagy. There's a lot of different pathways actually. Okay? And and hydrogen, can regulate autophagy to multiple different pathways. And and so some of the therapeutic effects of hydrogen have been shown, where you have a neuroprotective effect or some other therapeutic effect of hydrogen. And in this case, the therapeutic effects were mediated by hydrogen preventing autophagy, preventing excessive autophagy. So autophagy still happened, but it prevented the an excessive amount of autophagy and led to higher cell viability and higher cellular function. You didn't maybe you didn't need as much autophagy. You know, however we wanna talk about it, this is the kind of thing that happened. And, so so hydrogen can do this. Right? Prevent excessive autophagy. By the same token, an equal amount of studies have demonstrated that the therapeutic effects of hydrogen are mediated by enhancing autophagy. Okay? By increasing the the the the autophagy process. And, and we can see, you know, the the the, the different complex. There's a lot of ways you can see this with best one and different things that have been looked at to see the the the complex that have been formed where hydrogen can increase this, the inhibition of of mTOR or or in or in some cases, maybe even a stimulation, for example. Right? So all all of these things, are have been shown. And that's why I think hydrogen is such a great, I don't know, tag along or such a great, molecule to use when it comes to the autophagy process because, most people, they induce autophagy by fasting. It's it's one of the best ways, honestly. Right? Just fasting, a good fast gets some good autophagy going. And one of these I'd like to research, but but it makes sense to me, is I wonder if in some cases, people are getting a lot of the benefits of autophagy. Let's say they they're doing a twenty four hour fast. Right? It's a great benefit starting to get into some stem cell production, and then they're gonna move on to the forty eight and seventy two hour fast. And and during these these, you know, three days, four or five days, and longer, you you you it it's feasible that some cells, some organs, some areas are starting to get too much autophagy. Okay? They're starting to get maybe some damage occurring because there's just too much autophagy going on, and it's and it's it's not being regulated as much. But other organs or other cells are having the optimal amount of autophagy. In fact, they're still they they could they could they could use more autophagy, if it were possible. So, hydrogen, in this case, the idea then is that you would take it during your fast, for example, and it would go through and it would help to, protect and prevent excessive autophagy from going on in certain cells or organs, and the other cells that would help to, promote and enhance the autophagy process. And so, again, it's regulating the the autophagy process in in different cells, adjacent cells, organs, different organs, and and it's able to just just have you know, ink enhance the benefits of of the therapy you're already doing. So it's a great, you know, adjunct type therapy, if you will. Yeah. That's really fascinating, and it's really cool that, yeah, that your your body can really adjust itself. And and it's and it it is true that, you know, autophagy isn't always good, and there's definitely, like, a very tissue specific aspect to it. So you may want to have autophagy in some regions, but you don't want to have it in other regions. And, you you wanna have it, like, chronically turned on all the time. So, yeah, it's it's great to see that, you know, the molecular hydrogen could help to kinda guide the process of autophagy, you know, you know, in a in a very optimal manner and in in a way that's always, like, more beneficial rather than harmful. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. That yeah. That that's what the research is trending. I I haven't seen any data which suggests, oh, no. Like, it did this and it made things worse or something. So, again, we need more data, especially in clinical trials to actually test this, but, it looks it looks very positive from the preliminary preclinical studies. And there's tons of anecdotal reports people, you know, have said that they're they're, you know, have so much better fast or things have gone a lot better or whatever from when they take the hydrogen along with their their fasting. Right? Yeah. Well, it's been great talking with you, and we could definitely, or we should we should probably do, like, another one in the future when we have, like, more additional research. And, yeah. So far so far so far it's so far it's looking looking good in the molecular hydrogen front that, you know, it shows a lot of promise in many many, like, ailments. Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. No. There there's there's a lot more we could dive into, in terms of different different areas that where where it can be used, different aspects, different, molecular mechanisms, and it's very exciting. So, again, yeah, my my my pleasure. It's, I'm I'm happy to, be on be on your podcast and and share some of this information. Yeah. Well, thank you. Yeah. Be before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? Yeah. So you're welcome to, of course, my my my website, Molecular Hydrogen Institute. That's, our science based nonprofit. You know, I set it up to, just provide education and as a platform to kinda do more research and things. I do we we I have put a lot of the the scientific articles. I do need to update it, but but there's, a lot of scientific articles. You can just go there and you can learn a little bit about molecular hydrogen. You're welcome to add me on social media. I just started an Instagram page not too long ago, at tyler w labaron. And, you're welcome to follow me. I have a lot of things that I've posted on hydrogen, even some research we've done on, COVID nineteen, and molecular hydrogen and some articles. We we got published, in fact, featured on on one of the journal articles, which is pretty cool. So, yeah. So so Instagram is great. And then, of course, on Facebook, just head of the brand, you can look me up. And, and then, again, I post a lot of the stuff on molecular hydrogen and and things on there as well. So, yeah. That's that's yeah. Great great to connect with everybody as well and spread spread the word. Yeah. Completely. We're gonna put all the links in the show notes. And, my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit you wish you adopted sooner? That I wish I would have adapted sooner. You know, I I I wish that I would have adapted sooner. And maybe this isn't necessarily true, but it's something I I am I am learning more about on the neuroscience behind it. I enjoy I I I I handle stress quite well. I've had a lot of stressful events, so to speak, in my in my life, and I've always been able to handle it and resilient, but I don't feel like I've taken advantage of it as much as I could have. And one of the things I like to compete in in sports and and and, and also like in in in in, and I just like to push myself in in all aspects, you know, academia or whatever. Right? And I guess one thing that I wish I would have done more is I think about when I was younger and I had a lot of drive, but I sometimes you go through these bouts where where you're just like, oh, that's kind of hard. I don't really wanna do that or or, or there are different things. Those are the most critical times to, to step into it, to to, like, just go forward, like, to just to to to do it. Because you can actually, have when norepinephrine is kind of in the in the cerebral cortex saying don't do it, and you just go forward and you can get some dopamine to suppress that and some acetylcholine. You can mark the synapses for that growth, and it's really awesome neuroplasticity. So I would say, I wish during these different times where where, you know, when I when I was younger that I would have, like, done more because because I feel like I don't know. I just I just feel like I could have, like, maybe competed or done things at a higher level, but I didn't I didn't I didn't have that in in Simon. I mean, I did, but I at the same time, I feel like hindsight's always twenty twenty, you know? And I, and I I never really I guess I didn't really see, like, you know, this this life, you can do so much in in this in this life. You know? And and I just I came from, you know, from a very small town, so I guess I didn't I didn't see a lot of things that I see now. And I'm like, man, if I would have known, I should have just, like, gone for it. You know? Like and, anyway, I I I'm I'm still learning, you know, a lot of these things. But I guess I'm just saying that, when when you have difficult times and and and, the cognitive, stress, physical stress, that's the time to just step forward and do it. The more you don't wanna do something, the more you should do it. You know? Yeah. Yeah. Totally. I I I agree. And, usually, the things that you're afraid to do are the ones are the things that you actually need to do the most, so to say. So it's like a signal signal from your body that, you know, this is the right direction almost. Yeah. Yeah. That's where the real growth happens. Yeah. Totally. Well, it's been great talking with you, and, yeah, looking forward to your future work. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you. Yeah, Sess. My pleasure again, and, nice visiting about all this. So Yeah. Well, I'll see you around. Alright. I'll see you. Yep. Goodbye.