Because if you're going to lose five pounds of fat, five pounds of fat all at the same time, all the toxins stored in that fat, and by the way, we biopsy the fat, heavy metals, pesticides, I mean, it is full of stuff. You have to process those. And if you don't bind those toxins, you are going to experience extreme brain fog. And the number of people who don't heed that say, Dave, I didn't believe you. I just tried doing it. And, yeah, I felt like I got brain fog. And I it took me six weeks to feel like myself again. Just like I couldn't focus. Yeah. That's what happens when you dump all the pesticides and metals from your fat into your circulatory system. Body mind empowerment. Get stronger, faster, smarter, quicker, friendlier, more helpful, more driven. Everything the buddy needs. Control your mind. Welcome to the BodyMinds Apparent podcast. I'm your host, Sim Lund, and our guest today is Dave Asprey. Dave is the founder of Bulletproof, TrueDark, and many other companies. He's a best selling author of several books, and he's often called the father of biohacking. This episode is brought to you by KAOSU training. KAOSU bands incorporate blood flow moderation training that trick the body into thinking that it's lifting heavier weights than it actually is. When traditional weight lifting requires you to reach 70 to 80% of your one repetition maximum to simulate muscle hypertrophy, then KAOSU achieve that effect only at 20 to 30%. So it's perfect for treating injuries or use when you don't have access to heavy weights. Research about KAOSU bands also shows it lowers blood pressure, speeds up recovery from injuries, releases stem cells, builds muscle, burns fat, and prevents age related muscle loss. These things are a game changer, and I use them almost every day. If you wanna try out the Katsu Cycle Bands, then use the code SEEM for a 10% discount at katsu-global.com. That's katsu-global.com, and the 10% code is SEEM, s I I m. Dave, welcome to the show. Siim, thanks for having me on. It's a it's a pleasure, and I appreciate your work. So I'm happy to happy to be here. Yeah. I'm also glad to talk with you and to have have my own podcast, because it like, your work, especially, like, the bulletproof radio was one of my first, like, introductions to biohacking and ketosis and that sort of thing. So, yeah, I'm, gonna glad that we can actually, you know, talk face to face now. It's, it's beautiful because there's something where where we go out there and and early stage biohackers got and find, you know, here's some stuff that works, and there's enough crumbs that we're going to test it on ourselves, see what happens. And then it creates just like you're describing, it creates this, oh, okay. There's enough here, and then you've gone in with metabolic autophagy. You've really gone in. So there's more research, and so it sort of starts to snowball, and then more and more gathers as it speeds up. So now we know more about ketosis. We know more about circadian timing, all that kind of stuff than anyone would have known ten years ago. But it takes all the crazy researchers in academia, and then it takes people assembling them, but it takes a community of people, not just one person, in order to get all the information out there in a way that people can digest it. And I think you're you're doing great work, so I I truly appreciate it. Yeah. Thanks. Yeah. And and you're so right. Like, there needs to be, like, some sort of a community effort in a way that we need to kind of bounce our ideas from each other and, you know, share share different experiments, and that's how, the kind of field moves forward as a whole. Yeah. So how did you And that's also why that's always the the conferences really matter. And Yeah. You have you got health optimization summit, you've got the BioAccum conference, that I started a while ago. It's in LA. I think it is eighth year. But you need a physical coming together, and COVID's trying to stop that. And then you need the digital ways that we come together, and then you need podcasts. And so I was really happy when you started yours, and it's, it's cool. I'm glad you're doing well. Yeah. So so how did you start, and how long have you been doing this biohacking? Well, let's see. So it's 2004. I was in, the Himalayas. And even before then, I'd I didn't have the name for biohacking, but I was doing this stuff that no one had heard of. Things like electricity over my brain, the first light stimulator for brain flow or for blood flow in the brain. That was in the late nineties and smart drugs in the late nineties. And it turns out there's a old generation of biohackers, guys like Steve Folkes, who, and and Dirk and Sandy from the antiaging front and the even nineteen seventies bodybuilders. They were all putting knowledge together. It just wasn't well distributed. Even Robert Atkins on the the side of well, he wasn't as much into fasting as he wasn't just in ketosis from any type of fat and any kind of protein. Just, you know, don't eat carbs. You'll be alright. So all of these were out there, but they didn't really talk to each other very much, and I wanted it all to come together. So I had these thoughts about it when I was in Tibet when I had yak butter tea that was the genesis for bulletproof coffee. And when I came back, I really started saying, how do I build a community to make these people come together? So it's really been, whatever that is, sixteen years of working on it. Yeah. And I registered, the first biohacking domain in, I think, 2008, if memory serves. Yeah. It's it's been quite a long journey. And, yeah, it's it's only actually at the beginning. So to say that we are only, like, a bit scratching the surface of, what we know about the human body and, like, the technologies we use and what the potential actually is in the future. It it's kinda funny. If you look back on the history of computer hacking, which it was my background, you end up looking at open source. And the original hackers are like, you know what? If you let the big guys like Microsoft and, I guess back then would have been Apple or IBM, if they own all of the source code, they will do bad things with it, and we'll never know what they're doing because we can't look inside the box. And so hackers came out, not the, you know, the black hat, we're gonna steal your credit card number guys, but the guys who said, we can build stuff that other people can't build, and we're gonna build what we wanna build, and we're gonna do what we wanna do. So they went out and built Linux, and Linus Star Vault, the whole open source movement. And if you look now, this is about thirty five years after that movement started. There was one crazy guy, I believe from somewhere in Scandinavia, who said, you know, I'm gonna do this. And now most of what we're communicating over today is run based on open source where everyone can look under the hood. And that was really important because if you can see what's happening in your code versus just running the code, you can see if there's something bad in there. And what I think is happening now on the pharmaceutical side of things and on the biology, even the medical side of things is exactly that. Biohackers like you and me, we're going out there and saying, actually, we're not gonna just go in and, you know, a nice man in a white lab coat's gonna tell us to take some of these pills, and everything will be just fine. We wonder how it works, and we wanna change it. So there's new knowledge that's coming into medicine from biohacking and new knowledge from medicine that's coming here. Today, Microsoft is the largest contributor to open source code out there. Microsoft, that people were they fought against it for years. What I forecast is in another ten, fifteen years is that the pharmaceutical industry and medical schools and all that, they will be a lot more biohacker friendly than they have been a while ago because they'll realize this is where innovation comes from. And when they share openly, that's, the collaboration will work better. So some of the medical monopoly stuff won't work. And if, you know, pharmaceuticals in, say Europe or The US are opposed to that, that's okay. There's billions of other people in countries that won't have those problems. So the the end of it, I've I would forecast. It's not not really the end. It's just the evolution where you and I have a right to know what's going on in our body. We don't need a permission slip to do it, and we can get the tests that we want. We don't have to, go beg to get the test. And then when we say, you know, I wanna try this thing to make my body do this, that you're allowed to do it without there being any sort of legal repercussions. And today, just peptides and things like that are you know, there's a war on peptides you don't even see. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's, yeah, quite quite interesting to see that. Yeah. Because in a way, you should have, like, at least, educated freedom about what you put into your body and, what what do you do on a on a, like, daily basis. So, everything everything, you know, should be somewhat allowed as long as you have, like, enough education and you're willing to take the risks yourself. The unfortunate situation is that you're, like, the big big, medical companies and governments that try to, let's say, not even tell you or not even give you the information so that you wouldn't do something, to to yourself. It's a it's a fundamental human right, to decide what you put into your body. And that means you could decide what you don't put into your body, as in I don't wanna eat the margarine. Even if you tell me it's good for me, you're wrong. Yeah. And by the way, maybe I'm wrong when I say you're wrong, but it's my right to decide that. And you also, don't get to say that, this food has to be fortified by law with something that's toxic for me. I'm talking about folic acid. A third of people can metabolize folic acid. So it's really good that you're reducing folic acid deficiencies in two thirds of us while messing up one third of us. That's just dumb government planning. I should have the right to choose. Yeah. And this comes down to really fundamental human freedom. And there there is going to be more and more of this as people who get sick and stay sick. Some of the post COVID people are saying, I feel like I have chronic fatigue syndrome. Like, yeah. I've had chronic fatigue syndrome. That sucked. And you'll do anything to stop it even if it doesn't have a a prescription pad with it. So I don't think that it'll succeed to drive in knowledge of ketosis or knowledge of fasting or knowledge of antisemescence drugs or knowledge of antiaging therapies. To drive this underground, it won't work. Even with Internet censorship happening the way it's happening now, it's the cat's too far out of the bag. Yeah. That's also and, yeah, it would be, yeah, too late to kinda fully suppress and, censor this kind of information. All you have to do is take someone like me who used to weigh three hundred pounds and say, you used to weigh three hundred pounds? I go, yeah. I did. You wanna see my stretch marks? And I go, that can't be possible. Yeah. Well, it is. And when when people see that and they've heard a story from big media or whatever that says, well, if you're fat, you're gonna stay fat and and do these things that don't work like diet soda. Well, eventually, you hear enough of those. You say, someone's BS ing me, and it's not the people who used to be fat who aren't fat anymore. And, you know, that happens at a very grassroots level. It happens in churches. It happens in grocery stores. It happens in places that aren't the Internet, and it's already unstoppable because enough people have had massive transformations. I I did the math. People lost a million pounds from the Bulletproof Diet book. And, like, okay. They talk, and you you just you can't reverse it that much. It just takes a while. Robert Atkins, the Atkins Diet came out in 1972, the year I was born. So I have a first edition of his book. It was directionally right. It was wrong about the type of fat and whatever. But it was to say, if I had known that when I was 16, then I would not have been as fat as I was. It would have really helped me in massive ways. And that's one of the things that inspired me to write Bulletproof is the information just wasn't out there to write the Bulletproof blog. So what I think is gonna happen is, you know, someone's gonna hear this podcast, read one of your books, read one of my books, whatever, and they're gonna do it younger and younger and younger. So you and I are saying that this is so new. Really, this is a continuation of something from whatever this from fifty years ago when when he wrote the first books on ketosis. And his was a continuation of Banting's work, which was in, whatever, the late eighteen hundreds, saying, hey. What do you know? If you quit eating carbs, you lose weight. Who would have thought? Yeah. Yeah. And and the same applies to overall biohacking as well. So biohacking as a as a, like, a practice or activity is been practiced for, yeah, like, ever since humans, you know, started to roam the earth. And, like, we've been using different med meditation techniques, different types of fasting, different types of nutrition, supplements. All those things they are, like, essentially biohacking. We just have, like, new tools and, new techniques that we use nowadays. Yeah. We've accelerated it exponentially. And if you look at back in the enlightenment, we had some really serious things. I wish I could turn my camera. I have a a picture from, like, the sixteen hundreds, a painting, and it's, an alchemist wearing the robes and the little things like that, talking to mother nature. So it's, like, sort of technology versus nature. Mhmm. And so this has been going on for hundreds of years, and that even comes from, this idea of, okay, how how are we gonna live a long time? Who's doing it? Monks living in caves. You know, the tantra, Ayurveda, traditional Chinese medicine. Thousands of years of observations of what works and what doesn't work, and we should do this at this time. Again, it's distribution of the knowledge. How do we get it out there? And then in the West, we decided we were gonna discard all of that, and now we're rediscovering it. And I very consciously at the beginning of biohackiness, I'm gonna be very western on this. But meanwhile, I did figure out the effects of yak butter tea went beyond just ketosis, back in when I was learning meditation from the masters in an ancient lineage. Right? And so you're saying, wait. And every time I try to disprove something, that comes from back then with numbers or data, I'm like, oh, there must be another mechanism there that I didn't understand. Like, the the tiny droplets of fat in water do something that that's meaningful metabolically. And I did not know that from the yak butter tea. And, by the way, native Tibetans, they could feel it. But I ended up funding research at the University of Washington that proved what was going on. I knew that you had to blend your coffee in butter. I just couldn't tell you why. So what what does it do to them? What to the coffee? Well, Jerry Pollock, wrote, books about exclusion zone water. And when you drink normal water, they he calls it bulk water. And this guy's written he's he's done a huge amount of research, spoken at a couple of the conferences and, you know, many decades with us in basic water chemistry. And no one could adequately explain from just surface tension why water bubbles, like it forms a a lens at the top of a graduated cylinder. And he said, alright. We've gotta dig in on this. And he found that when water is near a surface, that it changes its structure in something that's a little bit more gel like. So when we drink water, before we can use it to fold proteins or make, electrons in the Krebs cycle, for essentially any enzymatic based process in the body, the first thing we do is we transform the water from bulk water into exclusion zone water. And you do that by putting the water near droplets of fat, and different fats have different levels of exclusion zone that'll happen. And very interestingly, you it works much better with either vibration or with infrared light. That's called heat. So what happens is you, you do this, and you can look at it under a microscope. It's very visible. You say, this is the clear water, and right near the fat or right near the the, the barrier, whatever you're measuring it the water up against, you see a change in the water. You just need a very good microscope to do it. So when I funded the research there, he said, alright. Let's see what different fats do. And with butter oil, basically ghee Mhmm. He said that forms the largest exclusion zone I've ever seen. And, you know, he was all excited. He emailed me the the photos from the microscope. And he said, so this is it. When you're blended in hot liquid, you've got heat, you've got blending, you've got tons of surface area. So what the Tibetans had figured out was, you know, if okay. I'm just gonna describe when I first had yak butter tea because it's it's too crazy to believe this. We're about a quarter mile from a river. K. It's 10 degrees below zero. It's a by the way, those are American degrees, so, you know, everything is frozen. And, still so a lady wakes up in the morning, and she makes tea. And there's a little mud hut in on on the side of Mount Pilash. And to make tea, you have to burn yak dung. So, you know, they're lighting up the big piles of yak poop and burn you know, heating up the water. And she takes it. She makes the tea. And instead of just pouring this nice hot tea into cups, which would be really nice, now she takes a scoop of butter. She puts it in this big wooden butter churn. She pours the hot tea in this cold butter churn, and then she takes her, you know, the the paddle on the churn, and she goes to chunk to chunk and, like, spends ten minutes just pounding on the water and the butter. And I'm like, this is just odd. But then again, Tibetans, you know, they wear different hats, and they you turn prayer wheels. It's just a very different culture, one one that I I respect. Well and then they poured this kinda lukewarm concoction out, and you drink it. And I felt massively better. Now you could say, what the heck? Come on. Eat the butter. Drink the tea. Like, how hard is it? Yeah. It it just doesn't work, though. I tried it. Right? And the reason it doesn't work is all of that churning with the heat and the tiny water droplets that they're getting, they're turning the water into exclusions on water. Why? Because they're at very high altitude, and it's really cold. And for them to survive really well, do you really wanna have to make heat? Because all they're eating for breakfast is tsampa, which is barley flour, and they drink some yak butter tea, and then they can carry a couch on their back up Everest. I mean, these people are superhuman beyond belief. Like, they're they're half my size and twice as strong as me and cold resilient. And, well, I know now. Even this that research came out even after I wrote the bulletproof diet. I'm like, there's six theories for why blending the butter really matters, but that was the one that I could at least back with science. But no one knew this, except that Tubman's figured it out. They just didn't do the science to understand, oh, it's the water. It's because your body doesn't have to take its own heat and electrons to heat up the water to transform it. Yeah. And and then you take that and you cut it back to whole body vibration. Yeah. Which is something I've been a huge fan of for ten years. We make the bulletproof vibe. You you stand on this thing. Well, what's going on there? Well, the water is being mechanically agitated right near lipid membranes. You know, cell membranes are all made out of fats. And, magically, do you feel different after you do that? Yes. Does more research keep coming out about the benefits of this for antiaging, for bone density, even for changing the bacteria in your gut? It does keep coming out. And I think some of the benefits are from exclusions on water, transformation because your cell membranes are piezoelectric. And so, man, we're just we're peeling off layer after layer after layer and finding the coolest stuff inside the body, and every one of those is a mechanism for new, new work to be done. That piezoelectric cell membrane thing. So that means that if you vibrate your cell membranes, they make electricity. We run on electricity. Does that mean that the frequency with which you vibrate your cells, if you manipulate that, that it might have different effects on the body? Yeah. It's called sound. And, yeah, it does have different effect on the body, and there's other mechanical vibration. Yeah. But those are there are new devices. I have a couple of them on my desk here that are taking advantage of that. And so I'm just thinking this is the best time ever because we can measure data in ways you never could possibly do. You can do things like pulse wave analysis to see how long does it take a a wave to travel through your your circulatory system, which is something I've been, more interested in lately. And according to the analysis, the the normal tables, apparently, I'm 27 years old. At least my arteries are. I'm okay with that. But we couldn't get the data. But if I went to some, you know, Chinese medicine guy who's 90 and has been studying these years, he'd probably put two fingers right here and go, yeah. Of course. He already knew it. So we're just taking ancient knowledge and putting numbers on it. That's my my real belief. Yeah. Yeah. The the structured water is really interesting, and, it does make, sense as well because, you know, the the definition or the the idea behind structured water is that it's sort of, like, this trans translucent state between vapor and solid water. So it's like this transitionary phase. So that's what, like, the fourth phase water. So, yeah, like blending, it does make sense that it does create this sort of, the fourth phase. I have tried the weirdest things, and and MCT oil, does something different. And I always say brain octane oil. Just when I say MCT, at least they're not lauric acid MCTs. Lauric acid doesn't metabolize the way the c eight MCTs, that I that I put out there a while ago, the the way they do. So most of what I'm talking about is c eight. And by the way, I there were no studies that showed you that c eight was better than c ten or c twelve when I came out with Brain Octane. I just knew I'm gonna test all three of these. And if you put c eight in there, it feels like rocket fuel. You put c ten, it kinda works. And you put c twelve, it doesn't do anything but give you disaster plans. And then studies came out of UC San Diego saying, oh, look. Four times more ketones from c eight versus c ten versus, c 12. So each of those things, I'm like, alright. You can feel it. You can sense it if you're trained to do that, and then you move on from there. But when you put that stuff in a blender, it has very strange behavior around water. We can't even tell you if it makes an exclusion zone because it's the only, really, it's the only fat that's soluble in water to the extent that it is. So getting it to hold still so you can look at it under a microscope when it's transparent and water's transparent is really difficult. So that represented a challenge in the lab. But so I couldn't tell you that it does, but it probably makes one. But even if it doesn't, when you blend it, you can blend it with anything. And this is a crazy thing, but everyone who's a wine connoisseur knows if you wanna aerate your wine, you can blend it for a second with a little whippy thing, and then your wine's aerated. I think Tim Ferris first did a video on that that just went crazy about it. Oh my god. He's, like, blending his wine. What's he doing? He's, like, making it taste better. Well, I had leftover wine after dinner, and I threw some Brain Octane in the wine because one thing that c eight does, it protects the liver from LPS induced toxins, lipopolysaccharides, which is a primary reason that bad bacteria in your gut cause inflammation. So I found a study that said it does that, and alcohol increases damage from LPS. Okay. We'll cancel one out with the other. And so I threw some mice in there. Yeah. As a if you're a wine snob, like, that's disgusting and horrible. I'm like, guys, it was a waste wine. It was an experiment. And I blended it for a while. I figured maybe there's some cool stuff going on. And I will tell you, everyone who tried that was going, what the heck? Like, this is fantastically good because your body will sense when you're drinking something that has extra energy in it, and it's not a flavor. It's a feeling. And when food is cooked properly, like, oh, I want that. And that's one of the reasons we like fatty foods and especially good fatty foods. Something made with proper grass fed butter tastes better than something made with margarine. And it's hard to say, well, they taste almost the same. It's it's the feeling your body gets from it. So that was another experiment where what's going on at this really atomic level, the molecular level with what we're eating and drinking, and I think there's something actually, there's a lot more to be done there even with respect to fasting. So maybe it's not the calories you get. How distributed are they throughout a liquid? Which liquid? With what components along with it? Is coffee or tea better? Coffee. But, you know, all all of those are open questions for proving. Yeah. Yeah. Totally. And, yeah, the quality is also, like, huge, especially when it comes to fats and, yeah, the the protein source in general. One of the things, we were gonna talk about Superhuman, my antiaging book that came out a few months ago. Was on the New York Times list for a couple weeks. I I like to go really deep. One of the reasons for writing, and I when I read your books, I get the same sense from you. It was, like, it's an excuse to go deep on the research and then pull it together in a framework for understanding so then you can understand it better, and that also allows you to be able to write a book that's worth reading. So I went down that path, and I found some, a study. And I'm not remembering the date from it right now, but it's cited in the book around when you eat fat, where does it go in the body? And, like, I've I've known for a very long time, the whole antiaging world has known for twenty five years, that you can measure in the blood the ratio of omega three to omega six fats. And normally, you have, like, a a four to one ratio there for six to three, and that's considered a a healthy antiaging ratio. Over the course of manipulating my lipid membranes, I've gotten myself down to about 1.28 to one, which means very low omega six. News flash, omega sixes are essential fatty acids. That probably wasn't healthy. The only guy I know who's been lower than that was, Larry Smarr from UC San Diego, one of the professors there who, took huge amounts of data and then three d printed a picture of his own colon. And one of the the early speakers at quantified self conference, he he was slightly lower, like 1.08, if I remember right. I'm like, okay. We're gonna race to the bottom of disrupting our cell membranes with not enough omega six. Yeah. So one answer to that would be, hey. Let's just drink some corn oil. No problem. Except those are all damaged omega sixes, and that's gonna do much worse, much more of a problem versus, you know, eating some walnuts that are kept in the fridge, which are going to be not oxidized, or having some olive oil. Frankly, eating some beef that ate grass. There's omega six in there. So I would imagine I have higher levels now. I haven't tested in a while. But in superhuman oh, and by the way, you know this. This is just for listeners. The average Western diet eater has a ratio of 40 to one instead of four to one. So there's 10 times more omega six, and most of it is the deep fried crappy, you didn't wanna do this soybean, canola, corn. I don't know what other crappy oils people eat, but all the all the bad ones. Yeah. But what this new study that I, that I I wrote about covered was, okay. If you eat a fat, where is it gonna go in the body? And it's not at all evenly distributed. I was sort of blown away. The brain will peg itself at 45% saturated fat, and it'll do that until the end of time. It it's actually way more important than the omega three or omega six ratio, which swings all over the place in the brain. So your adipose tissue, the the stuff under your skin, you just the the white fat, that stuff is also highly variable. So it'll store the most inflammatory fats very, very quickly. So if you're carrying extra weight there, if you eat that that, you know, bottle of corn oil, it's going to go into your white fat and generate free radicals like crazy. Yeah. But it'll also go into your muscles or into your blood cells in different ratios, and I record the different ratios. But if you lose a ton of weight through fasting, through, I'm gonna say, clean ketosis or clean cyclical ketosis with grass fed stuff, that would be bulletproof. But I believe cycling is very necessary for it, even more so now than I did ten years ago. But however you do it, you you lose a ton of weight. But then you say, alright. I'm gonna have a cheat meal. And your cheat meal is I'm gonna go eat, you know, French fries and crappy oils. You're you're gonna build yourselves out of those oils, and it's not gonna end well. You're gonna you're gonna wreck it. So at least when you go off a fast, eat the best fats that aren't all, you know, cooked at high temperatures and fried and grilled and all that because you're replacing stuff. And you wanna be built out of pristine materials, not built out of crap materials. And this goes beyond ketosis. It goes beyond fasting. It's just one of those okay. If you put it in your mouth, it's either fuel or a building block or a toxin. And we weigh too many toxins and don't know it. We take damaged building blocks, and fuel is not really an issue for most of us in the West because there's enough calories. It's not been a calorie issue. It's like what was riding along with the calories? And and that's also been a message in biohacking that is very hard for people to accept. The the food safety thing, the toxins from mother nature, in the Bulletproof Diet before Superhuman, I said, alright, guys. Here's the toxins that are messing with you. There's lectins. There's oxalates, and, let's see. There's mycotoxins, and there's biogenic amines, mostly like histamine. Right? And if you account for those four, you're getting it from most of the the things that will get you. Some for some people, it's solanine, and there's other little compounds they're sensitive to. But you take out those four things, you might be fine on some but not others, and that's also outside of ketosis. And it's funny. I went on the Joe Rogan show a while ago. It's kinda like five, six, seven years, whatever. And I was on, and he started drinking bulletproof coffee. He was like, this is the best thing ever. You know, change his whole brain and all this. And then his buddy decided to knock off the brand, like, try to steal the brand. And then it was like, Dave's a bad man. And the last time I was on there, I was like, I wanted before it got weird for financial reasons. I was like, I wanna do something for Joe and his followers. He has them all drinking kale smoothies. And so I sat down and said, Joe, I put together a blog post, because I know that you guys have been doing kale smoothies. I'm gonna tell you how to do kale safely because this happened. I was a raw vegan. And when you eat lots of raw food or lots of kale in general, you get a buildup of this toxin in the body. And it's not a good thing, and it causes kidney stones. It causes tartar on the back of your teeth. It causes vulvodynia in women, which is basically pain in the perineum around the vulva. And it's even tied to autism, and joint pain, and gout, and all sorts of bad stuff. So guys, cook your kale. Drain the water. When you're cooking it, have some calcium carbonate or even baking soda. Anything to precipitate out the oxalic acid. So that instead of precipitating in your blood with calcium and then making tiny crystals throughout the body, maybe you could do that in the pan. And then you you drink it. Sorry. Then you dump the water, and then you eat the food, and you put put in your smoothie. You can make blocks of frozen kale, or you could just say kale is disgusting. You could use it as a little decoration on the side of your plate like it was meant for, and then you could eat some other vegetables, but whatever. And so be like, ah, such bullshit. Such bullshit. And and just last week, Joe goes on there. He's like, well, guys, I had to lay off the kale smoothies because of the oxalates. And I'm like, I told you six years ago, buddy. Six years. And all these are in the realm of biohacking, but it's a framework. Okay? Now I've got my fasting down. I've turned on autophagy. I fixed my metabolism. What am I gonna put in there that's not gonna gum it up? And I found those are the big categories. Last night, for instance, I live on a small farm, and it's awesome because, I mean, I grow most of the food, especially during a pandemic. It's in middle of summer, and there's a vibrant garden. And we have a dozen pigs, a dozen sheep. So lots and lots of fat here, and I know what they eat. In fact, my pigs eat the bulletproof diet. They do intermittent fasting. They get brain actinol, they get activated charcoal, and they get all vegetables. Like, these are it's the best pork of my life. Right. Well, we cooked, roast yesterday for lunch, and we didn't put it in the fridge. Just waited till dinner. Pork and fish are the two types of food that form histamine most quickly during, bacterial breakdown. But normally, you'd think it was a roast. It should be able to sit out for five hours. And if it was beef, it would have been fine. But because it was pork, by the time dinner rolls around, I ate it. I'm like, you know what? My brain is a little bit off. I can I can just feel it? Right? So I took a few things that counteract histamine. I took a black cumin seed oil. I took a DAO, which is an enzyme that blocks it, and I felt fine. Oh, and a little bit of dark chocolate seems to work like magic. Who would have thought? Anyway, I was fine. But my my wife's like, what? And she actually got hives from it. Oh, wrong. But at lunch, we ate the same thing with no issues. Right? And both of us are relatively histamine sensitive in the overall scheme of things. And other people that would eat that have nothing. And same thing. You can give two people, kale, and one of them is like, man, the next day I had to pick rocks off the back of my lower teeth. Yeah. You're you already have problems with your kidneys or something going on, but there's little ducts in the back of the mouth. All of these are part of biohacking. All of these are understanding what came along with the fat and protein. Because those categories don't even mean anything. By the way, if I deep fried that pork, it would have been something different than if we slow roasted it. So you you can just keep looking at these different layers going, what matters? And the answer is how do you feel? And if you're not sensitive to histamine, you can have, you know, kale pork roll ups. But I'll tell you, everyone is sensitive to oxidized fats over time. And whether you feel it in your brain, you feel it in how your skin looks the next week, I don't know, but it will kill you. And so in Superhuman, I'm doing my best to stack rank this and say, alright, guys. There's four things that are gonna kill you. So if you wanna live to 180, which is what the book is about, you might as well not die of these four things. And then there's seven things that are causing aging that we didn't know about before. And if you say, oh, I'm just gonna fix three of those things, you're probably still gonna age. You'll age better. But if you fix all seven of those or at least slow them down to allow technology that's coming online very quickly to help you, you have a really good chance of living well beyond 100 under your own power, independent, but full of wisdom now because you learn a few things being alive even for seventy years. You know, it's another thirty years on top of that, and you can still walk around and do what you want. You're kind of masters of the universe. Like, oh, yeah. I saw that in 1920. I saw it again in 1962, and I saw it again in 1983. Pretty sure it's happening again. Right? I can't say that. I wasn't around then. And when I talk to people who are 90, and I've had a couple Nobel Prize winners on a Bulletproof radio in their nineties. Oh my god. They're so smart. Right? And and their brains are still working. And I wanna be like that when I'm 94, and I wanna be like that when I'm a 124. And say, you young kids over there, you don't know what it was like when I was old. Except I'll probably be on whatever the InstaSnap that they're doing at that time in virtual reality goggles. I'm gonna be right there with them because I have the energy to do it, and my brain still works. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's, yeah, that's really good. And, you know, there's there's a difference between, like, aging this dysfunctionally where you are, like, you know, just deteriorating slowly, but and there's also this aging more gracefully or aging in a functional way where you are. You're, like, yeah, highly creative and productive even in the, like, last years of a life. And, most people just most people associate living longer with the deterioration so that if you tell them that would you like to live until 100, then they think that they're gonna be in a wheelchair or in a, like, a coma or something. But that doesn't have to be like that if you take care of yourself. Yeah. You know, yeah. The difference between the perception of, what we think aging means in our society. I I was really surprised. I was having this conversation with, Maria Shriver, who is, you know, she was married to Arnold Schwarzenegger and, you know, very well known, person, member of the Kennedy family. And I've done a lot of work to support her women's Alzheimer's movement, charity project because women get Alzheimer's more than men, and that's one of the big four killers that's in Superhuman. So we're having a conversation. I think it was on her show, and I I said something about that. And she kinda recoiled and said, god no. I wouldn't wanna live that long. So I'm like, but, you know, you're you're in such a great position, but it's because the first thing that came to mind was what you just described, Wheelchairs and, you know, diapers and tubes and not knowing your name and all that, and it's kinda horrifying. And so part of my mission here and I'm intentionally including antiaging as part of biohacking. Look, if you wanna have control of your own biology, that's all biohacking is, not getting old is a big part of it, or better yet, not feeling old, and not looking old, and not having old cells. So I'd like to get very old, but I'd like to do it undetectably. And when you replace the picture you just described and the one that Maria had with a picture that's a little bit more realistic, which is that, you know what? When I'm 70, I will be walking around under my own power, feeling good, doing whatever I want with my brain fully working. Now do you wanna be 70? Like, heck yeah. And it turns out this vision has already happened. You probably know what one of these things is, but have you seen one of these before? Yeah. Grip. Grip tester. Yeah. Grip tester. Dynamometer. Now the most reliable and simplest way of determining whether someone is elderly or not is their grip strength. And you can squeeze it, and it measures your grip strength. About twenty years ago, they had a problem, and this problem was quantified in The US and Japan. This we said, okay. When you're 65, you're elderly, and it was true based on grip strength. But all these 65 year olds were like, you know what? Screw you. I am not elderly. I don't feel elderly. I don't look elderly. You know, I'm going for hikes. I can work just fine. So that is a lie, and I'm insulted. And what happened there is, they said, alright. Let's test some grip strength. And they did a wide testing, and they found out, oh, it turns out they're right. So they moved the age for elderly from 65 to 75. So we already gained ten years of of youth, but it didn't make the news. But that's what the scientists did. So we're already on this path of extending the time that we have before we officially are elderly. Me, I do grip strength stuff. I'm, you know, mid to late forties. It thinks I'm 18. My pulse wave analysis thinks I'm 27. My brain response time, which, you can measure called p 300, it says I'm 20. Right? So I have a 20 old response time in my brain, and I think it's because for ten plus actually, more like fifteen now, years, I have been feeding myself undamaged fats. I've rebuilt my cell membranes. The half life of fat in the body is this is in the Bulletproof Diet, and it's somewhere it's it's right about two years. It's It's, like, seven hundred and something days. It it's a little bit less than that. Yes, bro. So it's gonna take you really at least two years if you go on a diet. Let's see. We're half saturated fats. So so in the recommendations that came out from years of manipulating my diet and all in the first book, where half your calories from fat should come from saturated fats because that's what you're built out of. Yeah. Yeah. And who would have thought? But you do that, and then you replicate the ratios for the others on damage that you want to, and you do that over time. And if you eat a lot of fat, you can actually flush out fat from your body, which is important because guess what else is in your fat? Lipophoric toxins. What does lipophoric means? Fat loving. So if you imagine you have a you know, test tube with water in it, and you put in one drop of food coloring, it just sits there, and it slowly percolates. And if you wait twenty four hours, it'll be spread throughout. But it's the same thing. If you eat a toxin that likes to absorb into fat in your body, it'll do that. It'll be in your myelin sheath, which is mostly made of fat that's lining your nerves. It'll be in your cell membranes, which are all made out of fat. It'll be in your adipose tissue. It'll be in your brain. Now if you wanna get that out because it's inhibiting, oh, electron transport or any of the other things that toxins and fat can do, well, you're gonna have to eat a lot of fat. You're gonna have to increase bile turnover, and you have to do it for a while. And as you do it, you get healthier and healthier because you've now replaced parts of your infrastructure with undamaged parts of your infrastructure, and you washed away the stuff. If you take that test tube and you want to just dump it, well, that'd be called dying. Don't do that. But if you start adding a little bit of water at the top, some of it's gonna splash out, but it takes a lot more than one test tube's worth of water to replace all of the water that had food coloring in it. The concentrations go down over time. It's a linear algebra equation there. And that's why I'm just a fan of eating a lot of healthy undamaged, saturated and monounsaturated and small amounts of omega six and omega threes, and doing that over time, combined with the techniques of autophagy that cause, cells to go away that are probably made of fats you didn't want anyway. Yeah. And doing that over time, it seems like it really works. In fact, it works very quickly. So true that the fats, they stick around for a long time. And, yeah, if you eat bad fats and inflammatory fats, then you are you're you're going to be made out of those fats, and those same fats are gonna cause more inflammation inside your body because they're, you know, spreading the inflammation there. And I I would also imagine that, you know, burning fat or increasing the fat cell turnover with, like, you know, being in ketosis and fasting increasing the top notch and those things, they they would also speed up some of the process faster because, like, the majority of people, they aren't burning fat. Like, they're burning sugar and carbs on a daily basis, and they never they never actually even, increase the turnover of the rate of the fat cells. And so so, therefore, they are inflamed for, like, literally for decades and, aging themselves faster. You're a 100% right there. In fact, I wrote this this blog post, on the the daveasprey.com page, which is where I'm putting all my my latest research and all. On the Bulletproof page, I've got all the the stuff that's, like, if it's collagen, MCT, or kind of that side of things, it's all on Bulletproof. All the other biohacking stuff is on my page. And this post is it's gotta be, like, seven years old now, but it it's called the rapid fat loss protocol. How to lose weight faster than your faster than you should. And there's a big warning at the top, and it says, look, this is for people who have to fit in their wedding dress. You don't have much time. And there are actors who've used it before their shirts off scene, and it works very, very well. And it's basically a combination of fasting and ketosis with clean fats and a whole protocol. But the problem is and the reason I warn people about it, I'm like, I'm not joking about taking activated charcoal and glutathione when you do this. Because if you're going to lose five pounds of fat. Right? Five pounds of fat all at the same time, all the toxins stored in that fat. And by the way, we biopsy the fat. Heavy metals, pesticides, I mean, it is full of stuff. You have to process those. And if you don't bind those toxins, you are going to experience extreme brain fog. And the number of people who don't heed that and say, Dave, I didn't believe you. I just tried doing it. And, yeah, I felt like I got brain fog. And I it took me six weeks to feel like myself again. Just I I couldn't focus. Yeah. That's what happens when you dump all the pesticides and metals from your fat into your circulatory system. You didn't have a way to escort them out, which is what activated charcoal does. So that's something that I think is underappreciated in the fasting world. Is that, you know, you might wanna take some charcoal when you're fasting. Yeah. You know, I I added charcoal to the world of biohacking. It was one of the first products I did at Bulletproof because it turns out most of the charcoal in the market used a larger particle size than was ideal. So I got the finest particle size charcoal, which, was very hard to manufacture because it makes, like, clouds of fine black dust everywhere, but, we got it out the door. Yeah. That's a good that's good advice and, helps to kinda eliminate the detox symptoms that happen if you are, like, burning fat at a really high rate. But you mentioned in that in the soup book Superhuman, you talk about the main causes of aging. So, can you go through what are the main causes? The main causes of aging, there are well, okay. Let me do the four killers first. Those are diabetes, which is a risk factor for the other three. Then it's cancer, cardiovascular disease, and Alzheimer's. So you've gotta fix your metabolism and not get diabetes, which reduces your your odds of getting into other things. The reason for those are really straightforward. First step of living a long time, don't die. So if you play the odds, that's what kills most people. It's one of those things. Right? And you might be hit by a truck. That's a different one. That's a a low iron diet. And then in, in Superhuman, the other seven pillars were where I spent, the the bulk of the book, and I will do these from memory. And, one of them is what I call, zombie cells, one that you'll appreciate effectively. You know, these are are senescent cells that are are floating around in the body. They're not dead, but they're not performing their function. They're making free radicals, and they're not contributing. So these are kind of hang hangers on, for lack of a better word, and you need to kill senescent cells. There's also toxins inside the cells, that gum up the works. And you can imagine there's, parts of the cell, that are it's usually like a furnace, and their job is to, you know, burn up proteins inside the cells. And the problem we have there is some things don't burn. So imagine you have your your garbage incinerator, and you're shoveling garbage in there because it's how you get rid of garbage. But then you shovel in a bunch of metal pieces over time, and the metal won't burn. And, eventually, you can't shove anything else in there because it's full. Oh, at that point, you have a cell that becomes dysfunctional. And, oh, okay. So what do you do? You have to either make a new cell or you have to somehow get rid of what's in there. And there's different techniques talking about that in the book. But one of the things you could do is you could eat less of the things that clog up your furnaces. You'll probably live a lot longer if you do that. And and the structure of the book is that for each of the these seven things, here's what the crazy anti aging, the the most cutting edge, you know, people are flying around the world. I did as much of that as I possibly could. So I'd go there and I'd do the thing, and I talk about it. And then I'd say, here's the pathways that we know are real because this because this is possible. Here's the, you know, $50 use this supplement or do this affordable thing. And then here's the free version of it. Right? So the pathway is real. Let's leverage it to whatever extent we we believe is important for ourselves biologically and whatever is economically and time wise feasible. You could spend your whole life flying around the world trying to get anti aging treatments and then die of circadian disruptions. So that's not but that's not the point of the book. The point there is what's going on with those. There's also toxins outside the cells, which are, a different issue, that you wanna deal with. There's cellular stiffening, and I believe a lot of cellular stiffening is driven by this eating bad fats, to be perfectly honest. But there's other causes for it. And, let's see. There's mitochondrial dysfunction, which my book before Superhuman called Head Strong, is a a a very heavy work on mitochondria. It's actually very readable, but it's very detailed research thing about, mitochondria in the brain specifically. But it turns out forty eight percent of people 40 have early onset mitochondrial dysfunction. And just about everyone over age 40 has some degree of it, and it's just called aging. But what that means is they're not as good at taking oxygen and food, whether it's fat or carbs, doesn't really matter, maybe amino acids, and turning them into energy. So if you suck at that, what do you do with the energy? Well, you use the energy to heat the water to make exclusions on water or structured water. You also, after you do that let's see. Are you gonna fold a protein? Right? Are you gonna take a breath? Are you going to remove senescent cells? Are you gonna sleep? Anything you're doing requires electricity. And so if you're running on just lower and lower power because you've gotten your mitochondria messed up, well, you gotta fix that. What are mitochondrial membranes made out of? The same fats that your cell membranes are made out of. You better eat some good fats if you want your mitochondria to work. It's not that hard, and maybe the path shouldn't be full of toxins that inhibit mitochondrial respiration in dozens of studies. And that's one of the reasons that I talk even in this book about toxic mold. It's one of the most common environmental sources of mitochondrial inhibitors, which is, to me kind of hilarious. You look at very ancient evolutionary biology. Well, we have this story that says we were these cells. By the way, we don't know what kind of cells they were. There's three or four different candidates. They're all, like, parasites. And we're floating around the ocean, and then we found these great bacteria, and then we harness the bacteria that made that became our power plants, the mitochondria. Right? And that is what we've all been taught, and that's kinda what we believe. Now the alternative narrative that I fully believe after all this research is that there was some red bacteria floating around in the ocean, and they found these cells, and they moved in and say, hey, look, we got mobile petri dishes. This is awesome. And that was where evolution took off. But those little bacteria are in charge. The mitochondria, they don't just make power. They sense the environment, and they change the chemistry of your body as well as the electro environment. They make hormones. They make neurotransmitters. They do all sorts of sneaky stuff in there. They're calling the shots, not you. They're the first line environmental sensors way down in a distributed network, that eventually rolls up into your brain after enormous amounts of data filtering. Mhmm. And I know that because that's how we build data centers. That was my whole career in Silicon Valley, and the parallels are eerily similar to the way we're building very highly scalable distributed systems on the Internet and the way decisions are made subcellularly and between cells, between networks in the body. And as it rolls up and rolls up, you have to shed data. Otherwise, you end up with this weird problem of having a a full size map of the world. It's never useful. It's as big as the world. So you have to pull data out that's less relevant. The body does that before we become aware of it. Yeah. Now in terms of aging, we've got mitochondria inside the cell, outside the cell, cell stiffening, and we've got, the first one, senescent cells. Then we've got, telomeres is another big thing. And in the book, I talk about telomeres. People are usually familiar with that because it's been around for a while in the the world of antiaging, even in the common press. But the idea is it's sort of like a fuse in your cells. And every time the cells divide, it gets a little bit shorter. And when you run out of fuse, your cells can't divide anymore, and then bad things happen. So what would you do, to fix this problem? Well, you would go for, you'd you'd go for a thing that could lengthen, and it turns out deep sleep can. Fasting works pretty well, but there are some supplements that people have talked about forever. But they're, like, $2,000 a month for the amounts of these things, and it takes 50 plus pounds of certain herbs to be compressed into a little bottle. You know, they're they're getting things from a stegolus in order to do that. So I took that stuff for several years with no effect, and that's a bit of a problem, because it's quite expensive. And, then I said, well, what if I tried this Russian thing? And it turns out some of the best biohackers on Earth are Russians. I I don't know why, but it turns out rocket scientists and biohacking, like, go to Russia. These guys are awesome. So the Russian stuff is, like, $50. It comes in a vial, and it's a a peptide. And you inject that stuff, and it lengthens telomeres pretty darn reliably. And well, wait. Okay. So I read about all this in Superhuman saying, okay. Here's the the the techniques that you can do. Here's why the pathway is real. Here's the techniques you can do, that are expensive. And then here's something that's the cheapest I could find to do it. And if you wanna go even cheaper, turns out sleeping and fasting and some cold exposure and the normal things like that have small effects on telomeres. And, that's one of the things, but the flip side is also dangerous. If you do all of the things I'm talking right here that turn on growth like a young body, Well, what also can grow is cancer. Right? Yeah. So there's that risk. In my experience, having talked with hundreds of experts on Bulletproof Radium, and having been, you know, a lecturer on the main stage of the American Academy of Antigen Medicine a few times, and just having gone deep with cancer docs, the vast majority of cancers are mitochondrial in origin. A very small percentage of them are genetic, and some of them are actually fungal that are just, kind of confused, for lack of a better word. Some of the the sac fungus things look an awful lot like certain forms of of things that are diagnosed as cancer, and the cells look almost identical under a microscope. So, from that perspective, and that's a lot of what I'm seeing in that last point comes from Doug Kaufman's work where people are going, Dave, you don't know what the hell you're talking about? Okay. Fine. I don't know what I'm talking about. I'm not here to debate. Here to share. You can you can do the research. But, what's very interesting to me is as you look at all that stuff, if you up regulate that mitochondrial function thing, which is the cause of aging, you reduce your cause of cancer sorry, your risk of cancer, from all causes. So highly functioning mitochondria are gonna power the immune system to get over the genetic cancers, but you still might have to do some heavy duty work if you're one of the three or five percent there. And you end up playing this balancing game. But do you want short tumors? No. Do you want really long ones? Yes. Do you want cancer? No. So these are the pillars of aging, and that's the interesting thing. Imagine a bar stool. So why I wanna sit here for a long time? K. Well, it has seven legs on it. And if you cut off one of the legs, make it a little bit shorter, it's gonna be wobbly. But if you cut off the wrong two legs, it's gonna tip over. Right? And so what we wanna do there is make sure that you're providing some support for each of those pillars of aging. And the book there is just full of things. Oh, look. In this study, this caused rats to live 90% longer. What? You mean? I thought that wasn't supposed to be possible. I I heard in the news there's no such thing as anti aging. Like, well, I don't know. These scientists did it, and here's another guy who replicated that. That's funny. Oh, and this compound, activated charcoal, raises, let's see, extends lifespan by 15%. I wonder if that's because of what we talked about earlier, where it's binding to fat soluble toxins in the biliary system in bile and causing them to be excreted. Well, of course, that's why. Or maybe I'm totally wrong, and there's some other reason. I don't care. But the numbers are that it does do that, and we have a reasonable hypothesis for it. Yeah. That Yeah. Yeah. It's it's so true. Like, it's a it's a the aging itself is, like, you know, culmination of many things, and you can't really pinpoint it into one particular thing. You have to kinda approach it or from a, you know, holistic perspective and, do as much as you can to minimize the collateral damage. Yeah. You really do, have to to look at it as a multifactorial problem. And one of the things that that Western medicine has done is broken that, and it it's getting fixed now. So if it's this multifaceted of a system, people love to look at this as, I'm going to to as a Western doctor, I'm gonna focus on kidneys. Right? And I'm gonna focus on bones. And it turns out this hormone made by your bones called osteocalcin is really important as an antiaging hormone. But you're a bone doctor. You're not an antiaging doctor. You're not going to see that. And so we've probably known about this somewhere or another for a long time. We know about osteocalcin. But studies just came out a couple weeks ago saying, oh my goodness. It turns out we can probably inject this stuff and reverse a lot of the diseases of aging. Oh, wow. Wouldn't that be useful to know? So bones are hormonal regulators. But if you're not trained to look at the system of the human body, you won't see the hormonal regulation side of bones. You'll see broken bones. You'll see weak bones. And then an epidemiologist will say, oh, or or data scientist, I see a correlation between weak bones and other diseases of aging, but there is no causal factor. And so the people the systems biologists who are coming in now with the power of big data, these amazing systems, they're just shredding years and years of knowledge saying, that doesn't work. That doesn't work. That doesn't work. And they're able to do it so quickly because we have this ability to do machine learning and AI. That's one of the reasons I I think we can actually do better than 50% on top of our current best. We know there's a couple people who are 120. We can do one twenty as a species. It's already proven. I just feel like we can do 50% better over the next hundred and forty something years. And I'm willing to to bet my life on it because, you know, if I'd What do you have to lose? If I lose, I was gonna die anyway. If I win, that's cool. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Totally. And, yeah, I totally agree that, we are almost like at a this sort of a breaking point, I think, towards, like, the next sort of a next level or a next leap in in the average lifespan in humans as well as overall, like, functionality and, health span. And the book and your book also gives a lot of, great details into all these topics that we talk about, your ketosis and sleep and peptides and or other other types of, useful things for antiaging. But what is your next book about? What are you gonna write now? I'm working on some more of the the books that include the psychology of all this stuff. So it's pretty easy to say, you should go eat this stuff. It's pretty easy to say, you know, go fast for a day or a week or, you know, avoid protein in the the bulletproof diet that I talked about. It's one of the first books I know of to talk about autophagy. I said, look, just one day a week of protein restriction increases autophagy. You don't even have to fast. Just don't eat protein more than 15 grams. And now we know a little bit more about which types of amino acids you shouldn't do and all that. But the number of people who are gonna hear this episode and then go eat a donut is shocking. Why do they do that, and how can they change that? So I'm including a lot of that stuff in my next book because as a guy who's lost 300 pounds and has picked up the donut more times than I would care to admit, but I don't do that anymore. What is the transformation that has to happen in your thought process as well as in your biology simultaneously to get the results you want. And what I'm looking for is I want more people to do this with less pain because when people get their biology working, a side effect is that they become nicer to each other. Your anxiety levels go down, so you stop acting like a stressed out asshole. That's just that's how it is. So anxiety can come from the story in your head, or it can come from what's happening in your cells. And a lot of times when you have cellular stress, you have systemic stress in the body that's based on biology. We just say, well, I feel like anxiety. It must be and then you point at the nearest person. It's their fault because we're not very good at filtering where that stuff comes from, and then you start acting like a jerk. At least this would have been my path. So I I feel like I'm less of a jerk when I have control of my biology, and I like that. Yeah. Like, the mindset is huge and, yeah, it's almost, like, very, very difficult to make some sort of a bodily transformation if your mind doesn't transform in the process. So you can really, like, self sabotage yourself, or you can just procrastinate on the things that you know you need to do, if your mindset isn't on point or if you have, like, some sort of, I don't know, like, a negative connotation about those things and, that sort of thing. So my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit you wish you adopted sooner? So I had a lot going on biologically. You know, you're three hundred pounds. You have arthritis when you're 14, and just all sorts of bad stuff. I wish, that I had figured out that your emotions are caused by your biology a lot earlier. You spend a lot of time feeling guilty or feeling shame about the fact that you're you are going to pick up the doughnut and that you yell at people and you feel like crap, and then you feel like you're lazy when you can't make enough energy. And if someone have just said, Dave, you have a hardware problem. Fix that. Instead, I spent a lot of time thinking I had a moral problem. Like, it's because I'm not trying hard enough. So the habit that I wish I'd picked up was just going, I feel like crap. It's probably my hardware. If I just had that habit, it would've been so much easier to fix it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's so true that sometimes we just, even even if we, you know, judge ourselves, then it can also come from the lack of awareness or lack of knowledge about, like, what's correct or and you you you just become Yeah. Frustrated. Like, I've tried everything, and it doesn't work. Like, what's wrong? Maybe you just had the wrong information and you took the wrong wrong advice. Mhmm. Yeah. And then it's the self blame part of it that that's a big issue there. And, I mean, it it's an endemic problem for for everyone when they're young. And even if you have the best parents and all, it's just in there. But if someone just explained that to me. Like, sometimes you act like a jerk, and it's because of what you put in your mouth six hours ago. Yeah. I just didn't know that. Like, I must just be a jerk, and it wasn't true. Yeah. Alright, Sam. I gotta run and jump on my next call. Alright. Thank you for having me on your show, and keep writing good books. Yeah. You too. I'll see you around. Alright. See you. Bye. Alright. That's it for this episode of the BodyMind Appointment podcast. If you wanna support us, then I would greatly appreciate it if you could leave us a review on iTunes and the other social media platforms. You can now order my new book, Metabolic Autophagy that covers a lot of the same topics that we talked in here. It's a collection of certain lifestyle habits and practices that prioritize longevity as well as performance. To support this podcast, you can also become a Patreon and get exclusive video lectures from my biohacking boot camp that covers circadian rhythms, intermittent fasting, autophagy, resistance training, biofeedback, and many more. But other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.