The more oxidative stress you have in the body, the sicker you are, the more likely you're gonna have higher levels of senescent cells and the more likely viruses are able to infect your own cell. So one of the first line defenses then is to have a low amount of oxidative stress and have healthy cells because unhealthy cells are more susceptible to infection. Welcome to the Seamland podcast. I'm your host Seamland. Today, we talk with doctor James DiNicolantonio. James is a cardiovascular research scientist and doctor of pharmacy. Doctor James and I coauthored a book called The Immunity Fix. It's a comprehensive guide to strengthening your immune system fighting infections and reversing chronic disease that takes into account all aspects of your health. You can get The Immunity Fix on Amazon. James, welcome back to the show. Sim, thanks for having me. Yeah. I'm, glad to have you on on the show. And, we we wrote a book. So, it's a special occasion to do a podcast. It's a it's a good time to celebrate. Yep. Absolutely. So the book is The Immunity Fix and like you reached out to me maybe like it was in May or June of this year and you're gonna propose the idea of let's let's write a book together. And yeah it was a kind of a you know, it's a very, hot topic at these times, the immune system and such. So, like, what what was the main kind of reason why we would we would you, like, want to, write a book about immunity? Well, I think I mean, obviously, from a public health standpoint, I think it's important. And I had been publishing, you know, several academic papers about, you know, potential ways to boost the immune system. I figured, you know, might as well put out a book to get to get it out to, you know, more people. And so I think, you know, a lot in the news, we hear a ton about, right, masks or, social distancing and things like that, and that's fine. But, you know, people do need to understand that they have control of their own health, and their own immune health. So I think that this book was really, you know, to bring attention to that because I think it's important for people to know. Yeah. Absolutely. I agree. And, like, although, the immune system is very, you know, relevant at this time of the year and this year especially, but it's also something that you, you you could use, all the time, so to say. So it's not a book about specific events at this time. It's a book that I think, will also kinda stand the test of time, so to say, because, we do cover basically, everything related to the immune system. What's immunity, how the immune system works, inflammation, and, yeah, like everything else, how do you strengthen it. And the book is, like, maybe, like, 400 pages, around that and, like, 2,400 references. So it's not it's it's pretty, dense and full of old information on the research that you've done. Yeah. And I think, like you said, it takes a it takes a broad approach. So it's more about, you know, not just, you know, what supplements, but, like, a whole lifestyle, sunlight, sleep. Right? You know, diet, exercise, like, everything that can potentially help the immune system. And, ultimately, right, your immune system if you're if you're improving the health of your immune system, you're gonna improve the health of, you know, many other things because your immune system is involved with inflammation, right, or autoimmune disease or, you know, taking care of precancerous cells. So, ultimately, anything that helps fix the immune system should translate to better overall health. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. And, yeah, it kinda carries over to other things. And, like, there are many things that actually affect the immune system as well. So you so you can't take it, very narrowly. So, like, you know, your metabolic health is gonna affect the immune system. Your kinda age or, like, your let's say, biological age, is gonna affect it. Your, sleep schedule, your exercise routine, your nutrient, status. So, yeah, it has to be very, all encompassing almost. Yeah. Exactly. And I think too what was what was important to me for the book was to get people to understand how the immune system works and how nutrients sort of interact with the immune system. So I think that the, you know, the book lays that out very well. And so people can really understand which nutrients interact with the immune system and which nutrients are more important than others. And what's like an optimal intake, in the diet or via supplementation. Yeah. Absolutely. So maybe let's, start off with some of that. So, yeah, the immune system does need, a whole lot of nutrients to function optimally. And, like the most common one that, like, people know about is probably, like, vitamin d. So, yeah, like, how does vitamin d affect the immune system and, like, you know, how can we optimize it? Yeah. So, I mean, taking just a step back, in regards to, like, your own body's defenses. Right? The first line of defense, I guess, you could say against infection would be your skin, mucus membranes, epithelial barriers, and endothelial barriers. And so, you know, the nutrients that are important, for epithelial health. So let's say the epithelia around your lungs is vitamin d. And for mucus membrane health, vitamin a and vitamin b two are very important for mucus membrane health. So essentially a virus has to drill through the mucus membrane first in order to even have the opportunity to infect you. So if you have a good strong mucus membrane, that is your first line of defense against any infection. And that can start breaking down as what me and you discuss on immunosenescence as your body, not only does the immune cells kind of, you know, go down and they lose their function with age, But your mucus membranes as well sort of lose their integrity. And so so starting out with the nasal passages and the throat, that's where typically people get infected first. So if you can have a strong mucus membrane, strong epithelium, strong endothelium, that's gonna be really important. And then, you know, collagen obviously is important for that as well. Now going down to the in the intestinal tract, you have stomach acid that produces, well, that is formed from partly hydrochloric acid. And that in order to get hydrochloric acid to form, you need chloride, and you can only get that through salt. So salt is important for another first line of defense, which is stomach acid to sort of degrade any pathogens that could be absorbed in the first place. And then our body actually uses salt, particularly chloride, to secrete hypochlorous acid to kill cells. So you have, like, this first line of defense of mucus membranes, your your epithelial and endothelium barriers, and then your stomach acid. And so you can right away see that nutrients are playing an important role there. In regards to vitamin d, almost every single immune cell has a vitamin d receptor. And in order for vitamin d to activate those receptors on immune cells, it has to be the active form of vitamin d, which is calcitriol. And in order to activate vitamin d, you have to have good magnesium status. So, again, this just kinda shows you that you can't just take vitamin d and hope everything's gonna be okay. There are other nutrients that sort of allow vitamin d to work. But from a from a sort of broad perspective, vitamin d helps us produce something called cathelicetins and defensins. And so these are basically antimicrobial and antiviral peptides. And, again, that you need the active form of vitamin d in order to do that. And so, probably the nutrient that is associated with the highest if you're deficient in it, that's associated with the highest sort of mortality and worse outcomes with COVID is vitamin d deficiency. Basically, if you're deficient in vitamin d, there's a tenfold higher risk of mortality if you're infected with COVID versus if you have sufficient levels. Yeah. Yeah. It is, pretty, well documented that, you know, vitamin d deficiency is linked to not only, like, a more severe symptoms of COVID, but also just the autoimmune disease in general and, influenza infections. So, yeah, it's, quite central to all the immune cells. And, yeah, like, for example, in the case of, like COVID, then, this vitamin d deficiency is also associated with, this pro inflammatory kind of, environment that is, characterized by this particular damage associated protein like h m g b one, which is a mouthful, but essentially, it's it is found to be like a very, important and pro inflammatory, factor that does get raised during infections and injuries, especially, during COVID, and that leads to this cytokine storm. So it is, vitamin d is important for, like, a lowering that, pro inflammatory signature as well. Yeah. I mean, so essentially vitamin d helps control the cytokines that are released from the immune cells. That's actually, you know, how it works when it binds to receptors. So it essentially it sort of helps balance out the immune system. And so, it helps sort of increase anti inflammatory cytokines, and it sort of reduces pro inflammatory cytokines. That's kinda how it works. And then, what it also helps to do is, again, the active form of vitamin d, helps to reduce, senescent cell formation and the pro inflammatory cytokines that are released from senescent cells. And if people don't know what senescent cells are, essentially, when a cell gets damaged, to a certain point, it becomes this senescent cell, which is essentially like these we call them zombie cells for the layperson. But they're really not just, like, dormant. They actually have their own phenotype, which is a pro inflammatory phenotype, and they can start sort of damaging nearby cells. And senescent cells are more susceptible to viral infection as well. And so the more oxidative stress you have in the body, the sicker you are, the more likely you're gonna have higher levels of senescent cells and the more likely viruses are able to infect your own cell. So one of the first line defenses then is to have a low amount of oxidative stress and have healthy cells because unhealthy cells are more susceptible to infection, and you'll have a higher viral load. And that higher viral load will lead to more killing of your cells because the virus has to hack your own host machinery to reproduce. And the only way to kill a virus is to kill yourself. So if you can prevent the virus from infecting a lot of yourselves, you're gonna prevent yourself from having to kill a lot of your own selves. Yeah. Yeah. The, usually, like, what what I kind of figure discovered during the writing of the book was one of the one of the biggest things was that, yes. It's not necessarily like the virus that's always killing the person. It's it's more like the the, overreaction that the body creates in response to the virus, which is essentially is the cytokine storm, this, massive production of these pro inflammatory cytokines that, leads to, like, lung injury and sepsis and eventually organ failure and death. Exactly. That that's a 100% correct. And sort of when I was doing some of the some of my research on the topic, I was trying to understand essentially if there were things that would cause an increase in the inflammatory cytokine storm. And what what seems to be a large driver, it's not necessarily the only driver, but there are two two primary things that seem to be happening to people who are having worse outcomes with COVID. One is they don't produce as many type one interferons. So type one interferons are produced, by macrophages and monocytes to sort of interfere with with viruses. They sort of inhibit viral replication, and they have a bunch of other functions as well. But as we age, our production and our and our function of interference actually goes down. So we published a paper on potential supplements that could help boost that, and we cover that in the book. And then the second factor is there's a reduction in the cytotoxicity of the CD eight t killer cells. And, essentially, those particular cells will seek out the virus and kill it in a in a soft, non inflammatory controlled way. It's called apoptosis. Other parts of the immune system, though, aren't sort of targets specific to a virus. For example, macrophages, monocytes, and neutrophils kill in a highly inflammatory sort of nonspecific way. So what you have is a reduction in the cytotoxicity of your CD8 T killer cells from eating a poor diet, not exercising. And that that forces the inflammatory part of the immune system to start having to kill the virus instead of the CD8 T killer cells. So now you have pro inflammatory killing of the virus, and it starts killing healthy cells around your own cells that are infected with the virus. So if you can figure out ways to boost c d a t killer cell cytotoxicity and levels and also c d four c d fours and b cells as well, any part of the adaptive immune system is going to be beneficial to potentially reducing cytokine storm. Yeah. Yeah. And, one of the, key, things that leads to the, reduced cytotoxicity of, these, t cells is, like, a magnesium deficiency. So you you wrote to, like, a pretty, big, paper about it as well, and you we cover like pretty, revealing studies in the book, how this, magnesium, deficiency leads to this, immunodeficiency basically where the body is very susceptible to, these real problems. Yeah. That's a good point. So, essentially so if you look at, people who have genetically low intracellular free magnesium, so there's there's bound magnesium in the body, things that are bound to, like, proteins and DNA and ATP, and then there's your free ionic magnesium, which is actually the active form of magnesium. Well, inside the cell, that free ionic magnesium controls the natural killer receptors on both CDAT killer cells and natural killer cells. As the level of that free ionic magnesium goes down in those cells, the cytotoxicity of those cells goes down. So people who have a syndrome called X Men disease, who have this low magnesium in the cell, they have chronic Epstein Barr virus, sort of activation. So ninety five percent of everyone around the world is globally infected with Epstein Barr. You just don't even know it. Some people will get mononucleosis from it, you know, particularly usually in your teenage years, but some people don't show any symptoms. But people who have chronically low intracellular magnesium have chronically activated Epstein Barr virus and a significant increased risk of lymphoma. So what this is sort of showing you is that nutrients control the function of your immune cells, which then can control your risk of cancer. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. What would be, like, a optimal way to let let yeah. Like, let's let's let's let's recover the vitamin d. Like, how much vitamin d should you have, and, what's the kind of recommended way of getting it? Well, I think you and I both both agree that the the best way is probably through sunlight. Like, appropriately getting sunlight not burning because sunlight, activates well, sunlight, first of all, it consists of infrared, red light, UVA, UVB. It has a bunch of, you know, different spectrums of light, and we are essentially like these batteries that get activated with sunlight. And so you're not only producing vitamin d when you get sunlight, but you're obviously increasing melatonin, and infrared receptors are being activated, which improves production of ATP and, you know, numerous other things. Insulin sensitivity boosts nitric oxide, which has antiviral effects itself. So if you can get appropriate sunlight exposure, you're not only gonna get, you know, the benefits of vitamin d, but you're also gonna get the other benefits, right, through nitric oxide and other things. If you can't, though, in the winter, like what's happening now, if you can't get vitamin d through sunlight, diet or supplements as close to nature as possible, like cod liver oil, is a is a potential good way. But even just a vitamin d supplement as well, like, two thousand international units per day is usually a good starting point. The key with vitamin d, though, is that you wanna make sure your levels of vitamin a are appropriate, your levels of k two are appropriate, and magnesium. Because if you just take high doses of vitamin d, basically, fat soluble vitamins compete for absorption. So, essentially, if you take high doses of vitamin d, you're going to automatically increase the need for all your other fat soluble vitamins, so a, e, and k. So you you gotta make sure you're adequate on vitamin a, which which is pretty high in things like liver, eggs, and vitamin k two. And then the magnesium is important as well to activate the vitamin d. Yeah. Yeah. I totally agree that the sunlight is the best source for getting it and food is also pretty good. But, if you are, let's say, very low in vitamin d and you're deficient, then, yeah, the smart thing to kinda boost it up as fast as possible would be to take a supplement. And like the research that we that we've seen is kinda indicates that, the best range to be at is like a forty eight to like seventy milligrams per decimeter for vitamin d. Your vitamin b, blah, blah status. And, if you're low lower than that, then you're, like, risk of getting in, serious, infections, or serious outcomes from COVID nineteen is also quite dramatically high. And, yeah, like, if you are in this risk group, then, using as a supplement in the short term can be a pretty, effective to kinda just raise our levels, to the optimal range. Yeah. And I think, we still don't exactly know, you know, what that optimal range is. But I agree that we definitely wanna be at about thirty one nanograms per ml or higher. And, again, it's if you take vitamin d as a supplement, you wanna make sure at least a vitamin a, vitamin k, and magnesium are all optimized first before you take vitamin d. Yeah. And, what about magnesium? How how can you get magnesium? So well, we used to get it through diet, and now, with how we produce crops. So we've sort of shifted away from regenerative farming, which is using things like manure for now chemical fertilizers. And the problem with, chemical fertilizers is they reduce the nutrients in our food. And so, data back from 1940, comparing basically, you know, sixty to eighty years ago, the foods are now about 20 to 40 lower in magnesium for vegetables, and animal foods are anywhere from, like, 10 to 20% lower. So if you can, you wanna try to always eat organic or foods from regenerative farms because they're gonna be higher in nutrients. And I think the first thing for magnesium status beyond just intake is sort of what taxes your magnesium status. So that would be, like, oxidative stress, certain medications like diuretics, insulin, proton pump inhibitors, like, these acid suppressors, having high insulin levels, which basically causes you to lose magnesium out in the urine. First, fixing all those issues. Right? High sugar intake and everything that can deplete magnesium is probably the first step. Because if you're taxing your status and or constantly losing magnesium, I don't think just taking magnesium as a supplement or getting it through the diet is gonna do that much good. I mean, it's gonna help, but you gotta fix the root problems first. Yeah. Yeah. Like because, then you will have to keep on taking, that larger intake of magnesium, because you're, like, leaking out, more of it on a continual basis. And, like, the more stressed out you are and, more, you know, inflamed or on the rocks of the stress, then, you you do need, more magnesium. It's sort of like like you have a hole in a boat, you're out in the ocean, and you're just you're just, like, instead of fixing the hole, you're just kind of, like, throwing the water over, like, the the side of the boat, and you're only gonna get marginal benefits doing that. Yeah. But, I mean, I do think that it is important too that if you can't get high quality foods, that supplementation does play a role a 100% because, you know, there the estimates back from the paleolithic times have estimated our intake of magnesium to be around six hundred milligrams per day, and it but as high as a thousand. And the average person is only eating about two hundred to two hundred fifty milligrams of magnesium. So, I mean, to cover your bases, if you're not able to eat a nutrient dense diet or you're you're not sure if your food has good amounts of magnesium, supplementation may be important. Now foods that are high in magnesium would be things like, like, cacao, spinach, nuts and seeds, but their bioavailability is a little bit lower. Right? So you can get magnesium through, meat. But I think how I typically also add magnesium to my diet is through drinking mineral waters because it's already sort of dissolved and ionized, and it's very easy to absorb magnesium once it's dissolved in solution. And so, typically, I probably get an extra hundred to a hundred and fifty milligrams of magnesium through through just natural mineral waters. Mhmm. What do you think about these, molecular hydrogen tablets that have the, ionized magnesium combined there? So I think, hydrogen is important. I I haven't done a ton of research on molecular hydrogen like exogenous intake. I do think there are some studies that show benefit, but you can naturally boost, hydrogen sulfide through supplementation. Like, n acetylcysteine actually helps boost it. Taurine helps boost it. And hydrogen sulfide sort of works like nitric oxide in the body. It sorta has this, you know, you know, blood vessel, health promoting properties, and even antiviral properties as well. It bound to magnesium. Like, I haven't seen anything like that before. Are you saying, like, there's supplements that have high molecular hydrogen bound to magnesium? Yeah. Like the, tablets, molecular hydrogen tablets that you put in the water, they have, magnesium in in there. Okay. Interesting. Yeah. I'm not sure if it's just, like, a synergistic effect or or if it helps. I don't think it would help with absorption having it in there. Yeah. That's interesting. Maybe you get, like, maybe you get, like, just a more better absorbent for the magnesium itself rather than supporting the absorbent of the hydrogen. Yeah. Potentially. I'm I'm not really sure. What about you you mentioned the insulin resistance. So, like, you know, diet and metabolic health is also pretty, huge, for, the immune system. Yeah. So, I mean, recently, a couple months ago, there was a a study that was published, and it showed that if you have metabolic syndrome, you're at a three and a half fold higher risk of dying from COVID, and you're at a four and a half fold higher risk of ending up in the ICU. So, essentially, metabolic syndrome for people who don't know what it is, it's it's five different things. It's an elevation in blood glucose, blood pressure, waist circumference, and triglycerides, and a reduction in HDL. If you have three or more of those five, you are considered to have metabolic syndrome. And so, essentially, metabolic syndrome is insulin resistance. It's just an easy way to measure it without having to measure, like, HOMA IR or, you know, doing a insulin assay after an oral glucose tolerance test. This is it's just a quicker, easier way what doctors typically order. And so, essentially, if you have three of those five, you can pretty much guarantee you have insulin resistance and probably high insulin levels as well. And so when the cell is insulin resistant, we need to understand too that the insulin is not just a fat storing hormone or, puts glucose into the cell. Insulin is important for bringing nutrients into the cell. So if a cell becomes resistant to insulin, now you can't get magnesium or potassium into the cell. There's other nutrients too that are sensitive to insulin. And when you can't get nutrients into the cell, well, then that's a huge deal because we just discussed how magnesium in the cell controls immune function. So the other sort of part about is that you start spilling more nutrients out in the urine when you have high insulin levels like magnesium and calcium. And so it's it's essentially it's it's eating a high sugar diet is one of the main drivers of insulin resistance and high insulin levels, and it's just it's worse than just, like, most people view sugar as, not harmful, just sort of empty calories. But, actually, we need to view it as, like, an anti nutrient and something that increases oxidative stress and actually taxes and depletes you of nutrients. Right. And, it also promotes the kinda accumulation of a visceral fat, so which is like the internal fat around the organs and in between organs that, just starts to secrete, like, these proinflammatory cytokines, which, you know, suppress the immune system and eventually lead to, like, metabolic syndrome. Yeah. Fruit so fructose can actually, sort of increase the conversion of glucose to fructose in the body, and that can sort of activate parts of the brain that increase the production of cortisol and noradrenaline and the renin angiotensin aldosterone system. And we know the renin angiotensin aldosterone system is highly associated with cytokine storm if that's activated. We know stress hormones like noradrenaline and cortisol inhibit immune function. So, essentially, you have sugar sort of stresses out the body, like, literally increases stress hormones, which suppresses immune function. So that's another sort of, you know, blow to the immune system when you over consume refined carbs and sugar. Yeah. Yeah. And, like, what we discovered or one of the studies that we use in the book, also kinda indicates that, like hyperglycemia when you constantly elevated blood sugar, it's a mimics the same pro inflammatory, kind of a pathway that leads to the cytokine storm as well by using the same receptor to get into the cell, which was the h m g b one like a high mobility box group one Yeah. Which is a mouthful but essentially that yeah. Like you you the hyperglycemia creates the same environment around the cell, that gets into the cell using the same receptor. And, the receptor for advanced glycation and product products, reach is also involved there. So hyperglycemia essentially kinda leads to also this, cytokine storm eventually by promoting, NFKB and other, pro inflammatory, cytokines. Yeah. Exactly. So, h m g b one or high, high molecular group box one Yeah. Which is which is essentially what's called a disease, or or a damaged associated, molecular pattern, a damp, sort of is secreted by immune cells, when there's viruses or viral infections. And, essentially, they can activate toll like receptors, which can activate, nuclear factor kappa beta and then activate NLRP three inflammasomes, which sorta activate pro inflammatory interleukins. So you have most people know, interleukin one beta, to convert the pro interleukin one beta to the active form. That's where NLRP three inflammasome, that's how it works. That's how it's inflammatory. It sorta activates pro interleukins to active forms. And you're you're a 100% right. The receptor for advanced glycation end products, RAGE, can also be sort of it takes up h m g b one, into the cell. And then once the RAGE receptor has taken it up, then it can activate nuclear factor kappa beta, NLRP three inflammasomes. And then there's this feedback cycle. So then the NLRP three inflammasome further increases the production of damage associated molecular patterns, and it it's just like this vicious cycle of inflammation. Yeah. And, therefore, like, the key, step to prevent the onset of, the cytokine storm is to kind of, of course, yeah, suppress the pro inflammatory cytokines, but also, kind of inhibit, h m g b one and, lower the hyperglycemia. Yep. And you you also, like, wrote a book about, the new not another book about a study about, like, the nutraceuticals that can, do that and, also help with, this infection. Yeah. So so, essentially, we, our first publication was on nutraceuticals that have potential to boost the type one interferon response. And then there are it's basically those same nutrients essentially seem to also, inhibit, h m g b one release. But then there's additional ones too that we cover in the book, that have those properties, like like quercetin, which is in, the skins of, you know, certain plant foods. But, essentially, what you have is in order to the best way to sort of inhibit oxidative stress is to create a little bit in your body and allow your body to then up regulate its own antioxidant defense enzymes. So, essentially, that's n r f two activators. So in the book in the in the publication, we sort of said, if if someone has, you know, cytokine storm, potential, nutraceuticals that could possibly help would be n r f two activators, which would be alpha lipoic acid, ferulic acid, which you can form through drinking coffee or certain, whole grains have high amounts of ferulic acid, and, broccoli sprouts, which contain sulforaphane, are essentially n r f two activators, which then boosts all your antioxidant defense enzymes. And then, essentially, inflammation is what suppresses our body's own production of type one interferon. So anything that sort of boosts glutathione is also gonna be helpful. So that would be things like enocityl cysteine, glutathione, glycine, collagen, even taurine too because taurine is formed from cysteine. So if you take taurine, you're gonna reduce the shunting of cysteine to form taurine and and sort of increase the shunting of cysteine to form glutathione. Yeah. Yeah. And, some other things that also help to, recycle glutathione, like vitamin c, for example. Yeah. So, well, glue so vitamin c, yeah, helps recycle vitamin e. Glutathione helps recycle vitamin c, but, any type of oxidative stress is gonna deplete glutathione levels. And so, selenium is important for maintaining good glutathione status, so it's magnesium. So, essentially, glutathione, if people don't know, it's your your master antioxidant, and it seems to be very depleted in people who have severe COVID nineteen outcomes. Yeah. And, what what what would be what what would be, like what do you think, how can you, like, just you know, there's, some people get, like, very severe symptoms from, COVID. Some other get, less severe, and some others don't experience at all. So what is what do you think is the kind of, key, differentiating, factor? It's probably a lot to do with, you know, poor metabolic health, poor new nutrient status, and then essentially just a poor functioning adaptive immune system. And so you have the innate immune system having to take control of killing the virus in an inflammatory way. And, essentially, that's and you don't have any antioxidants to sort of calm down the inflammatory cytokine storm afterwards. So the the the body actually has several antioxidant enzymes. You know, one of them is thioredoxin reductase, which needs methionine sulfoxide reductase to work. And both of those antioxidant enzymes require selenium. And so we've seen that, populations that have a low selenium intake have about a threefold higher risk of having worse COVID nineteen outcome. So, I mean, then that's just one nutrient. And sort of how I like to think about to get people to understand how important selenium is is some people have heard of something called Kishan disease where, it's a province in China, Kishan, and it's associated with very low selenium in the soil and, hence, low selenium in the food. And people can develop cardiomyopathy, or Kishan disease from low selenium intake. But what a lot of people don't realize is it's actually also due to an infection from an RNA virus called coxsackievirus. So coxsackievirus can cause hand, mouth, and foot disease, but sometimes it doesn't cause anything. Or it can be very severe and lead to cardiomyopathy if you're just deficient in selenium. So it goes to show you an essentially a non virulent virus like Coxsackie can become extremely virulent if you simply are lacking one nutrient, that being selenium. Because if you cheat treat people with Keeshan disease, which is selenium, that fixes the cardiomyopathy. Well, that at this point post COVID complications. And so we already know the post coxsacksee complication is cardiomyopathy, and we know the treatment for that is selenium. So I wonder how many post COVID complications there are, which we know there are a lot. Right? Strokes, heart attacks, pulmonary, embolisms are caused by potentially nutrient deficiencies. We haven't figured out yet which one's adding back, but we've published, we published a couple papers that have antithrombotic potential for certain nutraceuticals like citrulline, the biotin, folate, or folic acid. Essentially, those increase the effects of nitric oxide. Biotin and folate do that through increasing cyclic GMP. Citrulline does that through increasing nitric oxide. And then sort of the same nutraceuticals that we had, published that have antioxidant effects also have seem to have antithrombotic potential as well. And, magnesium as well, if I'm not mistaken. Yeah. Yes. A 100%. Yep. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I totally agree. And I think, like, one of the kind of maybe if you were to if you were to kinda narrow it down to one particular thing where it's not like one particular thing but if you were to try try to narrow it down to one thing then it could be like this, overall immunosenescence and, immunodeficiencies. And that doesn't necessarily, you know, have to be, like, we as we get older, our immune system does deteriorate, which is, you know, describes immunosenescence. But you can also get the immune immunosenescence faster if you have, like, you know, metabolic syndrome, you're obese, you have nutrient deficiencies and all things. So, yeah, like, that's why, like, maybe some younger people are also having problems with their immune system because their immune system is essentially aging very rapidly and, you know, that makes them more vulnerable to, just overall illness. And you can see that too where in United States and in The UK, COVID is much more severe than certain other places, and it probably has to do with our poor metabolic health. Essentially, you know, the variance of a virus depends on your own metabolic health, and and that's sort of kind of what we drive home, with the book. Yeah. Absolutely. And, and like the unfortunate case is also that if you have, like, poorer metabolic health, then you're also shedding the virus for longer and, you also get infected yourself for longer. So, yeah, it's a double whammy. Yeah. I mean, essentially, what we sort of wrote in the book is that if you have a population that is obese and has metabolic syndrome, you're gonna get a higher viral load. You're gonna carry the virus for longer, and there's a higher chance for it to mutate. And so you're you're essentially creating potentially super viruses, when you're a population that it has less, effective metabolic health and effective defenses against viruses because it just gives the virus more time to mutate in the body. And essentially, we see that too with, nutrient deficiencies. So for example, mice that are deficient in selenium, they have more the virus infection is more lethal, leads to worse pathology, and it leads to an increase in mutations. And so just being deficient in nutrients is going to increase the susceptibility of the of the virus mutating more when you get infected. And then we sort of covered, things like heat and cold and sort of how to, you know, boost p shock proteins that have antiviral effects as well or cold shock proteins. And I think that was an important, key thing of the book as well. Yeah. Absolutely. And there is a quite a lot of, research, you know, decades ago even that shows, that the heat regular heat exposure with the saunas is, very, beneficial in reducing the risk of influenza and reducing the chance of catching the common cold, and, buenomia and, other things. So, it is has a pretty, profound, you know, immuno strengthening effect, and it does, like, destroy, like, pathogens and viruses with the heat as well. Like, even the WHO has, like, a page, on their website, that says that, high heat, can destroy, like, the SARS virus. Yeah. So, essentially, another first line defense against viruses that we evolved, you know, over millions of years and it's been around, you know, throughout all mammals is a fever. And the reason why we develop a fever is because that boosts core body temperature. And we've developed defense mechanisms through that increase in core body temperature to release what's called heat shock proteins. And essentially, in order for a virus to replicate, it has to export its viral ribonucleoprotein complex out of the cell. And in order for that to happen, a protein called M1 protein needs to dock onto that complex to export it out. Well, heat shock protein 70 can bind to that complex and prevent M1 protein from binding and prevents the ribonucleo complex from being exported. And so essentially, heat shock proteins and via, you know, things like sauna or exercising in the heat through increasing your core body temperature does have antiviral effects. Yeah. Yeah. And, like the sauna does it, infrared sauna does it, you know, yoga can do it, and exercise does it as well. So just anything that, releases these heat shock proteins can have, like, a positive effect, on that. But, regular I I I think, like, the regular sauna itself is also may have, like, some additional benefits in in terms of, like, you know, sweating out that it talk, you know, heavy metals and other toxins. Right. And so, what you were referring to on the WHO, it's true that, they do have data if the temperature is a 133 degrees Fahrenheit. There is rapid killing of the SARS virus. Now you'll never be able to get get your lungs to a 133 degrees, so we don't think it's going to have that type of mechanism in the lungs. But you do heat up the nasal passages and you do heat up the mouth. And I don't necessarily, know if you can get your nasal passages or the mouth to a 133 degrees. I don't think there's been any studies to that. But certainly, just breathing hot air through the nose or through the mouth has been shown to reduce the symptoms of upper respiratory viruses by, like, two days. Not even boosting core body temperature. Simply just breathing hot air. So that seems to have an effect as well. And even doing hypertonic saline nasal irrigation with hypertonic saline gargling has if you can do that quick enough within forty eight hours of an upper respiratory tract infection, studies have shown a reduction in the duration of symptoms by two days, a decrease in medication use by thirty six percent, a decrease in household spreading of the virus by thirty five percent, which is interesting. And then a significant reduction in viral load as well. So salt has both topical antiviral and antimicrobial cells, effects in in cells. Salt has been shown to, kill both DNA and RNA enveloped and non enveloped viruses. Right? Essentially, salt was before we had refrigeration. It was the, you know, universal preservative, for those kinda antiviral, antibacterial effects. Yeah. Absolutely. And, one thing to note about, like, the, heat is that yeah. Yeah. Like, I don't think you're gonna raise your, lung temperature to the required temperature, I I think it doesn't really matter at that point either because, like you said, your body responds to the heat by activating these heat check proteins, and then the heat check proteins go in there and do the job for you, so to say. So you don't have to, you know, use a flamethrower to kill the, you know, these pathogens. You can the body is gonna do it itself with these, heat shock proteins. Exactly. And then the other thing to to realize too is sauna is a hormetic stressor. So it's it causes the breakdown of your own proteins, and then heat shock proteins are released to sort of repair those damaged proteins. Yeah. It it essentially makes your body stronger. And so anything you can do from a hormetic perspective with appropriate repair is going to make all your cells more resilient. Right? And so you're essentially creating a greater force field around yourself by increasing the health of your own cells, sort of hitting the sauna numerous times a week. And we've seen this in animal studies. If you heat shock mice prior to infecting them with lethal avian influenza, the mortality is significantly reduced. The lung pathology, the viral replication is significantly reduced. So even doing it before getting the virus, at least in animal models, has shown pretty interesting results. Yeah. Like, it describes this, preconditioning hormesis that, increases resilience. So if your body has been exposed to a particular stressor like the heat, or exercise, then it's more able to tolerate it and it's gonna experience less of the negative side effects from it as well. And the kind of interesting and the kind of fascinating thing about it is that like exercise also activates this h m g b one protein that, is involved. This is in the cytokine storm. So if you're the idea is that if you are exercising regularly and you're, like, doing the saunas, then your body is already kind of at least get it's experiencing this, h m g b one and this small amount of inflammation, beforehand. And thus, it's able to deal with it better when you actually get, you know, exposed to a larger exposure of it. So it's a it's a this, you know, exercise, a regular exercise does boost the immune system, and it does increase this overall resilience, as a result of that as well. Exactly. It's like the the saying, what doesn't kill you makes you stronger. That's exactly what is happening with chronic moderate exercise, you know, moderate doses of sauna, even potentially moderate doses of cold. Although I think you have to be a little bit careful with timing of cold therapy because it can Yeah. Prevent the benefits of exercise. So you just gotta just like everything, you gotta figure out how to time things. Yeah. But sort of what we discussed too was what's the appropriate dose of exercise. And you and I had sort of, you know, come to this summation that if you are exercising at a sort of strenuous, very heavy, either lifting very heavy and hard or, running fast or over an hour, that will have a suppressive effect on the immune system. And you and I sort of said, it's not like you you shouldn't ever exercise hard for over an hour. Just realize that that will make you more susceptible to upper respiratory tract infections. And we sort of kinda came up with a package of potential ways to sort of offset that. If you're someone who likes running marathons, well, obviously, you have to run longer than an hour. So what can you do? And we sort of came up with some strategies that had clinical trials like vitamin c, beta glucan, baker's yeast beta glucan, selenium, zinc, and copper. Things like that seem to have the most evidence from potentially offsetting the significant increased risk in upper respiratory tract infections with prolonged exercise, which can be anywhere from two to six fold higher risk of upper respiratory infection. Whereas if you have moderate exercise, which is an hour or less, that can reduce your risk by about fifty percent of upper respiratory tract infections. Yeah. Like exercise, shortly after the exercise, you get weaker. Like, both your muscles and your, like, strength, it does diminish a little bit, and your immune system does also take, like, a small, dive. But it kinda supercompensates afterwards and, it just takes time. So if you're, like, you know, the problem is that if you, you know, do, like, a long exercise session over an hour and then you also combine it with, like, the other stresses like sleep deprivation or, traveling and, the cold or something, then you may just get infected because of, you come off from this, slightly, immunocompromised state. Whereas if you were to, you know, not exercise beforehand, then you wouldn't, get the you would, like, have a lower chance of, getting sick. And, yeah. There are some studies that also show, like, the polyphenols, with, you know, blueberry powder and green tea and those things, they have been shown to kind of, mitigate, that, risk a little bit, by reducing the chance of, you know, reducing the, slight, immunodepression. Exactly. So it's kinda like the dose makes the poison or the treatment. And I think moderate exercise between thirty to sixty minutes, maybe up to five times a week seems to be optimal. And if you're gonna do more high intensity, you probably wanna drop that down to three or four times a week and just may not wanna go over that hour mark, which seems to be sort of that threshold where you're overtaxing the immune system. Yeah. And, like, what about the sauna? Like, what is the optimal time frame for doing that? So it depends on the person. Some people are very good at sweating and sort of cooling off. And then other people, they almost turn red. They don't sweat much, and they don't cool off that well. So, you know, it's always dependent on the person. If you are cleared by your doctor to be able to do a sauna, starting at a lower temperature and slowly working up is a smart idea. So, essentially, maybe you start at ten minutes for infrared. Maybe you start at a 130 degrees Fahrenheit. And the optimal, once you progressively go up, needs to be at least twenty minutes. I mean, the studies are pretty clear about that in regards to reducing, well, the studies that have associated sauna use with a lower risk of cardiovascular events are when the duration is twenty minutes or longer. So that seems so between the 20 and you can feel it. Once you start hitting the twenty to thirty minute mark, you start getting antsy. You can feel your proteins breaking down, essentially. That's that's why you started You sort of get antsy. Like, man, I kinda need to get out of this sauna. That feeling is the breakdown of your proteins. And so you need that to happen in order to really start activating heat shock protein, really start getting some of the what, you know, the hormetic effects of sauna. And then with traditional sauna, you have to go higher, and and they typically are higher temperature anywhere. You you can find traditional saunas that go up to 250 degrees Fahrenheit. They work differently. Traditional is through convection heat. Infrared uses both convection heat as well as heating you from the inside out. And you do get some additional benefits from the infrared as far as activating, TRP v one, which has, insulin sensitizing effects and it activating cytochrome c oxidase, which improves ATP production. And you do seem to get a little bit better of a nitric oxide boost through the addition of infrared, but traditional saunas are still amazing and are still gonna provide a lot of the benefits. You're gonna still get the heat shock protein release as well. Yeah. Yeah. I do. I, enjoy both of them. So, they're quite, amazing. Do do you take any, like, supplements or something to boost the effectiveness of the sauna or, kind of maybe, like, some salted water or something? So sauna does seem to liberate, toxins from the skin. Some people will take binders, sort of like chlorella or cilantro or something like that to if if you're releasing toxins, how do we maybe bind them in the gastrointestinal tract? Because you can get this sort of enterohepatic recycling of the toxins. So it's almost like with fasting too, you get a release of persistent organic pollutants from the adipose tissue that you've accumulated. And so, sort of what can you do to bind those toxins once you release them and and sort of essentially poop them out? You know, some people have sort of toyed with things like, the chlorella, the cilantro, and char activated charcoal is another potential. I have never, tried that and play that game, but that's a potential way to sort of enhance the detoxing effects of sauna. Some people have said, there's, like, this niacin protocol that sort of helps too with, you know, releasing toxins out of the adipose tissue as well, in addition to sauna therapy. And there there was a a doctor who made that niacin protocol pretty famous. And he also used, polyunsaturated fatty acids as well with that protocol. But the supplements that I personally take, in regards to immune function is I'm gonna start taking yeast beta glucan, continuously because that that's almost a hormetic, sort of way to activate the immune system. Because what you're essentially doing is you're telling the immune system that there's a a potential pathogen because you're you're taking the baker's yeast, which is the cell wall of yeast. And so that actually activates, receptor pathogen receptors. And so now that stimulates the immune system. It puts it more on a higher immunosurveillance, which is a good thing if you get an infection because now the immune system is much more ramped up. The cytotoxicity of your immune cells are much better, and you can take that on a consistent basis. And it seems to be a more natural, sort of way to boost the immune system that that isn't sort of, you know, a big tax on the immune system, so to speak. So I'll probably do that for three or four months during the winter months. And then, if, you know, sort of I just make sure, obviously, all nutrients are optimized. And then if I ever were to get, a viral infection, I would absolutely take on acetylcysteine. I would consider taking a a bioavailable form of glutathione. Elder I I would do elderberry too, because there there is a meta analysis with elderberry that it reduces the duration of the common cold anywhere from two to four days, but you need to find a quality elderberry. So the goal would be to find something that is 10 to 15% standardized anthocyanins because it's the anthocyanins that have all these antiviral effects. So so sort of plant polyphenols, for some reason, have this ability to sort of prevent viruses from infecting a cell, reduces the replication, and then also activates antioxidant enzymes. So for some reason, plant polyphenols seem to have that n r f two boosting effect. Mhmm. Besides those, I would, I would definitely take taurine, glycine. I take collagen every day in my coffee. And that's pretty much it. I mean, there's I do do k two and vitamin d and some cod liver oil and omega threes, but, you know Yeah. I don't wanna the the list could go on and on, to be honest. Yeah. Yeah. Look. The book, does give you a lot of, different, nutraceuticals as well. And like me yeah. Like, the polyphenols and other these, beta glucans and other plant compounds, they just follow the similar dysrometric effect, that, you know, the small amount of exposure can be good for, kind of entraining the immune system to deal with the this this kind of stress and, you know, activate also also these defense path pathways. Yep. Exactly. Well, like, is there anything, you you wanna maybe wrap up on as well? Because, we don't want to, you know, give everything away because the book itself, covers basically everything about the immune system. Like, we cover, information, the autoimmunity, even, like, cancer, the kind of connection between immunity and cancer, what's the link there, and kind of how these, immunodeficiency will lead to eventually cancer. And, you know, we talk about a little bit of COVID and, but it's also, like, only, like, a one chapter. So the book itself includes, you know, a whole lot different topics. Is there anything you wanna mention, as a kinda wrap her up? Yeah. I mean, I think, getting the book is is super important because we don't just talk about the science. We actually show a lot of good graphics on how these things work, and we give a nice sort of, here's what you can do to sort of, boost the immune system via sauna or via how to improve sleep or you know, it's it's almost, like, every chapter is sort of like a how to as well, which I think we did a really good job with. So, like you said, we don't wanna give all the secrets away, but there's a lot more that we talk about in the book. So I think I definitely think it's a really good resource that everyone should have for their immune health. Yeah. Absolutely agree. And, yeah, it was great, to talk with you again. And, like, before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? So, doctor jamesdineck.com is my website. And if people wanna pick up our book, go to Amazon. It's on, you know, all Amazon markets. Yeah. That's good. And, I wanna do, like, a a different kind of question for the end. Like, what's the one thing that you're gonna definitely do in preparation for the, like, the coming flu season or, like, the winter? So I am, I actually bought a freezer for my basement. I'm gonna stock up on a ton of meats because when the first wave of COVID happened, I couldn't get meat at the grocery store. I had to, like, find, like like these like, mom and pop stores. So that's like, I'm starting to stock up on some of the things like water, you know, meats. And then, you know, in prepping for I've I made sure to really get some good sunlight to sort of, you know, boost my vitamin d levels, and I got I got my sauna in the basement. So I'm I think I'm ready to go for the winter. Yeah. That's a good device. Like, they and also prevention is worth a pound of cure. So, never never hurts to, you know, have a little bit of, like, extra food around. That's right. Yep. Well, it was good talking with you, and, yeah. I'll see you around. You too, Sam. Alright. That's it for this episode. If you wanna support us, then check out the immunity fix on Amazon, and make sure you leave us a review. But other than that thanks for listening. My name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.