When you look at human history then, we always went through periods of semi starvation and famine and overabundance of food. So we never stayed in one extreme for too long, and we kinda cycle through them periodically. One of the mechanisms for repairing the body and eliminating junk and keeping it in balance is autophagy. It gets activated primarily under energy deprivation, and it's important for eliminating dysfunctional cell components, pathogens, senescent cells, and general junk. Unfortunately, in the modern world, we can spend way too much time in the overabundant state of excess calories and chronic eating, so we never allow our body to tap into its autophagy and enable ourselves to recycle that junk. This video talks about the signs of not enough autophagy. They're gonna show you whether or not you need more autophagy. Join me, and I will complete your training. First of all, I have to say that there is always some autophagy happening inside your body, and it's important for modulating the immune system, fighting pathogens, and just general metabolic function. But in order to eliminate senescent cells and waste material more deeply, then you also need to increase that autophagy and go into deeper stages of it. Here are the signs that you need more autophagy. High insulin and IGF one signaling. High fasting insulin is associated with metabolic syndrome and diabetes, which happens due to energy excess. Insulin and IGF one stimulate emptor the anabolic switch that suppresses autophagy. IGF one levels above 300 are associated with increased mortality, but the same can apply to levels below 100. Ideally, you would want to be somewhere between 100 to 300. A lower insulin IGA of one signal indicates more autophagy because of decreased nutrient signaling. Fasting, low carb diets, and exercise all stimulate autophagy a bit, and they also reduce insulin IGA of one. Secondly, insulin resistance. Hepatic autophagy is suppressed in the presence of insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia. With high insulin, autophagy won't begin effectively because insulin inhibits the formation of key autophagy genes. Generally, a phasic insulin below 25 is considered normal. Anything above that may hint towards insulin resistance or prediabetes. Third, heart disease. Suppressing cardiac autophagy in the heart is associated with age related cardiac function and aging of the heart. Glycogen content in the heart is regulated by extracellular insulin and glucose in cardiomyocytes. Hypertension, insulin resistance, high blood sugar, and being overweight all promote heart disease. Getting healthier by any means will improve the situation, but autophagy is directly linked to mediating some of the benefits. Atherosclerosis. Autophagy is present in atherosclerosis as shown in both in vitro and in vivo. This is so because the autophagic process is trying to clear out the plaque and reestablish homeostasis. It's been shown that knocking out ATG five, the key gene for autophagy regulation in macrophages, can cause the aggravation of atherosclerosis lipid plaques by increasing apoptosis and oxidative stress. Macrophage autophagy plays a protective role in advanced atherosclerosis. Autophagy plays a vital role in protecting cells from oxidative stress, reducing apoptosis, and growing lesion stability. Inhibiting autophagy accelerates plaque necrosis. However, excessive autophagy can lead to autophagic cell death in smooth muscles and endothelial cells, resulting in decreased collagen synthesis. It's a trap. Inflammation. Autophagy removes aggregated inflammasome structures, thus dampening the pro inflammatory response. Autophagy reduces NFKB, a protein complex that produces inflammation and cytokines. Biomarkers of too much inflammation are CRP above three milligrams per liter at elevated white blood cell count. Weak immune system. Autophagy plays a role in shaping immune system development, fueling the host's immune responses and directly controlling intracellular microbes as a cell autonomous innate defense. Signs of a weak immune system include getting cold easily, coughing frequently, constantly runny nose, fibromyalgia, sore throat, allergies, autoimmune issues, and chronic fatigue. Neurodegeneration. Loss of autophagy promotes the formation of protein aggregates and neurodegeneration in mice. Autophagy is like a clearance system that eliminates these aggregates from the nervous system. Early stages of Alzheimer's show deficient autophagy, and autophagy is important for metabolizing beta amyloid. The most important thing for preventing neurodegeneration is sleep, but primarily because that's the time period autophagy is processed, especially in the brain. If you tend to forget things, can't memorize information, and lack concentration, then you should try to improve the quality of your sleep. Gut health. Lysosomal disorders and deficient autophagy may lead to irritable bowel disease. Certain probiotic bacteria that have been shown to reduce inflammation, such as Bacteroidis fragilis, activates autophagy and requires autophagy for its therapeutic effects. Autophagy also eliminates pathogens and inflammatory cytokines from the gut. Liver spots, lipofuscin is an age related pigment, It's a breakdown product of proteins and lipids formed by the oxidation and peroxidation of lysosomal contents that can cause the accumulation of defective organelles and aggregates because of reducing autophagy. Inhibiting autophagy results in impaired turnover of lysosomes and the accumulation of lipophuscan. Liver spots and dark pigment on people's hands, face, and skin is oxidized lipophuscan. Sufficient autophagy eliminates the source of lipophuscan, which are oxidized iron and polyunsaturated fats. Bad skin health. Wrinkles and skin damage happens as a result of aging and oxidative stress. Autophagy in the skin fibroblasts promotes skin health and keeps it more elastic. Acne, pimples, or other spots are caused by overexpression of mTOR and IGF-one. Your skin reflects the health of your gut and digestion. With enough autophagy, you can keep your skin clear and not inflamed. Fatty liver. It's been shown that impaired autophagy prevents the clearance of excessive lipid droplets, damage mitochondria, and toxic proteins, which get generated during the progression of liver disease, thus contributing to the development of liver disease, fibrosis, and tumors. Signs of a fatty liver include high amounts of visceral fat that pops out as well as insulin resistance. Muscle loss, autophagy protects against atrial dysfunction and sarcopenia by degrading misfolded proteins and organelles. It's just that if you're fasting for too long or are under reading, then you will eventually lose muscle through autophagy. Regular basal autophagy actually strengthens your body against the calorie stress from exercise as well as fasting. So if you're the kind of guy who immediately starts losing their gains whenever they skip a meal, then it's because of inadequate autophagic adaptation. You would need to become more fat adapted to prevent that. All of these signs, they're not just signs of not enough autophagy. They're just signs that your body is out of balance, and it's too far in the overabundant state, and you need to kinda grab yourself back into balance towards the middle. Fasting and calorie restriction are one ways of doing it, but you can also promote this process with things like exercise, taking a sauna, and anything else that stimulates autophagy. If you only knew the power of the dark side. You don't want to be in autophagy all the time because it can cause some health problems, and it will also make you lose muscle. So the idea is to just balance the overabundant state with the semi starvation state, which is autophagy, and your overabundant state, which is mTOR and insulin, you have to balance it, and you have to find what suits for you, what is the best for your situation, and, what kind of a balance you need to create. You can also check out my other video about the signs of too much autophagy. But if you want to know how to fully optimize fasting, nutrition, and meal timing, then check out my Middle Body Katawat master class. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay balanced. Stay empowered. Join me, and I will complete your training.