I thought, there's some there's definitely something to this because, you know, I was obviously waking up with, better morning wood and noticing more energy and things like that. So yeah, man. Then I then I sort of did blood work before and after, twelve weeks, and I managed to get my testosterone all the way up to 988. Welcome to the Sim Lund podcast. I'm your host Sim Lund. And today, our guest is Lucas Awan from Australia. Lucas has studied exercise science and naturopathy and is into many different biohacks. He runs his website at ergogenic.health where he discusses his experiments and shares the latest studies on health, steep, hormone optimization, and longevity. This episode is brought to you by KAATU training. KAATU bands incorporate blood flow moderation training that trick the body into thinking that it's lifting heavier weights than it actually is. When traditional weight lifting requires you to reach 70 to 80% of your one repetition maximum to stimulate muscle hypertrophy, then Katsu bands achieve that effect only at 20 to 30%. So it's perfect for treating injuries or used when you don't have access to heavier weights. Research about KAATSU BANS also shows it lowers blood pressure, speeds up recovery from injuries, releases stem cells, builds muscle, burns fat, and prevents age old muscle loss. These things are amazing, and I use them almost every day to recover from my heavier workouts. If you want to try out the KAATSU BANS, then use the code SIM for a 10% discount at kaatsu-global.com. That's siim@kAATSU-global.com. Lucas, welcome to the show. SIM, thanks for having me, man. Yeah. I'm, glad to talk with you. And, you know, it's interesting because, you know, one of the things that you're known, online is this, experiment that you did with, icing your testicles. So I think, like, it was a good icebreaker between you and the audience So, like, I know we've explained, you know, what why did you do it and, how does it work and what were the kind of results? Yeah, man. So I actually stumbled across the practice, like, scrolling through some, bodybuilding forums a long time ago, and I've read some some people logging their experience, you know, like applying an ice pack to their, testes. And I was like, I sort of looked into the research and, you know, I came across some studies sort of, demonstrating beneficial effects on fertility. And so there was, like, a one particular study that demonstrated that, icing the testes for, like, eight to twelve weeks improves a variety of sperm parameters. And, obviously, being a biohacker, I am similar to you, Sim. I ended up sort of just trialing it myself and, you know, I started I grabbed an ice pack and started applying it, you know, regularly every single night. And, I thought, there's some there's definitely something to this because, you know, I was obviously waking up with, better morning wood and noticing more energy and things like that. So yeah, man. Then I then I sort of did blood work before and after, twelve weeks, and I managed to get my testosterone all the way up to 988 nanograms per death later. So yeah. Yeah. That's pretty pretty crazy. And, the the testosterone level is also quite high. We can talk about it a little bit later of how you did it. But, you know, what's the, like, potential mechanisms of this colds improving, I don't know, like sperm? Yeah. So the the the research sort of looked at how, anytime the testes are two degrees too warm, so anytime they're outside, you know, increased by two degrees, outside outside of core body temperature, they're actually it actually arrests spermatogenesis. So it's it actually impairs fertility. So the practice is based around, you know, we're cooling the testes, but we're also one of the mechanisms that hasn't been fully explored is the, vasoconstriction that occurs. Just like when we have a cold shower or jump into an ice bath, we get severe, you know, vasoconstriction. I think the same sort of will apply with the testes. We're getting major vasoconstriction up against the actual gonads, and then that's followed by, like, a rebound sort of vasodilatory response, which makes sense. Sort of just bringing more oxygen nutrients to the testes to help with their, function. Right. So you wouldn't want to basically have, some something hot on on your lap sitting like a laptop or something, that double the also inhibit this aspermatogenesis. Exactly. Yeah. And that's a one of the leading causes of, infertility is, just generally, like, you know, being exposed to AMFs and, just heat in general is having a deleterious effect on sperm parameters. You know, definitely one of the leading culprits behind, infertility for sure. I also, you know, gotten a lot of questions about, like, the sauna. So would that also have, like, this negative effect? Yeah. So part of my recommendations when it when it comes to sauna usage is that I think all men need to need to bring an ice pack in with them, using the sauna. I know it sounds sounds crazy, but, I mean, I I've got my own infrared sauna here, full spectrum, you know, mid air and far infrared. And, I always make sure to bring an ice pack in. And, it just makes sense because traditionally, they viewed the, the the sauna or, like, heat exposure as a mean as a male contraceptive a long time ago, like a method of contraception. Right. And, is there any, let's say, you know, like, prescription or protocol with the ice pack? Like, how many times a day would you need to do it? How long per e session? Yeah. So, there is no, like I mean, I'm trying to sort of, describe, like, a bit of a protocol, and that would be, like, ten to fifteen minutes up to three times per day. And I think the best way to sort of start is and one thing that all men need to know is that we don't wanna be applying the ice pack directly to the skin of the testes. We don't wanna burn the skin. A lot of guys think that it's, you know, applying the ice pack there, but it's just gonna damage the skin and burn the skin. So instead, you wanna apply it directly up against the the underwear, for 10 to 15. Right. Yeah. Okay. Gotcha. Yeah. That was a good clarification. So, yeah, how did you, you know, get into, this, biohacking and health in general? Well, I mean, I've always been fascinated with, various interventions to improve, my performance on the soccer field. So I played, you know, I played professional soccer for many years, and I was always interested in, like, what could I use or take that could improve my ability to read the play on the soccer field. And that's when I sort of experimented with, like, l theanine and acetylo carnitine and things like that. Just the basic nootropics. And you just fell in love with the whole idea of taking control of your health and, it didn't just snowballed into, like, starting the Instagram page and then just sharing really useful research, which a lot of people are are liking at the moment. Yeah. Yeah. You have really interesting, posts and articles as well and videos, you know, about more or less or less conventional ideas. And, yeah, it's definitely people should check it out. But, you know, let's talk about the testosterone experiment. So, you know, that's quite high for natural testosterone. So how did you do it? And, you know, what were the things that you maybe experienced as well? Yeah. Well, I mean, I I did devise, like, a a full protocol. I I outlined it, in in some detail in my, in my testosterone course. But, essentially, what I did was, I focused on lowering prolactin, increasing, monounsaturated fat intake and saturated fats. So both those types of fats. I was shifting my, protein sources primarily to organ meats. So eating liver, kidneys, chicken hearts, things like that, rich in zinc, co q ten, selenium, all these vital nutrients, heaps of cholesterol. I mean, so I was focusing on, you know, high cholesterol diet alongside, like, five grams of taurine every day plus like, vitamin b one. I was using couple of herbs like cistern. I was using a a a couple of there I mean, there was one pharmacological intervention that I guess it's not really directly shown to increase testosterone, but it's, cyproheptadine. So that sort of helped with lowering serotonin. So, yeah, really focusing on optimizing and driving up dopamine and and lowering serotonin, I think, really helped. Okay. So what what do you think about this, you know, this trend that over the past few decades, this, testosterone level average testosterone levels have been declining because of maybe, like, xenoestrogens and, you know, bad lifestyle and plastics and chemicals in our environment? Yeah. I mean, there's some crazy stats going around now. I mean, they say that, like, in thirty three years or so from now, all men in the Western world will be infertile, which is pretty scary stats. I mean, you've seen you've seen the diagrams, the graphs yourself, the trending decline is so severe. And I think you definitely hit the nail on the head. There's, you know, EMF exposure, plastics, microplastics, nutrient deficiencies, poor sleep, obesity, insulin resistance, lack of exercise. There's so many factors, you know, playing a role in the decline in both fertility and testosterone. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. So, like, kinda funny funny thing that, like, physically, you know, men are, let's say, more resilient, but at the same time, like, their sperm is also very fragile or very vulnerable to very, like, you know, the small things like EMF or, I don't know, the, the exudiosterations and plastics and things like that. Yeah. It is funny like that. And I like to look at I like to look at, testosterone as, like, the resilience the resilience hormone because it does help a man sort of become more robust and withstand stress because there was one particular study that looked at how testosterone can, help, increase a man's willingness to withstand adversity. So how long a man could withstand severe adversity and struggle was the higher the testosterone, the longer they could last in, like, struggling sort of thing. Right. Right. Yeah. And, what what's your, like, testosterone now? Like, have you changed anything? I mean, I know it was a while ago when I got my test done. I'd hoped to see it a little bit higher by now. I mean, I've been experimenting with some things that may help increase it further, but, I think yeah. Definitely, environmental things affect that. At the time that I did the test, my sleep was excellent. I was sleeping, like, eight hours a night straight. I was definitely in a caloric surplus. Mhmm. Whereas right now, I wouldn't I I don't know if I would be in a caloric surplus. I'm I'm doing the one thing that's changed is that I'm doing 20,000 steps a day. So I'm I'm not sure what sort of impact that's gonna have on my hormone status. Okay. Gotcha. But what what what what are maybe, like, some of the best, like, exercises or, you know, exercise is important for testosterone, but there's also, like, the aspect of chronic, overtraining and, yeah, not having enough time for recovery. So, you know, what would be, like, a good, way to balance those things and optimizing it? Yeah. Well, from from the exercise perspective, leading up to that blood test, I was doing two leg sessions per week, and those leg sessions were very heavy, like, six to eight reps roughly. And then, you know, followed by I did two sprint sessions per week as well. I'm convinced that sprinting has some phenomenal effect on, testosterone. I've seen evidence that shows that it increases DHT, significantly. But in terms of, like, there was absolutely no, long duration cardio, nothing beyond twenty minutes that's been shown to have a deleterious effect on testosterone. So, yeah, avoiding avoiding the the the long the low in the list, low intensity steady state. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. Yeah. And, you know, what I also like to do is that, focusing more on this very low intensity, like, you know, walking is actually very low effort way of, getting your steps in and getting cardio without, you know, yeah, starting to interfere with, like, muscle growth and without interfering with these hormones and things like that. So it's a very, yeah, like a better way of unless you are, you know, trying to deliberately increase your endurance or something, then, yeah, like a minimal effective dose or minimal effort is a kind of a better way to go about it. Yeah. It was it was tricky because I was trying to balance, like I mean, I was trying to really optimize for testosterone, but at the same time, I was trying to, like, maintain aerobic capacity and, like, it's you know, know, you're trying to optimise for some different goals. But in the end, I think, the combination of icing, certain exercises, certain sleep protocols, couple of herbs, supplements, I think that all and then obviously really healthy thyroid function. My, my t three my t three levels are, like, basically, like, bordering on hyperthyroid. So I think that definitely having a better metabolic rate is definitely gonna help as well. Right. And how how would you achieve that with, like, nutrition, what kind of foods, to raise your t three and, as well as testosterone? Well, I was I was definitely encouraging myself to, like, have a lot of carbohydrates. I wasn't I wasn't holding back on carbs when I was trying to optimize testosterone. In fact, I was having upwards of two fifty to 300 grams of carbs per day, which is quite I mean, moderate moderate to high. And, yeah, in terms of which carbohydrate sources, I was actually staying away from starchy, carbohydrates because I find that they can irritate my gut. So sort of, leaning towards the sort of brown rice, quinoa, you know, oats, things like that, and some fruit as well. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Like a too low carb could definitely, eventually have, like, negative effect on, testosterone if you do it, like, for too long, especially if you, like, have intense training on top of that. So, yeah, I also, you know, like, prefer more of, like, a cyclical approach, of doing that. But you you mentioned also, like, the fats and, those things. How would they contribute to the saucerin? Yeah. I mean, so, obviously, I see sort of, shifting the focus towards, saturated fats and monounsaturated. So the monounsaturated fat sources, mostly, avocados, macadamia nuts, Brazil nuts, a little bit of almonds, and there was probably a little bit of, avoca there was a little bit of avocado oil. But then, like yeah. Predominantly, like, lean be oh, sorry. Like, just beef, you know, not worried about the the super lean aspect. But and the combination of the saturated fats plus the monounsaturated realistically is ideal. And then from the polyunsaturated fats, purely just having the, fish or seafood. Yeah. You mentioned there were, like, like, a smaller surplus, but, would, let's say, like, if you get too low in body fat, that would also, I would imagine eventually have a negative effect on testosterone. So what was maybe like a what is like a ideal body fat range to have, let's say, the boost optimal testosterone? It's a good question. I've haven't fully delved into that, but I think, you know, something somewhere in the range of, say, 11 to maybe 15% body fat, I think would be healthy. Have you seen I don't know. Have you seen much research in that realm? Well, I think that there's just there is some, let's say, this, individuality, and everyone has, let's say, this their body fat set point that where their body is, functioning optimally. Some people are genetically very easily able to stay at, you know, like, 6% all the time, whereas others, for them, it's hard to go below 11%, because of their your body starts to fight it. And, you know, downregulate the hormones. So I think there is some, yeah, differences between people. Some peep I I in general, I think, yeah, like, around 10% is probably the best and, you know, staying below 10% all the time, you know, your your body can get used to it eventually. But let's say, for most, average people, it can eventually kinda start to catch up. So you you you really you know, maybe you wouldn't be able to stay there year year round. But, yeah, for maybe a few few months of the year, it's gonna probably not gonna have a problem. Yeah. My my body fat according to my I did a DEXA a DEXA scan, and, everyone was shocked with my results. My results came back as 14%, which, like, people that look at me, they're like, there's no way you're 40%. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I saw I saw one of the pictures as well that yeah. Yeah. Like, you have lean leanness and the six pack, and it tells you a 40%, which kind of, you know, makes a lot of people, you know, what they think that they test is, you know, wrong or something. But, yeah, usually people, like, carry their body fat in different diaries as well. And, yeah, it's just the, the looks aspect can be, you know, deceiving, so to say, that the percentage itself is also, like, not really that relevant if people are Yeah. After, like, the looks themselves. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. You were also interest interested into, like, these adaptogens and, different kinds of, compounds. So, are there any, like, adaptogens that haven't shown to actually, you know, boost testosterone and help with it? I mean, the most well known is is definitely ashwagandha, but my my stance there on ashwagandha one of my one of my blog posts actually went viral talking about, how ashwagandha, although it's effective for, you know, lowering cortisol and, increasing testosterone, it can have a effect similar to SSRI drugs by sort of desensitizing the, the five HT one a serotonin receptor. So, I mean, that that's something I learned quite some time ago. So I've sort of stayed sort of clear from Ashwagandha instead shifting my focus towards, Korean ginseng, saffered muesli, cisternge, pine pollen, and Tomkadalei. These are like the main ones that I was leveraging. But, yeah, I think definitely my favorite one is, cisternge. It's well known. It's one of Genghis Khan's favorite herbs. He used it Right. To to populate much of Asia. So, yeah, definitely like that one. Yeah. That's so pretty cool. And ginseng is also, like, good for stress management in general. And, you know, stress has, like, a negative effect than testosterone. Yeah. Yeah. I like I mean, Panax Panax ginseng is generally very warming and very, like, sort of stimulating. So, and that's also been shown to, you know, have beneficial effects on, luteinizing hormone as well. How do you, consume it? Like, as a as a powder or the root or the supplements? Which which which one is the best? I always lean towards, like, a powdered extract. Yeah. Tend towards, like, sort of 10 ginsenosides. But, I mean, obviously, I've experimented with a range of adaptogens. Another one from Russia, morale roots, which is quite good. Rhodiola. I've tried basically every adaptogen under the sun. Yeah. Yeah. Like, I also like the rodeo. Usually, you actually kinda feel the effects of it faster as well with it. But you also, mentioned in your blog that you had, like, some health issues in the past. So, you know, what what what were they, and how did you kinda solve them? Well, I mean, the one thing that sort of got me into this, my dad being a pharmacist, I was I actually suffered from reflux harpoon, and this was ongoing, very young age. It was prescribed, proton pump inhibitors, so like Nexium, SODIMAC. And that was leading to now that I understand the research, what it's doing, I understand that, you know, clearly that's affecting vitamin b twelve absorption, iron absorption, magnesium. So that was definitely having a deleterious effect on my health at the time, and that's sort of what transitioned what prompted me to to study naturopathy, and complete my natural naturopathic, degree. And so, yeah, like, the the reflux and heartburn was definitely a major factor, major reason why I got so interested in health and then sort of bar hacked my way out of that using, like, root and artichoke extract. And I don't even you know, I haven't needed any reflux medications for, like, I don't know, eight years now. So Okay. Nice. Yeah. Yeah. The, these medications tend to have, yeah, like a even, like, you know, proton pump inhibitors, they, reduce their absorption of potassium as well. And, so, yeah, you you may actually get worse, from using them, chronically at least. What what about, have you looked into things like, you know, cognition and mental side, like any nootropics? Any research on that? Yeah. I mean, I'm I'm heavily involved in on and I spent a lot of time researching, nootropics and, cosmetic neurology, which definitely is an area that I'm really fascinated in. So, yeah, I mean, I've experimented with hundreds of different, nootropics, you know, ranging from, you know, l theanine, l carnitine, CDP choline, alpha GPC, just a range of really, you know, sort of I guess they're well known now, some of these ones, but I've, you know, I've used a range of other ones. A couple of my favorites, I sort of I think I mentioned one of them is a bromantane, which is a it's a synthetic it's a synthetic adaptogen. So it was developed by the Russians to sort of see if they could help their soldiers, withstand stress. And bromantain is definitely one of those compounds that helps with just physical energy and, just being more motivated sort of thing. Okay. Well, that's interesting. How does it what what's what is it? Or how does it take a form of it? Where do we extract it? Bromantain basically was actually modeled off, a compound called bematil. And it works through a unique enzyme in the in the brain. And it's an enzyme that, needs to be addressed, which is ignored. And that's like most people that use l tyrosine or phenylalanine, these amino acids, their ability to get converted into dopamine is regulated by the enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase. So that enzyme that converts the tyrosine into l dopa, that's where bromantine comes. It actually upregulates that enzyme to shuttle more tyrosine into dopamine. So it's having a it's actually having an epigenetic effect on this enzyme. So it's actually increasing the, mRNA expression, which is awesome. Okay. Right. So dopamine is, you know, known as the kind of rewards chemical and helps with motivation and attention. So I I would imagine that you can have, let's say, high high dopamine, then you're also more eager to do the things that you need to do even if you're, let's say, because all of the times, like, you know, starting to work or being productive is actually having this intrinsic motivation to do it. And if you have this intrinsic motivation, then you, even if you are tired, the intrinsic motivation is gonna override that, and you are still able to focus and, get the thing done. So that's a, like, a an important way of actually boosting your, productivity and motivation, through, like, internal internal means. Exactly. And I like to look at dopamine as the anti procrastination neurotransmitter. Yeah. Yeah. And, you know, but at the same time, there's also, like, you know, dopamine is involved in, like, addiction and, that sort of thing as well. So that kinda gets a gets a bad rep, because of because of this association. Yeah. I mean, the the whole addiction side, I think, yeah, definitely it definitely plays a role, but I think the the opioid the opioid network is definitely more reinforcing and and addictive. You know, like, activating that new opioid receptor can be more, reinforcing. Yeah. For sure. And that that's where, like, serotonin may actually be, like a negative thing. Exactly. Yeah. So that's where serotonin can, have a dampening effect on, the the pleasure response, can contribute to something known as anhedonia, which is the inability to experience pleasure, which, people can get from using five HTP, tryptophan, melatonin, things like that. So it's, like, almost like, you know, you know, there's a lot of this, online that I need to dopamine fast. I to kinda clear my receptors from, like, I don't know, eating junk food or watching pornography or, being addicted to social media, I need to get a dopamine fast. But, you know, the the serotonin may actually be the problem then, not the dopamine. Exactly. Exactly. And I think, you'd be surprised how many people have chronically high serotonin. And then I realized that let's look at just for men, for example, serotonin is having a suppressive effect on testosterone. Serotonin has a suppressive effect on thyroid stimulating hormone. You know, it's it's having it's a it really is a hibernation hibernation neurotransmitter. Yeah. I can explain that. Like, what is actually the serotonin and, yeah, what are the main effects on the body? Well, serotonin is, a compound a neurotransmitter that's synthesized from, tryptophan. So found abundant in, like, turkey, or walnuts. And its role, it's considered a neuromodulator. It's I mean, it it does seem to modulate a lot of, other neurotransmitter systems. But in general, someone a person with high serotonin is often very compliant and very obedient. And so, like, they can follow orders and I mean, that's that sort of makes sense why, you know, the SSRI medications, can make people feel like a zombie because they're basically flooded with serotonin and, you know, they they just they have no they they can't see motivation. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yes. But serotonin is also, like, you know, associated with, like, sleep and relaxation, which just comes to the hibernation side. Exactly. So, yeah, definitely regulating, I think the the main the main area of research in regards to serotonin is actually in the gut. And we know that, you know, 9090% of the serotonin is made in our gut, but serotonin is what causes diarrhea when there's too much. You know? Too much serotonin can increase peristalsis. Gotcha. So So how would you like, what what would be the, like, you know, like, a good amount of serotonin? You obviously don't wanna have too much, but, you know, I would imagine, like, not enough can also cause, you know, just the irritation or, not being able to relax and sleep. Yeah. I mean, if we had the I mean, I'm I'm sort of hoping that in the next couple of years, we have technology that can accurately assess neurotransmitters in the brain, because it's difficult to ascertain, like, the levels of serotonin in specific brain regions. Because one could have high serotonin and say, like, the amygdala versus they may not have high serotonin in the hypothalamus. And we know that serotonin's function and role in these different brain regions will exert a completely different effect. So I think, yeah, I'm looking forward to seeing that sort of research in, you know, maybe in the next few years or so. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. But, yeah, let's say if someone is, in this slump of, hibernation, so to say they don't feel any motivation, and they are very obedient, so to say, following the rules and all those. Like, how would be, like, a good way to, lower the serotonin then? Like, is there any is there anything, like, that is artificially spiking the serotonin too high in our environment and making us, you know, imbalanced? I mean, if from a from an anti serotonin sort of perspective, one compound that's pretty readily available, activated charcoal seems to have an anti serotonin effect. Okay. Vitamin b one can, you know, can help to increase the uptake of serotonin. But generally speaking, like, exposure to bright you know, going out and seeing the sun, exposure to the sun, that's gonna help to lower that, serotonin. Gotcha. And also boosts motivation or dopamine from the sun. Exactly. Mhmm. Gotcha. Okay. What you also had, like, a post about, naltrexone. So maybe talk about what is it and what was the experiment or the existence of research? Yeah. I was looking back at naltrexone and, you know, I was wondering, jeez, why did I go down that path? I mean, I know what it does. Basically, naltrexone is the, it's basically an antidote or an ant it's an opioid antagonist. So it blocks the opioid receptors, and it can also block, sorry, the, endorphins. So, it can have an anti endorphin effect, and that seems to have a a powerful modulatory role on the immune system. And and I originally started researching it in the context of autoimmune disease because, you know, many people were seeing improvements in their autoimmune symptoms using low dose naltrexone. So I ended up getting some maybe three years ago. And within thirty minutes of taking the first dose, I think it was two point it was two point five two point five milligrams, which is moderate low moderate to low. I did a workout. I went to you know, I did some sprint training, and, I remember usually my response from sprinting is that I get I get a, you know, feel good you know, definitely like a bit of a rush, an endorphin rush after sprinting. And I remember on this low dose naltrexone, I had none of that. And I felt actually really flat, like, really flat. And I was like I sort of I knew that was coming. So and that seems to have, like it had a mild rebound effect. So, like, after blocking the, endorphins, the endorphin receptors, it can have a rebound elevation and modulation effect. Okay. So did you get it, like, any post post dose, like, rebound? I mean, it took a few days. I don't know what's wrong with so I honestly think that my blood brain barrier is extremely leaky. It must have led too much naltrexone in, but, it took a while. It took, like, three to four days to really notice the rebound effect. Okay. And, how how how did it feel or what was it any different? I guess I just felt more social, bit more outgoing, just in a better mood, more resilient. It's it's also been shown to raise testosterone as well. It's it's I know I know I know it's been used in a fertility study, but, I mean, I from my if I would've I wouldn't recommend anyone sort of just go out and experiment with that. It's a it is a pharmaceutical medication. It needs to be used under guidance. So Right. Only if your only if your dad is a pharmacist. It's like, do not try this experiment at home, and I tried it at home. Yeah. I wonder what sleep. Like, you know, sleep is also very important for just testosterone and overall health. Do you have, like, any, special hacks or, like, compounds that you use for sleep? Yeah, man. I mean, my favorite hack at the moment's, mouth taping. I've been mouth taping for, you know, a number of months. In in fact, probably over a year now. Mouth taping is awesome because it supports, you know, nitric oxide production because most of the nitric oxide is produced, you know, in a nasal cavity. I also incline my bed. So I've inclined my bed about, six inches. I find that's I know some of the initial studies were looking at, improving varicose veins and helping with glymphatic drainage, helping with the brain. And also I've been using a particular seaweed, a brown seaweed called eclonia cava. It's one of it's an impressive marine drug that's, you know, really effective for it copies a lot of the effects that l theanine does in the brain. Okay. And l theanine is, you know, has this relaxing effects of lowering your excitation and, you know, focus. Not focus, but, you know, this, I don't know. Yeah. Excitement. Yeah. So, I mean, eclonia cava, seems to increase alpha waves in the brain similar to altheanine. It's also helping with a GABA response, and it lowers cortisol quite dramatically as well. Okay. But you do let's say, the ease, like, doesn't with GABA also have, like, the similar effect as serotonin if you, let's say, get too much of it, making you too docile or too kinda hibernating. You know what? It's a great question. And I've I've recently began to ponder that as well whether excess inhibitory neurotransmission such as GABA, so excess GABA Mhmm. It may have a, you know, blunting effect on glutamate. And glutamate is the opposite to GABA, and that's excitatory stimulating. But usually, the case is that most people have, you know, excess glutamate, not enough GABA. But, I mean, that's a bit of a bit of a broad statement because, like, do we have research on that? I don't know. I don't know. Okay. As but you would you ever recommend taking, like, a GABA supplement or something? I do use it, sort of infrequently. I'll I mean, I've I'm going away on a holiday fairly soon, and I've packed some GABA. Like, I might use it very sparingly, at a low dosage. I do notice tolerance if I use it consistently. Mhmm. So, I mean, I I like GABA. I like to use GABA sparingly, like, once or twice a week. Gotcha. But what about melatonin melatonin supplements? Jeez. I mean, I was yeah. I mean, I was very very excited when I found out about melatonin, some of the the pleiotropic effects it has in the in the body, antioxidant, anti inflammatory, some remarkable immune effects. But, unfortunately, like, experimenting with melatonin just left me disappointed. I I just prefer like, right now, I just prefer to, you know, wear my blue blockers, you know, 05:00, 06:00 at night. And, you know, just wearing my blue blockers alone, I did a Dutch test recently, and, my melatonin levels were were on the top end of this of the range. And I'm like, it makes sense. I don't need to use melatonin. The only time I would ever consider it is, jet lag. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I also agree that, you know, all and although I do just think that there isn't this negative feedback that your body would stop producing melatonin if you take it as a supplement, I think it's still, like, you know, kind of more better to just use it, when you you do have, like, a bad night sleep or you're trying to catch up on some bad night sleep and things like that. Because, yeah, usually because then it's you you may develop this psychological dependency that, oh, I need to take it in order to have, like, a good better sleep and that creates, like, maybe this placebo, like, feedback loop. So it's yeah. But you're always gonna you know, you always use it when you actually need it. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. And, the other aspect to that is, like, a lot of people are actually, like, overdosing melatonin without realizing. I was really I was a big fan of, Smart Drugs, Smarts podcast. He had a guest talking about, melatonin supplements. And realistically, the most ideal dosage is three hundred micrograms sustained release, whereas most supplements are selling, like, three milligrams or ten milligrams, which is super high. Right. Yeah. That can definitely be, like, you know again, you may feel tired and drowsy if you take too much in the morning. But, is there is there, like, any you know, melatonin usually helps with, like, deep sleep. But is there any way to, like, specifically increase REM sleep that usually some people struggle with? Yeah. So from the REM sleep optimization sort of thing, rhodiola was was researched, in combination with acetylazolamide. It actually does increase REM sleep. I would assume that would be the high rosavin's extracts. There's two different types of, you know, constituents. I've used the solidricide and the rosavin's. The the rosavin's, extracted the high percentage of rosavin's was more calming. So if I were to, like, sort of look at REM sleep optimization, really, we just wanna ensure we're getting sufficient, like, vitamin b six, vitamin a, and some of these essential nutrients, magnesium, zinc. These all have a a positive effect on REM sleep. Gotcha. And, any any, like, other besides, compounds, like any hacks or any technology, any any, like, kind of beta routines or something to help with that? At one stage, I was, you know, experimenting with the, acupressure mat. I, with the spikes. I mean, I did I did get a good response initially. Again, I I felt like I built tolerance to that really quickly. But in terms of, yeah, like the inclining my beds, mouth taping, blue blockers, eclonia cava, and then, yeah. I mean, occasionally, I might use, cyproheptadine, which sort of does help with sleep. But from my experience, our BPC one five seven, that increased my I mean, it increased my deep sleep dramatically dramatically. Really? Well, so BPC is like a a pept peptide, and, it's usually mostly known for, like, it's, helps to recover from injuries and tendon ligaments and that sort of thing. So how would it how would it help with the sleep? Well, if you look at some of the other research, I know BPC is, well studied for improving, muscle sorry, muscle soreness and ligaments, like, torn ligaments and injuries. It's also research to heal the gut, you know, leaky gut, things like that. But it also has been shown to help restore the GABA, system. Like, it has some restorative effects on the GABA network. So I think I'd imagine that's probably how it helps with, sleep. So kind of, just, repairs the brain, if that makes sense. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's phenomenal compound. Gotcha. Have you used it for other have you, like, used it for this, injury treatment itself as well? Well, I that's the that's the reason why I first tried it was because I tore my medial meniscus, and sort of, I used BPC for about two weeks. And after about a week or so, there was no pain in my knee. And so I was having a this was orally as well. Like, most peptides have to be injected, but BPC is unique because it's an oral orally bioavailable peptide, which is what we what we want. Okay. Well, yeah, that's good to know. Any other peptides that you have used? I haven't really played around with too many. I mean, back in the day, I did use, a particular bovine. So like a it's like a pig, peptide, amino ax amino acid complex. That was mostly for muscle building and, recovery and things like that. It helps with increasing nitrogen retention. So I'm sure it was having a positive effect on, protein synthesis. But yeah. I mean, I'm I'm probably I'll be getting into peptides in the next probably, like, five to ten years because I think there's some really phenomenal phenomenal up and coming peptides. So have you looked at the research about the current, you know, state? I mean, there's one particular it's not really a a peptide, but there's one small molecule, for fat loss. It's one of my highest performing, YouTube videos. It's called five amino one m q. And this particular molecule seems to increase intracellular NAD levels. Like, you know, instead of taking nicotinamide mononucleotide or, any other n NAD supplement, It seems to increase the intracellularly. I spoke to Ryan Smith from TaylorMade, and, he said some pretty phenomenal things about it. It also increases, skeletal muscle satellite cell production, so, helping with stem cell production, things like that. So, yeah, five amino one m q is definitely a really cool compound. Okay. That's interesting. So, yeah, like, the the peptides themselves are, you know, supposed to be research chemicals, and they're not, like, for human consumption unless you have, like, maybe a doctor who is prescribing it. So how would, maybe, people who are interested in it, how would they, I don't know, learn more about it, or how would where where can they actually get it from some facility? Well, I had a I mean, I spoke to Ben Greenfield and and, Ryan Smith from TaylorMade, and I ended up, finding a really reliable vendor, which I'm now an affiliate partner with. There it's on my website. People just search, five amino one m q. They'll see I've linked to a particular product that has really good, reviews. Okay. Gotcha. So what about, have you ever done or what what's your thoughts on fasting? Jeez. I mean I mean, I spent a lot of time researching. I mean, I do fast maybe five days a week up maybe my first meal is often around 11:30 midday, and that's like the highest protein high fat meal. But to be honest, like, my goals are very much contrary to sort of implementing the fasting because I'm trying to build as much muscle as I can at the moment. Whilst you can build a lot of muscle still fasting, I just can't get enough calories in if I fast too much. So, I do fast, but I do it sparingly. Gotcha. Yeah. So, yeah. Like, you you do it, but, what do you think about the research or something? What have you what what's your thoughts about is is there any potential for it for from, like, a health perspective? Oh, absolutely. From, like, a longevity longevity and, metabolic health and insulin sensitivity, I'm a big fan. I'm a big fan. I think it's, you know, the research is strong. It does help with, you know, in improving increasing lifespan and and overall health span. But I mean, I I I also don't mind the use of, fasting mimetic compounds like spermidine and metformin, dihydroberine, things like that. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Those things, do mimic, at least, like, turn on the same pathways in the body as fasting or color restriction does. And, you you know, arguably, I would have, like you know, what I also like to think about is that there are ways to kinda speed up the benefits of fasting, like, with things like exercise or solas or, yeah, taking these different compounds so we can get, like, some of the benefits faster without you needing to, you know, fast for, days and days because, yeah, like, you maybe you would need to fast for three days to get into topology, but, that will only be the case if you're, like, sedentary and, inter resistant and those things that you you you don't have, like, this, energy stress on the body. Whereas, you you do have this higher energy stress, by with the exercise or the mimetics, then, this process is gonna be, tapas faster. Yeah. Somebody should, retitle these compounds as, like, faster fasting or something like that. Fantastic. Yeah. Which which ones, yeah, you mentioned the berberine and metformin. So which one do you think is, like, your favorite? Well, actually, like, there's, like, a new there's a new form of berberine, which I think's got a lot you know, it's gonna be trending a lot more, the dihydroberine. It's a metabolite of, of berberine that seems to have much better bioavailability than regular berberine. So, dihydroberine at about fifty to a hundred milligrams per day is equivalent to, like, five hundred to a thousand milligrams of berberine. Yeah. So, yeah, I'll tend to load up on that around my, highest carb meal of the day. Mhmm. Gotcha. And that helps to lower the blood sugar and lower the insulin as well. I also do use metformin about maybe twice a week or so. And that's usually under I mean, that's under very strict circumstances. So if I've had a really poor night's sleep, the next day, I'll I'll have metformin because I know I'm insulin resistant. And I'll also if I'm gonna have a cheat, like, go out and have some fun on the weekend or whatever, I'll have metformin. If I'm gonna eat, like, crappy food like pizzas and whatever, I'll have metformin. Yeah. Yeah. So that's biohackism. Yeah. Yeah. What about coffee? What do you think about coffee for the health benefits? Like, is is there actual like, there's a lot of controversy that some people don't think that it's healthy at all or some other think, you know, they they well, at least, like, I have also seen, like, a lot of research about the benefits of coffee. Yeah. I mean, I'm someone who actually, I I don't drink coffee at all. And the reason it's not that I don't like coffee. I really enjoy it, and I really feel good on it. I have more energy. I feel great. The only reason why I don't drink coffee is because, I lose track of my baseline. It ends up giving me this sort of false level of energy, and I just forget, like, where am I at? And then eventually, one or two days after drinking coffee, I'm like, if I don't have coffee on the third day, I mean, I'm struggling. Like, my adrenals are so shot that I really struggle. So, honestly, I just have, you know, I have decaf coffee or some other sort of caffeine alternatives. Gotcha. But what what what does the research say? Like, what is what are the main, main, benefits to coffee? Overall, we see an improvement in, liver function over time. So reduction in, liver cancer, it increases DHT, It improves, testosterone. It improves, the microbiome. I mean, I think coffee has a has a broad effect on improving, lifespan and longevity provided that the individual uses it consistently. I think this and one to two cups per day. I don't think pushing it any beyond maybe two hundred milligrams per day is very beneficial. Mhmm. But I think for most people who really struggle with, like, energy and adrenal issues, then I think caffeine can be slightly hijacking, their adrenals. Right. Yeah. For sure. There's definitely too much that is, may happen. But, yeah, what what is the, let's say, mechanism or the reasons why coffee has these benefits? And would it would it would it be like the caffeine, or would it be also like the, you know, polyphenols that you get from even, like, decaf coffee? Like, which one is it? I think it's the combination. I mean, there's studies that show that caffeine by itself has a different effect through caffeine in in coffee. Like so we know that it like, these polyphenols, they they're also some of them are psychoactive. Some of them have they modulate the microbiome. I think when we look at coffee, we're not just looking at the caffeine. Absolutely. We need to look in the full picture, the polyphenols, the, caffeic acid, the chlorogenic acid, the you know, there's there's a range of unique, polyphenols that, again, work on the gut, work on, binding to the bitter bitter receptors in the in the back of the tongue, the bitter receptors in the stomach. The bitter receptors stimulate, you know, gallbladder bile release, improve liver function. So I think, yeah, overall, the the benefits really lie in the whole package, the way that nature designed. Gotcha. Yeah. Yeah. And is there, like, any alternatives to coffee, like any teas or something? I I really like yerba mate. I mean, I respond quite well to yerba mate tea, South American, tea. That that's rich in thiobromine, that has a longer half life and seems to have a smoother energy kick than than coffee. And then there's also, one compound that I really like. It's called tea cream, which seems to be a similar molecule to caffeine, but it's, has a much longer half life and also has no signs of tolerance or, habituation, which is that's what we want. We want a compound that, you know, builds doesn't build tolerance. Gotcha. Yeah. Yeah. That was like, the green tea is also very, researched and, has also similar antioxidant effects and, protective things from cancer and, things like that. So yeah. Yes. Very, very ancient, you know, and beverage. Well, Lucas, it's been really fascinating to talk with you, and we could definitely spend hours on all the different, research, you've done and all the topics. But, yeah, we'll start wrapping things up as well. Before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? Yeah. Awesome. Just wanna say, yeah, thanks for having me on the show, Sam. It's been, it's been fun. People can, check me out on, Instagram, ergogenic underscore health, and also check me out on YouTube. The it's just type in boost your biology. There'll be a whole channel there so they can check that out. Awesome. We're gonna put all the links in the show notes. And, my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habits that you wish you out of the sooner? Oh, jeez. That's a that's a tough one. One piece of habit. Oh, okay. The biggest one for me is actually don't underestimate the impact of social connections. Like, you can bar hack all day. You can go on the treadmill desk. You can go on the sauna. But I think social connections, having a good community and a tribe is really what makes me feel the best. Yeah. Yeah. And research also shows that helps with, like, actually living longer. So if you want to, yeah, if you want to live longer, then you need to have a good social connection. That's it. That's it. Awesome. Well, it's great talking with you, and, yeah, I'll see you around in the future. Likewise, team. Take care, man.