Welcome back to the channel. My name is Seeb Lund and in this video we're gonna talk about what are the top three supplements that I would take for the rest of my life. You know, this hypothetical scenario where you can't take any other supplements and you only take three of them, which ones would those be? Make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. Alright. So number one, magnesium. Surprise, surprise. Magnesium is, yeah, I think one of the most important minerals. It, yeah, governs a ton of processes inside the body involved in the hundreds of reactions and the process of generating ATP itself requires magnesium. It's involved in almost all steps of the way when it comes to energy production as well as all other things like neurotransmitters, digestion, stress management, insulin sensitivity, and those kind of things. So what are the benefits of magnesium? I'm just gonna list them, you know. Yeah. It's it's almost like everything. Everything requires magnesium. It regulates stress, improves your heart health, better sleep, reduces anxiety, supports blood sugar levels, helps with migraines, relieves constipation, strengthens bones, increases energy, improves immunity, lowers pain, protects brain, and a bunch of other things that aren't listed here as well. The biggest, you know, consequence of not having enough magnesium in my opinion would be cardiovascular disease and, heart problems. So if you don't have enough magnesium then you're going to offset the balance between sodium and calcium which will raise your blood pressure and also promote tissue calcification. So excess calcium in relation to magnesium will promote this calcification and atherosclerosis as a result of that, which is, you know, obviously that. Other things that will happen, will also be metabolic syndrome. You'll, you'll become insulin resistant. You have high cholesterol, and, yeah, eventually that will increase the risk of cardiovascular disease quite a lot. You also damage the endothelial, so this, basically smooth layering of the blood vessels, that will become, dysfunctional and, that will promote thrombosis, atherosclerosis, and just the just the, you have to, like, deal with oxidative stress and inflammation that requires magnesium as well. And if you don't have enough magnesium, then your antioxidant defenses are not gonna work that optimally. And, yeah, you're at a higher risk of just, you know, experiencing damage. Gonna have a bad time. There are a lot of studies that finding this association between magnesium intake and cardiovascular disease. And, the less magnesium you consume, the higher risk of calcification there is. And so this study, 2014, magnesium intake is inversely associated with coronary artery calcification. And, you can see at, the intakes of two hundred and fifty, three hundred, the, increased risk of calcification is much higher compared to four hundred and to four hundred fifty. So the RDA itself is around 400, 420, somewhere around there. And, yeah, generally the less you consume, the higher risk of your calcification is, which is, you know, bad for heart disease. The problem with magnesium and all the other minerals is that, the amount of it has been decreasing in our food, and soils quite a lot because of mostly, like, soil erosion, pesticides, herbicides, those things that deplete the soil from those minerals. And as a result of that, the food is also, quite low in, those minerals. And that is also one of the reasons why people, like, why magnesium is such a common deficiency. Like, fifty to sixty percent of people are deficient in magnesium, and, yeah, it's just, like, a big problem. The foods that have the most magnesium are all these seeds, pumpkin seeds, almonds, as well as spinach, black beans, potatoes, salmon, and, yeah, they do have magnesium. The problem may be that, yeah, like, who who eats a bunch of pumpkin seeds, who eats a bunch of almonds, maybe like a few of them, maybe like a little bit, but not in crazy amounts. And even, like, like with spinach, you know, 0.5 cups is seventy eight milligrams. And, in order to get the four hundred twenty milli four hundred twenty milligram RDA, then, yeah, you would need to consume quite a lot of cups of spinach, which is, you know, obviously quite difficult. That's why I think, taking a magnesium supplement is something that if I were to choose what which supplement should I take then on a deserted island, then, yeah, the magnesium is probably one of them. And, the best brand out there, in my opinion is a magnesium breakthrough. So they have all, like, the main kind of best seven forms of, magnesium for the heart, for the gut, and, the the general health. So, yeah, this one is the best one, in my opinion, you because, you know, you may be getting magnesium that is good for the heart, but if you're lacking it in the intestines or you're lacking it in the brain, for example, then, you still may experience some negative symptoms of magnesium deficiency. So this kind of, prevents that because you get all the different types of it in, in some amounts. If you want to check out magnesium breakthrough, then I have a discount link in the description and, yeah, you can check it out. So good. Supplement number two is glycine, which is another one of my favorites. It's pretty damn awesome. It's It's pretty damn healthy for you, and it also has quite a lot of health benefits. Reason number one why you may want to supplement with a glycine is that it promotes glutathione. So glutathione is the main master antioxidant and it protects against, liver damage, improves your immune system, reduces fatty liver, supports detoxification, DNA repair, fights free radicals, antiaging effects. So it's a very important defense system and, glycine helps to boost that. Reason number two is that glycine helps with sleep. It lowers your body temperature, which then, helps to facilitate the production of melatonin. It, relaxes your muscles and, also prevents your body from over overheating during night, which is, you know, good. Higher body temperature and higher room temperatures themselves tend to be associated with a worse sleep quality and, you know, sleep is obviously very important. So glycine is one of the best, let's say, evening supplements that I take as well. Reason number three is that it protects the heart. So even even through glutathione, it can protect the heart. But besides that, it also protects against lipid peroxidation, lowers oxidative stress, improves blood flow, reduces inflammation, and, yeah, it's generally good for, again, preventing oxidative damage that you may experience. Reason number four is that it lowers blood sugar. So glycine actually raises insulin which then helps to shuttle glucose into the cells. So actually because it raises insulin, it is a good thing in in that sense because if you don't produce insulin or you produce it in inadequate amounts then you have, you know, high high blood sugar and that will be, you know, bad for diabetes. Diabetes. Reason number five is that, glycine balances methionine. So methionine is another is an essential amino acid and, it has some benefits with, you know, the methylation cycle, but excess methionine has been found to be associated with, accelerated aging and inflammation. So you want to balance your methionine intake with glycine. Methionine you get from a muscle meat basically and glycine from, these tendon meats, jello, gelatin, and skin, chicken skin, fish skin, those things have more glycine. And the studies have found that, the dietary glycine supplementation, it can mimic the lifespan extension that happens usually with restricting methionine in at least, like, in animals. So it's, with with glycine, you can basically mimic the effects of a of a methionine restriction on longevity. So you don't have to basically restrict the, your your at least that much. You don't have to restrict the amount of methionine you consume that much if you're balancing it out with glycine. Reason number six is that glycine makes up collagen. Like I said, one third of collagen is a glycine and, you know, collagen itself helps with wound healing, repairs or repairs tendons and ligaments and also slows down the skin aging. So your skin is made of protein as well as collagen. Natural foods of glycine are tender meats, chicken drumsticks, gelatin, fish bones, fish skin, those kinds of things. I do eat, let's say, those kinds of foods. Every once in a while, I eat, gelatin on a regular basis. I eat some fish skin, and maybe some chicken drumsticks. The tendon meats not that often, but I do have them every once in a while. So that's why I think that taking a glycine supplement, is also like a quick fix and an easy fix. If I were to have to take one supplement out of the three, then the glycine would be one of them because of the same primarily because of the, the effects on, the methionine restriction and, glutathione and just the, like, antiaging compound. Supplement number three is gonna be vitamin k. So, vitamin k is, quite a good vitamin. It's a fat soluble vitamin and, the effects or the functions of vitamin k have to mostly do with the cardiovascular disease again and bones. So, what what vitamin k does is essentially regulate your calcium levels in the body and helps to direct things like vitamin d and calcium into the bones where they where the most used at, whereas instead of keeping them in the bloodstream. So excess calcification, excess calcium, and excess vitamin d, the that doesn't get end up in the bones, that can, you know, cause calcification and atherosclerosis because of that. Whereas vitamin k ensure vitamin k two specifically ensures that, it goes there where it's needed. Other benefits again, yeah, like, prevents calcification and is also essential for a blood clotting. So this is again mostly for cardiovascular disease risk management. Foods that have vitamin k are both plants and animals. You get vitamin k one from mostly leafy greens and vitamin k two from, the cheeses, egg yolks, those kinds of liver and organ meats as well as a natto, which is this a fermented soybean dish. That's actually the one of the highest source of k two and the k two is more of this more bioactive form and k two actually is more related to the calcification and, blood clotting and things like that to the cardiovascular effects, whereas the k one is for the bones. Let's say it doesn't have like a lot of the cardiovascular effects, but yeah, ideally you still want to consume both. How much vitamin k you need? You don't need like a ton of vitamin k two every day. Men need about one hundred and twenty micrograms, women ninety micrograms, but in my opinion it's still worthwhile to get, like, two hundred micrograms a day and it's not gonna be any problem. So that's why, yeah, like, I would include a vitamin k two supplement, NK seven preferably on a regular basis if I were to choose. Okay. Which one which supplement should I take for the rest of my life? Choose wisely. Alright. That's it for this video. Let me know in the comments which ones did you choose, which three supplements would you take if you had to choose for the rest of your life. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.