Hey. Welcome back to the channel. My name is Simland. And in this video, we're gonna talk about what are the best ways to boost your testosterone levels. So we're gonna be ranking different kinds of activities, supplements, and foods, for raising your testosterone levels. Make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. Alright. So let's get straight into it. So we have the tiers here and the activities. So we're just gonna begin from, like, randomness. First off, let's take obesity. So being overweight, that's actually, has been shown to be associated with lower testosterone levels, and it, does impair your, hormone production for both males and women's. Especially for men, the excess body fat, basically, your fat cells basically have this, enzyme called aromatase that converts your testosterone into, estrogen. So, that's why the more body fat you have, the kinda lower testosterone levels are gonna be and the higher your estrogen levels are gonna be. So, that's obviously huge, very bad. So I gotta put this into the shit tier. So if you're overweight, then the first thing you need to do or the most biggest effect one of the biggest effects you will have on your testosterone levels is gonna be just, you know, obviously just losing weight and, that's gonna be the best thing to do that, for that. So, yeah, you don't even need to take, like, some magic supplements. You usually just need to kinda lose some body fat and that will do the trick in most cases. Next, we'll pick up, something else from this list. Okay. Oysters. So oysters are actually a good food for testosterone production because they contain a lot of zinc. So zinc is one of the essential nutrients for producing testosterone, other hormones as well, and, especially for sperm sperm count, spermatogenesis, that's been also been linked to not only zinc, but also actually the oysters specifically. Just so just eating oysters themselves has been found to have a positive effect on spermatogenesis and the zinc obviously will also then have a positive effect on, the testosterone levels. So I think this is gonna be a good thing to do because, you know, nutrition is still one of the most effective ways of regulating your biomarkers and, yeah, your diet does directly have an effect on your body composition as well as the sex hormone production. Next up, we'll take cardio. So cardiovascular exercise, obviously, it can be a good for you good for good thing for losing weight and into doing helping with testosterone production. But as an exercise itself, cardio doesn't raise testosterone at all. So, the HIT HIT cardio, like, high intensity interval training that could have this effect, But regular low intensity cardio doesn't really, raise your testosterone at all. So you don't get any, disaster boosting response from that. But I'm still gonna put it into, like, oh, and you can already over you can also overdo with the cardio. Like excess cortisol, will impair testosterone levels and the testosterone production and, can make you stressed out, but it still has a positive effect on your body composition by making you burn calories and losing weight. So I'll just put it into, like, okay, just because of that. As an exercise itself is, no effect on testosterone production. At least that is what I, think. And then, the circadian rhythms or less this is more linked to, yeah, like the vitamin d. So sunlight exposure and vitamin d is huge for, your testosterone levels and low vitamin d status is associated with lower testosterone levels. And, optimally, you would want to have, you know, slight slightly higher end of the vitamin d to, have a good as exformal profile. So that's why I'll put it also here into, good. So to say, like, you want to have vitamin d and you also wanna get exposed to sunlight specifically. So there's even studies where the sunlight exposure on the testicles raises the slasher levels almost like double more than if you get some exposure on your just just regular skin. So, sunlight in your balls is, it has been shown to raise testosterone levels. So, yeah, vitamin d plus the sunlight itself has a positive effect on on that. I was tripping balls. Actually, I'll put it into here, gut tier, because the vitamin d is so kind of crucial, for that. And I'll actually put the zinc here as well, gut tier, because they are literally, yeah, one of the most kind of fundamentals vitamin d and zinc, for testosterone levels. Let's move on with, this is, if I'm not mistaken, then this is gonna be ginseng. So, this ancient herb that is usually associated with, sex hormones and libido and, cardiovascular health. So actually, yeah, ginseng have been found to also, yeah, raise, testosterone levels in studies. The effect isn't, like, significantly huge, but it's still there that it does. The kind of folk medicine is true in this case that it is good for libido as well as testosterone levels. And it is definitely better than cardio for that. I'll put, this I'll put this into good. Yeah. Because, it does work in small amounts in minor effects. Next up is gonna be, stress. So, stress, obviously, I mentioned that excess stress can be bad for the testosterone levels and too much working and over over over like, a overstressed chronic stress chronic cortisol, that will have a negative effect on your testosterone levels as well. I think that, yeah, it's probably like, you know, so it's has a huge negative effect on your testosterone levels, but I don't think that it's as bad as being overweight. So it can still be somewhat sympathetically overdriven and still have high testosterone levels. So, yeah, cortisol isn't nearly as bad as being overweight, I think. And, in some sense, like, the cortisol you get from, like, exercise, you know, it's still rate is cortisol and it but it doesn't have long term effects on, the testosterone whereas like, you know, exercise does like a net positive is still gonna be there for the testosterone. And I think that's applies to just chronic stress as well that even if you are experiencing slightly higher amounts of stress, it's still not as like shit there. It's still bad but it's not complete shit there. Boron. So boron essential not an essential mineral but conditionally essential and, that is also associated with high testosterone by reducing this sex hormone binding globulin that kind of frees up testosterone a little bit more. So, this I think would also be good. So most people aren't getting adequate amounts of boron. It's a huge deficiency, and just because it's not considered an essential nutrient, then it's not, like, made that big of a deal. But it is quite important, and I do think that it's a effective way to kinda have a minor effect on your testosterone levels. Let's move on with soybeans. So soybeans, obviously have slightly more estrogenic. They're exinostrogens. They mimic estrogen in your body. I'll put it into bad because it will potentially raise your estrogen levels if you're male, but that's, again, not as bad as just being o rate. Like, some if you're just, you know, still working out and eating clean and, staying healthy, then your testosterone levels may shouldn't be, like, very affected by eating soybeans unless you are yet eating, like, only soybeans as your main source of protein that may may have, like, a negative effect. And it may not happen to everyone. Some people may get it more easily than others, but it's not going to raise your testosterone levels. So, it it could have a negative effect, by being estrogenic, but, it may not either. So just still put into, like, bad. I wouldn't, like, recommend eating a bunch of soybeans for, meals unless they're, like, fermented. If it's, like, nacho, then the fermentation actually is good. But if it's, you know, regular ones, then I wouldn't do that. Oh, Oh, hey, Stan. Could you grab me a beer? There it is. Here is the, resistance training. So this is what I was looking for. The resistance training weights obviously got here because one of the best ways to boost your testosterone levels, I'll put it actually even, like, number one just just because of how big an effect it will have on your testosterone levels. So the, heavy compound lifts especially have been found to have the biggest effects on testosterone levels and, yeah, other hormones as well. Growth hormone, IGF one levels, all the growth pathways in the body go up with resistance training and so does the testosterone levels. Testosterone levels aren't necessarily like super mandatory for building muscle but they do have an effect on stimulating muscle protein synthesis. And I think of that. So you could still build muscle with low testosterone but it's quite hard to do that. And when it comes to like volumes and stuff, then the higher volumes tend to be more boosting of growth hormone and the testosterone compared to like power lifting or like endurance. So a slightly higher bodybuilding volume, more sets, more reps is generally more accommodating of testosterone levels. Plastics. So, plastic bottles, plastic containers, those are shit tier because, yeah, they have a pretty bad effect similar to being, like, estrogenic because of being xenoestrogens. And, yeah, one One of the biggest reasons or not the biggest one or that is one of the reasons why it's thought that men have slightly lower testosterone levels nowadays is because of the exposure to these chemicals and plastics and those kind of things. So, I would be I would definitely try to avoid plastics as much as possible and use different kinds of containers, for that. Ginger. So ginger is also actually been found to raise the testosterone levels a little bit, but it's not, huge. It's not huge, but but it seems small effect I'll put into okay. So just that you know, I'm not making these things things up. So ginger has been found to have a positive effect in increasing FSH, LH, and testosterone in in fertile men. Obviously, it's not not healthy men or their testosterone levels were already low, but it just, you know, shows that it is still possible to, have a positive effect on that. Obviously, it may not have that big an effect if you already have your good health than you already have. So, like, the higher level of testosterone is not gonna be, like, boosting additionally. But if your testosterone levels are low or if you're infertile, then apparently according to this study, it could have a positive effect especially on the semen parameters of increasing, sperm count and, sperm motility and, sperm viability, those kind of things. Next up, we'll take, another common herb used for boosting testosterone, which is a tonkat ali, and it has been, yeah, also been found to, have a positive effect on, the testosterone levels. And it is one of the few herbs that has actually, like, a even, like, a very significant effect in boosting testosterone levels compared to things like, you know, tubular storiasis or whatever kind of natural testosterone boosters there are. Tonkat Ali is actually one of the few ones that has been shown to have quite a significant effect in raising testosterone. So I'll actually put it into card tier, because, there was, this is one study, total testosterone, free testosterone, baseline three point eight four nanograms per milliliter. Three weeks later, four point nine. And, five weeks later, four point four two nanograms per milliliter, which is quite a, you know, large increase. But the free testosterone themselves, increased also quite significant to five point two and eight eight point thirty eight, picamol picograms per milliliter. So, yeah, it's quite a significant boost in testosterone. And when it comes to the the females, then the females saw also a very significant increase. So the female participants saw a 48.6% increase in, total testosterone and a 122% increase in free testosterone. So the male testosterone levels, the increase from that Tonka Ali wasn't that that large, but it was also quite similar. So, yeah, you can also see, like, a double boost in your free testosterone levels. And if you're interested in getting a Tonka Ali, then, my recommended tonkaryali supplement for boosting testosterone is by VH Nutrition. So I have a huge, like, a very content highly concentrated supplement that has twelve hundred milligrams per serving. So it's much larger than than most other supplements and, yeah, it's, I think something to try if you have some aspects of if you're trying to, like, push your natural testosterone levels to the maximum optimal range, then, yeah, this could be something that you try out. You can also check out my discount link for this Donkat Ali supplement and the link is in the description. Right. Next up, we'll take omega threes. So, Fish and DHA salmon, I think, this is also gonna be god tier because the omega threes, have been also found to be positive for boosting testosterone. Obviously, healthy fats, they raise HDL cholesterol, which, there is association with higher HDL levels and, and the testosterone levels as well. Coffee. So the interesting thing with coffee is that, obviously, it can break cortisol. It can make you stressed out. It can interrupt your sleep. But there is also a study that found that the, the coffee or the caffeine actually has a good effect in boosting testosterone levels if you take it, basically with exercise. So the idea may be behind that, you know, with, this caffeine, you have more energy to push yourself at the gym. And as a result of that, you're going to have a positive effect on, the testosterone levels as well as through the mechanism of just training harder and heavier. So I'll just put in an okay tier. Like, I don't think that it's it's going to be huge in terms of boosting testosterone, but again, using as a pre workout or something, then, at least this study, let's say yeah. This study does affect of caffeine and testosterone and cortisol response to resistance training. So testosterone concentrations showed a small increase of 15% during exercise. Caffeine raised this concentration in a dose dependent manner by further small 21% at the highest dose. The eight hundred milligram dose also produced the moderate 52% increase in cortisol. So, yeah, exercise raised 15%, testosterone, but the if you combine it with caffeine, then it got up to 21 plus or minus 24% at the highest dose. Next up, let's take sleep. I think sleep is a guttier because, yeah, your body repairs itself doing sleep and, it also kind of produces a lot of these hormones during sleep and sleep deprivation has been found almost like in a dose specific manner to reduce your testosterone levels and not sleeping enough, then if you don't if you don't sleep, let's say, for one night, then the next day, your testosterone levels will be, much lower because you get more cortisol and as well you just your body isn't recovering. Next up, let's take green tea. We talked about coffee. So green tea actually, lowers testosterone. So I'll put it into bad. It's obviously not gonna be as bad as something like, being overweight or something, but it's similar to here that I'll put it into bad. So the same applies to white teas. So green and white tea, both have a suppressive effect on testosterone. I don't drink tea. A white steak and eggs. So this, not only refers to steak and eggs, but it also refers to just a higher saturated fat intake. So, this, I think, is also god tier similar to the salmon because of, yeah, your body needs cholesterol to make sex hormones and, a lower fat intake, like a low fat diet has been found to reduce testosterone levels. And going back to a slightly higher saturated fat intake has been found to rebound that and raise the the testosterone levels back again. But there is, like, a, you know, a threshold as well for that. You're not gonna see any increase after, like, 30 to 40% of your calories coming from fat. So you still want to get about, like, 30 to 40% of your calories as fat if you want to maximize or optimize the testosterone production, and you're not going to gain any additional benefit after that. You're not gonna gain any increased effects if you eat 60% as fat. So kind of 30 to 40% is better than just 10% or 15%. Next up, horny goat weed. We have this picture of a goat and the legend goes or the myth goes that these, goats eat this herb and they get, like, super horny or their libido increases. So that's why this herb is called horny horny goat weed. It does seem to raise testosterone and libido in, like, rats and other animals, but it doesn't do so in, in, humans. So, and it actually may have, like, in human some humans that they found to have, like, actually a suppressive effect on testosterone and maybe, like, slightly estrogenic as well in humans. So I actually put it into bad tier. So I wouldn't, after seeing those studies, I wouldn't recommend to, like, take horny goat meat if your goal is to kinda maximally boost your testosterone levels. Next up, we'll take fasting. So fasting can be a double edged sword as well. So in moderation in, like, time machine eating aspects, then, it has been shown to, like, raise luteinizing hormone and, testosterone levels as well a little bit. But, obviously, if you over over fast, you fast for too long, then that will have a negative effect. Or if you're just, you know, under under nourished, because of the fasting. So I'll put it into okay. Like, I I wouldn't consider fasting as a way to boost testosterone levels, but I wouldn't say that it's gonna inherently be negative either if you know what you're doing and if you were able to still recover optimally. The same applies to calorie restriction. Obviously, you need calorie restriction to lose weight, but you don't wanna become undernourished and malnourished. So I'll put this into okay as well. So, you know, it's not you know, it's more bad in some sense than but it depends on the the amount of calorie restriction. You could just restrict your calories by 10 to 20% and you do a diet for, like, a few weeks, then it won't have any negative, like, the saucer or it may actually boost it. But if you're doing, like, a chronic calorie restriction when you count, like, like, a fatty immunity diet or something like that, then, yeah, that will have a huge negative effect on testosterone, especially if you're restricting protein and fats as well together. This brings us to carbs. So carbs are very beneficial for boosting testosterone levels by boosting thyroid hormones as well. And low chronic low carb diets have been found to, like, suppress the testosterone levels to a certain extent. And, you don't you do want to do cyclical carbs cycling, both males and females. It's just that the excess carbs can also be negative for testosterone if you become diabetic or if your blood sugar levels go too high. So, yeah, just eat carbs in kind of moderation and do some sort of cyclical. That's what I kinda like to do. But don't be, like, chronically zero carb or low carb all the time either because, yeah, your, testosterone will go down. Your six hormone binding will go up. The same applies to calorie restriction that raises the six hormone binding will go and, yeah. So I wouldn't I wouldn't, do, like, a very, low carb diet for too long if you want to maximize your testosterone. Type of carbo load. Olive oil, another form of good fats, raises HDLs. I'll put it into good, because yeah, I think it will raise HDL and you can increase your fat indicator as well. Yeah. I think the polyphenols may also be slightly good for like estrogen side but, yeah. It's not god tier because, you know, other things are kinda more effective for that but it's still cute to get like some olive oil, I think. The sauna, so the sauna hasn't been found to change testosterone levels in men or or females for that matter. The, thing with sonars is that, it does raise prolectin which can suppress testosterone levels. So, I think, this will be okay because, you know, the sonars depends on dose and depends on frequency. The heat can reduce your sperm count and have a negative effect on on that but it's not going to reduce the testosterone levels, the heat and the sonas or the product even. But it's still, you know, something, I wouldn't say it's like super testosterone boosting but it's still healthy for you for the other reasons that you get sex intercourse. So this is good because, yeah, if you are having intercourse then you will see an increase in testosterone levels as well as dopamine. The thing with the ejaculation is that after ejaculation, your dopamine goes down. So and you get the increase in prolactin, which can lower your testosterone. So, yeah. I think, having sex itself will raise your testosterone levels, but ejaculating, let's say, too frequently, that could lower your testosterone levels to a certain extent. When it comes to, like, the NoFap or not ejaculating, then there is gonna be increase in testosterone levels up to point of day seven after and after day seven, you're not gonna see an increase. So, yeah. I ejaculating too frequently gonna be bad. Masturbation is also probably not going to raise your testosterone levels whereas intercourse with a real partner will. And watching someone else like porn, then that doesn't raise testosterone whereas the actual intercourse will. That's been shown by studies. So just the real thing will raise your testosterone, but the other others, the artificial artificial things that don't. Ashwagandha. So it's a commonly popular used supplement for or associated with, like stress management and testosterone levels. And we will put it into GUID because there are some studies that the ashwagandha has a positive effect on things like like, sperm quality, semen quality, and some sexual hormones as well. Although, it's not again super crazy. I don't mean I wouldn't compare it to Tongkat Ali or I wouldn't compare it to, like, sunlight, but, yeah, could be something to add. And the same applies to fenugreek. Fenugreek is actually also quite, commonly used to boost testosterone and there is studies, a meta analysis even that many other combination of studies have been found that the, the fenugreek extract has a significant effect on total serum testosterone. So the, increase can be anywhere from, like, 15 to 17 or 20% increase in testosterone levels. Alright. We have the some of the final ones. Dopamine. So getting a boost of dopamine is very good for testosterone levels, because dopamine does boost testosterone levels, and testosterone also helps with producing dopamine. So it's a good, virtuous cycle in almost and, you get the higher motivation from dopamine, and testosterone also increases, like, the drive and those kind of things. So being low dopamine, because of maybe watching porn or not getting enough amino acids or not getting enough any sunlight, then that would have a negative effect on testosterone. Whereas you get dopamine from, let's say, even like competition winning, doing good in life, getting positive feedback, that would raise your dopamine levels and that will also kind of raise your testosterone as a byproduct of that. And last, we have the circadian rhythm alignment. So similar to sunlight exposure, so your body produces testosterone in a circadian manner. The highest production of testosterone is around, 9AM in the morning. And, misalignments in the circadian rhythms will have negative effect on all all the hormones including testosterone. So I'll put being aligned with the circadian rhythms into gut, because it is a kinda underlooked, aspect and it's very important in actually, yeah, making sure that your body produces enough of this testosterone, like, at the right time of the day. So there you have it. This is the list. The best things to do for your, testosterone is lift weights, sleep, get sunlight, sunlight your balls maybe, and, eat zinc, eat, fatty slightly fattier foods, with cholesterol and, healthy fats, protein, obviously, as well. Maybe consider supplement with tonkadali if you want to kind of, maximize the natural production and, yeah, and avoid things of VCD and the plastic bottles. So and, yeah, those those are gonna be lists of making sure you have the best optimal natural testosterone levels. Alright. That's it for this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is C. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.