What this study showed is that if we can slow down and or reverse the biological aging process by just one year, we already bring back into the economy $38,000,000,000,000. Welcome to the Sim Lund podcast. I'm Hosim Lund, and our guest today is doctor Melissa Peterson. Doctor Melissa is an epigenetic success coach and a licensed chiropractic with a board certification in holistic health. I was also speaking at doctor Melissa's free online event, the longevity summit, with other experts from the antiaging field. Check out the free longevity summit at simlan.com/260two. That's simlan.com/260two. Melissa, welcome back to the show. Thanks so much, Sim. It's great to be here. Yeah. Like, we had our first, podcast maybe, like, a year ago as well, and, we were just talking about your longevity summit, where you were, you know, just, having these experts on from this longevity field and teaching field, and you're doing it again this year. So, like, what what's new this time? Like, is the, summit itself, like, principle are the same, or is there something, like, new that you're gonna be covering? Yeah. Thanks. That's a great question. You know, longevity is an ongoing conversation, so it's definitely not a one and done. The the advancements are occurring so rapidly. And it's interesting. I didn't know if I was gonna do a season two, but season one was so widely, you know, just accepted and celebrated, and we got great feedback from it. And what I realized quite quickly, I was like, you know, I have all this great content, and so maybe I'll just do a reboot, and I'll just grab a few new interviews. And I was like, there's so much that has happened this past year, and there's just there is such a deeper dive. And I I don't think that people understand this precipice that we're at because we've all globally been consumed with a pandemic and a conversation that seems very restrictive and constricting around fear and, you know, and there's there's so much possibility. There's so much advancement. There is so much that is in the here, near, and, you know, kind of far horizon now into the next twenty five years. The way we understand our health and human flourishing is going to express radically in new and different ways. And so I had to do season two. And, of course, we had you back, and so I'm excited that we're here to kind of dive into some of the the big concepts and breakthroughs. Yeah. I'm also, like, excited to be back. And, yeah, the, it's it's definitely something that, hasn't, like, slowed down due to the pandemic, the longevity research, and, actually, like, pretty big, like, new breakthroughs have been also made, this past year or at least, like, a paradigm shifts in terms of the public's public's viewpoint on, aging and on longevity. So maybe, like, maybe I'll just, like, explain people to again briefly, like, what what do you mean by, you know, longevity and extended lifespan and aging itself? Like, what is what does it mean to you specifically? Yeah. Thank you. You know, longevity actually to me probably means something to me, it means a legacy conversation. I think to many, longevity is this idea of life extension, and it gets relegated to an age demographic 55 and older or 65 and older depending who you're speaking to. And yet that's not it at all. Longevity is actually a lifespan and legacy conversation because what begins to inform the quality of our health and how it will express throughout our lives actually begins a hundred and twenty days before we're ever conceived. So there's a whole pocket of longevity that's in preconception specifically in the male from an epigenetic standpoint. We spoke a little bit about epigenetics last time just in some of the methylation markers. So kind of, you know, the environment is always informing our biology, and notes are constantly being taken. And so then this idea of longevity, it's always again been about lifespan, but now more than ever, it is also about health span and something I talk about in the cause of longevity, which is well span. And what I mean specifically by this theme is that, you know, we can look around the world, and there's really clear facts. Lifespan has continued to increase pretty much year over year for the past hundred years, 65% increase in how long we are living. And then we can say, well, okay. Hey. We're just living through a pandemic, and most of the world is sick, and, you know, there's people dying. And we can see clearly that, especially in The US, forty five percent of our population is diagnosed with a chronic disease. And that starts, you know, we really see it exponentially increase every decade after 30, but it really gets in intense by time we hit that that sixtieth. Like, once we hit that 60 marker, that starts to increase. So on the one hand, longevity has always been lifespan living longer. We're living longer, but not necessarily better. Mhmm. And what was what was so groundbreaking, and this just came out in July, was a new study, and this was actually published in Nature, and it was all on the economics, the economic value of aging. So, you know, the moment you bring money into the conversation and we start to think about it differently because we all make decisions every day, that are financial. What foods we're gonna eat, you know, what vacations we're gonna take, what, you know, what courses we're gonna purchase. Like, so many of our decisions are economically based. Do we feel that there's value in it? If there's value, we'll spend our money. And so what I loved about this study and why this was so transformative, and this really goes into what I believe. So I believe longevity is all about life. It's lifestyle, it's lifespan, it's the quality of how we are living and experiencing our life every single day from the moment we're conceived. And now the research is saying, yeah, this is a lifelong conversation. We see the effects of aging start to really hit 65 and older, but this is now a lifelong conversation because what this study showed is that if we can slow down and or reverse the biological aging process by just one year, this is super easy. You and I know how to help people do this with our eyes closed. By just one year, we already bring back into the economy $38,000,000,000,000. So chronic disease costs us about 3,700,000,000,000.0, just to put this in perspective. So just the the disease model has a cost of what it's costing the economy. It's a drain on the economy by 3,700,000,000,000 here in The US. The moment we now extend lifespan and we talk about the quality of life, we talk about, you know, really healthy aging, healthy living. Now we're actually putting money, 38,000,000,000,000, back in. So this is like an amazing gain, and it's shifting the conversation and the paradigm of how policymakers, you know, researchers, developers, and consumers are gonna start to understand and appreciate themselves and their health. Yeah. That's that's quite amazing that, I I also saw that study. It was, like, one one of those was David Sinclair. And, yeah, like, 38,000,000,000,000, and that's, like, that's more than the national debt of The US, and you can just with one year, that you can recover it, quite easily. Yeah. Amazing. Right? It's like, oh, that's all we need to do. Come on. Let's get on this. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And you're so right as well that, you know, the it's the longer lifespan can be definitely a part of this longevity. But, even if we did extend the lifespan, but we didn't fix, like, the health span and we didn't fix the chronic diseases, then that that would just impose more of a burden, economic burden on the system because of the people are being kept alive basically with these pharmaceuticals, and their quality of life isn't better. So, yeah, like, if by fixing the underlying issues of this, chronic diseases and what causes them, then you will see, you like, the natural lifespan would increase, but the longevity or the health span and the wealth span that you said, that would be also higher. So, yeah, it's just a win win situation. A 100. And what's interesting, and you you just kind of pointed to this, is the fact that what this is doing, it's now really saying, wait a minute. Let's let's look at this process in a way. And and why longevity all eyes are on longevity is because all along, the traditional health care model has been treating disease. Let's find the problem. Let's give it a label. Let's give it a pill. And so we've been treating disease. Yet when you really look at the mechanism of disease, the majority of all disease processes in the body are metabolic. Well, what is aging? It's a metabolic breakdown. It's an accelerated metabolic breakdown. And so what is the byproduct of all of these meta metabolic conditions? It's inflammation. And, of course, that term that, you know, I know you've spoken about as well as inflammaging. And so now all of a sudden think about this. It's like this is a big paradigm shift. So, wait, have we gotten it all wrong? Are we actually supposed to be treating diseases, or can we put all focus into understanding the true mechanism and the byproduct in this cancer, heart disease, Alzheimer's? Right? Are these disease processes truly just a byproduct of the inflammation? And, I mean and this is, like, while it might seem normal, like, you and I are probably like, well, of course. That's what we talk about all the time. It's it's like, let's bring down that fire. Let's let's slow down. Let's understand what's causing what's what's, you know, accelerating the inflammatory processes, and then let's let's remove those. Let's reduce those. Right? Let's reduce that load on the system so that it helps to decrease that and thereby slowing down the process of aging. But what this does is it's now, again, it's a really radical concept from a from a traditional health model. It's going, wait. Wait. Wait. Wait. We don't have wait. Wait. So we really wanna be looking at these inflammatory processes. We wanna understand how we can begin to support the body biologically, but that also now makes us look out into lifestyle. Right? Because what we know about metabolic chronic disease, seventy five percent of it is driven by lifestyle. So, again, it's it's really beautiful. While it's it's normal in the wellness conversation, this is really a radical paradigm shift in the research lab. It's making them think about it and look at it in a really new and exciting way. Mhmm. Yeah. So so with inflammation, it's like the chronic inflammation of, being chronically inflamed and, chronically, physically exposed to this kind of high amounts of oxidative stress that, damages the body and deteriorates the system over time. Because, you know, like inflammation is can also be a good in some in some cases, like, infections and, like muscle building. It does involve some inflammation. So it's, like, the chronic inflammation of this chronic inflammatory lifestyle. Is that part of the problem? 100%. Yes. Acute is good. We want the body to to work normally and naturally as it's supposed to, but that's about that's the whole thing. Right? That's the crux is going. When we see chronic disease, it is a body that is out of balance. It's out of homeostasis. It is in overload. It's in dysfunction that leads to breakdown and disease. And so it's bringing it back into ease. It is taking the foot off the gas of that chronic inflammation, but we want the normal acute inflammatory processes just like we want eustress. Right? Like, we want these demands on the system to still occur, but we want that time to rest, to repair. We want the body to have the ability to also come back into that that homeostatic space. Mhmm. Yeah. You you have, like, a background in, epigenetics. So you mentioned genetics as well before. So, you know, how how does each, you know, contribute to this? Like, what's the, like, proportion of each and, what are the effects? As far as in disease process? Yeah. Well, we're like yeah. Like longevity itself, or as well as disease, you know, because, yeah, some people can, you know, have, like, a bad lifestyle, but they have good genetics so they can get away with it. Whereas others, you can't really do that. And I appreciate you saying that. So bad lifestyle but good genetics, that's interesting because at the end of the day, you know and, again, we talked about this a little bit last time, but from a genetic standpoint so we've got our genetic code that's really the blueprint of potential. So what we now know, you know, widely known, the gene is not the destiny. Just because you've got the the phenotypic expression doesn't mean that this is this is it. It's what's informing this. Right? And, of course, that's epigenetics. It's the signal from above the gene that is directed, influenced by the environment around that cell. So there's the signal to the DNA to say, hey. Replicate. And based on the quality of that signal, it's gonna determine what is expressed or repressed. So so while somebody can have good genes, they can have longevity genes, they can have a predisposition to have life extension. Again, just because we've got it, if we are living a if we are having a high stress lifestyle, and I'm gonna say stress in all forms, physical, mental, chemical, you know, environmental. So whether that's food, whether that's too much exercise, whether that's, like, you know, just absolutely in a toxic you're a mold filled house, things like that, constant overload to the system, well, that pro inflammatory state will increase in in those methylation marks. So it's gonna close down more of what is accessible in that genetic code. Yet on the flip side, something that is very exciting, if we look at the one percent of disease processes that are genetic mutations, there are mutation in the code. That is very promising, you know, when we look at gene editing. So we look at CRISPR. We look at the technologies that are coming in. And within ten years, you know, that's the longest. We will absolutely see this in a very everyday medical use where we're going to have the ability through gene editing to eradicate these mutations. So things like sickle cell will be an issue of the past. And so that's gonna save millions of lives, you know, just with what we're going to be able to do from a from a purely genetic standpoint. So there's a side of the gene that's the mutation. Right? Mhmm. But what we're talking about epigenetically is what's called the phenotypic expression. And so that's your genes are not always on. They're not always doing it's just, hey. We need you to we need you we need you to work now. Right? We're knocking on the door. Here's the signal saying to replicate so we can have the string of amino acids to build these proteins, to build these tissues, to do these specific functions. Mhmm. And that's what's influenced by environment, by lifestyle, by by literally our perception. And this is one of the the really interesting breakthroughs of some of the research around our our mental perception and how, again, that truly is informing, physiology, and that plays into the epigenetics as well. Okay. So it's like, you have all this, tool shed, and, your genes are like these different kinds of, tools, like a rake or a shovel or x or something in the tool shed. And, some of them are good, some of them are bad. And, the epigenetic is like the signal of the, you know, farmer coming and picking up a certain tool and using it. And if it has this bad signal of, you know, I'm gonna use only the rake or something, then maybe they're gonna get some cancer or something because their lifestyle is bad. Or or, you know, if they use the other tool, then they won't get that particular disease because they didn't have, like, the particular signal signal that would, help to activate that gene. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, bra like, the BRCA genes are a really great example. People have heard that, and so they think, oh my gosh. If I've got the BRCA one, then I'm I have I'm gonna be an Angelina Jolie. I'm gonna need to go have a double mastectomy, and that's not it at all. That actually has very highly protective properties to it just by adding exercise. So you can have the BRAKO one, and you're you're exercising just a normal, not even some extreme program. You're getting in thirty minutes of just quality movement to the body a day, and you actually decrease your risk by more than thirty three percent of of even expressing, breast cancer. So you can have the gene, and you can then go and have, like, these, you know, and and and employ really good lifestyle strategies that even though you've got the gene, it will keep it turned off and so won't express. Does that make sense? Yeah. Yeah. For sure. Yeah. Like, the, the epigenetics is gonna be, more important at the end of the day. Absolutely. But but even, like, even then, like, you know, the longest living person in history, the Joan comment, she, like, smoked, but she never got, like, lung cancer or never got heart disease. So Yes. Okay. And this is what's so fascinating to me. I'll I'm so glad you brought that up. So this let's go into breakthrough number two. Let's really dive into the power of the mind for a moment. And I'm actually teaming up this year with, with BrainTap, and, we're we're talking with a couple of universities that wanna do this study. We're gonna do a study simply on the perception of the mind, but there's a lot of research out there. And in fact, what, what I love is that, you know, there's this ongoing very large study out of Michigan State University. And, and there's several studies on this stuff. But, in this particular one, they, you know, they studied over half a million people. And the conclusive finding about perception is that it was unequivocal that our perception of age changes as we age, and our perception changes our age, if that makes sense. And and let me go one step further. And a study in, the frontiers of aging talked about that just people who perceive themselves felt younger, you know, had, like, a really looked at aging, like, not with fear, and I'm gonna be obsolete, obsolete, and I'm I'm afraid I'm gonna get old and decrepit and, you know, whatever kind of imagery it was. I am I'm saging. I'm wise. Like, I love it. I'm revered. I love life. I'm learning more. I I can't wait for what's coming. I feel great. I feel I feel like I did when I was in my twenties. The people that had the perception of loving life, loving aging, feeling good in who they are and still feeling very vital, they actually had more gray matter in their brain, had lower incidences of depression. They scored higher on memory tests, and they they themselves rated themselves as healthier because they already perceived themselves to be healthier. And then their biomarker showed, in fact, that they were healthier than their counter group who held a different perception. Right? Who didn't who didn't didn't feel healthy, who didn't feel vibrant, who didn't think of themselves as young, who didn't think of themselves as, you know, as still having a place of having worth in just kind of how they're showing up and and living life. But perception continues to be a fascinating to me, it's the outlier. It's the thing it's it's the thing that you can't fully quantify because look how you perceive your life and how I perceive mine are two totally different things. And when we look at when we and this is great even around epigenetics. When we look at identical twin studies, and so they've got the same DNA, they grew up in the same house, and they do these studies when they're living in the same environment. So we even account for the same environment. They will have different expressions. Right? And so the question is, well, why? Well, when you forgot the same DNA, you've got the same environment. What are some of the things that you and if you're eating the same foods, you've got the same parents, what's different? This. Right. Right? Like, this is what's different. Well, what's right between our our the headspace here. And so I could be excited about what's for dinner, and my twin could hate what's for dinner. I'm gonna love my body is gonna be so excited. Like, I'm receiving that information, and not only is that food nutrigenomically informing my DNA, but there's the emotion around it. Right? So I've got very specific neurotransmitters, hormones that are being elicited that aid in that gut brain access, that digestive process versus my twin who could hate it. And now all of a sudden, they're in that stress. There's constriction. Right? Like, they're gonna have a totally different experience of how their physiology is understanding that input, which then changes the expression or the output. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's a really, yeah, amazing thing that the perception you literally changes, your physiological response to, like, a system. And, yeah, like, you could be, you could think that you're running away from a lion or you could think that you're, you know, at a dance dance party or, exercising or something else. So, yeah, like, the kind of mindset is a huge in terms of determining how is it gonna be stressful to you? Is it gonna be actually, is it gonna release, like, dopamine? Is it gonna release, this oxytocin or, other chemicals that are associated with happiness and longevity, etcetera? Or it can be something that is more cortisol driven. So, yeah, it's quite amazing of, yeah, like, how the mind can change literally how you, experience the world on a physical level. And think about that. Like, if we really, like, let ourselves sink into the profundity of this and go, wait a minute. I in essence, I control my reality. I control my physiological response. Like, I can love this. I can lean into this. I can find the fun. I can find the excitement. I can find the interest. I can find the adventure, or I can hate every second of it. And either way, both are gonna be real for me. There's no judgment on it, but you're at choice of what that's gonna do. Now I'm not saying, like, all of a sudden we can love, like, when challenge hits. We don't have to love it. We don't have to fake it till we make it. But this all of a sudden becomes radically empowering and going, okay. Well, wait. Like, then what what can I do? How can I better support? And I love you talk actually a lot about this in your book. You know, even from a stoicism standpoint, when we start to condition the mind, right, like, we can face challenge, but we can also face it and realize that we we get to be a choice with how we want to respond to it. I mean, that is one of the most empowering and freeing type of shifts that we can ever have, and it will, and we know scientifically, impact our lifespan, our health span, and our well span. And that's our well-being. Right? Our sense of just how we are being in the world, our purpose, our meaning, our joy, our love, our our creativity, our connection. It it affects it all. Yeah. And it also ties to, the neuroplasticity so that, like, in in a single moment, if you, you know, have this negative reaction to an event, then it's probably, like, gonna have, like, any profound effect. But but if you do it, like, repeatedly, then your brain is gonna, like, rewire itself to start acting like that. And if you rewire it to be, you know, more, grateful or more, happy and more, yeah, like, more of this positive longevity, pathways, then after a while, it's gonna become, like, your default state. And that's, like, the way that's how you're gonna be in the world all the time. Whereas if you're wiring it to be, like, negative and, hateful or something, then, that will just start to become who you are because the brain is just, you know, detecting of are kind of thoughts and emotions you're experiencing, and then it's gonna build itself, based upon that information. Yeah. And and that's actually one of that really merges. Like, you just kind of did a perfect segue into another one of the big breakthroughs. And I really call this where, you know, ancient technology and advanced technologies are merging. And there's a few things happening in this space. I a lot of, one of the sectors of the work I do with my clients, I do a lot of neuro tech I work with neurotechnologies and cognitive optimization. Right? So making the brain work better. And it's to your point, like, okay. So we need to kinda work at this. We're gonna create neuroplasticity. And so there is the the way we can show up every day and be conscious and aware and be very intentional about gratitude, appreciation, thinking new thoughts, like catching ourselves, and just acknowledging when we're feeling kinda crappy, but going, alright. Don't wanna reframe this. So there's a lot of there's so many kind of self talk and self practice tools that a 100% work over time. Right? So we do have to employ them over time. It's not a one and done. Now we're coming to into this time where we have ancient technology and and advanced technologies that are truly converging, and they are allowing for that time window to shorten and compress. So in sessions, in in days, in hours, days, and weeks versus months and years and lifetimes, we can completely heal deep traumas. We can radically transform, what how our brain is functioning, how our brain is able to respond to stress. You know, you being such a stress expert, when you're faced with somebody who is who is literally, clinically, you know, suffering from PTSD, they're in I a lot of my clients, a lot of high performers, especially over this pandemic, have high levels of anxiety. And, and it's and once it's kind of like once you start to entrain those pathways, they they get laid in in as little as six weeks. And once they're there, they're gonna be on autopilot. And so the unconscious is defaulting to those those, networks, if you will. And so consciously, the conscious rewiring, the conscious development of new pathways can happen, does happen. It has to be conscious, and the unconscious does 95% of the work. So it that default is there. So how do we override the default? How do we how do we help our conscious when our unconscious is firing faster, half a second faster than our conscious mind? And that's when we bring in these new technologies. So a few things, if if it's okay for me to talk about, just something even as simple as neurofeedback. And there's people I think at this point I think this is a conversation that more and more people have heard about, but neurofeedback is a technology that's literally like going to the gym for your brain. It's a feedback mechanism that is done by way of sensors and a screen, and it's working with your four primary. Obviously, we have more than four brainers, but we have four primary brain waves that are in action kind of every single day. I call them, like, gear shifts of a car. They fire at different speeds. And what happens, especially when we've been exposed to some crazy stress like this past year and we get stuck, we it's like our foot is on the gas, but we're just revving the engine because we're still in park. Like, we're trying to go, but we just can't. And it's it's it's burning out the brain, and people are feeling like crap. Well, it's stuck, and so let's help it. And so what technology like neurofeedback does, it's immediately training, reminding the brain of how to use those different brain wave frequencies. And so, like, in all of this, you get scanned, and then you're gonna sit down, and and it's all in just the the computer program, if you will. And so the feedback's gonna come on, and it's reminding the brain when the brain is not firing in that optimal, frequency, the screen gets dimmer and the sound gets lower. When it's opt when it's firing in the right frequency, then it's brighter and louder. And just that little bit of feedback, the brain's like, wait. I want the brighter and louder. So the person I don't do anything when I'm on it. It's not like me going, come on, brain. Let's get brighter and louder, brighter and louder. The brain is getting the feedback, and that's what life is. It's feedback. Right? That's how we know. Like, that's how we learn. That's what this is all about. So we've got some a simple technology like neurofeedback, and there's more home units and things that are coming out direct to consumer that's making that more accessible. There's some fascinating immersive technologies like VR and AR and the new virtual reality. So it's not like what your Oculus is right now. Right? Like, we've got an Oculus here, and we play Beat Saber and all that kind of thing. And it's cool. It's super fun. Like, I still think the walls are coming at me, and I my son laughs at me. I'll be like, ah. You know? And so even that is immersive, but the new the new immersive platforms, it's literally going to be like, you can you'll be able to see your arms, like, what they're working on so that there is feedback because what you're missing right now in virtual reality is feedback. So even though you feel more like you're in it, you can't see yourself in it fully. And so this so the new level of what's coming out is working in a and a big part of it, is around what's happening with brain function, and it's looking at longevity. It's looking at mental health. It's looking at, you know, how do we optimize brain function throughout our lives. And then and then how can we use it for for deep trauma healing work? How can we use it to actually start to thrive? So think about this for a moment, Seem. Plant medicines, and I'll talk about that in a moment because I that's part of the ancient technology. People there's so much research around plant medicines and people that have had have had experiences with psychedelics of what it does to their level of how they engage with the natural world, greater levels of compassion, greater levels of empathy. So there is this greater human, if you will, quality that emits instead of mine mine, it's us against them. It's, you know, like, it it's just it's this do or die survival of the fitness, which is not what nature shows us. It's not the true state of life, but that's what we've been trapped in. But plant medicines help to kind of open that up. And and so the moment somebody goes through plant medicine experiences, it there's so much they're using it with PTSD. They're using it in a lot of mental, mental health environments right now, and they're using it with Alzheimer's also to see the efficacy. They're even using it with telomere studies to show how this will affect lifespan and health span and well span. But the immersive technologies, like the things that happen when you go into plant medicine experiences, fundamentally, you're seeing things that you didn't otherwise see, that you didn't even understand existed, that you didn't even think were possible. So whether it's real or not, it's real in that moment, and you're going, woah. I'm I'm experiencing some stuff. Right. Immersive technology is going to be able to do that same thing. And then when we are literally in it, we embody it. We're feeling it. And we are real time. Imagine real time being in this immersive environment, and you're seeing your heart rate variability. You're seeing how your physiology is responding, and now you can start to entrain you can start to entrain real time resilience and antifragility in this technology. So it's one thing to say, hey. Let's go do a cold plunge. Right? Like, let's expose ourselves to these hormetic stressors, which is important and great. And we can then see on our data, like our devices, what that's doing for us, but it's still a delay. It's still a delay. And you can see it and you can feel it, you know, and you can try to breathe through it, do some Wim Hofing, right, and, like, regulate your system. But now imagine being in the technology, and it is instantaneous. You can see it as you're experiencing it. So my point is is we're going from months and years and lifetime worth of trying to figure things out and heal and create new states of thriving in the body, a lot of trial and error to minutes, hours, days, and weeks. So, again, what's gonna happen in this new human, which is us, we are we are literally upgrading our own operating system by pairing these ancient understandings, these ancient principles that we're not just a cell, we're not just a biological entity. All ancient healing paradigms understand and include they take a more holistic approach understanding there is a consciousness. There is a life force that permeates through this vessel. Right? And so now as this new research continues to come out, as these new technologies come in, we can't just we can't just extend lifespan without questioning health span and well span, and that means going beyond the petri dish and beyond going be going beyond the single pathways and going deeper into what does it really mean to be human, and how can we use these technologies, ancient and advanced, to amplify who we who we are at our core. Makes sense? Yeah. Absolutely. And, yeah, definitely like this. If you have, like, some past traumas, and then it's certainly have, like, a negative effect on your perception, which then in turn then will lead to this, negative, physiological responses, etcetera. But one interesting thing that I was curious about was that, you know what? You hear about you know, you have, like, you you you inherit your, like, bad genetics, etcetera. And you there are, like, some stories as well, like, the concentration camp victims that the next generations also have, like, this down regulated network rate or something like that because of their, like, demonstration. So, would those things, or, like, what what would, transition over from, one generation to the next through genes? Like, what kind of things, like, do this, you know, trauma and things, psychological, like, neuroplasticity, like, does that that will also carry over? Yeah. They do. And it it's through the epigenetic process. So, genetically, it it takes a very we we don't make genetic changes in a single generation. Epigenetics are think of it like that's that is the note keeper. Right? Like, what is happening right now that we have got to we have got to store this information? Because this is really critical. This stuff has not happened before, and we need to know how to respond to it when it happens again. And so, yes, from an epigenetic standpoint, there there are really amazing amounts of studies around, especially from World War two, right, in looking at the Jewish population and and what has happened in the subsequent generations. And so this idea of transgenerational trauma is a real thing. We carry we carry with us. And so then there's a part of it going, well, crap. What the heck, man? What can I do about that? Like, that was my grandparents' or my great grandparents' stuff, and now I'm stuck with it. I'm carrying this crap around. Oh, that's why things are so hard. That's why I feel like such crap. That's why I'm sick all the time. And it is and while there's a little bit of that, here's here's the really cool thing. The gene there's so much more that we don't know than what we do know currently about our genetic code and about the response of our physiology, you know, our biology to to to the world around us. But what we are learning, especially with the new AI, especially with the, you know, the new technologies coming in, we're able to to see these changes. We're able to see these changes in these methylation marks of areas of the DNA that were once closed off and how, you know, how there can be radical changes that can erase those marks that were laid down from generations before that now can kind of clear the way, if you will. And I'm I'm oversimplifying this, but it it's this is really the beauty of what it is. So we can change. We can heal not only our own traumas, but we can heal the traumas from our our family that have come before us. And there is you know? And that's what we're really kind of being called to do right now. Like, humanity is we're feeling so traumatized. Like, we all had to go through this big thing. And so we all have gone through trauma of some sort even if it's just the fact that we've been, like, isolated in our houses and that was like you know, made us feel like we were crawling out of our skin. So trauma looks and and expresses in different ways for people. And there's, you know, various degrees, yet it will still impact our our genetics in a similar way. It's still gonna put down those marks. And so how do we heal it? Well, it's gonna be things like being able to Plant medicines are absolutely a tool that are helping to with this, going back to some of these ancient healing paradigms and helping to, really when you look at some of the ancient healings, it it's coming down to more of a how do we free up, if you will. So if we're to think like a computer, how do we how do we defrag the system? So think of trauma almost like, you know, there's been compression and errors and fragmentation. So how do we defrag this? And so this is where we're getting into an area of science that I don't I don't know if your audience likes it or not. It might feel too people call it woo. You know? So when we start to think about energy medicines, when we start to think about ancient healing paradigms and and indigenous cultures, again, what technology will allow us to do is to actually validate what's been done for thousands of years by many cultures way before modern culture here today. Yeah. So it's gonna be, using both, like, the, technology, like VR as well as the, plant medicine. Are you gonna do it together or, like, you know, you're gonna do VR on the drugs or or how does that work? You're like, wait a minute. Like and so and I kind of talked in a few different directions there, so let me bring that back together for clarification. Separately, so there there is there's gonna be different types of technology that we can utilize individually. We could also stack things together. What's going to be able to be created inside of a VR experience can be the equivalent of what can happen in a plant medicine experience or in a psychedelic experience. So would somebody need to do both? No. No. Absolutely not. However, if you just look at things individually, so even plant medicines, now we can bring in some of the new type of testing that's coming in. So all of a sudden, even if we just look at, you know, we we look at epi we look at biological age. We look at some of the testing around the four bath clocks and all that good stuff of, hey. What's happening with these methylation marks? And we do testing before and after these, therapies. Right? So whether it's a plant medicine, whether it's a neurofeedback session, right, whether it's meditation, whether it's cold thermogenesis, where we're at with the new forms of diagnostic evaluation. We're going to have so much more information so quickly that allows us to absolutely see, yes, again and again and again and again, this is making a shift. This is making a shift in our telomeres. This is making a shift on the methylation. This is making which means it's making a shift to our very genetic code. Do you understand what I mean? So there's kind of these individual things, but there's also these cross points of how one is inspiring and informing the other. Mhmm. Yeah. Like, yeah, just the, awareness and the faster feedback Mhmm. Even with, like, biomarkers. Like, you're gonna get, CGM. You're gonna get some other continuous meter for some other biomarkers. Yeah. And, yeah, it's just gonna have more immediate feedback about Yeah. What what you're doing. Yeah. But what are the other breakthroughs? I know. And I'm just like, I I don't know how much time we have, so I'll I'll kinda speed this up. And you just said that. So then I'll tie in this really quickly, but there is a topic I I wanna give us a little bit of time to because I think it's so important for everybody. But with the technology and just what we can wear on our wrist or on our finger, our wearable technologies, our sensors, our our continuous glucose monitoring, things of that nature. One of the big breakthroughs is around not only this personalized and precise, I call it precision longevity. So not only are we able to more quickly able to see our body's response. So, you know, before, you used to have to go to the doctor's office, and that's where they would do your pulse ox. That's where they would take, you know, your blood pressure. That's where that's where you get on the scale and you'd look at muscle mass, fat mass, BMI. You can get all of that on your wrist. Right? You'd have to go do a sleep study. You can get all of that on your wrist, and you don't have to do it just twice a year. You can do it every single day. So we, as individuals, are being invited into being the co being the true creator of our health, being the advocate for our health, and learning. We're really being invited into learning about our health, about our bodies, about our capabilities to learn when do we see that our bodies are tanking, we're not recovering. What did I just do yesterday? What did I eat last night? What was my sleep like? What what am I emotionally experiencing? When you see those recovery rates down day after day after day, what is happening in my life? Oh, man. I'm going through a breakup. Oh, well, of course. Wow. Look at what my emotional distress is doing to my body's recovery. Interesting. Okay? And then all of a sudden we can see, man, when I when I, you know, when I cut out grains and I just, you know, and I I did a twelve hour, time restricted eating window, and and I did that, you know, two weeks in a row. Wow. Look at what was happening with my sleep. Look look at how low, you know, my my heart rate was. Like, wow. Like, this is really interesting. So we're learning in real time, well, in quicker time about ourselves, which means when we know better, we can do better. Right? So now I am at least in control. I am the creator of my own destiny. If I choose to keep, you know, staying in an unhealthy relationship even though I can see what it's doing to me, well, I can I'm a choice. I realize that this is affecting this. This is affecting this. Right? If I want this to be better, if I wanna live longer, I wanna live better, I wanna feel better, then I get to make a choice. Change myself and how I'm responding to my relationships or my food or my environment or whatever. Right? Get a different career. Make the changes. So, but what else is really important about this scene is timing. And I know you're big on this, and you talk a lot about this. You know, when and and on the summit this season, there's some great conversations. I have several pharmacists and biochemists on. And what I love that they really get into, and it was so fascinating, like, Sean Wells. I think you've had Sean on your show before. Doctor Leonard Pastrana. Like, when they're formulating, when they're looking, they were super hands off about wanting to give any kind of take this, don't take this generalized statements because they're like, it is so individualized now. Like, you can't just say you you can't just say that, you know, like, you need to take you need to take metformin. You can't just make a blanket statement because it is about the timing of if we're fasting, if we're you know, are we gonna go do are we gonna go intentionally take ourselves through hormetic stressors if we see that our we have not recovered? We're tanked. Like, how much are we gonna continue to put on ourselves? And so it's really the timing and the personalization versus here's the generalized advice. Yes. We know this stuff works. But now look at your own precision metrics and make an informed decision. Even though I know this is good for me, is this good for me today? Is this good for me right now? You know? Let me let me, go out and get some natural sunlight exposure. Let me go meditate in nature for a little bit today. Let me see how that's now helping me to recover. Let me now look at what my my data is saying. Then let me go ahead and reassess and determine what my next step is gonna be. So this timing piece is so personalized, and I think that's something we're really missing in a lot of just the advice that we all dole out. And so that's another that's something you guys I you're gonna hear more and more and more and more, and it's not gonna go away. It's only gonna get more refined and, and exciting as as we especially move into this next year. So yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Like, you know, if you take metformin, after exercise, then you may, like, lose out on some of the benefits of of exercise. Whereas if we take it, you know, on a rest day or something, then that's, like, a more, beneficial time to take it. So, yeah, timing is important. Yeah. 100%. 100%. And then I think the really big last one, and and this is why it's so relevant, again, on everybody's mind, is looking at the state of our immune systems and our health. And and the big conversation, it's kind of like this has been the underdog, is immune modulation versus suppression and really looking at the thymus gland and understanding that this beautiful gland, you know, it's right here in our chest behind our sternum. It it actually starts to shrink in size as we reach adulthood. And and so then over time, it gets smaller and smaller, and it is the gland that helps to modulate and regulate and contribute to a healthy and vibrant immune response. And if part of, fundamentally, what's driving aging is inflammaging, and is and and while some of it might be that we are chronically stressing ourselves, but could there be a piece of it that our immune system when we look at just the rise of autoimmune diseases. Right? Something is happening within the body that we have lost our modulation. Stress is good. Right? But we have to modulate. We have to know how to toggle sympathetic, parasympathetic, fight flight, rest digest. It's all about this modulation, and that's really the innate wisdom of the body. It's it knows innately how to modulate. We think we're smarter than the body, so a lot of times we will override that innate intelligence, and then we really start to create these breakdown problems. But there is also just this natural phenomena of chronologically aging in that gland changing. So that means that not only do we have less less of a, support from it, But, of course, as we get older, we're typically putting more stressors on ourselves. Right? We are we're not sleeping as well. We're not eating as well. We're drinking too much. We're not moving as often. We are dealing with adulting. Right? Like, what's going on with the finances and the kids and the house and the neighbors and all the things? So our stress levels to the system increase, which means that that ping to the immune system increases. And when we need that modulation the most, it starts to go away. So now the body is really kind of fighting an uphill battle, and we keep putting more on, and there's not enough inner resources. So the thymus gland really looking the one of the biggest conversations is saying, okay. How do we support this gland? Right? How do we support it? Can we regenerate it? Can we replenish it? And so we're seeing this in a couple of categories of just even some basic supplementation, things like vitamin a with palmitate, zinc, selenium, ashwagandha. Right? Astragalus. Like, astragalus is a really big one. Astragalus is is actually a a really big longevity kind of herb that is and and one of the main roles of is what it's doing within this immune modulation. But then it's going a little deeper. Right? And so now we're then we're looking at glandulars. So, if we just think about thyroid. So a lot of people know about thyroid. They've heard about hypothyroidism. And if you go to your doctor, because hypothyroidism is especially in The US, it's one of the most diagnosed conditions. And so everybody's on thyroid pills. And, and and so what it is, if you just get the synthetic version, it's a synthetic version of the natural gland. If you get it compounded, then what's happening in a compounding pharmacy is pharmacists are compounding the glandular, So the thyroid gland itself is part of what you're taking. So now we think, okay. So thymus glandulars. So that is another strategy that is being looked at and utilized. And then last but not least, and I know that your audience really loves this, we all, in the biohacking and optimization lane, we love talking about peptides. Right? And so this is where we get into thymosin, and we look at we look at thymosin alpha and thymosin beta. Right? So these these two big players, and and even when we get into growth hormone a little bit, that's gonna be a precursor for this. So we start to look at these players, and we understand they are so important, not only in immune health and if somebody's dealing with an autoimmune condition or, they've gone through COVID or something of that nature, and so we want it for supportive. This is now something that can become an actual optimization strategy, a longevity strategy, because we're gonna support that gland to support better function throughout the system, better handle immunosenescence, all that kind of stuff. Right? Mhmm. And and make sure that body is able to properly respond and modulate innately like it was designed to do. And I think that's one of the most exciting conversations that you're gonna continue to see and hear more and more about and research around that. Yeah. That's super interesting. And, yeah, with with age, you start to experience this immunosenescence, that the aging of the immune system. And, yeah, part of the reason has to do with this, thymus deterioration, but also, like, this, you know, senescent cells and, aging itself leads to that. So, yeah, like, take taking care of your immune system would, help to protect against all these, age or diseases as well. Like, Yeah. Cancer is cancer is actually very linked to immune system and, yeah, like the other kinds of bad diseases. So, yeah, like, an interesting perspective for her. Yeah. Absolutely. So it's it's just an exciting time. We're gonna keep growing younger. Whether we want to or not, the ability to do it is here. And I think what we all now get to do and really consider for ourselves is we get to free up some mental space and and physical we get to free up some mental, physical, and emotional energy, if you will, from beating the drum of the problem. I'm trying to fight a disease. I'm trying to stave off aging and go, okay. It's here. It's gonna be so much more accessible, so much more affordable. You're not gonna have to pay thousands of dollars to access a lot of these simple strategies. I mean, heck, even just sleep, movement, good nutrition, and some mindfulness, you know, a recent a recent peer reviewed study, just eight weeks of being mindful about those four elements, showed age reversal of three years and eight weeks. Right? So there's these simple things that we can do. We and we just like, that just needs to become our nonnegotiable. Like, we just don't need to keep talking about it. Just do it. Right? We don't need more proof that this stuff works and it can slow down aging. It does. So just do it. Make that decision and be done with it. Free up some mental space and now start to actually ask yourself, what do I wanna do with my extra years? How do I want to be showing up? How do I wanna enjoy? How do I wanna contribute? How do I want to live? Like, really live because fundamentally and this the conversation I had with Sergei Young, which was so fascinating, and when he said, you know, he I will give him full credit, but it may touch an imprint on me. He said, you know, we're living longer, but the problem is we haven't decided the type of life we wanna live. Yeah. We haven't decide we haven't. Individually and collectively, like, if you really think about that, like, holy moly. Humans have been so reactive for so long. Every day, we're just reacting, reacting, reacting. So few of us are really out ahead of things. And and if we just go, wait. We don't have to keep reacting. Like, they're simple things. Just do this, and that's gonna that's gonna save us a lot of worry right there. And then with that free mental space, go, okay. So what is the life I wanna live? What is this world that I get to be a part of it? And so now what's possible? And to me, that is the conversation of longevity. That's why it's a legacy conversation because as we start to think forward and we start to reimagine our own health, our own space and place within this world, and the type of world we wanna live in, now we literally are transforming and impacting generations to come. Yeah. That's a amazing, I think, a point to end the show on on as well. And, yeah, I'm I share the excitement for sure. Like, the, there's so many new things to come. And, yeah, I think that there are gonna be quite a lot of, like, breakthroughs within the next few years for sure. But, yeah, before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about the summit and, you as well? Yeah. Thank you. So, I think the easiest place will be to go to doc melissa, d o c m e l I s s a, just docmelissa.com. On there, under resources, there's links for the summit and all of it. And, right now so it airs on August 25. But if they just there are amazing bonuses. So we already have some of the sessions, and there's a great session with doctor Kent Holtorp, and we talk about immune modulation. We talk about, some senolytics and a few different things and some peptides. So for your audience, you might like that. Just even in registering now, you're gonna get a bunch of free gifts, and that interview is one of those. And so but you can find out about that at docmelissa.com or the longevitysummit.com. Awesome. We're gonna put all the links in the show notes. And, my last question is, what's this one piece of device or a habit that you wish you adopted sooner? Oh, that I wish I had adopted sooner. The answer I'm gonna say is is truly looking forward. And and what I mean by that is I I would say and I I the reason I pause is I would sit here and tell you, hey. I'm a really positive person. I've always been excited and grateful and appreciative. Yet, what I just said a moment ago, there is this default, and I I realized it just from my own upbringing. Right? Like, there was a default unconscious kind of conversation at play that just felt like, you know, just when we get to the next, to the next, to the next. So it was almost like this compression energy, which this compression is a very real thing that actually ages us versus an elongation. Like, it's all taken care of. I don't have to worry about all that stuff. There's other people doing that. Let me let me really let me get excited and seen forward and bringing that that forward excitement and appreciation into the now. I just am right here with that, and I just and I just show up in the present from that place. It's like when I started to do that scene, my entire physiology changed. Like, I would say that's been a big shift for me just even in the past year doing deeper healing of things that I didn't even know I needed to heal per se. Right? But these trapped patterns of I'm a high achiever. I gotta go go go. I gotta do do do. And, like, where did this all come from? And so I wish I would have adopted sooner just the trust and the knowing that there's nothing that I had to do. It's really truly celebrating and allowing myself to be to be, you know, fully here and present in the now and sharing the excitement and the appreciation for what is still to come. Wow. Yeah. So you don't have to use the VR then. That's awesome. Well, yeah. It was it was exciting to talk with you, and, yeah, looking forward to your future work. Thank you so much. And I just love it. I love the time with you, and thank you so much for being on the summit. We get to feature stronger by stress, and and that's always a joy to to just get to celebrate and support one another. So thank you. Yeah. Well, thank you.