Welcome to the C Milk podcast. And today, I'm going to play you a comprehensive presentation about how to build muscle. It tells you how to train, eat, and recover for muscle hypertrophy and strength. This information comes from my new book with doctor James DiNicolantonio and Conor McGregor's nutritionist Tristan Kennedy. You can now get our new book, Win on Amazon. It includes 12 chapters about optimizing athletic performance and fitness. Alright. Welcome back. This is another video. We're gonna talk about muscle growth and, how do you build muscle, the mechanisms of how it happens, and what I'd like, you know, the best ways of building muscle. So, yeah, I'm just gonna start off with my own, let's say, transformation, mini transformation that I've gone through over the years. So on the left, you can see just me in 2014, when I was in the military and, approximately the weight sixty nine kilograms or something like that. I was, like, lean. I was, you know, still relatively muscular, so to say, like, more muscular than the average person, but definitely, like, you know, smaller and, a bit thinner, so to say. And on the right, that's, you know, me. I have approximately now two thousand twenty one, and now I weigh around eighty five kilograms. And, that's sort of like, you know, a 16 kilogram difference. And, yeah. Now now I have more mass, muscle mass, my, you know, all these muscles are more defined, the shoulders, the delts, etcetera. I am actually, you know, even maybe like a little bit, I wouldn't say like I'm a lower body fat percentage, but I'm definitely thinking around the same body fat percentage, but I just look more jacked and more muscular because of having more muscle mass and the definition is more there, so to say. So, just like a difference between the military training and, the, the training I'm doing right now. So, like goes to show that, you know, there are like your body adapts always to what you're doing. So in the military, you're doing a lot of cardio, not a lot of like heavyweights and mostly like calisthenics, etcetera, which doesn't mean like you can't build muscle. And for sure you can. Like I did build muscle in the military, but, you know, there's a different ways of achieving that, which we'll, you know, discuss, in this video in more detail. So basically the process of building muscle is called hypertrophy and, you know, there's different methods or different types of hypertrophy but the main idea is that when you are putting your body under some sort of a stress, physical mechanical stress, mechanical stimuli, then your body responds to by building this muscle mass. And hypertrophy describes like you know expansion of the already existing muscle. And there's a difference between hypertrophy and hyperplasia. So hyper hypertrophy is actually the increasing of the muscle cells. The muscle cells just become more inflated and they get bigger. Whereas this is a normal muscle cell, hypertrophy, a muscle cell experiencing hypertrophy is gonna be bigger than the normal muscle cell, and hyperplasia is actually the the basically, the replication of the muscle cells or the increase in the number size or the number of total muscle cells, which doesn't necessarily equate to having bigger muscle cells, so to say. So usually most of the process of building muscle, you know, there's a bit of both that's happening, but most of the process of like you know looking looking like a bodybuilder or looking bigger is, related to hypertrophy. Muscle, cells or muscle fibers themselves are also different or like the, they respond differently to different kinds of training and there's different types of hypertrophy like I mentioned. So there's a sarcoplasmic hypertrophy which, relate is associated with the increase in the sarcoplasmic fluid of the muscle, like all the all the, like, glycogen content, the creatine, other kinds of things that, make the make the muscle cell look more bigger essentially. And there's the myofibrillator or hypertrophy, which relates to increasing in the number of these myofibrils, which are basically muscle, like, fiber types. And the sarcoplasm is all this fluid, the water, the glycogen, in between the muscles. Most of most of, like, the training adaptations, let's say, strength based adaptations, are related to myofibrillia or hypertrophy, like power lifting, lifting heavier weights, weight lifting, those kinds of things that promote myofibrillia or hypertrophy. And, yeah, like you get stronger and you, experience this type of hypertrophy. Whereas if you're doing, more like a bodybuilding type of approach where you're using lighter loads but you're doing, like, more volume, then that's associated with the sarcoplasmic hypertrophy. So, like, the pump and, a ton of reps, a ton of sets. Whereas the myofibrillator is, like, lower, reps but heavier loads, heavier intensities, and thus, more strength gains as well. So this is like a Olympic gymnast and power lifter, and this is like, like a bodybuilder. Muscle fibers are also different. So, there's three types of, main muscle fibers. Type one is called the slow twitch muscle fibers, and this is associated with, like, endurance. They have, basically a relatively low, force output. They're not, like, explosive. They're not strong, but at the same time, they have, like, high tolerance to fatigue. They're very hard to fatigue because they're, like, endurance, fibers, and you can use them for, like, hours and hours, like walking, jogging, cycling, hiking. Those things are used primarily type one muscle fibers. And they have a lot of these, mitochondria in them, which gives them, like, more of this red type of look, and they can, like, basically utilize a lot of oxygen because of that because of the high mitochondria. The, type two a muscle fibers are called fast twitch oxidative muscle fibers, and they're more explosive for sure than the salt twitch muscle fibers. They have a medium force output, medium fatigue, and medium amount of mitochondria, and that they're mostly related to, like, this sarcoplasmic effect. Like, you're not fully reaching maximum intensity, but you do, experience relatively higher, loads, higher mechanical tension, than compared to, like, endurance sports. So this is again like a bodybuilder type of muscle fiber. And the lastly is the type two b, fast twitch glycolytic muscle fibers. They're also sarcoplasmic, but they're also mostly like the myofibrillator type that they're a very high force, maximum near maximum effort and high fatigue as well. You can't use them for too long because you will get exhausted. Like, sprinting, like, if you were to put it on a spectrum, this is, you know, long endurance marathon running. The type two a is, like, like a 400 meter dash or something, and the type two b is the, sixty sixty meter sprint or the 100 meter sprint. You can't really do it any more any longer than, you know, thirty or twenty seconds. And they also have a lower amount of a mitochondria because of that. The mitochondria are mostly related to a lot of oxygen consumption, a lot of energy production, and that's also like the endurance and aerobic sports, whereas the fast twitch ones are like explosive and power power related. Like a clean and jerk snatch power lifting again is type two b. And, you know, your body, like I said, responds to these different training stimulus differently, and, the sprinter has a lot of this myofibrillator or hypertrophy, a bit of sarcoplasmic as well and this type two b fast twitch muscle fibers, whereas the marathon runner has the slow twitch muscle fibers and thus they don't experience that much size as well because they're, you know, doing a different kind of training stimulus. What is then promoting muscle hypertrophy and muscle growth? Well, there are many contributing factors to that, but the main, let's say, key switch that I think a lot of people have heard about already is, the mTOR complex. And mTOR is basically like this fuel sensor in the body that detects different kinds of stimuli coming from the environment, and based upon that is gonna promote cell growth, cell survival, and muscle growth. So there's actually, two main complexes of mTOR, mTOR c one complex one and mTOR c two complex two. So mTOR c one is mostly related to this hypertrophy and muscle growth, cell growth, cell survival, and, the mTOR c two is mostly it also also promotes cell survival, but it doesn't have, like, this hypertrophy hypertrophy effect. It's mostly actually promoting cytoskeleton remodeling and, like, the actin skeleton, like bone density and the, collagen tissue and the joints and that sort of thing. What, promotes mTOR? Well, there's a bunch of things and, the most of it has to do with actually, like, energy, excess energy, excess nutrients, So glucose, carbohydrates, ATP, energy, amino acids, protein, oxygen. They are like, needed for mTORC1 activation and as well as a mechanical stimuli, which is, you know, training, The training overload, weights, sprinting, whatever it may be, calisthenics, all those things, they stimulate both of the complexes. And they're also, like, growth factors like incident, like an IGF one as well, which is another growth factor. Growth hormone, doesn't necessarily promote mTOR c one, but it does promote IGF one, which then, does promote mTOR c one. So, yeah, the growth factor is basically, the body detects growth and, then turns on mTOR, which then sends the signal to the body that okay it's okay to build muscle. You don't need to be catabolic like autophagy. When mTOR c one is activated, then autophagy gets blocked because autophagy is a process of not growing, but actually degrading. Autophagy is that degrading all these different kinds of, you know, cell material and, autophagy and mTOR, they can't coexist at the same time. From a, like, evolutionary perspective, your body would want to build muscle or break down at separate times. It can't do it at the same time because it's, you know, energy energy, intensive process. Testosterone. So, a lot of people know that testosterone is like the male hormone, although, like, women have it as well. And testosterone has a pretty direct effect on muscle hypertrophy. So even, like, injecting, like, the artificial, testosterone to, people, it does have, like, this benefit benefit on muscle growth and muscle hypertrophy. And the way testosterone works is that, testosterone binds to basically like, you have circulating testosterone and testosterone binds to the cells androgen receptors. So your different muscles have muscle cells have androgen receptors and they detect androgens and testosterone testosterone binds to them, then it's going to basically activate satellite cell activation, myonucleus, and that leads to muscle hypertrophy. Like, through the satellite cells, it promotes myonuclear growth and formation of these myotubes, which basically, you know, just builds builds this muscle framework framework and muscle tissue. Yeah. How do you build muscle? Well, the main main, let's say, core idea of muscle hypertrophy over time is progressive overload. And progressive overload just means that your body is experiencing this increasing amount of stress, mechanical stimuli, mechanical tension that over time leads to muscle growth. So if you're a beginner, then, you know, obviously, you can't lift heavy weights, because you don't have the strength. Your body hasn't adapted to it both both the hypertrophy wise as well as the central nervous system wise. So you need to start off with the weights that you're currently at, like lighter weights, and, your body is still struggling a bit. And, as you get stronger over time, you increase the weights and your body is almost, like, you know, almost in a linear fashion. You get bigger based upon, how much weights can you lift. So if you can't lift heavy weights, then you can't be big either because the, the the tension isn't there. The the adaptation isn't there. Whereas if you are increasing the weights over time, you get stronger. Your nervous system also gets stronger. Then the body just responds to that, by becoming bigger, essentially. The mechanisms of muscle hypertrophy, there are three of them, the three main ones, mechanic metabolic stress, muscle damage and mechanical tension. And mechanical tension, the progressive overload is actually the vast majority of what contributes to muscle hypertrophy. So, almost like I would I would say that maybe like 70% is gonna come from mechanical tension. So 70% of your muscle growth is determined by progressive overload, how how strong are you gonna be able to get. And, you know, progressive overload doesn't necessarily always mean adding heavier weights. It can also mean doing more reps. Just means that you'll get stronger over time. You can't stay the same or you won't build you won't build any muscle if you stay the same all the time. You have to get stronger in some shape or form. And you can also get stronger by improving the quality of your repetitions, like slowing down the repetitions, doing paused reps, and connecting to the muscle a bit better because, you know, there's a lot of mind muscle connection that also, is in weightlifting and doing resistance training. So, like doing, let's say, sloppy repetitions, you may get the weight off, but you're not really fully recruiting all the muscle fibers. You're not really fully recruiting all the type two b, muscle fibers to see this, proper adaptation. So you need to be, like, there is, like, a very subjective difference between, it's it's very subjective. Progressive over is very subjective. What I mean is that, you know, you have to do, you have to subjectively feel that it's difficult and the mechanical tension is gonna determine that. And, metabolic stress refers to basically, like, the pump, the feeling of burn, the feeling of lactic acid accumulating in your muscle tissue, and that is also like a signal to the body that, okay, there's this, like, toxins. The lactate is considered like waste material, and, this accumulation of this waste material, it means that, you know, we need to kinda get stronger. So we experience this stress and, we have to adapt. And usually no metabolic stress is achieved with a, like, a higher repetition scheme. So So instead of doing, like, near maximum lifts, you do, like, a higher rep type of thing. And the lastly is the muscle damage, which is basically when you are lifting something, doing resistance training, then you are damaging the muscle fibers. And as they get repaired, you know, they get stronger. And the most most any kind of, you know, exercise may cause muscle damage, but most of it or the the the type of exercise that causes the most muscle damage is the eccentric, exercises, like the negative parts of the repetition. So with the very slow contractions of, you know, trying to resist it and trying to slow down the rep as much as possible, that is causing actually the most amount of muscle damage. And, muscle damage can also be experienced with, like, increased range of motion. So if you're doing, let's say, quarter squats, you're not going full depth, then, yeah, you may build muscle, but you're only building muscle in those, in those muscle fibers that are being stimulated and recruited. Whereas if you go full depth, you know, as the grass, then then the amount of muscle fibers recruited is also greater. You are going you're recruiting more muscle fibers, and that generally is in research is also associated with a greater gains in muscle and strength if you go a full range of motion. So in most cases, I would recommend to always train in the fullest range of motion as you can, within reason, of course, but because it's gonna give you most results and it's also the safest. Because imagine if you are training always, like, say, quarter squats quarter squats and you're not going below parallel or you're not going full depth, then whenever you accidentally do go below parallel, then you're not your body isn't ready for for for it to deal with that weight. So to say your, below parallel muscles aren't ready to deal with the heavy weight and then you may get injured or, you know, you fall under the weight or something. So it's always better to, train in the fullest range of motion as you can for safety as well as the, the actual benefits and the gains. And lastly, the novelty is also something that causes a muscle damage. If you're doing some sort of a new exercise, you know, I would imagine that if you have haven't gone to the gym, then you go there, then the next day you're gonna be super sore because you haven't tried trained it, in a long time and it's a cause of novelty and, because the higher amount of muscle damage. Whereas if you are training, that same type of workout all the time, then your body kinda gets used to it and it's gonna experience less damage. So adding some novelty every once in a while, changing your program, doing different kinds of exercises, different kinds of rep schemes, it has a positive effect, on, hypertrophy, at least like in moderation. Because you don't wanna be doing too much novelty either. Too much novelty means that you're doing, like, cardio with weights every time. You're doing this crazy random exercises, and you're never giving your body enough time to adapt. So, we'll talk about, you know, how long you should do certain exercises. But, yeah, you know, the novelty is, something that you can play around with. And like I said, most of the result is gonna come from a mechanical tension getting stronger over time and, you know, adding adding this weight. So what is the process look like? Basically, you have mechanical stimulus or mechanical tension from training, then, there's this anabolic hormones, testosterone, IGF one, and the, like, amino acids. You need to be at also almost also in an anabolic state to build muscle. Like, if you're fasting or if you're in a calorie deficit, then it's much harder to build muscle. So you need to have the anabolic pathways activated and some nutrients present, mostly amino acids that promote, mTOR activation and muscle growth. So whenever it does happen, then, satellite cells satellite cells get activated, mTOR gets activated, and this leads to muscle protein synthesis, which describes the creation of new muscle protein, basically. And as a result, you get, new new muscle and, muscle hypertrophy and strength. Things that inhibit this process are, you know, aging in general. You when you get older, these, hormones get more desensitized and you become more resistant against them. Atrophy itself, you know, cancer cachexia, malnutrition, those sort of things, and the bed rest. Like, if you're completely sedentary or if you're out in space, then you would see this deterioration of your muscle tissue and lack of because there's no stimulus there. There's no stimulus when you're in bed rest and in space. There's also things that, like, hormonal factors that can inhibit muscle growth. Myostatin is basically like this protein or a gene, much rather, like a gene in the body that inhibits muscle growth. So because, like, from an evolutionary perspective, survival perspective, your body doesn't want to have, like, a ton of muscle. Like, it wants maybe, like, a little bit, but it's always trying to reduce it because muscle burns a lot of calories. It's, like, energy consuming tissue, much more so than fat, and so your body always tries to, let's say, put the brakes on the muscle. And when myostatin is activated, then, your muscle tissue is not growing or it's slowed down to a great extent. Thing there are ways to also inhibit myostatin like resistance training itself. Training, inhibits myostatin, so it takes the brakes off, so to say, because your body thinks that, okay, there is a reason why we need the muscle because there's the mechanical stimuli and the the myostatin then takes like the back burner. And there's also things like creatine that inhibits myostatin as well. And I would imagine like, like a high quality diet that incorporates all the amino acids and other types of proteins that can also maybe inhibit myastatin. And then there's, you know, cortisol. Corticoid stress basically can basically stress will lower testosterone and anabolic hormones, but it also has a directly catabolic effect on muscle tissue and can inhibit basically muscle protein synthesis. So what kind of exercises should you do to build muscle? The research finds that the compound lifts, the full body compound lifts that target multiple muscle groups and multi joints, those appear to be the most effective for building muscle, and they also raise the most testosterone and they raise the most IGF one because, you're using multiple muscle groups and you're, you know basically, your full body is engaged and you're activating all the muscle fibers. So that's why it's generally much more effective than isolation exercises. So the, the compound lifts are bench press, shoulder press, squat, deadlift, barbell row, pull ups, dips, and, all all those different kinds of exercises. Whereas isolation exercises are biceps curl, triceps pushdown, cable flys, all those things. You can definitely add them into your workout routine, but the main focus should always be on the compound lifts, The main compound lifts and getting stronger in those, increasing the weight on those lifts. And like the most of the three main muscle groups are like push push muscle groups, bench press, incline press, shoulder press, etcetera, triceps, and pull muscles, pull ups, rows, lat pull downs, those sort of things, and legs, squats, front squats, deadlifts, Romanian deadlifts, those things. So these are the three main muscle groups. Different kinds of workout routines are out there. Some do the push pull leg split that on one day you train push, the next day pull, the next day legs, or some other training routines also do full body exercises that you had to train all all all three muscle groups in one, in one session. But with that, you have to be more careful with how many exercises are you doing. So if you're doing a full body exercise routine, then you can't do, like, you know, 15 exercises because you're gonna be just get overfried, and then you have to actually just focus on the main combo lifts. The three main variables of training that you can manipulate are frequency, which is, you know, how often you train intensity, the, how near maximum effort it is, how hard it is, how heavy it is, and volume, basically how much of it are you doing, how many repetitions, how many sets, and how many training sessions per week are you doing. So these three are the main ones. You can't really do all at once, so to say. You can't do high frequency, high intensity, high volume because you're gonna get, overtraining and you're gonna get ride. You're not gonna make any progress. So good training programs usually prioritize only two of them at once. So it's in a triangle. So you can do high frequency and high intensity, but then you can't do high volume. So let's say you train every day and you do a high intensity, you, reach your near maximum effort, but you're keeping the reps very low. So you're doing only three reps, maybe two reps, and the sets also relatively low, like three sets, five sets at max. Whereas if you're doing, let's say, high frequency and high volume, you train every day and you do, like, 20 repetitions, five sets, then you have to keep the intensity also lower because, you wouldn't be able to handle that amount of volume at that intensity. So the in this scenario, the intensity has to be probably, like, 50 to 60%. Like, this would be, like, an example of a farmer or, like, a construction worker. High frequency and high volume, but lower intensity. So you're not really lifting near maximum weights, whereas this is more of, like, this professional sports athlete type of approach. You train very frequently and at, near maximum efforts, but you keep the volume relatively low. And, of course, you could do the, Goldilocks zone or the balanced approach that you do relatively moderate frequency, relatively moderate volume, and relatively moderate intensity. But then I would imagine that it wouldn't be enough to see, like, progress over the long term because you lack the intensity. So you do need to be tapping into this high intensity zone every once in a while, to see, like, progress. Because the like I said, progressive overload requires this mechanical tension to be there, and you need to add the mechanical tension over time. Because if you keep lifting the same weights all the time, then it's not gonna work after a while. It's gonna stop working because your body has gotten strong enough. So, here's actually like a graph of the different kinds of reps and set schemes and the percentages of them. So let's take warm up. So warm up sets are something that should be, you know, much lower in the intensity, usually prefer, like, 50 to 56 55%, and the reps are thus a bit higher. You don't need to do a ton of warm upsets, but it is generally a good idea to, when you start to work out, do at least one to two and three warm upsets at, like, this very small smaller intensity. The hypertrophy effect is generally achieved with about, like, eight to 12 repetitions, and the intensity has to be 60 to 70% of your, one repetition maximum. And when it comes to this hypertrophy scheme, then the amount of sets is usually three to five. In total, to see, like, an adaptation response, then you need to be doing approximately, like, 24 or 30 working repetitions. So working meaning, at the maximum weight that you're training. So, 30 repetitions. And if you're doing eight to 12 repetitions, then that would entail three sets. So you don't need to be doing 50 repetitions. You only need to stimulate it about, like, 30 repetitions. And but if you're doing, you know, strength based movements and your repetitions are around five to six, around there, then you would need to do a bit more sets. Like, five sets would be ideal for this five repetition scheme, and the strength training intensity is 75 to 8080% of the intensity. And lastly, there's the power, which is in here. It says two to four, but, in my opinion, power would be anything like one to two repetitions because the power is the idea behind power training would be to, yeah, just max out, do the repetition as heavy as possible and as fast as possible. So power examples will be sprinting, as well as, like, clean and jerk, snatch, max max barbell squat, and those things. Power athletes usually do train in this very low repetition schemes, but the average person, they, may want to do a bit more of this strength based and more of this hypertrophy style training because they're gonna see more results in terms of muscle gain because the power like, you like to remember, the power training trains mostly the myofibrillator or hypertrophy, the, very tight or very, very, yeah, like the amount of muscle myofibrils that getting increased without the increase in muscle size. And lastly, this training is basically, like, training the actual one repetition maximum, which, you know, can be related to some sort of sports performance like gymnasts when they train this maximum effort than they are trying to, basically reach the 100% of their maximum. Training frequency. How much should you train? Well, research finds that the generally, like, a slightly higher training frequency is better for muscle hypertrophy or muscle growth because, if you compare training a muscle group four times a week versus training it twice a week, then training it four times a week would, keep the muscle protein synthesis elevated for much longer or more frequently, so to say. If you train twice a week, you train on one day, the protein synthesis in that muscle is gonna stay elevated for maybe twenty four to forty eight hours, depends on your training status. If you're a beginner, then the muscle signal can stay elevated for up to a week, but, after a while, you get, resistant to that, and it only stays elevated for twenty four to forty eight hours. So if you train only on Monday, then by Wednesday, that that muscle signal is gone. So you need to be training again to kick it up. And, thus, if you were to train a muscle group once a week and you're already adapted to it, then, you're missing out on a lot of gains because if you try to train four times a week, you know, every other day, let's say, like, a full body workout, then you would keep the muscle protein synthesis elevated basically all the all the time. Like, whenever you're eating, then you're promoting muscle growth because the, the muscles are already primed to be able to muscle from the training stimulus. For most people, I don't at minimum, I recommend training a muscle group twice a week and at maximum four times a week because, yeah, like, overtraining is still something that would inhibit this process. I personally train, three times a week with weights. Maybe like a fourth workout would be like calisthenics, but, yeah, three times a week, something like that. So how does the progressive overload look over time? So, when you're when you are doing weights or resistance training, then, this initial encounter with weights will cause some stress and damage to the body. You get weaker in the short term, and you over time, you would get stronger if you have, like, sufficient amount of sleep, nutrition. I mean, I say it's rest, and also things like saunas can promote the recovery, and you would get back into a higher level of performance. You would get stronger. You would build muscle, and that's the way it goes. It keeps on, you get weaker, but you get stronger. You get weaker, but you get stronger. The problem is that if you get weaker and you, aren't taking care of the fundamentals, you're not sleeping enough, you're not eating enough, you're experiencing a lot of stress, then you could get, you know, weaker as well. You could, degrade. You could deteriorate. And, you can come back you can come back from those things, but it just requires a bit more effort. So, yeah, over time, you just need to, take care of the fundamentals and, repeatedly put yourself under higher, higher amounts of mechanical tension and higher amounts of, like, metabolic stress and that sort of thing. And over time, you would see your performance increase. That's how you get stronger. That's how you build muscle, and that's how you also increase power and, those things. Alright. MTOR. What turns on mTOR besides resistance training? So amino acids, like I said, leucine is the most, let's say, anabolic, amino acids that is responsible for mTOR the most. And, in research, the leucine threshold for activating mTOR is around, like, two grams after three grams. Younger people need less leucine to turn on mTOR and muscle protein synthesis, whereas older people need a bit more because they're more let's say their hormonal system has become older, and they, less sensitive to that. And, yeah, you can get two to three grams of leucine from about, like, 20 to 30 grams of protein. And, yeah, the eating anything less wouldn't be, like, optimal, in my opinion. Like, if you're if you're eating less than 20 grams of protein per meal, then, you're missing out on a lot, and you're not really doing any favors for muscle growth. So at a minimum, your meals should include, you know, 30 grams in my opinion at least and upwards the upward to 50 grams or, you know, you can even eat 100 grams per meal, but 30 grams at least is the minimum. And there's also insulin and IGF-one that also activate mTOR through another pathway in the cell. And, yeah, insulin from carbohydrates can do that. IGF-one from growth hormone, IGF-one from protein as well, and IGF-one from carbohydrates again leads to that. And the end product is muscle protein synthesis. How much protein should you eat? So, the research is pretty clear on that actually. Like, we already know how much is the optimal amount. So, when you when like, the RDA is about, like, zero point eight grams per kilogram of body weight. And, whenever you start increasing that upward to 1.6, then you will see increase in muscle tissue as a result of that. And it caps out at 1.6 to 2.4 per kilogram. So for, let's say, me who weighs, like, eighty six kilograms, then for me, that's, you know, I try to get it at least, like, two grams per kilogram. So for me, it's at least, like, 170 grams, 175 grams of protein a day. If I go above that, you know, that's fine, but I'm not expecting any additional muscle growth from that because, yeah, the research is pretty clear that you don't see any additional muscle growth beyond the 1.6 to 2.4 gram per kilogram mark. But if, there are studies where, the people consume more like 2.4 to 3.3 grams per kilogram of protein, which is, like, for me would be 200, 220 grams of protein, then, they see, that the muscle mass is still the same. They don't build more muscle, but they see a bit less fat mass from that because protein is very thermogenic. You consume protein and your body, expands a lot of energy to digest that protein, and you lose basically calories. So eating more protein is not gonna build more muscle, but it does help with, let's say, calorie burn. You burn more calories for that. And if you're in an energy deficit, you're trying to cut weight, or you're trying to maximize your diet, then, a higher protein, can be still even better for that. How frequently should you eat? So, there is also, like, a threshold for how much protein stimulates muscle protein synthesis, and that threshold in research appears to be around 30 to 40 grams of protein per meal. So, if you, if you were to eat more than that, then your body wouldn't, like, lose it. It's not gonna waste it. It's it's going to absorb it over time, but you're not activating more muscle protein synthesis. And for that to overcome this limitation, then you would need to be eating very frequently, like four to six times a day to see an additional muscle building benefit. The, research finds that the maximum, frequency for muscle protein synthesis and muscle growth would be four meals a day and they're separated by, like, four hours. Like, the bodybuilders are notorious for eating six times a day, eight times a day, or 10 times a day even sometimes. For them, it may be worthwhile because they're also, like, taking out of steroids, but the average person doesn't they're not gonna see any additional muscle building benefits from four meals a day, which doesn't mean that eating less frequently would have, like, a negative impact on muscle growth. It's just that, you're stimulating the muscle protein synthesis less often, and, your speed of muscle building would also be a bit slower. But, you know, over time, you could see, like, the still same benefits. If as long as you're hitting your daily protein intake off around this area, then it doesn't really matter how frequently you're gonna eat. Like, I, you know, eat mostly one meal a day, but I also incorporate this protein shake into my workouts that basically gives me two, protein spikes, two muscle building protein spikes per day. So one meal a day would be, like, pretty hard to build muscle with, but the two meals is perfectly fine for most people, and three meals is also fine, like breakfast, lunch, and dinner, it's also very fine. But if you were to be very serious, like, you're actually doing natural bodybuilding and you want to really fully maximize muscle growth or you're an athlete, then a four meal would be the maximum recommended, amount. And like I said, the amount of protein, that you ingest gets capped off or how much protein synthesis gets stimulated gets capped off, and, 20 grams already is suffice is sufficient, and, there's no additional benefit beyond 40 grams. If you eat more than that, then, yeah, your body just slows down the absorption of protein, and it's gonna absorb it later, but it's not gonna have an additional, mTOR activation effect or protein synthesis. What kinds of protein to eat? You know, protein is in a lot of different foods. Most of the highest proteins are meat, eggs, fish, cottage cheese, dairy, chicken, those sort of things. Those are the highest protein foods. And but there's also, like, protein in nuts, beans, seeds, legumes, even, like, vegetables, etcetera. But the difference between plant based and, animal based protein is that, plant based is much lower in protein, and, they don't also have, like, all the amino acids, they generally don't have that much leucine to reach the leucine threshold, whereas you can reach it very easily with animal protein. Like, you can eat three eggs and you already hit the maximum leucine threshold, or, like, even, like, six ounces of meat, you're already gonna maximize the leucine threshold. So the research finds that you can still, build muscle with only plant based proteins. You just have to be eating a bit more to compensate for the lack of amino acids. So if you are to be, let's say, the average person could eat 1.6 grams of protein per day to maximize their muscle growth, then if you're eating only plant based protein, then you would need maybe, like, two point zero or 2.4 to reach that same effect. So you just need to be eating more protein, you know, which just like a difference. So, like, if you were head to heads compared, the animal protein is just, more anabolic and more protein, or more amino acids. Like I said, leucine is the main, amino acids, but they're also, like, different kinds of essential amino acids, methionine, valine, etcetera. So, yeah, the animal based proteins are all higher in the, EAA's and leucine as well. So we have whey, milk, casein, beef, egg fish, etcetera, and then there's also all these plant based foods. So, yeah, you can certainly like, in the modern world, there's no at least, like, in Western society, there's no, like, real malnutrition danger as long as eating a good diet. And, yeah, you can still reach the desired effect. Just gonna take more time, maybe more effort, and, yeah, you just have to consume a bit more protein. Or if you're taking, like, plant based source, the protein powder, like a soy protein powder, hemp protein powder, rice protein powder, then you probably would overcome that effect because the protein powders themselves are very concentrated forms of this protein, and they also have added amino acids in them that would maximize the leucine threshold immediately. So that's why the whey protein is considered to be, the most anabolic, let's say, food because it's animal based. It has all the amino acids. It's high leucine, and it's, also more bioavailable. Like the that's another difference that the animal protein is just, more easily absorbable and more bioavailable. So you lose a bit more protein, on the digestion if you're getting it from, plant based plant based sources. So what are different kinds of diets out there? Like I've made a video about ranking the best diets for muscle growth and in my opinion, there's like the best one out there is the vertical diet which is basically rice and beef, rice and red meat plus some other vegetables and nutrients. That is very good because it's high in protein, high in amino acids, as well as high in carbs. So the carbs are gonna carbs are needed for muscle growth, but they do have, like a good effect on glycogen resynthesis and exercise performance. So you can lift heavier weights and chances are, yeah, you're gonna build a bit more muscle if you're eating the carbs plus protein instead of just protein. Another one is just a standard bodybuilding diet, chicken breasts and broccoli and rice. That's similar to the vertical diet, not much difference, but the chicken is a bit less nutritious than beef, for example. Of course, you can also do the if it fits your macros approach that, you're hitting the optimal amount of the protein and the rest of the calories come from, like, whatever you want, like, junk food or something. That can also certainly work. It is, you know, still pretty effective because as long as you're hitting your protein, then it doesn't really matter whether the rest of the color is coming from, or the carbs or fats. But at the same time, the carbs are superior for sure, when it comes to muscle building and hypertrophy. And then there's the lean gains diet, which is, intermittent fasting, six in any type of intermittent fasting, and, like, any fit for your macros approach. So even two meals a day can be pretty effective still for muscle growth. Other categories are carb backloading, which is just eating carbs at night, which is just fine as long as you're getting enough protein. The zone diet, you're eating, 30% protein, 30% fat, and 40% carbs. That's also fine. The paleo diet, eating, like, caveman foods, hamitz, vegetables, and those things also fine, high in protein. The carnivore diet, high in protein is gonna be fine, but, yeah, you if you were to add, let's say, more rice or, like, fruit, it will be more like the vertical that, and, it would be, I think, superior for that. And, the gallon of milk a day diet. So drinking a gallon of milk so milk is very high in the protein, not high, but high in, IGF one and high in leucine and does have anabolic effects, but it's also high in calories. So if you were to be drinking only a gallon of milk a day and other foods, then you would gain a lot of mass, but it can also be like a body fat. So you don't want really unless you're, like, a very skinny guy, then you don't really need to be doing that. Some some diets that are like slower in process are vegetarian diet because it's, you know, tends to be slightly lower in protein and, you know, if you eat only eggs and fish, you can still hit high protein intake. But generally, like, red meat also have, like, some other things beneficial for our muscle growth. The KetoGains diet is a keto but higher in protein, so that's also pretty good. And most people can do fine with it, but it's generally a bit slower of a process than eating carbs. And, last row is gonna be, the vegan diet, Mediterranean diet, standard American diet, keto diet, the Warrior diet. So those diets are generally here because they're a bit lower in protein. With the vegan diet, you just have to be more careful with that and, make sure you hit enough protein. With the keto diet, the same. The standard keto diet is very low in protein and not really suitable for, maximizing muscle hypertrophy, whereas the Keto Gains is a bit better for that. The Warrior diet is like one meal a day, but it's because it's it is one meal a day, it's hard to build muscle with that, whereas the one that I'm doing where I have the protein shake during the day, that generally overcomes that limitation. And lastly, in the category is the Calabrio AKF, which is I would put here, like, the fruit fruitarian diet eating only fruit because, you know, it's low in low in protein, and, you will go catabolic as eventually. Like, you may not you might not experience it in, a few weeks or months even. But over years, you would see, like, the slow deterioration of the muscle tissue because I'm not getting enough protein. And here is, like, a brief overview of the vertical diet as well. So Stan Efferting is the creator of it. It's like a record holding power lifter. So it is basically focusing on mostly white rice because it's easy to digest. It's high in high in carbs, and it is doesn't cause, like, a lot of GI stress. And the meat, the protein is mostly red meat because it's loaded with all the different micronutrients and high in protein as well. So you just stack those and, basically, the rest of it come from, mic or you, basically cover all your micronutrients first, like carrots, vitamin c, eggs, some fish, some vegetables, etcetera, but you don't really do them in volume. You, basically hit the minimal effective dose with these foods, and then you stack it or you scale it up with red meat and rice. So once you got your micro nutrients covered, then the rest of the calories will come from rice and red meat. So that's kind of the vertical that you go upwards into the vertical zone, with rice and the red meat. Alright. Well, this is it for this video. I hope you got some valuable information from that. I personally I'm doing like a cyclical, keto diet with carb back loading and one meal a day in intermittent fasting. My book, Menelabik, it talks about that, but it's very similar in, like, the vertical diet as well. Although I don't eat a lot ton of rice, but it's similar in principle that I do eat high protein and on some days also eat carbs. But, yeah, I do also intermittent fasting and, other other type of things. Okay. So that's it for this video and, yeah, stay tuned for the future ones.