In his book Blitz, the German author Norman Oler writes how the Nazis used many different drugs to fuel their campaigns in World War two, most notably cocaine, heroin, crystal meth, and various painkillers. In this video, we're gonna talk about Nazis on drugs. What drugs did the Nazis use in World War two? Because it's good to know not only the history of it, but also the physiology and, you know, what happens when you do take these drugs. Drag use was actively encouraged in the Wehrmacht by officers to make the troops more alert, have higher endurance, and not get tired during long days of marching or fighting. Norman Oler writes, soldiers were awake for days, marching without stopping, which wouldn't have happened if it weren't for crystal meth. Hitler himself and many other Nazi party leaders were using different drugs for their health conditions and to create a sense of euphoria. History records suggest that Hitler suffered from irritable bowel syndrome, coronary sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, syphilis, and tinnitus, including other diseases. He started using amphetamine after 1937 and became addicted to it in 1942. Hitler's personal doctor, doctor Morel, gave him daily injections of methamphetamine until his death in 1945. Other drugs he took included opiates, cocaine, and barbiturates that all have effects on the central nervous system. Doctor Morell's personal records claim he gave Hitler up to 800 injections over the nine years they worked together. In July '43, he had a a decisive meeting with Mussolini, because Mussolini wanted to leave, with Italy, the the the evil Axis. He wanted to leave, and Hitler was very depressed about that. And Morella on that on that day, in July, for the first time used a drug called Oikodal, Eukodal, which is an a half synthetic opioid and opioid, a pharmacological cousin of heroin you could say, but with a much stronger euphoric, momentum to it. And after a good shot of Eukodal, you feel extremely good, and this is exactly what happened to Hitler. And, extremely good and this is exactly what happened to Hitler. And, there's reports from that meeting with Mussolini where he just, didn't stop talking and was in such a euphoric mood that he easily convinced Mussolini to stay on board. So when did the Nazis start using drugs? Germany's pharmaceutical industry was the world's most advanced and financed during World War one already. Thanks to the invention of morphine by a German chemist Friedrich Sertoner in eighteen o four. Morphine is a powerful painkiller and opioid that is often used by the military and doctors to reduce the feeling of pain. Morphine was patented and globally distributed by the German pharma company Merck in 1827. During the Nazi party rule, Merck, which back then was named Werwirtschaftfuhrer, was manufacturing products for the war such as narcotics, supplements, biocides, and other chemicals. Merck is still operational today. Another major German pharma company, Bayer, started using heroin, a derivative of morphine with great success to substitute morphine for cough suppressants. However, although Bayer marketed heroin as a nonaddictive morphine substitute, it was soon discovered that heroin had the highest rates of addiction among its users. The name heroin was coined from the German word heroisch, which means heroic or strong because the drug also had euphoric and invigorating effects. Heroin was legal during the first German Empire or the second Reich, and it was widely used in World War one to treat chronic pain and respiratory conditions. After Germany's defeat in World War one, Bayer lost some of its trademark rights to heroin under the Treaty of Versailles. Bayer is also still operational today and is one of the biggest pharma companies in the world. In the Weimar Republic, most drugs were legal or allowed with a medical prescription to relieve pain and improve performance. Many World War one veterans were addicted to painkillers and drugs for pain relief. These tolerant drug policies were adopted by the Nazi party as well in the third Reich. Despite the tolerant views on drugs, the Nazi party was more critical of alcohol use and smoking. Hitler stopped drinking alcohol around nineteen thirties when he adopted a vegetarian diet. He encouraged his close associates to do the same. So what kind of drugs did the Nazis use in World War two? In 1937, a Berlin pharmaceutical company, Temblr, came out with a methamphetamine called Pervitin, which quickly became a bestseller among the population. The Wehrmacht found out that Pervitin reduces fear. It reduces your need to sleep. And it makes you, more aggressive. So these three reasons seem perfect for the German army in 1940. Drugs came into play, for example, for the army, in the war as a sort of pharmacological weapon just as they used, real weapons. Churchill said to his French colleague, Daladier, when the Germans attacked that, he shouldn't worry so much about the speed of the German army because after twelve hours, they would have to rest. But, the German army being high on methamphetamine didn't have to to rest. Churchill didn't know about this. So in the first, three days and three nights, the Germans made, huge advances by just not stopping and surprising the Western allies this way. Because Pervitin had a really serious hangover and some even became violent, it was not allowed to be used by the troops after 1940 and was tightly regulated by the military. It would be interesting to think about what the course of the war would have looked like if the Wehrmacht kept on taking the drugs. The Nazis weren't the only ones taking drugs to fuel their war efforts. Allied troops and pilots were also often given amphetamines to keep themselves awake. The drug of choice for the allies was benzodrine, which is an amphetamine sulfate. It's estimated that 72,000,000 amphetamine tablets were consumed by the allies during World War two. In The US, methamphetamine is classified as a schedule two drug, which means it has a very high rate of abuse and addiction. Despite that, it has been used in almost all military conflicts of the last century. It was used in Vietnam and probably Iraq. Even Syrian jihadist fighters are reported to be using a drug called Captagon, which is another amphetamine that provides energy and euphoria, making you not care about pain or death. Japanese kamikaze suicide bombers in World War two also took methamphetamine known as storm ink tablets before their runs. Both meth and cocaine increase two neurotransmitters in the brain, serotonin and dopamine. This increases the person's motivation, energy levels, and puts them into euphoria. Other effects include higher physical activity, decreased appetite, faster breathing, elevated blood pressure, and irregular heartbeat. So, basically, it makes war and fighting more effortless. Because of the quick release in dopamine, the drug encourages drug taking behavior to repeat the experience or to get the high. Long term use of methamphetamine increases the risk of infections, weight loss, severe dental problems, which is called meth mouth, anxiety, memory loss, sleeping problems, violence, paranoia, hallucinations, and impaired judgment. Some of these changes may reverse after stopping the drug use for a year, but other changes are permanent. A recent 2015 study discovered that people who have used methamphetamine even once have an increased risk of developing Parkinson's disease. When the allies bombed the Tremler pharmaceutical factory in Berlin 1945, the Nazis and Hitler's drug consumption came to a sudden halt. As Hitler's drug supply ran out, he suffered from severe withdrawal symptoms like paranoia, psychosis, low dopamine, rotting teeth, extreme shaking, kidney failure, and delusions. During the last week of his life, Hitler was seen shaking and cold all the time as it's common for people who go into withdrawal. This shock can often result in death. Today, we call we call methamphetamine crystal meth, but it's today, it's produced under different conditions in illegal labs. So methamphetamine by Tamla was a was a pure product. Pervitin was taken orally, so the effect is milder than, snorting crystal meth. According to 2009 statistics, there are up to twenty five million amphetamine abusers in the world, and the numbers continue increasing. There is also a massive opioid crisis where people are addicted to opioids to treat their pain. It's estimated that between 1999 and 2016, four hundred and fifty three thousand Americans have died from opioids. Painkiller prescriptions have tripled from seventy six million to two hundred and nineteen million. In conclusion, drugs are very widely used in war and other high stakes professions. They do apparently improve performance and vigilance, but at the same time, it has many negative side effects on the person's long term health. Addiction is almost guaranteed with prolonged use of these drugs, and it changes the brain permanently. Unfortunately, war is war, and many countries wouldn't hesitate to give their soldiers speed to gain an extra edge in combat. If you want to improve your mental performance, alertness, and wakefulness, then the best thing for that is sleep. Your body and brain repair themselves during sleep, and poor sleep is linked to neurodegeneration and reduced cognition. Check out my total sleep optimization video course to correct your sleep wakefulness cycles, circadian rhythms, and speed up recovery. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.