Welcome back to the channel. My name is Sim Lund, and in this video, we're gonna talk about how do you make NAD plus naturally. You know, there's a lot of talk about NAD plus being this potential molecule for anti aging purposes and longevity. And, usually, people, you know, prescribe it as a supplement, not directly, but, you know, those those precursors, NMN, nicotinamide riboside, nicotinamide, all those things are to boost NAD levels. But there are also, like, ways to boost it naturally. So, that's what we're gonna talk about in this video. Make sure you click a like and subscribe as well for future videos about health and performance. Do it. NAD, it stands for nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, and it's this major coenzyme inside the body that has a lot of different functions, and it helps to also convert the food that you get, and the calories from that into energy. So it's a very, important regulator of all these energetic processes inside the body. And, with low NAD, basically, your energy production would be lower, whereas with higher NAD, there's like more of this basically abundance of energy around. And that's why one of the reasons why, you know, you may see that with aging, you start to see this accumulation of these health problems and lack of energy and lack of muscle mass and lack of bone density because of this deterioration of NAD that happens. It sucks. And, like I said, with age, your NAD levels at a drop, and it's quite a significant drop. It drops more than half, more than 50% after your thirties or so. And, yeah, that is one of the, let's say, part of the reasons, why you start to see this age related comorbidities and age related issues from that. Your NAD levels go down. And because of that, you, it's basically harder for your body to stay healthy because of its lack lack of energy essentially and lack of NAD. And there are, like, different reasons why it happens. So why does NAD go down? But the main, main, contributing biggest ones are just just like damage, physical damage you experience, DNA damage. Inflammation is one of the biggest consumers of, NAD through this enzyme called the c d 38. And c d thirty eight basically would be a makes you burn through the NAD. Also things like DNA repair. So if you are experiencing DNA damage, your body has to repair it, then it uses NAD to conduct this process, with the help of sirtuins. So sirtuins are DNA repair proteins. And, if you're experiencing basically a lot of damage all the time, then, yeah, your body burns through, the NAD stores, from that. So all these things like sleep deprivation, chronic inflammation, bad diet, lack of exercise, maybe environmental pollutions, toxins, radiation, all those things are gonna basically, burn through the NAD stores. And, then you will see actually, like, this, vicious feedback loop that the lower your NAD levels get, the hot the more damage you're gonna experience because your antioxidant defense systems go down. You have less less, basically, ability to deal with those stress. And because of that, you're more vulnerable, and you start to experience more damage from that. Whereas if you're if you have high NAD levels, then your antioxidant defenses are higher and your resiliency against all all these environmental stresses is also higher. It's a trap. Alright. So now I'm gonna actually uncover all these different pathways. So I show you like a pretty, you know, confusing picture. So I'll explain it briefly. So these are the three main pathways of creating NAD. We have the price handler pathway, the novel synthesis the novel biosynthesis pathway, and the salvage pathway. So, the price handler pathway is the one where you convert, nicotinic acid from food into n 80 plus through these different, path steps. And the the the NOA biosynthesis pathway is, also where you convert food, tryptophan and niacin in the TCA cycle into n 80 plus. So these are the food pathways, the ones that you get from a dietary, means. And then there's the salvage pathway, which actually contributes to the vast majority of the NAD that you're, producing, you know, on daily basis. So if it produces it daily, and it also recycles it. So the, the, vast majority of NAD that you actually have is produced through the salvage pathway. So, yeah, the food is important, but it's not nearly as important as the ones that are governed by the salvage pathway, which are exercise and basically intermittent fasting and those things. Key, like a rate limiting step inside a salvage pathway that determines how much NAD are you producing through the salvage pathway is NAMPT. And, this is it's, basically connected to a lot of, the AMPK pathways. So AMPK pathways, they're the one that is, regulating energy metabolism and energy balance. So when you're exercising or you're doing fasting or your calorie restriction, those things, you're activating AMPK because your body's under energy stress, and then your body ramps up things like ketosis, fat burning, as well as this AMPT, NAMPT, pathway. And, that then, helps with the recycling of, NAD. So, all these positive energy stressors, exercise, fasting, calorie restriction, so on maybe, those will, have a positive effect on the salvage pathway. And, that's why I think that, you know, that's why exercise is, you know, one of the most important and one of the best things to boost your longevity and just overall health because of this. You know, there's many reasons, but, this is also, like, one of them one of them. Cardio. However, the NAMPT pathway is also, connected to the circadian rhythms. So circadian rhythms are the day and night cycles, and the sirtuins themselves are also, basically circadian clock or the circadian regulators, circadian genes. And, the, main, like, search circadian clocks, like clock, the m a l one, They're, SIRT one dependent, and NAEPT itself is also SIRT one dependent. So, you need basically the sirtuins, and you need the, circadian rhythm alignment to have NAEPT, working properly. So, it's this is the one, that usually, like, overrated or overlooked so that you need to be circadian rhythms. Your circadian rhythms need to be aligned. You need to be, getting enough sleep. You need to be getting you need to be having this consistent sleep wake on a cycle. You need to be, synchronized with the environment in order to the light signals, instead of things like, you know, jet lag and the shift work and, irregular CP patterns. Those things are gonna mess up the sirtuins and the sirtu the, NAPT pathway, which then lowers your NAD levels as well. Whereas if you are having a regular consistency, we're gonna cycle, then the NA and PT pathway is also activated, which then helps with the recycling of NAD. And I think that, you know, I'm not exactly sure of the numbers, but I think that the, the salvage pathway contributes up to, like, 80 or 90% of the NAD that you produce on a daily basis. So, the food, yeah, is is actually, like, pretty insignificant in terms of how much NAD you have. So the most of it is coming from the salvage pathway, the exercise you do, the time receiving you have, the sleep that you do, getting sleep and, getting sunlight in terms of the circadian rhythm alignment, because, yeah, like, n n AMPT is the kind of the the bottleneck almost that, if this if this messes up because of circadian realignment, then, you're gonna have, like, a pretty drastic reduction in the potential of how much NAD that you have. Disappointed. If you want to know what your NAD levels are at or you wanna boost your NAD levels, then check out Do Not Age. They have the world's only at home NAD testing kit, and they also have NMN plus other cool antiaging supplements like hyaluronic acid, TMG, ApoGenin, Resveratrol, and others. You can get a 5% discount with the code SIEM at donotage.org. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is SIEM. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.