Balance isn't just a good idea. It's absolutely essential. It's based on what's most true about the body. It's based on things actually work and that you will imbalance systems in the body through imbalanced inputs. And I don't care if they're healthy or not. You're gonna inbound you're gonna create long term imbalances. Welcome to the Seam Lund podcast. I'm your host Seam Lund, and our guest today is Joel Green. Joel is the author of the immunity code and a pioneer of many of the ideas in the nutrition space. He's the founder of Veep Nutrition Systems and has worked with companies like Quest Nutrition. This episode is brought to you by the metabolic autophagy master class. It's the most comprehensive and in-depth program about applying the benefits of intermittent fasting and metabolic flexibility for both longevity and body composition. You get access to over thirteen hours of video content about the science of autologie as well as a four week meal plan workout routine with precise macros and food recommendations. Head over to simlondon.com forward slash master class in one word, and use the code pod 20 for a sweet 20% discount. Joel, welcome back to the show. Hey. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you for having me back. Yeah. It's, we had our first talk maybe, yeah, like, a year ago before this, craziness started. And, yeah, it's a well, it was a really good podcast. So maybe can you give, like, a brief overview as well about your backstory and, like, reintroduce yourself to people? Yeah. Sure. So I, have I generally just consider myself a a, like, basically a consumer. That's kinda how I think of myself. And, I've been consuming solutions for, you know, health and fitness and biohacking for a very long time going back to, going back to really, like, the eighties. And so all that led me to, a path where I was, I was, not making a living from from fitness or anything like that, but I was, running a company. And, this was, for me, like, my late thirties. And running this company, I I came into this period of my life where I I started I started the company, when it was, like, kind of a a start up, and then we we went, we grew pretty fast. We grew to, like, $25,000,000 run rate, like, just in, you know, a couple years. And I was, so my body fat was, like, about 5% when that started, and then it was, like, 30% by the end of that. And, led me down this path where, I I, for me, realized that a lot of, a lot of the advice that we as consumers get just didn't really translate very well into, like, you know, having a job and a real life, family and kids and all that stuff. And it set me down this path of trying to figure out, well, what would work? And so from that, I had created a nutrition software, and then it was, a a commercial software, though. So instead of offering it to consumers, it was offered to, like, hospitals and, you know, the YMCA and big companies and things like that. And so, it was sort of an interesting period. This was for me 2009 through, like, you know, into, like, the late late late twenty nineteen where, using this software, we had, several several thousand people at any given time using it. And, there was a a kind of a a way that I would implement protocols. I would find protocols in research. I would implement them. And then I was able to harvest data. I was able to see, like, what worked and what didn't work because I had thousands of people using things all at once. So I could kinda, you know, put in a new protocol. And, if it worked, great. I could kinda see why it worked. It's a lot of trial and error. I was able to harvest data pretty quickly from that. And, along the way, what happened was, I kinda kinda knew some people kind of on an inside track that led to doing some consulting with other companies. One of them was Quest. And, I kinda had, based on the data that I've been harvesting, a bunch of ideas about, about, body fat and immune centric mechanisms and adipo and people would ask me these questions, and I I would get into, like, these very long explanations. And finally, I was like, okay. Well, I just should write a book. So I wrote a book, and then here we are. That's kinda me. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's, data can give you, like, a lot of, information for sure. Like, you know, that's what that's how, like, Facebook is, based on or, like, how they built their own entire business. And if you look at to know people's data and especially, like, behavioral data, like, most people don't know about, how many calories are they eating, and they don't know how often they eat. They're just, you know, kind of, passing through life without really paying attention to those things. And if you have them, give them, like, some sort of this valuable information about, their health habits, then that can be a pretty, transformative for a lot lot of people. Yeah. You know, what I think also sort of what, is evolving on that front that is very interesting is, sort of sort of a different way to do research. So the classical model of research is you very expensive and very time consuming where you, you know, you you create an experimental group, a control group, and blah blah blah blah, you do all that stuff. It's very plotting and very expensive and very slow. And there there is, because we have these these new platforms that are ubiquitous, everybody has them and they're able to harvest data. There's an emerging there's an emerging way of doing research that, allows you to rapidly harvest, very fine tune guesses about, different protocols. And so I I kind of kind of see that into the future that, the way that experiments and science are done will will have a a very large conjoining effect with, the data that is readily available every day from smart devices to do research, and and marry that. It'll never replace empirical research, but it it will become, an adjunct, that will allow us to rapidly see, well, this probably is not gonna work or this probably will work. So Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's because that could be current, studies. To good have a good study, then you need to kinda control all the variables and to do a lot of, you know it's very costly and takes a lot of time and a lot of effort, which is, you know, definitely something that needs to be done, to get, like, actual, definite, evidence, scientific evidence. But at the same time, you know, you can't do, like, this, double blind control studies all the time for every smaller problem. And, you know, that may just be, let's let's say, it's gonna take forever for actions. We're making, like, some actual focus in in these fields. Yeah. And and also, like, I think also the the applications of something like that commercially are also very interesting where you can have companies that kinda border the line between commerce and science. And, they they don't need to do a study per se. They just need to know. They need to know, like, what is probably true, and they need to know it really rapidly. And so using that kind of data harvesting, you can just, you can you can get a very good approximation for what's probably gonna be true, and it can be very, very accurate. You can apply statistical analysis to that kind of stuff. It was so very interesting front kind of an aside, but yeah. What what are some of the that's the main, things that people can, learn from by using your software? Software, like, like, designs, like, the macros and stuff. What is some some of the many, yeah, like, key advice that they can expect? Well, probably the, in my original software, the the main thing in that some of the ideas introduced in that were the idea of meal to meal sequencing. So that that was a really big thing to to, understand that the way that you have one meal impacts another meal. Good example would be like, barley kernels. Barley kernels, have a very interesting, you know, life or excuse me, very interesting effects on, glucose control. And, there's some some interesting data that, has shown that, the effects are long lasting. So, like, you can you can have a meal that's rich in barley kernels and have it at night. And then, what you're gonna see eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen hours later is, better glucose clearance. And and so the way that one meal affects another, is something that really hasn't been looked at a lot or talked about very much. But, that that was, like, one area that was, you know, really heavy really heavy into that particular system. And then, I have a newer go ahead. I wanna ask the the Barney colonels, like so you're you're basically kind of, setting your setting your body up for, digesting the next meal by, you know, priming it in some way before that. And another example would be, like, you know, like, if you eat, let's say, low carb beforehand, the first meal, then the second meal, having a higher carb maybe may make it easier for body to tolerate it in a in some way because of your, like, glycogen stores can be somewhat lower. And, therefore, you're you're not, like, over spilling the glycogen if you have, like, you know, several carb meals in a row, which is like this is just like a basic example. Yeah. And a very good one. Yeah. So and and that's that's, it it's kind of an interesting thing. Like like, we can kinda you can get into this, and and there's there's a a number of different variables in front that, meal to meal sequencing can work on. So, as you as you point out correctly, one of those is just simply glycogen storage. And then but there's quite a few other ones, particularly with respect to, not not just insulin, but all of the helper hormones around insulin. So the inkerton hormones, GIP, GLP one, c k k, c y y, all all of the or PYY for sort of, helper hormones, that in one way or another relate to insulin adiponectin, all this stuff can be dramatically influenced by one meal, and that dramatically affects the next. It's kind of easy to validate, like, just through junk food. Like, if you wanna like, if you if you have, like, a a really big junk food meal at, one meal, it's going to dramatically influence the next meal. You're probably gonna want more junk food. And so the same can be true in reverse. Yeah. So what are some ways to maybe hack it? Or, how do what is a good example of this meal sequencing, like, proper meal sequencing, let's say, for optimal blood sugar or regulation and maybe fat loss or something? Mhmm. Yeah. Well, probably at the core of this, there's there's, like, probably five basic ideas. The the most widely known is is glucose clearance or how well you're clearing glucose. And so there's a number of ways to affect glucose clearance. One of those methods in particular is not by subtracting calories. It's actually by adding calories. And so by adding calories from, insulin sensitizing foods, there is sort of a, both there's both a direct, direct effect on the next meal, but there's also sort of a cumulative effect long term on the sensitization of insulin. So simple examples would be, adding, things like, things like berries or, starches like garbanzo beans or or inulins from things like asparagus. Just, you know, adding these things to meals can have a, a a very small effect on the next meal, okay, in terms of glucose clearance, but it's it's an improvement on a number of factors. And the real benefit though is seems to be, most likely over the long term where we're actually sensitizing insulin function and helping the body just to get better at clearing glucose. So that that's kind of the first category. Mhmm. The next category would be enzyme impairment. So and it's it's pretty easy to show that, certain foods help to impair, enzymes you need for, transporting sugars. The most well known case would be berries where, the anthocyanins and the pigments and berries can impair alpha amylase, alpha glucosidase, compare those enzymes. But enzyme impairment sort of is its own category that we can look at. The next would be gastric emptying or just how fast or how slow things are emptying from the gut. And that really has to do with the order with which foods are taken in. So there's some good research that shows, when you're taking in foods, if the last thing you're taking in meal is the carbs, then things are going to empty slower, from the gut, and then that's gonna help glucosuria under the curve. Mhmm. And there's a lot of research in this area that's that's kind of interesting, and and a lot of it likes to parse things down like, well, you know, really fat is the key or really this thing's the key. But, really, from what I've seen, the main thing just seems to be that the last thing that comes in in a meal are the carbs. If you eat carbs last, then they're last in line to clear the gut. Okay. Clear the stomach. It seems to help. So there's several, so there's there's several categories of things. I know there would be sort of the amino acid makeup and the amino acid profile of things. So if you have glutamine in a meal, you're going to actually get a net reduction in calories absorbed. And some there's some decent research that suggests it's even as much as 37%. I don't know that I'd buy that, but, there there certainly seems to be, like, this thing that, looking closely at the makeup of the amino acids can have an impact on one meal to the next. So these are all, like, things that that get really interesting when you dive into it. Yeah. That's really that sounds very interesting, and, that's one one of the best, the one of the, you know, like, more unique ideas that I've heard about you or for from you, and your and your book, that these meal sequencing. So most people don't really pay attention to that. And, yeah, it does make sense that, you know, once we eat before that beforehand, that does have a huge impact on the next meal. And, like, how how big is how big does the space have to be in be between those meals? Like, does it have to be, like, an hour or, like, five hours? Mhmm. Yeah. That's a very, very interesting question. So there there's, there's a couple of quick answers there. One is that, if what we're looking at is sort of affecting, glucose clearance and insulin function, then there seems to be a window that's about thirty minutes to an hour prior. So a a very small preload meal thirty minutes to an hour prior, can impact things in a positive way. And in fact, there's been some research that shows, like, if you were to once again, add calories, which is a counterintuitive thing. If you add calories to a meal, let's say, it's a baked potato and you wanna add calories, you add whey protein, then you're gonna get, you know, up to a 20% improvement in, glucose, sorry, under the current glucose clearance. But if you take that same meal and you back it off thirty minutes, you get an additional increment. So so the timing seems to play a part. But the next thing about this that gets really interesting too is it's not just the timing of the next meal. There seems to be also that you can affect, meals the following day by by the way that you eat. So a couple of really good examples. One would be getting back to insulin sensitization. One would be sort of like, fatty foods like an egg at breakfast on one day seems to, number one, decrease total twenty four hour food intake, but it also, the evidence seems to suggest that it improves, the function of the incretin hormones, so GIP GLP one, And that follows into the next day so that your glucose clearance, insulin function is actually better the next day by having an egg the previous day. And then where this takes you to is you can start to stack these things. So you can have an egg sort of at breakfast and then barley at night, and both of those things impact insulin and insulin function in different ways, but they're complementary. So that this takes us into this whole kind of, you know, universe of things that hasn't been talked about a lot, which is, not just meal to meal sequencing, but the entire family of insulin function. So insulin sort of by itself is this one thing, but then it doesn't work by itself. It's got all these other hormones that make it work. And so how do you how do you time and, combine foods to affect those hormones so they affect insulin better? And, in in one sense, it's sort of very interesting because, once again, it hasn't been talked about very much, and there seems to be some decent research that backs this up. So, yeah. You know? And I think best of all, though, is it something most people can just prove to themselves? You can kinda do it. You can kinda do it readily and see if it works. So Yeah. So what will be, like, some good, like, golden rules? So you mentioned that having eggs for breakfast, so and the barley at nighttime. So, yeah, are there anything, like, that you would add to, like, every meal, in terms of helping to maybe absorb it better or digest it better or have, like, a lower blood sugar response. Mhmm. Yeah. So long once again, coming back to insulin. Long term, the the effect of getting insulin to just function better will affect everything else. And so, you know, you you can make a very, very strong case that there are very specific foods that just sensitize insulin to make it work better. And that even just by adding very, very small amounts of these things to any given meal that you're getting an incremental effect. And when I say incremental, you know, I wanna make make it clear that there's there's no panacea. It doesn't exist. But what what does exist is, you know, maybe a two or 3% improvement, and then you can stack four or five things that have a two or 3% improvement. And now you have, like, a 20% improvement, and then that carried forth meal to meal every day. That's a big deal. So, you know, no specific order here. But, you know, if we're looking at if we're looking at foods that are little little richer in carbohydrates, that are, you know, more prone to spiking insulin, then there are, you know, whole families of fibers that seem to affect insulin function in a very positive way. So beta glucans, inulins, things that contain, resistant starch, you know, and all of these things together. So specific foods, you know, going or certain types of grains. I mentioned barley works very well. Rye seems to work very well. Getting into, like, phenols, dark phenols seem to help, quite a bit. So the the color pigments in them seem to help, glucose function a lot. So, you know, things like pomegranate, things like blackberries, all these things affect, different phenols, and they affect things in different ways, in a very positive way. Whey protein seems to be something that works really well, seems to aid, glucose clearance quite a bit. And then you have, like, all kinds of tool sets like berberine and, you you know, glutamine and all kinds of things like that. So any one of these things. I just think of these things kind of like, it's kinda like fighting. You know? In fighting, you learn skills and you learn techniques, and so you learn when to use them. Yeah. Yeah. So kung fu of nutritional kung fu. Basically. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What what what I like to do is that, whenever I or, like, with with a with a slightly higher carb meal than I do like that, like these, resistant starch, like, either from beans or, the cook and cool potatoes, all those things, do kinda help with the the glucose response and the incident as well. So you and it also, like, absorbs slightly fewer the calories from there. So just an easy example. Yeah. Very much so. Yeah. And, you know, there's, again, there's decent research on that, particularly the the heating and recooling, heating and recooling. And the numbers that I've seen, are pretty impressive. Like like, you can literally double the amount of resistant starch in a food just by heating and recooling a couple of times. So that that's pretty pretty pretty impressive. Yeah. But what about, like, if you're eating if you're not eating carbs, like, I don't know, you're eating only, you know, protein, and that's, on a low low carb diet. Is there any, like, rules for that or, like, guidelines? Yeah. So that gets into kind of a whole different category. So we're not really talking so much about, we're not really talking so much about glucose there, but but we are indirectly. So some of the things to keep in mind is that and this is sort of controversial, but, it's it's not that hard to show. Long term sustained high protein animal feeding can increase insulin resistance by virtue of elevating serum glucagon glucagon. So, that's the sort of one thing to keep in mind. The other thing is the long term effects of, fermentation of proteins in the gut. You know, it's something we kinda need to counter. And by by themselves, none of these things are bad. Like like, you know, like, I I have a lot of animal protein in my diet. I have, you know, all that stuff. But but really what, when you when you look at sort of mechanistically, like, well okay. Elevated serum glucagon long term, that's not a that's not a good thing. It's a great thing in the short term because it helps you get lean. But in the long term, it's it's kind of a problem. There needs to be a balance between insulin glucagon. And if you're having too much too much animal protein long term, that's that's probably not a great thing just for that particular measure. So, adding in things that sensitize insulin with that, which are the things I talked about. Like like, for example, you're having a steak. Have a small amount of, like, let's say, asparagus with that. Just it doesn't even have to be a ton. Just a little bit amount. And what that will do is, a number of things. One, it helps you ferment, a little bit better in the gut. So you're not purely fermenting proteins. You're actually fermenting, fibers, and and it sort of seems to shift the balance away from fermenting, potentially toxic compounds, from bacterial metabolites from fermented meat. And so it kinda balances things out. The other piece of that too would be that it also helps to keep insulin sensitive insulin sensitivity working. So Mhmm. Just by adding a little bit of balance in the diet, you get, like, a a a really nice long term benefit. Yeah. Yeah. Like, glucagon is basically the counterpart of insulin. And, if you're, like, fasting or if you're on a low carb diet, you're not eating carbs, then, glucagon goes up and insulin goes down. So, eventually, I think main role of glucagon is also this, breakdown of liver glycogen. And, as a result of that, your blood sugar will rise and, you know, because you're not eating carbs or you do become slightly insulin resistant. And, you know, actually, what people don't know is, like like, diabetics tend to have, like, high glucagon levels because they are, you know, breaking down all of glycogen and, you know, they're not able they're not insulin sensitive in a sense, and that can I mean, eventually, high level high levels of glucagon can also lead to diabetes because of the same reason? Mhmm. So, yeah, it's a definite and if you eat, like, carbs, you're basically you're raising insulin and you're and you're lowering the glucagon. So you're bringing your body back to balance, and you're able to clear the bloodstream from blood sugar. Whereas if you're not eating carbs or you're not able to produce insulin because of being insulin resistant, then the glucagon stays elevated and you keep, you know, producing those, you keep breaking down the glycogen all the time. Yeah. Well well said. Well said. Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's something, that probably isn't generally well known, but, I mean, you can get diabetes from a high fat diet. You can get diabetes from a high protein diet. You can get diabetes from a high carb diet. So, the the we we we associate, like, blood sugar disorders with purely carbohydrate intake, but that's not true. You can you can give yourself insulin resistance from sustained high protein intake. And the mechanism the interesting thing about that is the very thing that causes all the beneficial aspects to happen upfront is the same thing that causes all the negative aspects that happen down the line. And that's just simply your over sort of stimulating one hormone which would be glucagon in this case. In short term, that, you know, it accounts for for the fat loss. It accounts for all the things you think are great. But then the longer you do it, then, you know, really you're you're elevating serum glucagon. You're increasing gluconeogenesis in the liver, and you're suppressing, you know, all these, you know, very specific enzymes you need. And ultimately, what's happening is insulin insulin sensitivity is sort of going downward, and that's not a good thing under any circumstance. So to your point, balancing the diet sort of helps that out. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Like, I'm I'm not a, like, a big fan of doing chronic ketosis either. I am definitely the one to do it, like, cyclically. Like I said, it's good to do it, in a cyclical manner that you do get the benefits of this leaning out, with the highlights of glucagon. But, yeah, you probably don't wanna be doing chronicly because, yeah, chronic ketosis will make you slightly insulin resistant, at least in the short term. It's reversible, but it's not like the optimal place where you want to be, all the time. Yeah. What what I like to what what I like to add to, like, some of the higher fat meals is also, like, a little bit of, dairy or calcium, because calcium, like, helps to break down the fats and it also reduces the fat absorption. So you end up, you know, getting a fewer calories from that higher fat meal. So maybe, like, a little bit of cheese or cottage cheese or something, that is, like, less inflammatory. That that can be, like, a good this hack or this addition to, like, any higher fat meal. Yeah. So the addition of, I did a whole video series on this on my Instagram, which is, a lot of unknown things about dairy. One of them is that it actually increases, fats passing through the gut by the formation of calcium soaps in the gut. So it's kind of a natural fat trapper. And then along with that, you have sort of all these, beneficial effects on aldosterone or basically the renin angiotensin system and suppression of ACE and all this stuff. So, it's just a really good addition to help increase bad oxidation and help do all these beneficial things. Contrary to what most of us have been told, which is just avoid dairy because dairy is bad, blah blah blah blah. It's actually quite functional. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's if if this comes from a, like, a good source and it's, if you're not allergic to it, then it can be a definite very good, food. Yeah. Just like, again, the moderation is fine, and, you probably don't want to be and it's also, like, one of the kind of only reliable sources of calcium, besides, like, fish fish bones or something. And if you're, you know, not taking any calcium supplements and you're also not eating any dairy, then your chances are you're not getting, like, the full optimal amount of calcium either. Yeah. I actually saw some really interesting research on this a number of years ago. I I had I had seen some fitness guru post that the calcium from dairy wasn't absorbable, and, like, I knew that wasn't true. And I kinda just spur the moment, dug up some old research on that. And so it turns out that the, glyco macrophage or the the sugars, in dairy, what they do is that they extend the sort of runway of calcium in the gut. And so what they do is actually help calcium absorb better in the gut, and you get better absorption of calcium from dairy. So it's it's one of, and there's, there's some really good research a number of years ago by this dude named Zemel who, you can kinda take him with a grain of salt. Yep. Sorry about that. You you yeah. You can kinda take it with a grain of salt. Like, it's, you know, it was some of I think it was funded by the dairy council, some of it. But, you know, okay. Well, so what? You can kind of use it as a line in the sand and then compare it to other research and see, you know, if it seems to hold water or not. But but, quite a bit of that, seem to suggest that, the role of dairy calcium, behind weight management, that one of the factors why dairy seems to be so good on weight management is because of the the absorbability of calcium in it. So and that goes contrary to what what most of us heard about dairy. It's been so well applied. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. And, you know, the calcium from other sources doesn't, you know, doesn't tend to be, that's bioavailable. Like, if you get it from, I don't know, spinach or some other leafy greens, then you're not getting just very low amounts in total, but the absorption is also slightly lower. Yeah. So also on that note, what's interesting is that, dairy contains bioactive peptides. And by bioactive, essentially, the way to think of them is that they're encrypted encrypted peptides. So they they don't be encrypt or unencrypt until they get the gut. And once they become active in the body, they and they serve a number of different functions that are highly beneficial. And so these these peptides affect a whole host of things like gene activation, fat metabolism, a whole number of things. And, dairy is what really probably out of, you know, any food that I can think of probably has more bioactive peptides than anything. Anything else I can think of, and they complement the action of dairy and its role with calcium. So Yeah. Do you so so, Libby, you're you're not, like, a fan of high protein diets in the long term and, like, does it apply to, like what what's your maybe, like, I don't know, overall macro macro? Do you track your macros or something? What's your diet look like in general for you? Yeah. It's really varied. So there's no there's no, there's no single I I don't really subscribe to macros that much unless I'm really dieting hard, and and I really want to, I really wanna get, you know, like, the, like, the last twenty days of getting lean, then I'll look at macros. Yeah. But generally speaking, so to your thing, I I'm I'm fine with just about anything for a season. So high protein diet for a season, you know, particularly in winter, probably, you know, pretty good idea. Long term long term, we just need to have a balance and things. And it I guess too, like, a lot of what has, propelled the the, the things that people do nowadays are narrative or stories about our ancestors. And we always have to kinda keep in mind that that, stories are stories. Like, they're not they're not they're not observed facts. It's like nobody was there with a with, with an iPhone recording everything that happens. We don't actually 100% know. Yeah. We have to we're we're taking guesses. And and since we're taking guesses, one of the, things that's fair to point out is that, seasons affect availability, and, availability drives variety. Meaning, not by choice, but but you're forced to seek out other things when certain things aren't available. And, I've I've looked at this thing quite a bit. I've looked at, you know, ancestral cultures, and I've looked at, like, the Indians where I live and what they ate. And, really, it just seems to be the case that they had these really varied diets. And it was, again, it was driven by the fact that they didn't have a refrigerator sitting by. They had to go get what was available. And so they would eat, you know, sometimes they eat berries, sometimes they eat coyotes, sometimes they eat whales, sometimes they eat deer, sometimes they eat nuts, sometimes they eat, you know, whatever was available, sometimes roots. And so variety in the diet, from a narrative point of view seems to have a lot of benefits long term because what what variety in the diet does is the the potential every food has benefits, every food has negatives. And, short term, we always see the benefits a little more and then long term see the negatives a little more. And so what variety in the diet does is is it works as a counterweight, and it seems to balance out the negative of certain foods. A good example would be like, high protein diets with a little bit of fiber. There you you can make a case that there's a lot of benefits to high protein diets. The longer you do them, you can make a case there's probably some negatives, but if you add some fiber, you count over the negatives. And so, I have a very I have a really varied diet, and it can be, seasonal. It can vary a lot, but it can also vary a lot, day to day. So classically, what I do in in my book, I've talked about kind of what I believe is kind of like a a a way to eat that answers all of the all of the issues that we have to look at. And, if we if we take a comprehensive approach to why do people fall off the wagon, why do people get get fat over time, why do people, like, not stay on diets, and we and we even infer all those things, what you come up with is about six different things. You come up with the fact that, eating whatever whatever seems to be, a survival mechanism, and there's there's kind of no getting around it. There's there's particularly post starvation or or diets. So post diets, eating whatever seems to, seems to have an ancestral sort of thing in it, bringing up narrative again. But it seems to have, like, an ancestral thing where, if you were went through a starvation period, eating anything in sight, will give you a better chance of surviving. And so there seems to be, like, a mechanism there. And it seems to be mimicked nowadays when people do diets and they come off those diets, they wanna eat whatever. So, so we have to counter eating whatever. And the way to counter it is not by not eating whatever, it's to offset eating whatever. So so that's one thing. Along those lines, there seems to be a decline in the gut biome as we age, so we have to counter that. And just a number of factors that have to be looked at. The other thing one of the most important is the fact that, we have, if you make a living in the modern ecosystem not related to being fit, then you have probabilistic constraints that present very significant barriers long term to maintain anything. Case in point, when Arnold got a real job. So when Arnold got a real job and became governor and not movie star, what happened is, all of the stuff that the the the the system that Arnold pioneered to the masses didn't work. It didn't work for him. And the way he solved the problem was he had to get out of having that real job and get back to being a movie star, and then he solved the problem. So what you see are these time probabilistic constraints in the real world over time. So we have to have something that works on zero time. So all those things together are kind of what went into, what I put in my book, which is a two day eating pattern. And long story short, basically, what we're doing is one day we're emphasizing, a little bit more on the fruits and fibers and, starches that feed the gut. And what these things, potentially seem to do is amplify all the beneficial effects of fasting. And then the second day is more sort of fasting and fats where we also get the benefits of fasting, but we don't have to fast as long and we get the benefits of fats. And so you kinda have this balance day to day. That's kind of foundationally what I do. Yeah. Yeah. So it's a very you do everything cyclically based upon the situation and, based upon what you're doing and what you did beef beforehand. So it always varies. It's it's never it's never a second. Kung fu for food. That's what it is. Yeah. Like, I I I like to think of it in a in a same way as well. Like, it's always changing depending on how I exercise and, what I ate before that and that sort of thing. And, you know, like, the season may have a little bit of effect on it be because I feel like like the summertime, we're gonna have more of the berries around and, you know, vegetables in our garden. And during the winter, we have less of it. So, yes, it's Yeah. Perfect. Yeah. Yeah. And I think I think this this conversation right here is, very much beyond where the ecosystem's at today. Because, again, let's use our Kung Fu analogy. Let's just let's just assume that, really what's going on is is that, you know, you think I don't mean you, but I mean people at large. You you think that you think that you're up against a diet, but really what you're up against is a series of battles. Every week, you have roughly thirty, forty battles with food. Most people lose all of them. They lose those fights. Okay? And the reason they're losing them is that they're approaching a fight with this fixed style thinking that, oh, well, this is gonna be a boxing match. This one fights a boxing So that's you know, I'm just gonna box this one. And then and then the opponent shows up with a knife, and you're you're out of luck. Or or the opponent, like, shows up and is a jiu jitsu master, and you go to the ground. And so you're taking this stylistic approach to a battle when, really, the reason the plan never survives the battle is because that very first battle changes the plan, and you have to be able to adapt dynamically to that. And so moving away from this analogy of, of, like, the the the the, dietology of, like, oh, well, I'm I'm just I'm I'm high protein, low carb. That's what I do. Or I'm, you know, I'm high fat, low carb. What or I'm vegan. Moving beyond that, maybe a more advanced way to think of it is that these are all tools, and we can use all of them at any given time depending on what the situation presents us. And that dynamic nature of eating is the thing that throws everybody off track because you go to the office or you're you're with friends and someone introduces, like, a cookie and you're like, oh, well, I'm on a diet, but, okay, I'm gonna eat. Yeah. You know? And that just derails people. So, you know, rather than thinking of these things as plans, a much more advanced way to think of it is skill acquisition. These are skills I can acquire and skills solve real problems. Skills will solve real problems that plans can't fix. When you have a skill, then you acquire a skill, you gain the ability to overcome, that particular problem every time it presents itself. And and that's that's really the approach I took in the book was that the acquisition of skills is what's gonna solve your problem, not the plan. Yeah. So it's different way of thinking about things. Yeah. So the book also talks a lot about the microbiome and the gut because that's also probably one of the central parts that determines how you respond to any kind of, food that you eat. Yeah. Yeah. Massive part. Yeah. Very massive part. The thing about the microbiome, I guess, that, you know, I would probably offer just if anybody asked me is to understand how malleable it is, how, adaptable and and changeable it is and and very rapidly, and and to really understand, the impact that given foods have in the microbiome. So good example, sugar. Sugar absolutely has a very negative effect on the gut microbiome. It advantages certain species, particularly the clostridia over other species, and then the metabolites of those bacteria are are not good. You know? You get you get lipopolysaccharide. You get all these things that aren't good. You get inflammation, and that's not a good thing. And conversely, there are, very specific dietary factors that have a very beneficial effect on beneficial bacteria in the gut. And these changes happen rapidly, and and they affect a global spectrum of things, notably cravings. Like, you can rapidly, I I think I've I get this email from, you know, one school of thought, which is, which is fighting cravings and and you have to fight cravings. And, no, you have to you you can steer cravings. It's much better idea. You can steer cravings by steering bacteria, and it can be done pretty quick. You can make yourself crave, you can go from craving sugar to craving salads, and it's not that hard to do. You can go from and just just by changing the bacteria in the gut by giving them the right substrate. And there's good research on it, and it affects everything rapidly. So as a skill as far as skills go, like an indispensable skill that will help the average person make a dramatic difference over time is just simply understanding how to rapidly fine tune the bacteria in the gut. Yeah. It's a very, very simple thing. Yeah. Yeah. It's like because a lot of the time when people, let's say, do do, fall off the wagon and, they have, like, a cheat day or something and, they're not properly prepared for that, then the next following days, they're gonna crave these, additional junk foods because it because they they re re, restructured their microbiome to start craving those foods again. Whereas if they're on a diet for, like, weeks and weeks, then they actually like the healthy foods because the microbiome has adjusted. And it's just got just the kind of this you know, goes to show how big of an effect the, gut has on the brain and, or just decision making in general. Yeah. It's it's it's very, very, very profound. One of the key signature things to that whole thing, like, the way that you know that, you've done a good job is through nausea. And what you'll consistently see is when you have, done a good job of shifting the biome in the gut and then you have sugar, you're gonna get nauseated. And the reason you're getting nauseated is because you are suddenly advantaging the dysbiotic bacteria well, they're spinning up. They're growing rapidly. And what they're doing is they're displacing commensal bacteria. And as they displace those commensal bacteria, their gut still open. They still let the polysaccharide into your gut, which is the exact same thing that happens when a fever breaks. Your body heats up. It kills bacteria. The guts break open. You feel nauseated. You wanna go through. And it's the same thing that happens. So, that's that's how you can know. And it's also like a really good deterrent to eating, like, crappy food. Like, you can just retune the gut. And to your point, that's what happens. So you go out and you have a you have a day off the wagon. You eat whatever. Well, getting back to the idea of skills, an essential skill is understanding how to recompensate and retune the gut after you have that cheat day. And by doing that, you skip a lot of the bacteria induced sort of like, oh, I need more. I need more. Yeah. Yeah. What are what are some examples of that? You know, how do you, let's say, first or what let's start off with, like, a just the healthy bacteria in general. Like, are there any specific, bacteria, and what kind of foods, help to grow those? Yeah. Well, one of the talk about most in my book are bifidobacteria and necromancy, for different reasons. Necromancy is not the only bacteria that is in the gut lining. There's, fetal bacteria, prognancy. There's, thetomicron. But there's the so but there's a very few that, are commensal in nature. And, I focus on the theta bacteria in my in my book because, it it seems to feed a lot of other things through cross feeding reactions. And it seems to be really associated with, gene activation, in lean people and all sorts of really great things. So those are kind of the two that I really focused on because they're they're sort of easy to target. And bifidobacteria, is a big family, and a lot a lot of different strains. But generally speaking, you know, it loves color pigments. So it loves phenols. Phenols feed it really well. So these are your your your dark anything dark. Yeah. It'd be it'd be like sweet potatoes. It could be, you know, blackberries. Could be red berries. Could be, you know, anything dark. Mhmm. Loves inulin. Loves, like, certain types of more dense fibers. Loves, like, beta glucan. Loves loves these things. Yeah. So, cellular, semi cellular, all all that stuff seems to feed it pretty well. And so that that makes this argument for, you know, things in the diet. Things like cabbage, things like asparagus, things, you know, things that feed it that direction. Acromancia is kind of the upfront thing in in my book that I talked about where, we go right after the gut lining initially. And acromancy is very, very difficult to feed directly. But there do seem to be probably a couple ways that, you know, better than others that we can probably feed it and probably feed it with pomegranate. We can probably feed it with, apple the anthocyanins in in apple skins, alpha three, galactoside, and probably indirectly through, human milk oligosaccharides. We can we can feed it that way. And so those those are kind of the big two that I talked about. Yeah. I see. Yeah. I see. You, have these apple skins quite frequently. So that that's the main reason to kinda feed this acromencia. It's well, it's it's sort of in the mix. Like, it's I I think in the book, you know, I I put the applicants in first because it's doable. Like like, everybody can go get an apple and do it. But, like, if I were to do the perfect order, I would probably do, like, the red phenols first, add in the HMOs, and then the apple skins. It's just for the sake of writing a book. You you know, if you put, like, the red phenols upfront, it's like, oh my gosh. I gotta go to Amazon and order that or, like, or HMOs. What the hell are those? Where do I get them? What are they? You know? So the skins are sort of easier to do. Now the caveat to that too is if you have, like, some, you know, if you've seen serious gut issues, like, you have, like, Crohn's or colitis or things like that. You you you probably not gonna be able to do apple skins upfront just because the fiber itself. You can't transport fiber when you have too much, tumor necrosis factor alpha in the gut lining. You gotta clear all that first before you can actually make use of fibers. So you get into sort of a whole different set of protocols. Yeah. And my recommendation for that is, you know, if you have something severe, go see a good practitioner. That's that's how you do that. Yeah. So would it apply to some similar, like, leaky gut if you have, like, these, you know, intestinal permeability? So you have to first, like, start to heal the gut lining and then it's, you know, your, ability to just tolerate any kind of other food, which also could just increase, and you may not have actual, like, actual intolerance as you're just having, like, this, leaky gut. Yeah. So, you know, leaky gut and, you know, gut inflammatory related things are are like a family of things. And the degree of severity can can have a lot of variance to it. So, you can you can you can be really inflamed in the gut just like you you can't handle any foods to, like, you just have kind of, like, you know, a lot of discomfort and it and it just depends. So and and the types of the types of, like, you know, well, what should you do? Well, when you get into, like, you know, medical conditions, you should go see a practitioner. That's what you should do. But, you know, with respect to just, like, leaky gut, like, just kind of ideas that probably make more sense than not. Generally speaking, lipopolysaccharide is kind of, like, the thing we wanna look at. And so these cell wall bacterial fragments, that can sort of, like, happen in the gut from feeding the gut the wrong types of foods are really kinda like one of the main drivers of helping the gut to permeate. And so really clearing lipopolysaccharide is something that we wanna look at. One of the things that helps with that, is time restricted feeding. So it does seem to help. In fact, cessation of food in general, seems to help a lot of gut related inflammatory issues, and that's why fasting seems to help. So, like, good protocols, like, if you have, like, if you have, you know, sort of medium ish issues, good protocols are kind of the combination of, cessation of food for a while. Maybe like, maybe just sticking it like liquid diets for a few days along with things that, are anti inflammatory in nature and help feed the gut. So amino acids are really good. Yeah. And, like, when searching by these kinds of things, it gives the gut kind of a chance to kinda heal up and clear TNF alpha a little bit. Yeah. So glutamine would also be one of those things that help help with that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So what do you think about fasting in general then? I mean, well, it's yeah. Probably the biggest like, I I don't know what the biggest nutritional question of our day is. Is it is it, you know, is it is it high protein animal diets, or is it fasting, or is it them together? I I can only tell you what I've seen and what I've experienced in my life. So, you know, all this started like, I think the big interest in fasting probably started to gain traction about 2017. Most of that derived from earlier research that showed that caloric restriction was, really like a a surefire way to, to age better. And so just not eating helps the body to age better. And so it's a big concept. It's probably good to have periods where we don't eat, and that seems to be, fit the ancestral narrative that, you know, that's probably been there all throughout history. We just had periods where we didn't eat. The body has some good adaptions to that. So it's probably good. Probably good thing to have. The other side of that, though, is that continuing that narrative that, continual, like, restriction of food or continual starvation probably wasn't the norm historically. There are probably periods of feasting along with that. So, like, you didn't have food, then you had food, then you pigged out. And so and so I think we're like, an extreme has has taken place is that, I I see a lot of people that have latched on to just fasting all the time. And I did that kind of, like, around 2011. And the thing that I personally noticed from it was I just never recovered. I was always sore. I I just, yeah, I was really always sore all the time. And and from there, that kinda led me into, like, you need to feast periodically. Body needs to have lots of food periodically. The other thing about, fasting, there's numerous numerous benefits to it. But but also it's like anything in health. We we tend to I think I think if I could probably offer one bit of advice that we ask me about, like, you know, any protocol, it would be that you gotta understand that, when you think a protocol is only good, probably not the case, that you have to map things out over time. And when you map things out over time, you're always gonna get almost always this inverted sign wave. Like, almost always. It doesn't matter what you're talking about. Yeah. So appears the benefits, appears the negatives, and t with respect to time is just a question of how long. And sometimes it's not that long. Sometimes it's years. And, that, you know, having done this stuff forty plus years, that's happened to me. I've had lots and lots and lots of different protocols that I've done fast gate included, where I had lots of benefits for years years, like four, five years. And then and then I had, like, several years of negatives. Like, took me years and years and years to correct those things. So, there is a percentage of the population that will hear that and just ignore it. Power to go ahead. Great. You know? Yeah. Good. And then there's a percentage of population that is like, okay. Well, that makes sense. So how do I how do I avoid that? So my answer to that would be that, that you don't wanna do anything, like, indefinitely. Just, you know, if you mind the idea of seasonality, there there are seasons when, you know, fast is great. There are seasons when you wanna feast, and and both of those things are complimentary. Some of the things that, you know, we're we're seeing with respect to fasting, there's there's so many good things that it does. But there's also things that, you know, are not so good. One of those is that you can actually, increase insulin resistance through it, which is sort of contrary to what we think. We think, well, fasting improves insulin resistance. But, go there's good research showing that if you just fast for three days and then you go eat carbs, you can have, an insulin resistance. You're not gonna do very well with a bunch of carbs. There's that. Then there's there's evidence of sleep disruption that I talked about in my book and, you know, kind of other things. So, what what I have taken things to that I presented in my book was the idea of amplifying fasting, but shortening the window. And this came out of, some work I did, back in 2015, 2016 with Quest Nutrition, focusing on fasting, the medics, and things like that where, you know, like, when you break down why does fasting work, well, there's a very few mechanisms that you can come to right away. One is methionine restriction. The other is just simply the, reduction in total food intake, which, down regulates growth pathways. So you're not seeing as much mTOR activation, much less mitogenic pathway activation. And so those two things seem to help a lot, and then the next is just a reduction in oxidation. So food is inherently oxidative. When you take in food, doesn't matter whether it's fats or carbs, you have oxidated metabolism. Yeah. Glucose oxidation, it oxidizes. So the less we oxidize, the better we age. Well, we don't need to cease food to get those benefits. Like, you could still get most of those benefits without it. And taking that idea even a step further, when you look at, like, well, why does fasting work? It always converges on, you know, just about everything that's good seems to converge on a a very few given pathways. FOXO one, AMK, you know, sirtuins, all these pathways. And there's a way to activate those pathways through bacteria in the gut. So the bacteria in the gut talk to the mitochondria. They have crosstalk. And, you could draw a checkbox list of checkboxes with exercise and bacteria, and you'll find certain bacteria check the same boxes. It's kinda weird. Like, you get lactic acid production. That's odd. Well, lactic acid production, activation of AMK, activation sirtuins. So there's a very good case to to think that, certain commensal bacteria mimic exercise and that they accurate the same pathways and stimulate the same pathways, turned on by fasting. And, ancestrally, it makes a heck of a lot of sense. Like, if you go back in time and you think about it, like, I made this case before. If there was nothing to eat, like, as the last resort, I'd probably go dig up some roots, and it's not my first pick. Like, my first pick would be, like, you know, like, a really giant steak. I'm gonna eat that first. But if there's nothing else, I'll go dig up roots. Well, it turns out that probably that roots confer, a very significant survival advantage in a starved state because they feed commensal bacteria in a starved state. Those commensal bacteria in a starved state have the ability to mimic the effects of exercise, amplifying mitochondrial biogenesis, giving us a better chance to survive. And so kinda kinda makes sense from a narrative point of view. And then mechanistically, when we dive into the pathways, that kinda seems to make sense too. So Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's that's interesting that yeah. Like, if if you are if you if you have been, like, basically starting for days and you haven't eaten, then you'd like physically, you should be, like, weaker, because you're, you know, under under under eating and starving. But physiologically, what happens is that your body, you know, turns on the similar pathways, that has exercised that promote, like, this mitochondrial function and, you know, alertness and cognition also increases. So it is, like, incentive for your body to okay. You you've been starting and you need to survive. So, therefore, we're gonna give you these, basically, these pathways and these, functions that help you to exercise better and, you know, run after this game to ensure you that you, catch it. Because the alternative would be that you're you're getting weaker continuously, and therefore, you're gonna die anyway. So that's why the body Yeah. Evolution kinda works in this very funny way, and it's kinda yeah. There are many ways you can mimic the same, pathways, that you get from fasting as well as exercise, by doing, like, these different actions. Yeah. And it's a really fascinating topic, like like, to dive into this thing. It's it gets to, like, it gets to, like, the starved state and commensal bacteria and survival advantage. You know? And and it makes this case for, like, fibers in a starved state and, like, woah. Wait a second. Did we miss something here? Yeah. We did, actually. Yeah. It's, yeah, see, it really seems to be the case. Fibers in a start state potentiate, certain pathways of survival. Case in point would be MK. So the MK pathway does this really interesting thing with, glucose. What it does is it it it respools glucose glucose back up into cytosol, but it doesn't expend it. And so it has this sort of glucose sparing effect. And that makes a heck of a lot of sense because, like, if you're just starving and you're just getting weaker and weaker and weaker, your probability of catching anything is going down, down, down, down, down. Yeah. Well, you have to counter that or you're gonna die. Well, one of the ways to counter that is once you activate the MK pathway, you're restoring your sprint capability. You're restoring your, you know, your immediately energetic, fuel source so that you have enough power left for a last ditch effort, and that makes the difference between life and death. And so it's, like, really fascinating when you dig into this stuff. Yeah. And this also kinda goes to show how, amazing or how powerful the body actually is. And even even in this Yes. Even in this starvation state is, you know, it is very potent, and you can definitely do, like, maximum exercise if you are in this very depressed state. And that's not, like, part of the the incident resistance that happens is also the survival that the the muscles, become insulin resistant so that they could, basically, you know, still use ketones and function properly. So, that's the ketones that you get from your own body fat. So it is like a in the short term, it's actually beneficial for the survival. But, yeah, if you start to eat carbs right after breaking a fast, then it is problematic in terms of you're gonna have, like, this hyperglycemia for longer. Whereas if you kinda ease into it, slowly, you break the fast, you know, more more with lower carb foods, then you can avoid that and re reestablish the incident sensitivity after afterwards. Yeah. You know, I'll tell you, let me ask you let me ask you this, because I I'll I'll tell you my experience with this. I wanna know yours. My experience back in 2012 with, faster training was initially in the short term, I was just getting blasted on it. Like like, super amazing pumps. Like, really great. And then what I noticed is as I sort of just started thinking, well, this is the answer. You know, I was training fast all the time. That started to go away. Started to see, like, negatives or, like, longer I did it, like, very difficult getting pumped. So then went back to, like, okay. Well, you gotta have carbs in the diet. So I definitely noticed a time sensitive effect. I noticed, like, like, if it was kind of intermittent or, you know, just kinda there periodically that it was amazing. But but if I did it all the time, it didn't work so well. I don't know if you had a similar experience. Well well, I'd like a I sometimes I do have well, it depends on the exercise as well. Like, like, I've never I'm never gonna be my strongest in terms of, like, power lifting or, you know, bench press or something if I'm fasted, because of, like, limited energy and limited calories. So I'm always stronger if I have, like, some food in my in my system, and that's why I also don't, train fasted majority of time, at least if I'm doing weights. If I'm doing that something like, I don't know, HIIT cardio or regular cardio or if I'm doing, like, just regular calisthenics to just to get the blood flowing, then I can do it fasted. And I do have, like, energy and such. But, yeah, like, depends on my goal if I'm trying to because my my goals as a gym are usually, like, ready to, like, getting stronger and build muscle. So it's it's counterproductive to do it faster because you're never gonna be that strong and you're never gonna even let and you're not gonna also have, like, the nutrient partitioning effect that you, would have if you had something, like, in your system before that. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah, I found me personally, I found that there's there's a there's a nice benefit to injecting it intermittently, as a way of training all the time. You know? No. Yeah. Yeah. Some sometimes intermittently. Yeah. Sometimes sometimes, if you're in a hurry or if you're, trying to really maybe hone in on some fat loss, or turn on the EMP capacity much further, then, yeah, it can be good because, yeah, like, a training facet with probably turn on the AMPK and the and the other ones, the longevity path is also faster. It would turn on, whereas if you were to do it, like, fit. Yeah. It's it's great for MK. I found, like, fasting with, sprints and deadlifts is great. That's something I've done for a number of years. Yeah. But the alternative of that is, like, you just absolutely have to have carbs if you wanna, like, really, really make headway. Yeah. If you wanna really, really, really see a great or fast improvements and fast results, then, yeah, the carbs are gonna be probably better. Oh, yeah. 100%. As well as, you know, getting enough protein, that's also about more important one for, like, muscle growth specifically. Have you had, so, have you tried the, like, cyclodextrin in your workouts at all? Just curious. Not that one per se, but I've used, like, dextrose, regular dextrose as well as the the deribos. I've used those ones, and, they tend to be pretty good. Like, you get, like, some carb especially if you're being, like, if I'm doing, like, a lower carb period and I have those carbs doing my workout, then, I I I know I noticed the difference more because because there's, like, a contrast, a larger contrast in terms of my carb intake. Whereas if I'm eating let's say, if I ate the carbs the night before, then I would notice less of it, because of my glycogen stores are already topped off from the previous night's dinner that, where I where I had carbs. So I think it matters on the contrast. If I'm being low carb keto and I have the carbs maybe do inter workout, then I would notice, like, a bigger boost from that. Yeah. I've noticed, from from particularly the cyclodextrin, just right pre workout that, just significantly fuller all the time, like, in the muscles, just just post workout. Like, because, like, I I either get really pumped or really flat depending on, like, depending on, like like, glycogen availability in the muscles, and I and I did it pretty quickly. So most of the time, I'm, like, really flat, but, I've noticed with the cyclonextrin in workouts that, can be pretty full pretty full most of the time. Do you use, like, any, like, creatine or, like, citrulline or something? Any any any other workout workouts ops? Yeah. Yeah. For sure. So the thing you know, I'm older, so 56. So the number one thing when you're older is your circulation. You can't build muscle without good circulation. You just can't. You can't even get pumped. So, you really there's kind of a push pull between, things that will drive, better circulation and then doing it too much. So but, like, I use, just kind of like a lot of the standard stuff. Citrulline, beta alanine, you know, different types of special sugars, a little bit creatine. Lately, I've been experimenting with a couple other things, that seem to to be working pretty well. And it it just really has to do with, opening up, you know, opening and dilating the blood vessels. And, yeah, what I what I found is that particularly with age muscle, if you can get the blood vessels to dilate, you can get very similar sort of, like, performance gains to when you were younger. And and it's it's all circulation. The other side of that, though, has to do with macrophage polarity. And, so most people as they get older, they don't have enough nitric oxide. You get in kinda like the the fitness set where they're consuming, you know, energy drinks all the time, and they have too much nitric oxide. And so the and what they have winds up having is you're always sore because you have too much m one macrophage polarity. And so if you're consuming energy drinks and you're always sore, get rid of those and then just limit the, limit all that stuff to kind of pre workout. That's what I've found. Would it apply to caffeine as well, regular coffee? No. Not so much. I I haven't found that to be true with coffee. I don't I don't really drink coffee anymore, though, just for a number of reasons. Not that I think it's that bad, but I just I can't handle it. Makes me nuts. So Right. What about all the, BlockFlow restriction trading? Have you tried those? Yes. Oh, gosh. Yeah. I mean, I love it. I just, you know, after a while, it becomes like, you know, this checklist. I'm like, oh, yeah. Wait. I forgot to add the bands. And then, oh, shoot. I forgot. I can just I can only focus on two or three things at once. So, you know, just there's there's so much now that I just yeah. I I love blood flow restriction training. It works. I mean, it works amazingly well. I'd probably do it more if I could remember to just bring the damn band center. Yeah. Yeah. I I think also, though, as you get older, I think it's probably essential, like, that mix it in for sure. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I I use myself as well, for, like, recovery, and it's really awesome for the pump. And, just you you can just use the lighter loads, lighter weights, and kind of Mhmm. Avoid. You you don't wanna be doing heavy heavy lifting all the time either. Yeah. Yeah. I agree with that. With heavy heavyweights. Yeah. So so you mentioned you're 56. So, like, what is your maybe strategies, your or how's your like, what's your current, let's say, aging antiaging, you know, training strategy and diet strategy in general? Pretty much the stuff that's in my book. So, the most important thing is the way that I eat, just because, your your primary driver apart from sleep would be insulin output. So insulin output's gonna drive all the body's mitogenic pathways, the map gateway. And, that's that's what's gonna drive, a good chunk of the aging process. It's gonna drive you through the hayflip limit, all that stuff. So, really, the key is not where where we've come to in this era is, well, just get rid of insulin production. That's what you do. But, no, it's not that. It's Right. It's to increase the efficiency of insulin while having regular dose of insulin. That's that's really the thing. So, the way that the two day core pattern I talk about in my book works is that you're doing both. So one day you're training insulin efficiency and the next day you're actually driving insulin output. But so you have three days in a week where you're not necessarily producing that much insulin, but you are sensitizing insulin. And that's the trick. Sensitizing insulin and, insulin output at the same time, but not in the same day. So that works really well. And then along with that, you can stack other things on top of that. So, you know, kind of an easy one is the is driving commensal bacteria. It's gonna help help you age better. Another is focusing on redox and oxidation, which a lot of that you can do through food, but you can also just through selectively timing things, you can you can decrease oxidation. So, in the book, I made this case that, you know, like, antioxidants can be good, but it can be bad, and there's really best times for them. One of the best times for antioxidants is after a big meal. Like, that's like a no brainer. Like, after a really big meal, that's when you wanna have antioxidants. And also, it makes a good case for why balancing the diet is essential because, you know, when you get a varied array of antioxidants with a big meal, then, you just, you know, rust as fast. That's that's a big deal, how fast you rust. Yeah. So there's that. And then finally, there's just, you know, stimulation of all the longevity pathways. And so, you know, that stuff I talk about, which I call the amplified fast, and that's, stimulating bacteria prior to fasting, and then you have to fast much shorter. And then you can use small molecules to simulate all that stuff. So, top of list, you know, berberine, NAD repletion through a number of mechanisms, not just NR or NMN. And then a bunch of other things that we can look at kind of converging a bunch of pathways all at once. One of the ones that probably never doesn't get enough plays Genastine. And Genistein has a number of really beneficial effects, on sort of longevity pathways when it's used selectively. So that's a really good one I like to use. And then, you know, just an array of things, but I mix them in. I don't I don't use the same things all the time. Like, I'll have one month ramp emphasize more, more packsophagy. Maybe one month. The next month, maybe I'll emphasize more, just straight, you know, longevity pathways, cert one, MK, all that stuff. And then another month where, you know, maybe I'm emphasizing, you know, organs, liver, things like that. So I just mix a lot of stuff in. Yeah. Yeah. Do you use any of the, you know, metformin or Rapoizin? Or have you used No. I've ever yeah. No. No. No. I I mean, I kinda believe that, that, you can have a really good hundred years, like, a really good hundred years. Like, I think that's possible. I think I'm living it right now. I think I'm headed that direction. Time will tell. I mean, it could change tomorrow. I don't know. Right. You know, you only take a day by when you get to my age, you take a day by day. You're like, so far, I don't know. But, so I think that, with the idea of a really good hundred years, there's the idea of when to use these things. And my my belief is that, they're really great to save them for the finish. That includes steroids. That includes all that stuff. So, these things Right. Are not not bad or good, but, when to use them is a big deal. And I think, there's key junctures in the aging process. The early sixties being one of them where the administration of some of these things can have profound lasting impacts, and you can just age dramatically better. And so I put metformin and rapamycin kind of into those categories. I just use berberine for now because it's so effective. You know? It's great great since sizing insulin long term. Just does a number of things. It's great for cholesterol. You know? So, until until metformin and berberine. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So you don't wanna you don't wanna basically use your options as fast as possible or use up your order options. You wanna use them when you actually need them. And, you know Yeah. People start using, these things already in their twenties or thirties, and, may they may just exhaust their pathways or exhaust the the use of them. Totally. I yeah. I I've I've seen it. I've absolutely seen it. I've seen guys who look mind boggling, mind boggling in their thirties. And then by the time they're 50, their bodies are used up. It's like they're done, literally done. And but I'm just getting started right now. I didn't I didn't use those things. Yeah. So and it's not it's not that I'm against those things. I think but the analogy is the fast and the furious. It's like you save the nitrous right for the end of the race. That's where you save it for. And so I think that's a a much smarter way to go. And I've I've seen people, like, in their late sixties, seventies use some of these things, and they get, like, this 20 year old body. It's incredible. And the reason is they never used those things before. That's why. Yeah. That's awesome. Well, yeah, all the information you talk about can be found in your book, and it's really awesome when I've read it. And, yeah, it goes into detail about all the sequencing and the meal timing and the bacteria and things. Yeah. It's a very unique and very fascinating read. So, where can people get it, and where can they learn more with you? Yeah. So veepenutrition.com. Veepenutrition.com, you can get both the book and, you know, we've got some other great stuff there you can look at. You get the book there, but you can also get the book on Amazon. It's the immunity code, and, I think it's immunity code. You can get that, Amazon or at our website. Yeah. And and my Instagram is real Joel Green, and, come on down. Yeah. Awesome. We're gonna put all the links in the show notes. And, my last question is, what's this, one piece of advice or habits that you wish you adopted sooner? It sounds like a little thing. It sounds like it's just big deal, like a minor addition to the conversation. It's actually life and death. It's it's really life and death, and it's that balance isn't just a good idea. It's absolutely essential. It's based on what's most true about the body. It's based on the things that actually work and that you will imbalance systems in the body through imbalanced inputs. And I don't care if they're healthy or not. They're gonna you're gonna create long term imbalances. Analogy is salt. Like, salt is good. Like, a little bit of salt on the meal really makes the meal. Right. Too much salt ruins the meal. Mhmm. It ruins it. So let's suppose that somebody came out with a, salt is the answer diet, and you should only eat super salty foods. And had all this great research showing that, yeah, salt, basically, it's a natural, myostatin inhibitor. It does all these things. You add muscle. Everything you know about salt's wrong. And then a bunch of people said, yeah. Everything you know about salt's wrong. And they start eating salty foods. They see benefits, and it's fantastic. They see people muscling up, and it's great, blah blah blah. Well, in twenty years from now, a bunch of them have heart attacks and die. Okay? Because they cut away from what was really true. The the real truth is, like, yes. It's a little thing, but it's all the thing. It's like, salt is good. A little bit of salt really nails it. Too much will kill you. And that's really the truth applied to everything else. And it's it it's not just a little thing. It's everything. It's absolutely everything. And it's it's that, how your body works, the truth is it's based on systems being balanced, and you can imbalance those systems based on imbalanced inputs long term. So that's the most important thing. Right. Yeah. So yeah. And I agree. And a little a little bit of imbalance can be good, but not for the long term. Like, you can you can get away with it. And in the short term, it can actually be beneficial. But, yeah, like, eventually, you you would want to bring it back into balance to maintain optimal optimal option. Yeah. Yeah. Awesome. It was it was great talking with you, and, yeah, can't wait to do another one in the future maybe. Thank you. Thank you so much again. It's been great to come back on the show, and, super appreciate it. And good to good to talk to you. Yeah. You too.