Welcome back to the channel. My name is Sim Lund, and in this video, we're gonna talk about cold exposure and muscle growth. How does things like ice baths and cold showers, how do they affect building muscle, bodybuilding, and, you know, making gains? Are those things actually beneficial or, you know, are they harmful? So make sure you click like and subscribe for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. I'm pretty sure that you've seen online how these professional athletes, even like strong men and cross seed athletes, they use these cold baths, ice baths, to recover from workouts, especially during competition. But, you know, from my own research, I've actually come across a lot of studies that show that this exposure to cold, after a workout, especially resistance training workouts, can have a, like, a negative effect on specifically muscle growth, muscle hypertrophy, and some of the adaptations that you experience in regards to strength and, you know, muscle adaptations. Disappointed. So there are actually a lot of studies that find this, you know, 2,015 post exercise cold water immersion attenuates acute anabolic signaling and long term adaptations in muscle to strength training. So, in one study, 21 physically active men strength trained for twelve weeks, two days per week, with either ten minutes of cold water immersion or active recovery after each training session. Strength and muscle mass increased more in the active, recovery group than in the cold water immersion group. So this is one study. There's actually several more of them. Post exercise leg and forearm forearm flexor muscle cooling in humans, attenuates endurance and resistance training effects on muscle performance and on circular tree adaptations. So, the cold basically has this anti anabolic signal for the muscles for several reasons, which we'll discuss shortly. Strength training adaptations after cold water immersion, long term strength training adaptations in trained subjects can be negatively affected by cold water immersion. So people who are doing a ton of cold water immersion after strength training or resistance training, they may, they over the course of time, they're gonna see, basically slower gains, or some reduced performance. So what are the reasons? There are a few reasons for that. Why does it happen? So post exercise cooling impairs muscle protein synthesis rates in recreational athletes. So basically, you know, when you're training, lifting weights, something like that, then you're, triggering muscle protein synthesis, you're activating these other antibody pathways mTOR and, things like that. In In order to, you know, actually facilitate muscle protein synthesis, you also need to supply the muscles with nutrients, specifically protein and amino acids. So, the cold is gonna shut down some of that signal and, basically, you know, as a result, you can experience less muscle growth from that a little bit at least. And, there's other things as well. Cold water immersion blunts and delays increases in circulating testosterone and cytokines post resistance exercise. So, resistance ring also increases testosterone. So cold, blunts the testosterone as well as the cytokine response. So cytokines are basically, you know, inflammatory, molecules and they are actually somewhat needed to mediate some of the adaptations that you get from resistance training. So, training, you damage the muscles, mechanical tension, and, basically, swelling this, metabolic accumulation of waste material that is actually a signal for muscle growth. Your body needs to overcome this, damage or this inflammation, or, like, it actually signals the body that it needs to be stronger in the future and build muscle. Whereas if you use something like the cold, then you're, like, shutting down the inflammation. You're burning off, that cooling it off, and, that therefore the sum of the signal also goes away. So the sum of the positive signal of of inflammation is actually needed for at least the partly getting some of the benefits from exercise. Alright, everyone. Two. But fortunately, you know, not all training, not all exercise is the same. Different kinds of exercises have different effects on the body and, they're doing it for different reasons. Someone who isn't interested in, like, building muscle, then using the colds can be actually, you know, something that they want to do because of, you know, the cold does have actually also a lot of studies that it helps with just the faster recovery. So if you use the cold after workout, the next day, you're basically able to exercise faster or, like, you recovered faster because of the cold shutting down inflammation. So if you're in a very high frequency, training routine like a competitive athlete, then it, yeah, does make sense for you to take an ice bath after a workout because you need to be training the next day again or even, like, the same the next day. Like, cross lead athletes, especially during their competition season, like, they're training, you know, several times a day, five times a day even, and that they need to be, recovered fast. So the cold after their workouts is a way of, basically making it happen. Whereas, you know, at that time, you don't wanna have, like, the inflammation there. You don't wanna have the muscle soreness, things like that. You wanna actually be anti inflammatory with the colds and reduce the soreness. But regardless, you know, at least like this study, it also finds that the, the strength gains may not, disappear completely with the colds, but you do lose the hypertrophy signal. So hypertrophy muscle hypertrophy is describes, you know, adaptations to the muscles. Like, usually, it refers to muscle growth, and, there are different kinds of hypertrophy. Sarcoplasmic hypertrophy is basically the body builder approach where you're causing this muscle swelling and bigger the muscle gets as gets bigger and, holds more water and things like that. And that you need more inflammation for that as well because of the same inflammation makes you hold water and creates this swelling effect. Whereas for strength training, power lifting, weight lifting, like gymnastics even, for that is a different kind of hypertrophy. It's a myofibrillar hypertrophy, and that is the muscle fibers are more dense, smaller, they're more compacted, but they're more, like, powerful, more stronger. So, you have less size, but you're more, you know, rapid or more explosive, if that makes sense. So, yeah, like, I apparently, like, the cold water may have, like, a bigger effect on the sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, which refers to, like, bodybuilding and building muscle because you're shutting off the inflammation, whereas, that may not happen completely with the myofibrillia or hypertrophy that is responsible for strength and power. So that can be like a good insight, you know. If you're not trying to build muscle, you're not trying to get bigger, you're not trying to get more, you know, slow, then, taking a cold bath can be actually a good thing. Like, if you're a power lifter or something, then that can be something that you use at least more frequently than a bodybuilder. But even then, like, there are some better times to use the cold bath than the post workout window, even if you are not specifically trying to build muscle. So you still still would mitigate some of the positive adaptations to strength gains as well if you were to completely do, like an ice bath. It's a trap. You know, after a workout. And your one caveat is also that all these studies, they do cold water immersion for, like, fifteen minutes at 10 degrees Celsius or twenty minutes at 15 degrees Celsius. So, yeah, like, they're literally sitting there for, yeah, over ten minutes, and, that is definitely gonna be very, like, inhibitory of the muscle building signals and shutdowns all these, pathways. But, you know, if you were to do it only for maybe one to two minutes, I think that that can probably be some at least you're gonna have, for sure, less of an effect for shutting down these pathways. But even then, like, I don't know if if it would be worth it to, still have, like, any cold exposure after a resistance training workout at least. You can do it at let's say, if you're doing a competition or if you need to be, fully repaired for the next day, but, I'm I'm personally not doing any cold exposure after, if I lift weights or something. When it comes to, like, other sports, then high intensity interval training is also similar that it, it apparently doesn't alter this, HIIT adaptations related to, like, anaerobic performance and cardiovascular and poor performance. So, that is actually somewhat beneficial because you are reducing the soreness. As well as, like competitive cyclists or, like, more cardio sports endurance cycling, the, those studies also find that endurance sports doesn't really see this negative effect from cold water immersion. So the endurance is a different pathway. The endurance doesn't, let's say have this anabolic effects. It's actually more catabolic. And, funny enough, the cold exposure also stimulates the same pathways or creates some similar effects as endurance and cardio does, like by increasing PGC one alpha, which is, you know, helps with mitochondrial biogenesis and mitochondrial function. So if you're doing cardio, then you're building your mitochondria, improving mitochondrial function, and the cold does it as well. So, using the cold can actually be very good, when you're doing cardio. So, yeah, whenever I'm doing cardio, then I'm not afraid of the cold. I'm, you know, eager to do it actually because to reduce the soreness. This is also where, like, the sauna can actually be super amazing for post workout because with a sauna, you're not seeing this shutdown of the anabolic pathways. You're actually seeing the opposite. You're seeing an increase in blood flow, increase in the delivery of nutrients into the muscles, as well as increasing growth hormone. So, the the sauna is actually, the the thing that I would do after a resistance training workout because you're literally also recover improving recovery, but you're, you know, increasing growth hormone and things like that, which are beneficial for, muscle growth and strength adaptations. So, when it comes to cardio, do the cold. On rest days, do the cold. You can do the cold before a workout as well, you know, because it doesn't matter what you did before the workout. After the workout, I'm not I wouldn't recommend doing the cold exposure for at least, like, twelve hours at minimum. And, with with the post workout, it's much better to do, like, the sauna or something heat heat related. And, yeah. If you want to learn more about the hot and cold as well as exercise and other ways of, you know, biohacking yourself, then check out my book, Stronger by Stress. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.