A few years ago when I was in college, I started taking a cold shower in the morning every day, and I did it for up to, like, two years. I did it basically every day, besides maybe when I was traveling. But, yeah, even when I was slightly sick or with a cold, I still did it. In this video, I'm gonna talk about how I took a cold shower every day for two years and what are the benefits. Make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about health and performance. Now most people, they don't like the cold at all, like zero. Completely hate it. And especially cold showers, they never do it. But me, I, you know, actually kinda enjoy it. It feels good and it also has some health benefits. During that time, I also did regular cold water immersion during the autumn and sometimes at winter. This kind of ice bathing is much more stronger than cold showers and with a lot of different benefits. Sucks. But what are the benefits to cold exposure and, especially cold showers? It reduces inflammation and muscle soreness. The cold constricts blood vessels, which decreases swelling, trauma, and injuries. Cold may decrease inflammation of arthritis. Arthritic patients report significantly less pain after taking a two minute cold shower every day for just a week. Cold showers are considered a potential treatment for depression. Three weeks of cryotherapy has been shown to improve mood and anxiety in people with mild depressive disorders. Shivering and lower temperatures also activate brown adipose tissue, which improves mitochondrial functioning, increases metabolic rate, and heat regulation. Exposure to cold stimulates lipid metabolism, burns white fat, and decreases triglycerides. The cold strengthens the immune system by increasing antioxidant defense systems such as glutathione, superoxide dismutase, and reduces uric acid similar to exercise. A daily contrast shower for thirty days has led to a 29% lower self reported work absenteeism due to sickness in healthy adults. Cold and shivering increase adiponectin, which is a protein that helps with blood sugar management. Diabetes. Now besides the health benefits, there's also the psychological benefits that you get, you know, more discipline, more will power, more mental toughness. And, I do think that those things, they help you to be more productive and more disciplined and more focused in your everyday life as well because, you know, once you get it over with, once you get the coach hour done, then like everything else you do for the rest of the day is also a lot more easier. It's neuroplasticity. Your brain is literally rewiring itself based upon your habits and, you know, the actions you take. So if you, like, chicken out, you freak out in the shower, then you're gonna be be more procrastinating and, you know, more scared, of the things that you do outside of the cold shower as well. The biggest thing that I noticed when I was taking the cold showers was that, you know, I did have a lot more energy in the morning. I didn't need things like caffeine to wake up. I didn't need any stimulants to, be productive and be focused. And, you know, the best thing was also just this massive boost in mood, more confidence. You just feel awesome after taking a shower even if you are, let's say, a bit hesitant before going to the shower. After you get it over with, you just feel like a million bucks even if you had, like, a bad night's sleep or something. You just, you know, reinvigorate yourself and, reset the system almost, and you wake up awesome. Of course, there were some days that I, you know, didn't feel like doing it. It was like, hey. I've already done this for so long, and let's take a day off or whatever. Bullshit. But at those times, I still did it because of the same concept of neuroplasticity. So it's like, you know, if you made a commitment or if you made a decision that you gonna do it and you break it, then your brain is gonna literally start to rewire itself, to start making those same excuses and to start procrastinating in the future again. Whereas if you do stick to it, you stay to the routine, you stay disciplined, then the opposite happens. You strengthen the, connections of, discipline and, being more productive. Currently, I'm taking a cold shower or, like, a cold water immersion, approximately, like, three times a week. And, it's not because I don't like it. I love it. It's awesome. It feels great. It's just that my focus has more shifted towards, trying to build more muscle mass and strength. And there is a lot of research actually that shows that cold water exposure or cold water immersion itself after a workout, after resistance training tends to shut down some of this, muscle building signal and this hypertrophy response that you get from the workout. And, you do actually need at that time, you do need some of the information to create create these adaptations and build new tissue. Whereas if you take the coach over all the time or let's say too frequently, then you may negate those effects and you're not gonna see any gains or this is gonna be much slower. So the for the time being, yeah, like, I'm not, like, really worried about it. I'm just going to take my cold showers on the rest days, where I'm not, like, working out. And that's kind of allows to still gain those, benefits from working out and also implement the benefits of the cold shower. Awesome. Another great alternative to cold showers is the contrast shower where you alternate between hot and cold temperature. You do fifteen to twenty seconds of cold and fifteen to twenty seconds of hot. Now I've taken the cold shower for two years straight, and, and I do actually think that a contrast shower may be healthier and you get a bit more benefits from the contract shower than due from just a cold shower because you're alternating between these extremes of hot and cold. And in doing, you're also promoting better blood circulation. You're also gonna stimulate the lymphatic system a lot more, which is gonna have like a better, let's say cardiovascular benefits and, feels a bit more enjoyable. And it also has like this, let's say, helps to flush out some of the toxins and the things of that by stimulating the lymphatic system. If you want to know how to take the sauna, the cold shower, and engage in other similar longevity boosting activities, then check out my new book, Stronger by Stress. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell is all my name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.