Welcome back to the channel. My name is Simland and in this video I wanna talk about what does my intermittent fasting schedule look like. So, it's kind of a different one. It's not the standard sixteen:eight or one meal a day ahead type of thing. It's a kind of a different schedule. So And, what it essentially looks like is this basically graph that I illustrated to show you how does it look like. It's one meal a day with a twist. It's almost like one and a half meals a day. So this is how it looks like. Let's say in the morning, I wake up around six or 7AM and then I'll, you know, I'm not gonna eat breakfast, I'm not going to have any calories in the morning, I'll just, you know, start to work and I'll work for several hours in a row. Well, just maybe drinking a little bit of water but not even like a lot of that during this time period. And the reason for that is, yeah, just my mental productivity and focus is much better in the morning if I'm, you know, not eating anything and yeah that's why I like just like it. It's kind of the preferred way of for me to do my work to not really worry about food, to not eat anything to disturb me and to not like waste time. I think the best benefit of this one minute that you think is that you save a lot of time on cooking and eating and that that kind of thing and it's much more time saving in that sense. I can do, yeah, like, you know, other things that I just need to do and want to do. Do it. Then, at like 10AM or something, I will have the, kind of essential amino acids. So, this is like a supplement powder. Essential amino acids are kind of, you know, essential. They're they're vital for things like muscle protein synthesis and maintaining muscle and growing muscle. But they also have some other benefits. They have like benefits on producing neurotransmitters, helping with, yeah, just recovery and even mood and your gut health. Those kind of things can benefit from essential amino acids. I have that protein or the, essential amino acid does shake shake in the 10AM period because that's when, the circadian rhythm of muscle protein synthesis tends to be most elevated. So there is some studies that find that your muscle protein synthesis is much more, let's say sensitive or much more effective in the earlier part of the day around ten to 11AM or 12AM somewhere between there and that's I think is a good time for me to kind of take advantage of that and I'm not doing the one meal a day because of like religious reasons or that I have like some sort of a dogma that I need to eat one meal a day or autophagy benefits or something like that. I'm not doing one meal a day for that. I'm doing one meal a day only for the time management and the productivity benefits that I get. So I don't even care if I do have, like, essential amino. I should say shake, in that, ten hour 10AM period because my goal isn't to be in a completely fast state anyway. Like, under those, I mean, I said it's what I've noticed over the last one and a half years or so since I've been using them is that they do help a whole lot with muscle growth and recovery from exercise and strength development, which is why I've also seen, like, some significant gains over the last one and a half years by using them. Whereas if you're doing like I'll explain later, but one meal they're only without consuming any of the protein shake or something like that in the daytime then, it's very hard to build muscle. It's almost impossible to do that. So this is just a hack to add in there to get away with any one meal a day and still being able to build muscle. You son of a bitch. There are also even actually studies that find that the essential amino acids themselves may help with autophagy. So, yeah. In this study, they use the different amino acid mixtures. One of them was 100% essential amino acids and the other one was 85% essential amino acids and 50% being a non essential and both of them saw an increase in the activation of autophagy and some other benefits in terms of actually triggering apoptosis of cancer cells specifically. So yeah, there are studies, you know, the general idea is that amino acids will destroy will stop autophagy that, things like leucine and isoleucine, methionine, those things will stop autophagy and the essential amino acids, they do have those amino acids in them. But as you can see, it's not that black and white and even if it did, I wouldn't care that much. By this time, I've been fasting already for like a significant amount and I've forgotten some autophagy and even if I did break autophagy then it wouldn't matter. And it's not like that you break autophagy then you have to start over and over again. That's a very, like, false wrong way of thinking. It would maybe, like, stop for an hour or two, but it would return to back after the fact. And and even then, you know, as you can see, essentially, in The United States, they don't really stop autophagy. They may actually induce it. And the brand that I'm using is the, health optimization supplements that they have good amino acids. I'm not drinking coffee usually in this period. In this period, I'm not really drinking coffee on some days I may but most days I'm not and I usually have my first cup of coffee and my only generally cup of coffee at like 12AM, somewhere around there. I'll drink that most of the time it's just black coffee. I may add like glycine in there which lowers the blood sugar levels, has some other longevity effects by balancing methionine so it's a kind of good longevity supplement even. I'll drink that regular coffee and that coffee itself also boosts autophagy and has a other fasting mimicking effects that you get from caffeine and the polyphenols are from coffee. Good supplement for that or a good drink for that. And then I'll also continue fasting again, not drink not consume anything else and when I start to work out, I work out usually around like 4PM, somewhere around there four to 5PM and during this time I will have an actual protein shake, like one scoop of protein powder. Like usually it's whey protein and some other things like I may add like creatine again, some essential amino acids more. Then I'll have like d ribose or maybe ionocytol which I've been using recently. Those help with also energy production, creatine for the muscle strength and muscle power. The protein powder, the protein is, again for similar reasons as the essential amino acids. So it's going to reduce the muscle catabolism and helps with muscle growth. And if I were to be working out fast, it only without taking a protein shake specifically doing resistance training then I wouldn't see, any muscle growth at least that for like a long time. Disappointed. If you have more specific muscle building goals that you could also do that you have the protein shake even in the morning like in this 10AM period together with the essential amino acids, that would also give you like an additional surge in the protein synthesis and you would be able to build more muscle compared to doing like this way. With this, you get like a one and a half surges of muscle protein synthesis. But if you have like a second shake in here at 10AM, then you're gonna get even, you know, three surges of protein synthesis, which is gonna be much more optimal for muscle growth compared to doing it only once or Kopedo doing it only one and a half times and yeah the reason why I'm not having a protein shake in 10AM is because I'm not trying to like really build muscle at the moment. I'm just maintaining and I still want to, you know, get a little bit more muscular and a little bit stronger. That's why I'm using it only during the workouts but I don't have like that specific goals that I want to, you know, pack on, I don't know, five to 10 kilograms of more muscle. Awesome. I love protein. So I work out at 4PM. I stop working out maybe like five or or slightly before six. I'll wait a bit more. I'll take a sauna, usually infrared sauna or regular sauna, relax a little bit and I'm not gonna eat immediately after the workout. I'll wait maybe like an hour or two actually after the workout as as well break my actual fast with real food. Sometimes it can be 6PM, sometimes it could be 7PM. So around there, like, 7PM usually is actually like a good time where I break the fast. And the first meal that I usually break the fast is with some sort of eggs and some easy to just vegetables, maybe, like, some steamed vegetables, steamed broccoli, some salad like cucumber, maybe some fermented foods, sauerkraut, kimchi, those kind of things, herbs, those kind of things I'll eat. And the eggs I like because they're easy to digest. They also have a high stimulating effect on protein synthesis. They have high high amounts of leucine and other, you know, good nutrients. So I'll just like to eat some eggs, maybe like a little bit of piece of liver to also get some more nutrients immediately after the workout and after breaking the fast. I'll wait maybe like thirty minutes or fifteen minutes and I have slightly second larger meal which would be like the main course. This main course would usually have like a slightly different, they would have more meat and some carbs. If I worked out then I have carbs like potatoes or rice or some, I don't know, greens or buckwheat whatever. But I also like some more kind of vegetables with the side. But generally, it's gonna be slightly heavier on the protein and higher on the carbs, whereas the first meal is usually lower on the carbs and, easy to digest the proteins. So this is what it looks like, and I stop eating maybe, like, eight or 9PM. I I go to bed usually at, like, 11PM, so I still have, like, a few hours after finishing my last meal to digest the food and not interfere with my sleep quality, which is a good thing. Bed goes up. Bed goes down. You can also check out my book, Metabolic Pathology, that talks specifically about, how I do it and the rationale behind it and as well as the metabolic pathology master class, which is a fifteen or twelve hour video course. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seeb. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.