Hey. Welcome back to the channel. My name is Sim Lund, and in this video, we're gonna talk about sauna. We're gonna talk about all things sauna. What is the sauna? What are the benefits? How do you do the sauna? And, those kind of things will be a full guide to taking the sauna, basically. Make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. Alright. So let's start with the absolute basics. What is the sauna? Essentially, the sauna is this small room that you heat up with, firewood, usually traditional sauna. And, yeah, yeah, you elevate the temperature of that room and you sit there. Usually, if you're, like, in Estonia or Finland or Russia, then you're probably there naked as well. And the, yeah, it's a very traditional, let's say, form of, self cleaning. It's one of the traditional places where people would, like, clean themselves. Like, in, in ancient times or in a few even a few, century goes, people would be born in a sauna, and they would also be, basically washed. Their last washing, before they're buried was also in the sauna. So it's this kind of almost like a sacred place in this Nordic cultures because of the way it, you know, keeps you clean, and it also has a lot of health benefits, which we will talking about, shortly. What happens in the sauna? Well, I'm going to reference to many other studies here and, this image is from, actual very new twenty twenty one October study or a more like a review by Rhonda Patrick actually, sauna used as a lifestyle practice to extend health span. And, what the sauna essentially does is that, it elevates your core temperature. And, of course, it induces sweating as a result of that, but this elevation of core temperature, also has other effects like increases your heart rate. It, helps with blood redistribution, causes this small amount of heat stress that, actually has a beneficial effect on the heart and stroke volume and blood pressure, all those kinds of things. Many other health benefits from this small amount of, thermal stress that you experience. The normal human body temperature is around 36 to 37 degrees, Celsius. And this is the homeostasis, essentially, where your body is functioning the best at and it takes least energy and least effort to stay, you know, healthy and functional. If you drop below that, you start to experience hypothermia, which eventually can lead to death. Whereas if you exceed that, then this condition is called hyperthermia or a fever, basically. This fever, you know, is obviously can also be lethal in excess, but it also has some good health benefits. What essentially happens is that, when you're in the sauna, you experience hyperthermia. You cause a small fever. And the fever evolutionarily has been, one of the one of the most common and one of the best, let's say, immune responses to any kinds of infections and diseases. So if you are getting sick with some sort of a pathogen, then the fever is a very natural and a healthy response to that because with a higher body temperature, you, do see some immune system boosting benefits, and you can also potentially kill off these pathogens with the heat. So the fever is very, evolutionarily viable. And even like suppressing fever with these antifever medications, then, can be actually damaging and can can be actually lethal in some cases. So the fever is very healthy, in moderation. Excess fever obviously can lead to death, but, a small fever for an infection and for, the immune system is beneficial. And the sauna mimics that with, you know, the hypothermia and other benefits, which we'll talk about, but the fever aspect is one of them. The heat that you do experience from hypothermia follows this hormetic bell curve that, describes the small amount of toxin or stress that has a beneficial effect on the body. And in small amounts, in moderate amounts, it has a positive effect which is great. It's increases resilience and increases other health parameters whereas if it's in excess, then it's eventually going to have diminishing returns which will be harmful. And, yeah, too much in excess will actually be, damaging. And the same applies to everything like exercise, sauna, cold, fasting. They all have this hermetic bell curve. In small amounts, it's great. In excess, it's harmful. So what does the sauna do? I'm gonna reference back from the Rhonda Patrick paper. So heat stress, it, has been associated with many health benefits like it reduces the incidence of cardiovascular disease, reduces muscle atrophy or muscle loss. It reduces the risk of neurodegeneration and increases health span, which describes this, functional fitness and the functional health span or functional, you know, being youthful and being healthier for longer. The sauna, because it increases your core temperature, increases your heart rate, increases sweating, increases blood flow, all those things, it is considered like an exercise mimetic. And, exercise obviously is very known to be healthy for us and the sauna puts you into a similar physiological state that your body thinks that it's almost exercising. You when you sit in the sauna, then you notice your heartbeat racing a little bit. You're getting slightly tired, but not overly exhausted. It's not like sprinting. It's not sprinting. It's more of like a real brisk brisk hiking, and, a lot of those benefits are mediated by this, hyperthermia, increase the core temperature and increase heart rate. From a vascular side, it improves vascular compliance, improves endothelial function, improves the blood flow, can be beneficial for potential clearing out the plaque with because of that and also blood pressure improves. Although your, like, heart rate increases in the sauna after you come out, your, let's say, basal resting, blood pressure would, generally get better as a result of that because of the small exercise. Exercise improves blood pressure and, the regular sauna use as well. Although, like, if you have already hypertension and high blood pressure, then you may want to be more cautious, with the sauna and exercise as well. You don't wanna be doing some crazy heat. You don't wanna be raising your body temperature and blood pressure too much if you already have high blood pressure. But in for healthy people, it's actually one of the best things, for prevention, preventing against the hypertension. And lastly, what also happens with the sauna is the activation of these heat trap proteins. And, these heat trap proteins are essentially molecules that have many benefits. So one of them being, preventing protein aggregation, repairing different kinds of, damaged molecules, and being, like, almost antioxidant. Not antioxidant, but, they do repair, these, dysfunctional cell parts and, eliminate any potential inflammatory molecules that also may spread around. He trap proteins. So, from the same paper, what do he trap proteins do? He trap proteins have been found to be, very beneficial for for just general longevity and antiaging. And the main reasons for that has to do with, repairing misfolded proteins and preventing protein aggregation, like I said, these kind of damaged molecules. And the reaches does find that the heat shock proteins, different kinds of them have a protective effect against the neurodegeneration, heart failure, cardiomyopathy, atherosclerosis, and even it's gonna slow down muscular atrophy. So, they reduce a muscle break breakdown which is beneficial for, you know, bodybuilding, but especially the longevity as well. What the heat shock proteins do is that they repair mist for the proteins. And, as a result of that, your body will experience less damage and less inflammation and will be healthier. The heat trap proteins also, promotes autophagy, which, will additionally help to clear out different kinds of, you know, inflammatory molecules, weak and broken cell parts, all those things that cause, oxidative stress inside the body, those will be removed with the help of autophagy and the heat shock proteins. Let's move on to some of the benefits of the sonar. So, obviously or probably the biggest or the biggest effect of the sauna is associated with heart health. And it is pretty, well researched that the sauna reduces heart disease mortality and the risk of heart disease quite a lot. So this study from Finland 2018 saw that the, people who took the sonar more than four times a week had, sixty three percent reduced risk of, heart disease mortality and a forty percent reduced risk of all cause mortality compared to those who did it only once a week. So the blue line is once a week. Green line is the, more than four times a week. Two to three times is still better than once, but more than four times is, you know, even greater, even much a hue much bigger decrease in the risk. And, obviously, this is only once a week. Once even once a week is beneficial compared to no times at all. So imagine what would the risk be, in people who don't do the sauna at all. And, yeah, it it seems that, you know, know, the more you do the sauna, then healthier it is almost. Doing it every day is, is fine, actually. So I don't think that it's gonna be harmful for you. You may want may not want to do it there. Like, you may want to do it, like, every other day optimally. But, yeah, as this study shows and even, like, four times more than four times a week is still beneficial. Like, you can still see some formative benefit from doing it more than four times a week, and there doesn't appear to be a point of diminishing returns from this frequency yet. The reasons why, the solar improves cardiovascular disease, is multifold. One of them is actually, yeah, the heetra proteins themselves. Heetra proteins increase nitric oxide, which increases vasodilation, and, this is beneficial for atherosclerosis and, just, you know, blood vessel health and, that will that itself will be very beneficial for reducing the risk. Then there's also the nitric oxide that increase angiogenesis, which angiogenesis is the process of growing new blood vessels. So, obviously, you want to have your your muscles and organs well supplied with enough blood and with inadequate angiogenesis or without adequate blood vessel formation, you know, the obvious the risk of strokes and thrombosis and those kind of things, would be higher. H I f one alpha is a hypoxia inducible factor one alpha and that is also, apparently well, you do experience some aspects of hypoxia during exercise, and, this all mimics some aspects of exercise. So the, hypoxia increases VEGF, which is a vascular endothelial growth factor, which also grows new blood vessels. So we have more blood vessels. The blood vessels are gonna be healthier, more blood flow, improved blood flow from that. And in the brain, the, nitric oxide also basically reduces sympathetic nervous system, activity. So it kinda calms you down, reduces the pressure or reduces the stress on the heart, and actually, it makes you a bit more, you know, parasympathetic. It's a really good way to relieve stress actually. Although, you know, doing the sauna session itself, you do put yourself into a slight elevated state of, sympathetic overdrive because it still is like a form of exercise. But after the sauna, you come down from it and is actually very parasympathetic. For heart disease, avoiding obesity and avoiding insulin resistance is also very important because metabolic syndrome, diabetes, they increase your cardiovascular disease risk a lot and the sauna is also actually been found to, reduce both the heart disease, but as well, have some protective effects against metabolic syndrome, diabetes, and, obesity. So, the heat shock proteins, what they do is they, do increase insulin signaling. They make you more insulin sensitive and they improve the glucose uptake into the cells, which is good. You don't wanna have you don't wanna be insulin resistant and you won't you don't wanna have high blood sugar levels either. So the, sauna actually helps to lower your blood sugar by doing that. The second biggest benefit from, the sauna use is, with neurodegeneration. So there are a lot of studies that find how heat therapy can be beneficial for protecting against the Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, cognitive decline, and any kind of neurodegeneration. And the way or the reasons for that are, again, multifold. Obviously, metabolic health is a part of that. The the heat shock proteins are important for that, removing these, aggregates in the brain. But, you know, cerebral blood flow is also important. So getting adequate intake of nutrients and the blood into the brain will be, you know, obviously important for maintaining brain health and preventing neurodegeneration. One, like, hidden, let's say benefit of that would be also the muscle function. So having more muscle, having more strength, although it's like a, you know, considered to be a physical trait, it's still very important for the brain as well. Because with more muscle, you have better metabolic health. You will, probably have better blood flow as well and strength training itself also has benefits, on the brain. And heat therapy, it has been found to be actually a positive thing for muscle hypertrophy and muscle strength. It improves muscle mass. It improves recovery from exercise and improves your metabolic health in in total. This study, again, from Finland, 2017 found that, the men who use the sauna four to seven times per week had a sixty six percent lower risk of dementia and a sixty five percent lower risk of Alzheimer's compared to men who use the sauna only once a week. So that's another huge, reduction in the risk of, dementia and Alzheimer's in those who did it to more than four times a week. So, again, it seems that, doing the sauna as as frequent as possible, preferably every day, is kind of the go to, recommendation if you want to fully reach the optimal, reduction in, these disease factors. And, yeah, it's a pretty, huge difference. Again, obviously, I don't think that you need to do the four times a week if you're already healthy, but, you know, if you have the possibility, then doing it in some, you know, at least three to four times a week would be kinda every other day can be like a good strategy to do. Psychotic disorders. So, this study found found that, sauna four to seven times a week re re resulted in a seventy seven percent reduced risk of psychotic disorders. So kinda similar graph, blue line, once a week, green line, four to seven times a week, and you you can see seven to seven percent reduction in psychotic disorders. So, yeah, if you want to maintain sanity, you want to be not you wanna go insane, then, yeah, the solar can be again beneficial for that. And, again, the reason has to do with maybe reduce inflammation, reduced improved metabolic health, reduced these protein aggregates, and those kind of things. So four to seven times a week repeatedly appears to be kind of the good optimal amount or the frequency that you want to aim for when it comes to the sauna. Let's talk about the immune system, respiratory diseases, influenza, the common cold, pneumonia, those things, that have been found to be beneficial, with sauna. So, sauna two to three times per week has been found to reduce the risk of pneumonia at twenty seven percent compared to sauna one times a week or not at all. And, the sauna four to seven times a week was 41 lower risk of pneumonia compared to sauna only one times a week. So, again, the four to seven times a week, outperforms the sauna two to three times a week. The two to three times a week is still obviously better than once a week or no no sauna at all, but, yeah, four to seven times a week, yeah, will always, yield greater, results as it seems to be. So, So, yeah, some sort of hypothermia may be, quite important to do daily. You want to elevate your body temperature in some shape or form every day. It doesn't have to be exercise or it doesn't have to be sauna. It can also be exercise. So, you can mimic the sauna with exercise and you can mimic exercise with sauna. So, any kind of elevating your body temperature, any kind of hypothermia, acute hypothermia, at least once a day is a good idea for all these disease, parameters, the heart disease, respiratory diseases, Alzheimer's, and other things. Let's talk about working out. So, I briefly mentioned that it helps with the muscle hypertrophy, which is true, but it also improves just oral endurance and fitness. In this study, the participants did a thirty minute sauna session two times per week after a workout. And, by the end of the study, they show that, they had a 32% improved, run time to exhaustion, which is quite phenomenal. It's a really good result. And, yeah, the sauna is good for post workout recovery, but it also has enhancing the effect on actual the adaptations that you experience from the workout. Growth hormone. So, the sauna increases growth hormone. In these studies, these two studies, they have been found that the, two twenty minute solar sessions at 80 degrees Celsius separated by a thirty minute cooling period can raise growth hormone by two folds. To fifteen minute soma sessions at a 100 degrees Celsius, dry heat separated by a thirty minute cooling period, increased growth hormone five folds to one hour soma sessions a day at 80 degrees Celsius, dry heat for seven days was shown to boost growth hormone by 16 folds on the third day. So, yeah, with the, heat, it also appears that slightly, more frequent bouts and higher temperatures tend to increase more growth hormone and, probably because of the similar reasons that it mimics exercise and has these other hormonal effects. Obviously, growth hormone isn't, you know, is not anabolic. It's not gonna make you build muscle, but, having some elevations in growth hormone may be beneficial for, like, some additional fat loss. It may help with muscle preservation, antiaging effects, and, maybe bone health. So, yeah, you don't wanna be, you know, deficient in growth hormone at the at least especially when you're getting older. Muscle loss, so the HECHA proteins, they, do repair these protein aggregates, but they also reduce protein breakdown. And the growth hormone contributes to that. The growth hormone is anti catabolic to a certain extent. And it has been found in studies that, the solar use heat treatment reduces muscle atrophy. So local heat treatment reduced skeletal muscle atrophy by 37% compared to placebo. In this study, it actually immobilized the people. They caused them an injury and the two hours a day of, heating versus the, sham or the placebo. They no no no heat treatment group. They saw that the, heat heat group saw a thirty seven percent reduced muscle skeletal atrophy, which is, you know, important. For many things, it's gonna be important for, cancer cachexia, sarcopenia, aging, and those kind of things. But if you're interested in bodybuilding, then that's also something that you may want to consider that if you want to reduce your muscle catabolism, then exposing yourself to some heat can be a good thing. Fibromyalgia, or like, you know, muscle soreness, chronic fatigue, those things can also be improved with the soma use as it turned out to be. And in this study, they particularly the the functional discharge capacity was a much higher in the group who, got exposed to hypothermia or basically the sauna or some heat therapy. And their discharge was, looks like it's like 15% higher or something of that compared to no, heat exposure. So, yeah, you know, if you don't wanna be in in pain, if you don't want to be sore all the time, then, yeah, maybe you want to expose yourself to some sauna. And from your own experience, I can tell that, yeah, it's really good for just achy joints, any kind of muscle soreness, and those kind of things, especially if you combine it with a cold. You do the sauna, you jump into the cold, and you can almost, like, instantly lose any kind of soreness or, like, aching achiness. Depression. So, the heat hypothermia also apparently reduces, the depression scores in this study, effect of whole body hypothermia versus sham treatment on 17 item Hamilton depression rating scale across the six week post intervention period. And as you can see, the white dots is the, sauna or the hypothermia group and their depression scores were much lower than the ones who received the sham treatment. Although both apparently saw some sort of a reduction. The sham didn't get the hypothermia, but the maybe the combination of the sauna with the traditional, depression treatments, would yield a bit greater reductions in depression scores. But it does appear to plateau around, like, week two. So, yeah, you may want to, you know, still want to do it regularly, but you don't may not see, like, additional benefit after week two or week four. Let's talk about detoxification. So soda is, actually very good for detoxification because of the sweating aspect. Sweating is, essentially the main mechanism through which we detoxify things from our bodies. Those can include heavy metals, different kinds of plastics, chemicals, yeah, those kind of things. And there are a lot of studies that find that the the it is possible to sweat out those toxins and metals from your sweat and the sweat is a bigger excreter of these, compounds than urine, for example. So the concentrations of these metals and, toxins is greater in your sweat than in your urine. So, yeah, you do want sweat on a regular basis, especially if you're exposed to some sort of, toxins or heavy metals. This study, yeah, took the, actual comparison blood, urine, and sweat study monitoring and elimination of bioaccumulated toxic elements. So you can see the black one is a sweat, much greater excretion of these different kinds of, metals than in the urine. So, yeah, you can't piss out the heavy metals. Apparently, you need to, sweat them out. Bisphenol a, BPA, and all these organochlorine pesticides, herbicides, they're also, excreted through the sweat. Alright. Let's take a brief pause, a brief break. I'll just, repeat, give a overview about the health benefits of the sauna and the hermetic kind of bell curve. So what the sauna does, it reduces inflammation which is good for body pain and reduces risk of dementia. It improves insulin sensitivity, eliminates toxins, kills viruses and pathogens, increases growth hormone. The blood better blood flow, reduce the risk of heart disease, and the heat of proteins will conduct esophageal DNA repair and and glutathione, which is the antioxidant, mass of antioxidant in the body. So those are the benefits. Some potential negative side effects or the potential harm you may get from the heat or the sauna include dehydration, losing electrolytes, losing minerals, heat exhaustion, like you could pass out in the sauna, you could die to that. So it's no joke. Arrhythmias, if you have preexisting cardiovascular complications or preexisting, high blood pressure, then you may want you have to be more careful with the heat and you may experience arrhythmias more easily. But the arrhythmias may also occur if you're healthy because of being deficient in certain electrolytes and minerals. So if you become deficient in, let's say, sodium, magnesium and calcium sorry, calcium, potassium. And then, you may also get arrhythmias although you have no actual cardiovascular disease. Strokes, obviously, if you have, again, cardiovascular disease and burn injuries. So getting burned either by touching the stove or something like that or if it's like super high temperature like a 120 degrees Celsius, then you may also get burns on your skin. Another potential side effects of, excess heat especially around the testicles is, suppression of spermatogenesis. So, too much heat, especially around the testicles, will shut down, the production of sperm, and it may, reduce sperm count if if you're doing it chronically. So if you are doing the sauna four to seven times a week, then, you may want to, prevent against, against that. And one easy way to do that would be to just use an ice pack. So this is, like, really trendy thing, this among my followers and, some other people like, Lucas Owen from, Australia who kind of popularize this would be to, yeah, use some sort of an ice pack on the testicles either in the sauna or afterwards. I like to do it, like, afterwards. Like, I'm not using it in the sauna, but after the sauna, I usually use the ice pack maybe five to ten minutes, some of that. And, that will resume the normal, spomerogenesis process. There may be some, considerations when it comes to, like, pregnant women or very young children. So, yeah, I wouldn't say that pregnant women should go, like, some really hot sauna and ramp up the heat to a 100 degrees Celsius or something. But the, there are studies that find that the use of, like, 70 to a 100 degrees Celsius or ten to thirty minutes doesn't really have, like, any, negative effects on things like birth defects or, other other complications. And the Finland, where most people do the sauna all the time, they actually have the, lowest rates of anencephaly anencephaly, which is some sort of a birth defect, in the world. So, yeah, although they do take the sauna, even pregnant women probably all the time, they don't appear to have these birth defects. So you don't have to worry about it, but still, you know, be a bit more cautious. You know, don't exceed maybe 80 degrees Celsius. 70 to 80 degrees Celsius for a pregnant woman is, I think, good enough, and it may actually improve the health of the child as well by, you know, causing some heat shock response and obviously keeping the mother also healthier. There is a threshold that where where it becomes dangerous and, the threshold appears to be around 38.9 degrees Celsius. So if your, the mother's body core temperature raises basically to not 39 degrees Celsius, then, that is gonna be problematic. So you want to keep your body temperature lower than, 39 degrees Celsius when you're pregnant. And, yeah, you don't wanna be doing too much heat, basically. Alright. So let's look at the timeline of the sauna. Like, when do certain things happen? When do those benefits come? Obviously, you can't sit in the sauna for two minutes and get all the benefits. You need to sit there for a little bit. So initially, you know, when you start to sweat, then you will see already some excretion of these toxins and heavy metals, because, yeah, you don't need to be sweating profusely to achieve that. Like, any kind of sweating can do that. And usually, if you sit in the sauna for at least five to ten minutes, then you you start to see some more sweat coming. And the same applies to the heart rate. You will see like a slight increase your in your heart rate already within like three minutes, but it does start ramp up significantly at ten minutes or so. Fifteen minutes, this will be like increased white blood cells which is beneficial for the immune system and eliminating infections. So, yeah, that is a good thing. You do can also see this increase in growth hormone, up to five folds based upon the study that I mentioned earlier. All these other things, all these other time points are also based on studies. I'm not I'm not making them up. They're all based on the studies that I've already mentioned and the other references that we use in our books like, the Immunotefics with doctor James and my own book, Strong Over Stress. So, yeah, this is an actual timeline, not something that I make up. Yeah. Growth hormone increases five folds around fifty minutes. Cardiovascular benefits, you can start to see around twenty minutes. So you're, you know, the same to, like, exercise. If you're just exercising for five minutes, then you may not see the cardiovascular benefits. But this twenty minutes of moderate elevation in your heart rate will, provide additional these heart benefits and the cardiovascular benefits that you start to see. Heat shock proteins, kick in at twenty to thirty minutes. So, yeah, you do need to experience some aspects of this heat stress and, elevated temperature to start to see the heat shocks heat shock proteins. You can't see the heat shock proteins if you just sit there for two minutes. You do need to sit there for at least twenty minutes to start to see the heat shock protein response, and the heat shock proteins then repair damaged molecules and misfold proteins. Thirty minutes, your blood sugar will start to drop, because of this improved insulin sensitivity that happens. You increase GLUT four, which is one of the, glucose transporters that increases around thirty minutes and that also shovels the, glucose into the cells, which will, result in lower blood sugar levels. You could get it a bit faster, maybe twenty minutes if it's the temperature is higher. But, yeah, the optimal amount of the sauna length would be twenty to thirty minutes in one sitting that you do. You can't dissect it. Like, you can't do ten minutes of sitting in a sauna then going out ten minutes again and then reaching thirty minutes. Maybe you will experience some, but ideally, you would want to sit there at least twenty minutes in one go and really really ramp up this heat shock protein response and really ramp up the GLUT four activation and to get all the cardiovascular benefits. So, yeah, at minimum, you want to get twenty minutes in one sitting then go out, maybe take a slight cold shower, an ice bath or something, and then go back in for, you know, like, fifteen minutes or something. Thirty plus minutes, you will start to see this dehydration because of losing water and minerals. That can be prevented if you consume electrolytes, those kind of things. But, yeah, like, the longer you stay there without drinking any water, then you could pass out from that. So you have to get, careful with that. Some people are more, vulnerable to that, especially if you if they go hypoglycemic as well. If they've been, fasting while going to Zona, then their blood sugar levels may be already slightly lower and they may get hypoglycemia and they may pass out much faster compared to someone who, has taken their electrolytes, has drunk water, and, is also having, normal blood sugar levels. Sixty minutes, you will see this huge increase in growth hormone 60 fold, but you don't need to do that. Like, see, I don't know. I wouldn't say that a 16 fold growth hormone increase is better than a five fold growth hormone increase. There's no studies that compare it and, you know, with growth hormone, more isn't always better and you don't it's not like this huge miracle hormone that you need to have a 100 folds to see some health benefits. Like, probably a five fold growth hormone increase itself is already pretty good. Sixty plus minutes when you're over an hour, then you will start to, yeah, see a great loss of minerals, especially salt, sodium, and the risk of heat shock may also go up. The risk of heat shock can be easily, reduced and prevented if you cool down in between decisions. Let's say you do thirty minutes of the sauna. You take an ice bath for, like, two minutes, you go back in, then you can you've completely, like, mitigated the risk of heat shock because you cooled down your body. But if you stay in the sauna for sixty plus minutes in one go, not going out at all, just sitting in there throwing in the, the lulu, then yeah, your risk of heat shock can be quite high and you can even pass out. People have died for the sauna like the in the world world the sauna championships. The, one of the finalists died from a heat shock or and the excess heat so. But regular regular people don't usually die unless they're super pushing the temperatures. So this study from, the Rhonda Patrick paper shows that, the, heat shock protein response peaks at thirty minutes and it starts to drop after after that. So you don't need to be doing it longer than thirty minutes to optimize the, heat shock protein response. And the temperature for that appears to be 70 degrees Celsius or 163 degrees Fahrenheit for the optimal heat shock protein response. And heat shock protein response rises a 150 or 50% above a baseline. And, in people who are acclimated they're acclimated to the heat, then they actually see a greater increase, a greater concentration of the HECHA proteins, up over 200%, almost like 250%, which is a 150% above a baseline. Whereas the non acclimated individuals tend to see a bit less of this heat shock protein response, which goes to show that goes to show that actually you're not going to see a point of diminishing returns even if you do it a sauna more often and more frequently. So it appears that you still get heat up proteins even if you are super acclimated to the heat. And it appears to be that you get even more of this heat up protein response, especially if you are used to the heat and especially if you have been acclimated to this heat closure. From a duration perspective, then there's also been studies comparing the duration of a single sauna session. So the same authors from Finland, Lokenan 2015, they found that the compared with men having a sauna bathing session of less than eleven minutes, the adjusted hazard ratio for sauna bathing sessions of eleven to nineteen minutes for sessions lasting more than ninety minutes, there was a significantly lower all cause mortality and significantly reduced the risk of fatal cardiovascular events. So, yeah, eleven minutes is worse than nineteen minutes, so to say. So nineteen minutes, tends to be better than eleven minutes when it comes to the duration. And, like I said, I think this thirty minutes is probably kinda the optimal amount. So, yeah, short solo sessions, they may be reducing the risk a little bit, but the optimal risk reduction is around nineteen minutes and beyond that thirty minutes probably if you want to get the heat shock protein response as well. And the temperatures, I think, are again usually around like 70 to 80 degrees Celsius with these Finnish studies. Usually, that's kind of the minimal where you want to, go into sauna, 70 degrees Celsius with the traditional sauna. Another break. Let's do another pause, a brief overview of what is going on. We have the sauna cheat sheet which we've made Instagram post with doctor James. What are the main benefits of the sauna? So it increases insulin sensitivity, it improves your brain health, reduces neurodegeneration, improves immunity, detoxifies you, and has hot health benefits. The optimal temperature based upon these studies is around a 156 to 212 degrees Fahrenheit, which in Celsius is 70 to a 100 to a 100 degrees Celsius, not 700. So a 100 degrees Celsius is kinda the good maximum amount. You don't need to go above that. You don't need to go a 120. You're not gonna see additional health benefits, from that. You only gotta get burned. You may get burned and, you may you, like, you could increase your physical physical, resilience against the heat, but it's, you know, usually people don't need to do that. Usually, they're gonna show off if they want to go to a 120 degrees Celsius. Like, I could sit there easily, but I don't think that it's healthy or it could be healthy but it's not like needed. You don't need to do that. The optimal length is twenty to thirty minutes per session in one sitting. So to say you sit there for actually twenty minutes, in one sitting and the optimal frequency would be two to four times a week or above that. I personally do the sauna, you know, I try to do it every day so I would end up getting like five to six times a week, but I also also use the infrared sauna. I use the traditional sauna maybe once or twice a week And, yeah. But I still get like, four over four times of heat exposure per week. Let's talk about the minerals that you do lose, from Sweat from the book Mineral Fix, the references for this graph with doctor James. It's based upon studies on sweat in exercise, one hour of exercise. But obviously, sauna, it mimics exercise and I think that you actually sweat more in the sauna than you do while exercising and you and so this graph would actually be even greater when when we were to take it from the sauna. But regardless, what are the minerals that you lose in your sweat? So iron and calcium, you lose a little bit very small amounts like zero point sixteen to zero point sixty three milligrams of iron and forty milligrams of calcium which is a very small amount and it's nothing to really worry about. Like you can get it from just you know, taking one bite of meat or something that you'll get more than that from that. So you don't have to worry about iron and calcium when it comes to minerals from sweat. Selenium, forty micrograms. Zinc, zero point four milligrams. Potassium, a hundred and forty milligrams. And magnesium eight to ten milligrams. These are also fine. Like the these amounts are also pretty low. Like eight to ten milligrams of magnesium is not that much. Zero point four milligrams of zinc is low and yeah, you don't you don't necessarily have to replenish those minerals either. But moving on with chromium seven point five micrograms, copper zero point four to one point five milligrams and iodine fifty two micrograms. These are a bit more significant losses. So the RDA for chromium is like eleven to fourteen micrograms. So almost like a half of your daily chromium you can lose in one hour. Copper also zero point four to one point one point five milligrams. Your RDA for copper is like optimal intake of copper would be like three milligrams. So again, like, almost a half. And iodine, fifty two millig micrograms. The RDA for iodine is a hundred to a hundred fifty micrograms. So, again, almost like a half of your iodine. So, yeah, these are the minerals that you do want to replenish, chromium, copper, and iodine, especially after the sauna. With chromium, the easiest and most reliable way to get chromium is to take a chromium supplement. Like chromium picolinate, helps with insulin and helps with diabetes as well. I do take for other purposes. I think it there are studies that also find that it may help with, like, body composition and insulin sensitivity overall. So I take the chromium picolinate, like, two hundred to one thousand micrograms, on the days that I do the sauna. This is not, you know, that you have to do, but that's what I do at least because the absorption of chromium from food is also pretty low. It's like 1%. So if you want to replenish seven point five micrograms of chromium with food, you have to consume maybe, yeah, like a a hundred micrograms of chromium or, yeah, seventy micrograms of chromium, which is, unless you're eating mussels, unless you're eating, like, three ounces of mussels or three ounces of oysters, then it's hard to, achieve that. Copper, you could replenish that with just liver. Take one ounce of liver and you got it. Iodine, fifty micrograms of iodine, you could get maybe from some fish and, sea vegetables, those kind of things. You don't need to, yeah, supplement iodine if you're eating seafood, but you may want to do that if you're not eating seafood. And lastly, salt is the biggest loss when it comes to minerals, sodium and chloride. You lose a half teaspoon of salt per hour of exercise. And when it comes to the sauna, thirty minutes, I would I think it will apply the thirty minutes sauna session. So you would lose a half teaspoon of salt from a thirty minutes sauna session. To replenish that, you just you can salt your food or you can drink salted water, something like a half teaspoon is very easy to replenish. Let's talk about the difference between dry saunas and steam saunas. So, you know, both of them cause hyperthermia. Both of them have hypothermic effects. They raise your core temperature, have these beneficial effects on, just overall health and cardiovascular benefits. The difference main difference is that the dry sauna tends to be hotter. It goes up until 70 to a 100 degrees Celsius, whereas the steam saunas stay around 30 to 50%, 30 to 50, degrees Celsius. So it's much lower in temperature, but the humidity is much higher in the steam sauna. The humidity is over 50% in the steam sauna whereas in the dry sauna, it's 10 to 20%. And because of that, you subjectively feel that the steam sauna is hotter because of the humidity. And you think that it's hotter, but it's actually a little bit temperature. I think the maybe the health difference would be that in the dry sauna, you will experience more of the heat shock protein response because of the high temperature. Whereas in the steam sauna, you may may be better for, like, detoxification. You sweat more and, maybe, like, more blood flow a little bit because of the, kinda sweating side. The difference will also be that in dry sauna, you can throw or which describes this taking the water with a cup and throwing it on the sauna stove, which creates this vapor. It kind of resembles maybe like the steam sauna in some sense. Briefly, acutely, the Laulu, will, raise the temperature. It feels as hotter because of the increased humidity, but it drops down afterwards. So it doesn't stay, constantly high temperature. Yeah. Which one is better? I I do prefer the dry sauna because it's not as hot all the time as the steam sauna, but obviously the steam sauna is also fine. So people always ask, like, can I can I still get the benefits of the, sauna from the steam sauna or the steam rooms? And the answer is, yes. You probably can. Not sure exactly, what would be the timeline for the steam sauna, but I think it's kinda relatively the same. Just stay in the steam sauna for twenty to thirty minutes and, you'll be fine. What about the infrared sauna? So the, difference between the infrared sauna and the conventional traditional sauna is that the, infrared panels, infrared lights, they heat your body from the inside out. So the infrared wavelengths penetrate your body deep deeper and they start to emanate start to heat your body from this way. Whereas in the traditional sauna, the stove emanates the heat and it heats up the air around you so the air is then heating up your body, which is kind of a different it's more of like a outside in approach whereas the infrared is a inside out, elevation of the temperature. But, yeah, both are gonna be elevating your core temperature. Both will lead to hypothermia eventually. The difference is only that the, infrareds, they do penetrate deeper into the skin and, you know, they start to heat your body, which will then also have, like, additional health benefits, such as collagen synthesis and some other skin benefits, maybe improves joints a bit better because it, goes directly into the joints, lowers the inflammation there. So, yeah, it does have a bit of more unique benefits. And the wavelengths themselves infrared is around, you know, 700 630 to 700 is the red light and above 700 to 900 is kind of the infrared wavelengths, nanometers. There are also studies about the benefits of infrared specifically, Quite a lot of them. So, just a list of few far infrared sonars for treatment of cardiovascular risk factors. Weiyon therapy which is sort of like using like a sauna blanket or infrared blanket in Japan if I'm not mistaken. That has also been found to improve peripheral arterial disease. Weighing therapy improves quality of life as well as cardiac function and exercise capacity in patients with chronic heart failure. Far infrared therapy inhibits vascular endothelial inflammation via the induction of heme oxygenase one. So, yeah, the infrared sauna also has cardiovascular benefits. It has other benefits, nerve repair, then there's a phantom limb pain treated by far infrared rays and improvement of vascular access blood flow and pain control in hemodialysis patients. So, yeah, there's a similar benefits to the infrared as the traditional sauna. But the infrared also, again, improves skin health a bit more than the traditional sauna. And this study found that the cellulite treatment can be or cellulite treatment could could be used with the infrared, which is, maybe some people are interested in that. For antiaging purposes, obviously, the infrared can be a bit better because of that. Wrinkles and skin skin pigmentation, that works. So in this study, six weeks of infrared treatment. As you can see, like, there is a small difference in the wrinkle density or wrinkle intensity. Yeah. And I do notice, like, the with the red light therapy as well as the infrared that it does have some skin benefits because of that. Strength training. Effects of far infrared sauna bathing on recovery from strength and endurance training sessions in men. Finished study if I'm not mistaken. In conclusion, deep penetration of infrared heat approximately three to four centimeters into fat tissue and neuromuscular system with mild temperature 35 to 50 degrees Celsius and light humidity 25 to 35% during far infrared sauna bathing appears favorable for the neuromuscular system to recover for maximal endurance performance. So, yeah, it does help with the exercise recovery as well. Yeah. The infrared sonars have a bit lower temperature, which can be fine because you're still, you know, you're penetrating deeper into the system. So you're kind of getting access to some aspects of the body without needing that much temperature. Maybe for the heat shock protein response, again, the traditional sonar can be better because of the higher temperature, but you can effectively get some good heart heart benefit heart heart cardiovascular benefits with also 50 degrees Celsius by using the infrared, sauna. Newer generation, the infrared sauna has also been found to benefit near infrared and the far infrared as well benefits, newer degeneration. So what the, near infrared light does is that, it, you know, penetrates the brain, penetrates the skull, deeper into tissue and helps with ATP production, helps to repair mitochondria, causes these HETRA proteins there, causes autophagy there to a certain extent probably, repairs neurons, stimulates neurogenesis or synaptogenesis which, creates new connections. And there's also endothelial cells which, you know, cells inside the endothelium improve blood flow, vascular prevents vascular damage, repair vascular damage, repair neural damage, and, yeah, cerebral blood flow to the brain will be better as well. That is direct stimulation. Indirect stimulation also, has a benefit beneficial effect on the immune cells and the stem cells, circle stimulate circulating immune and or bone marrow stem cells, and they swarm to site of damage through blood vessels and or lymphatics. So, yeah, more delivery of nutrients into the brain, repair of damaged neurons, new connections, and neurogenesis. So, yeah, using the infrared on the brain in your head on your head is good for the brain as you can see. What is the difference between, traditional sonars and infrared sonars? The temperatures again are higher in the traditional sauna, 70 to a 100 degrees Celsius, Whereas in the infrared, my infrared is 60 degrees maximum. Usually, it stays around, yeah, 30 to 60%, in most cases. But I think that you may not need above that because of the infrared kind of penetrating deeper into tissues. So, yeah, surface heat on traditional saunas and infrared saunas deeper heat. You do sweat more in the traditional sauna whereas you penetrate the joints with infrared sauna, which I think would be better for arthritis as well as, you know, the brain perhaps. Things like, heart health could be a bit better, for that because of the penetration or, like, you know, arthritis and the joint pain. You heat up the sauna with the heat stove whereas in the infrared, it's the infrared lights that are heating up your body. And in a traditional sauna, there's more humidity. In the infrared, less humidity. And because of that, the traditional sauna may feel a bit hotter similar to the steam sauna. But both of them have similar health benefits, both improve heart health, both improve blood flow, both make you excrete toxins, both kill infections, both support immunity, both, prevent neurodegeneration. So yeah. You know, if I were to choose which one should I get only one, then I would personally, you know, I like the traditional sauna more. I like it, but I would choose the infrared sauna, because of the, yeah, the penetration of the joints. And it's a bit easier to do it as well. You just plug it in and turn it on and you can get the good temperature within like thirty minutes, forty minutes. Whereas with the traditional sauna, you have to actually heat up the sauna for at least an hour, an hour and a half or something like that to get to do a 100 degrees Celsius amount. Month. So, yeah. If I were to choose only one, I would choose the infrared sauna. But I have both, fortunately. Like, I have my own traditional sauna and I hope I have my own infrared sauna as well. But that's it for this video. A pretty long video. I think, I did cover basically everything, when it comes to taking a sauna, or kind of, as you said, benefits, the main benefits, how does it work, and, how to do it, the optimal amounts. In conclusion, we can go back to the cheat sheet a little bit. Let's go back to the cheat sheet. Main benefits, insensitivity, brain health, immunity, detox, heart health, and the optimal temperature, 70 to 100 degrees Celsius, and the optimal length, twenty to thirty minutes, two to four times a week. You know, obviously, once a week is better than nothing. And even, like, once a month is better than nothing probably, but the optimal maximum benefits you can see from more than four times a week. So even doing it every day apparently is healthy for you. Alright. In conclusion, the sauna is healthy for you. You should do it. I think everyone can benefit from it in some sense. And if you want to learn more about it, then check out my books that I've written on this topic, The Immunity Fix and Stronger by Stress. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well as mine and Seam. Stay optimized, stay empowered.