Hey. Welcome back to the channel. My name is Sim Blunt. And in this video, we're gonna talk about what is the best way to boost your NAD levels. So if you don't know, then NAD is this antiaging enzyme, and, it is important for aging. So we're gonna talk about what are the best ways to boost it, and we're gonna rank it in the tier maker software. Make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. I'll also kinda cover quickly the, main ways to boost any of the levels. So there's different pathways in the body that do so. There's the price handle pathway. There's the de novo biosynthesis pathway, and there's the salvage pathway. So price handle pathway and the de novo synthesis, those are the most, ones you get, primarily from food. And, you have these different precursors, nicotinic acids or basically vitamin b three or niacin. And then there's a tryptophan that will get converted into NAD plus eventually. And then there's the salvage pathway, which is taken a recycling pathway. And this is where you have precursors like nicotinamide, NAM, which is a form of niacin but not the same. And then there's a, like, nicotinamide riboside which is a common supplement and the nicotinamide mononucleotide. They will also be also converted into NAD plus. And the one of the main kind of enzymes in here is the NAMPT, which is kind of the rate limiting step in terms of, how much NAD gets recycled is limited by NAPT. And you need NAPT to basically have established pathway, working properly, which we'll talk about, shortly. Shall we begin? Let's start with vitamin b three or niacin. So as you saw in the previous, picture, it is a part of the presence and the pathway and you convert it into NAD. Eventually, you get niacin from mostly animal foods, meats, etcetera. And it is a pretty important nutrient as well mostly from like cholesterol metabolism, blood sugar metabolism. And, yeah, obviously, the Centrinoutrient, in terms of NAD plus, how much how big of an effect does it have? Then the price on the pathway is very small, actually. It doesn't contribute that much to your daily NAD synthesis. It's almost maybe very very small amount, like five to 10% of the daily NAD comes from the price and the pathway or the, even the the, the know about synthesis pathway is also, quite small. So I think, obviously, you don't wanna become deficient in one of them v three or NASSIM, in terms of boosting NAD, I will say that, I'm gonna put it into okay, so to say, like, yeah. It's not super miraculous. There are no actually studies that I've seen that show or look at how much NAD you get from vitamin b three. There's no there's no like, almost none of these have actual studies to show, you know, how much NAD you get or compare which one is better. So let's say a few of them do, but the vast majority of them don't. But my own subjective opinion is that, it's okay. Like, yeah, you don't wanna become deficient in, b three, and, it's just that the, the price handle pathway itself it's not that the 1,000 is bad for NAD. It is good for boosting NAD levels. It's just that the price handle pathway itself contributes so little to your daily NAD levels, so to say. It's just it's just a matter of how big of a contributor the price and the pathway is, not how big of a contributor, NAS in itself is, if that makes sense. We'll take on next, we have something else. Let's take, cardio. So cardiovascular exercise, exercise is a good way to boost energy levels. And, yeah, it's actually pretty important for, you know, other things as well, energy production and mitochondrial health. I'm gonna put that into card tier, actually. So the way, exercise promotes NAD levels is through the salvage pathway. So the NAMPT pathway or the enzyme here is regulated by another enzyme, a nutrient sensor called AMPK. So AMPK, basically governs NAEPT as well. And, that's why the exercise which raises AMPK also helps with the salvage pathway, so to say. And exercise is a good way to boost NAD through the salvage pathway. And the salvage pathway actually contributes a whole lot more than the price on the pathway or the de novo biosynthesis pathway. So the vast majority of a daily NAD will come from the salvage pathway, through basically shuttling electrons around and creating NAD through recycling it. So that's why any exercise, cardiovascular exercise specifically is gonna be a god tier. We'll take resistance exercise here right next to it to give a comparison. So resistance training, weightlifting is exercise but it has a different effect on NAD levels because resistance exercises are much higher intensity. It actually in many studies has been found to deplete any levels. So to say it's just if you're, you know, reaching maximum intensity, near maximum intensity and recruiting a whole lot more muscle fibers then you actually deplete any of the levels by by causing you know slightly higher amount of oxidative stress and inflammation which both of them will deplete or make you burn through NAD a bit more because NAD is gonna be used to basically treat those kind of things. So I'll put resist but in general overall, if you exercise regularly then your over NA level should be higher. It's just that the in the acute immediate after post, resistance training, those levels will be lower and if you chronically overtrain then you will see, like, your energy levels are getting lower as well. So I'll actually put this it's well, it's not, like, bad. I mean, it's not it's not gonna be bad for your energy levels or health overall. It's obviously one of the best things for your health, but I'll just put it into like okay because of that. That it that isn't necessarily the best way to boost your energy levels as long as you're not overdoing it. Like if you're just doing moderate resistance training then it's probably gonna be fine. Actually, it is good but if you overtrain then it can actually lower the end of the levels. Next up, we'll take another form of a b three. So nicotinamide. So it's another form of niacin, and this one is much better than niacin in terms of boosting energy, and I'll put it into actually gut tier. So it's, as you can know, nicotinamide is also part of the salvage pathway. So it it's not limited to the price handle pathway, which itself is, a much smaller contributor to the daily NDT pool. So nicotinamide e is a huge contributor to the salvage pathway, through NAMPT, and, that's why it's gonna be got here. And it's also very cheap. Nasi in itself is very cheap, but Nicotinamide is also cheap. So, yeah, I'm a huge actually fan. Like a like a, yeah, like a cheap version of boosting NAD is nicotinamide. How much does it boost it? That's, you know, hard to tell because I haven't seen, like, studies that show that how much how much does it elevate to NAD levels, yet but maybe in the future there will be some. Let's take fasting. So fasting can also boost NAD levels because of some reasons. We'll talk about shortly. I will put fasting into also like let's think. I'll put it into okay or good good tier because, the fasting also activates AMPK. And when I say fasting, then I don't mean, like, three to five day fast. Like, a three to five day fast may actually eventually deplete NAD as well because of the same aspect of physiological stress and, sirtuins, like, the fasting activates sirtuins as well, which then consumes NAD as well. So if you're excessively fasting, excessively activating sirtuins, then, like, a too much of a good thing, can be harmful for the NAD levels at least. Fasting doesn't cause DNA damage which the parts will repair and it doesn't cause inflammation with the CD 38, would refer to, but it does increase sirtuins which can deplete or lower some of the NAD. But the fasting also, let's say, time restricted eating. Eating within a, like, eight hour eating window or something like that. That's not really like fasting. That's just, yeah, like, daily time restricted eating. So, to clarify that so what the fasting does is that it increases AMPK, which then, activates n a NAMPT. And because you're doing the time restricted eating, which means you're, like, sticking to the circadian rhythm as well, then, this has an additional effect on the NAEPT enzyme as well because the NAEPT is, SIRT one dependent. So SIRT two in one is a circadian clock gene or protein, and, it regulates circadian rhythms and it also regulates n a n a n p t, which basically means that if you're not aligned with the circadian rhythms or if you're misaligned, then, your n a n p t is gonna go offline because the sirtuin one is also offline. And as a result, you're not going to recycle the n e n a NAD through NA MPT, which is really complex way of saying. But, yeah, essentially, you have to stick to the circadian rhythms and the time restricted eating, which means that you don't eat at night. You, confine your eating window to a certain extent that is, one of the best ways actually to have the salvage pathway at least working properly. And because it also raises a AMPK to a certain to a minor degree, but it doesn't, overexpress it the same way like a three day or five day fast would. It's a trap. Next up, we're gonna take this piece of chicken, which, refers to tryptophan. And, tryptophan is one of the precursors of the de novo biosynthesis pathway, for producing NAD. And, I'll put this into here as well next to b three, because, yeah, it's a a good way to, you know, raise your NAD levels, but it may not necessarily be enough. So, again, the amount of, NAD you get from the the noble biosynthesis pathway isn't nearly as much as from the salvage pathway, but obviously, you don't wanna become deficient of it either. The circadian rhythms themselves are being aligned with the circadian rhythms. So I'll put this into here as well because, again, the same reasons, NAMPT, SIRT one dependent, and you need to be circadian rhythm aligned to have the cert one and NAEPT activated, basically. So, you don't wanna become misaligned. Shift work and jet lag and irregular sleeping patterns will, basically turn off cert one and NAEPT and they will also raise CD 38 and PARPs or they will cause DNA damage which then raises PARPs and then depletes the, NAD through that. So you wanna be basically with the with the proper circadian rhythm alignment, getting daylight exposure and avoiding blue light at night and getting good sleep which brings us to sleep. So, obviously sleep is gonna be also good, to have your body rejuvenate itself and repair because a lot of these processes like, like autophagy and growth hormone and I would imagine a lot of the NAD, resynthesis also happens during sleep. So, yeah, very kind of important. I don't sleep. You don't sleep. I wait. Next, we'll take a calorie restriction. So calorie restriction, very similar to fasting, in that sense, It does activate AMPK. It's not necessarily circadian rhythm aligned or it doesn't have to be it doesn't necessarily do that but it does raise sirtuins as well a little bit. So but I'll put it into like okay. It's, yeah. It is a good way to have, like, the other longevity pathways activated sirtuins and autophagy and, AMPK and probably, like, NAD elevation as well through the salvage pathway, so to say. Again, through the NAPT enzyme. Alright. Next up, we'll take fermented foods like sauerkraut. So the way this works is through the accumulation of lactic acid which raises NADH levels which is another form of NAD. And the NADH gets converted back into NAD as a result of that to kind of get rid of the waste and the the veranda foods may also contain like some of the precursors to to NAD. So I think I'm probably putting and gonna put it into here the same way with this because you'd obviously both for the b three and tryptophan and the fermented foods, you would have to eat like, you know, ungodly amounts of food to have like a significant elevation in your, energy levels and that's why they're still somewhat, you know, okay. They're not inherently super effective at doing the energy boost, so to say. That whereas cardio, the amount of, like, physiologic stress you experience doing cardio is much greater and the amount of, like, activation of AMPK and those things, will yield a much greater response for, basically recycling NAD compared to just eating a piece of chicken. And the same applies to keto. Keto lowers inflammation, lowers blood sugar, lowers, lactose oxygen species, reduces DNA damage, those kind of things, and does contain, like, some other beneficial, you know, precursors to NAD b three and, and tryptophan, but it's not, again, superior to that. The ketone body is also, help to convert NADH into NAD. So, yeah, ketosis does have some effects in, increasing NAD, but it's not, you know, crazy effective. The same applies to, like, fruits and carbs. So the fruit does contain some, enzymes that help to convert NADH into NAD plus. But again, like, I wouldn't rely on a fruit cleanse, fruit juice fasting to have, like, a elevation or affinity. Probably not gonna be that effective. So but it's still okay in terms of that. Let's take, NMN and nicotinamide riboside. So we'll start with NMN. Obviously, I think they're gonna be guttier because those are the supplements that actually is shown to raise NAD levels, probably better than, NAM. And, yeah, there's actually studies that show that both of them raise NAD levels. And I think that, in a lot of ways, they're superior to, obviously, diet. They raise NAD levels much more than just just eating a piece of chicken. And, they may be better than, fast times in eating in some sense. At least in the short term, they're gonna have, like, a superior effect for that. They're not like a long term solution because you can still you need to still have just the circadian clock system working properly. You need to be doing some form of clarity reading and, getting enough sleep to, in the long term, have your NAD levels to stay them to keep them elevated. But in the short term, NMN and NR can obviously, yeah, still raise their levels, but it's just like once you stop taking them, then, your ND levels will drop as well as a result of that. But to keep them elevated, then you need the circadian rhythm alignment. Which one is better NMN or NR? I mean, that's a very hot topic a lot of times and there's no, like, clear answer. Both of them raise NAD levels. NMN actually gets directly into the cell, converted into NAD whereas NR gets converted into NMN first. So, yeah, I think that, you know, both are kinda fine. I personally take NMN because I think the kind of shorter, basically, process of getting into the sale may be somewhat superior. And that's why I also take this, one one of the brands that I use is I do not age, and that has the, NMN that I'm, you know, using on a regular basis. And, obviously, kind of the best way to boost NAD levels is to just take an NAD IV. So, that's probably the most effective way and most fastest way to have your NAD levels elevated. But, again, it's a short term fix. It may last for a lot longer. You may have this effect to stay around for even, like, weeks and months. But, again, yeah, like, if you still follow the bad lifestyle habits, then eventually you're going to, deplete that as well. So to keep it to keep the energy elevated, then you need the circadian rhythm alignment because of the NAPT enzyme, that is circadian rhythm dependent, which I think is I had to repeat it a lot of the times because no one else really talks about that. No one talks about the link between NAD and NAPT and circadian rhythms. So I'd I'm gonna have to do it for for that and, remind that the circadian rhythms are kind of this underlying clock system that just regulates the entire thing including the recycling and metabolism of NAD. Saunas. So saunas, heat of proteins, have been found to, yeah, help with NNE. I would say that, there's gonna be good because the sonas mimic a lot of the cardiovascular effects of exercise. So they do raise your heart rate. They activate AMPK. They, they NNPT related and, they also basically have this beneficial cardiovascular effect. They mimic exercise in all of ways. So that's why I gotta put it in the good. Obviously, it's not the same as actually doing cardio, but it's pretty damn close. And it's, from an NAD perspective, then it's superior than resistance training because the resistance training well, actually, we can put it into here bad if it's, if you do, like, yeah, failure exercise. If you're doing this crazy bodybuilding exercise, then actually actually gonna be bad for the NAD in the short term that you, birth through it. And lastly, one of my favorite supplements are glycine. So we'll put it into good, because what glycine does is that it reduces this, NADPH oxidase, NOx and ox and that is like an enzyme that could, you know, cause oxidative stress etcetera. And using glycine in studies has been found that they have been effective in reducing NOX and kind of having thus a positive effect on increasing NADPH levels which then also just results in a greater NAD, effect as well. So there we have it. This is the, NAD tier list. The best way to is, yeah, get an IV, but it's very expensive. It's super expensive to get an IV, and it's painful as well. So, yeah, most people aren't able to do that for obvious reasons. And, the next best thing I think is gonna be cardio from a just general health perspective is gonna be the best for NAD as well as just general health. And then we got precursors. NMN, NR are I think a bit better than NAM, but NAM is pretty damn close. Although NAM is slightly less effective than NMN or NR, it's much cheaper than NMN and NR. So if you don't have the budget for NMN or NR, then using NAM, nicotinamide, would be a good alternative. Then, yeah, you have to stick to the circadian rhythm system which would have your salvage pathway activated and keep it working properly. And lastly, okay, like the nutritional side. Getting NAD from diet is, you know, it's still you need it, but the results you get from that aren't probably not gonna be, like, super significant. Like, probably you won't notice a huge difference, but, you know, it depends what kind of diet you follow. But I would still eat foods that have these precursors like niacin b three, tryptophan, some fermented foods and those kind of things. Alright. That's it for this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.