Hey. Welcome back to the channel. My name is Sim Lunns. And in this video, I'm gonna talk about what do I eat with my, one meal a day diet. And, if you haven't seen before, then I in my previous video, I talked about, how do I build muscle with one meal a day diet and, yeah, how do how does it work? Essentially, as a brief overview, what I do is, I I do this semi one meal a day diet that I'm not necessarily eating one meal a day, but I do consume the majority of my calories within, like, a two hour window. And And during daytime, I'll also have, like, a protein shake and some amino acids, during my workout specifically to help with the muscle growth and the strength performance and those kind of things. So, yeah, in this video, I'll just go through the foods that I usually eat. Like, this would be, like, an average, very average meal. Make sure you click the like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. Alright. So I have everything basically laid out here and, I'll start from the absolute beginning of the day and what do I do. So usually when I wake up I'll still drink only water and coffee maybe for until maybe 11AM or twelve something like that. And I'm still in basically zero calorie state during that time. But around twelve or something I'll start having like some amino acids And the main goal of that is to just provide my body with adequate intake of this essential amino acids that are important for muscle maintenance and preventing muscle loss and those kind of things which are important for me for sure. And yeah, I usually take like one scoop of this which is like three grams. I may end up actually taking like five grams or something like that. And it's still, you know, it does have amino acids that theoretically will affect some of the fast food allergy state. But in reality there are studies that actually show that the essential amino acids do support the process of autophagy and the amino acids are also important for energy production, neurotransmitters and super beneficial for many other things. And this is the brand kind of that I use. It's one of the keenest amino acids. It also has creatine, glutamine, and taurine, which are also, you know, quite useful for other purposes. Then when I am working out, I'll usually work out around hour eighteen, hour nineteen of my fast or something like that. And so far, I have been consuming only coffees and teas and the amino acids. But then I also have some protein, and basically just a regular whey protein powder. So the goal is similar to have like some protein amino acids in my system to help with muscle growth and to also have a good workout. And I always, you know, fasted workouts, they're not that beneficial for muscle growth for sure. And having this protein shake will still ensure that I am able to make progress in the gym and make gains at the same time. I may also take the protein shake, one scoop is usually like 30 grams, 25 grams of protein, something like that, 100 calories. And I'll also add like another amino acid scoop in there. So it's still like 100 calories or something. And maybe on some days might also have like some collagen protein from the same brand. Because collagen like before a workout has been shown to support more of this collagen synthesis and beneficial for joints if you take it before a resistance training workout. So I may take like one scoop of whey protein, a scoop of collagen and a scoop of amino acids and end up maybe 150 calories or something like that. Then I'll have the workout. Around like hour twenty, I'll finish that. I'll wait be wait another hour or so, and then I'll start to break the actual fast, with actual food. And the first foods I usually eat are eggs. So eggs are one of my favorite sources of protein because they're high in leucine, high in all the essential amino acids, and, other you know, so they're also good for, post workout recovery because of that, for stimulating muscle growth and synthesis. And these eggs are, you know, my homegrown eggs, which is why they're kinda dirty and, with with some mud on them. So don't mind that. But, yeah, I'll usually have, like, four to five eggs depending on my day. If it's, like, a rest day, I may actually have, like, three eggs. But if it's like a heavy workout day, then I'll have five eggs. And the cholesterol is also, found to benefit benefit muscle hypertrophy and the recovery especially. So you're recovering faster from the workout because cholesterol is, you know, part of the cell membrane and stuff like that. Then next to that, they'll also have, like, some regular salad. So maybe like this, maybe like a cup of some sort of salad. This is maybe like just tomatoes, cucumbers, cabbage, herbs, celery, those kind of things to get some greens, prebiotics, and also this would usually be also some sort of fermented foods like sauerkraut or kimchi. This would be the the kind of first half of the meal. I'll maybe add a little salmon as well, like microdose and some fish and salmon for the omega threes. I'll, yeah, kind of have more regularly these kinds of foods. That will be like the first half. And, I also microdose the liver. So liver, obviously one of the best super foods. Eating it like raw or eating it, in this whole form cooked liver is fine. Like it tastes good. But, the best way to I like it is to have like liver pate. So this is mousse liver pate. And I'll take like one teaspoon of this. So this is like a daily micro dose of liver. Then they're gonna get like a bunch of nutrients. And I use it like, yeah, as a as a supplement almost as a multivitamin. Then the kind of the main course or something, would be more regular meats. I'll usually finish the eggs. I'll wait maybe thirty minutes or twenty minutes, something like that. Then I head over to the main course kind of thing. This would be some sort of meat. This here is a venison in particular, and it's gonna be the quantities are gonna be about 300 grams or something like that of some sort of meat, whether that be beef, game meat, fish, or, pork, or something like that. I usually don't eat that much chicken, but, yeah, usually it's like some game meat, the venison, or beef. And next to that, I'll have some cooked vegetables. So maybe broccoli, these are carrots, and turnips or beet root, which are also kind of tasty and good sources of some carbs and fiber. So I'll eat this this as well. If it's a heavy workout or resistance in your workout, I'll also eat some potatoes as my carbs. So I do, like, the cyclical keto diet. If it's a rest day, then I don't eat the potatoes. I'll eat just these kinds of vegetables. But if it's a workout day, then I'll also have some carbs. And I'll usually eat, like, two to three potatoes, something that which will end up giving me maybe up to 200 grams of carbs with everything else combined. So yeah. On the rest days, I may be 50 grams carbs. On the workout day, 200 grams carbs. And that's it for the kind of main dishes. I'll finish this, wait another maybe thirty minutes, and then I'll have like a small dessert type of thing, which usually is like cottage cheese or like curds or Greek yogurt or something like that. So this is about, like, 200 grams of cottage cheese. It can be, like, low fat or it can be also, like, full fat 5% cottage cheese, whichever it is. And I'll on top of it, I'll throw just some sort of berries, blueberries, strawberries, bilberries, cranberries, whatever, cherries, and maybe like a little bit of nuts. Here's like a few almonds or a few, hazelnuts. Next to this, I'll also eat four Brazil nuts. So these are great for getting your daily seleniums. I always eat maybe two to four Brazil nuts every day to get the selenium. And the selenium is, you know, important antioxidant defense mineral. It's also important for the thyroid, testosterone production, and immunity. So, you can cover your daily selenium needs with just a few of these Brazil nuts. So it's another, like, supplement that I consider. It's, yeah, like a multivitamin type of thing. That's it, for this. On some days, if I'm maybe feel a bit more hungry or something, then I'll also have, like, some fruit for dessert. Or if it's a high carb day, I'll have, like, an apple or an orange, something less. If I'm low in protein, if I feel that I'm low in protein or I'm not getting enough, then I'll finish the entire day with one scoop of this casein protein powder, which is a bit better for slowly digesting the protein. And you'll absorb it over a longer period of time. Especially if you if you finish your food with that and you're gonna start to fast again for the next day, then having some casein in your bloodstream will be beneficial for, you know, obviously muscle muscle growth and muscle maintenance. So there we have it. This is kind of it. You know, as you can see, it's not crazy amount of food. This actually covers my daily calories. This is about like 2,000 calories actually here. All the meats, all the eggs, all the protein powders. In total that's gonna be about 2,000 calories. And if I'm cutting weight, if I'm losing body fat, then I usually eat 2,000, 2,200 around that kind of calories. If I'm bulk if I'm bulking, I may end up getting 2,500 calories. But, yeah, I'm never bulking where I need to eat like 3,000 calories or something. And so I do keep it relatively modest. And, yeah, it's working. I'm still making gains with that. The most important part is to get enough protein, especially with one meal a day. You want to get actually a higher intake of protein than you would with when you were eating two meals or three meals because you're going such a long period of time without any protein. So you need to make sure that you do have adequate intake of this protein in your bloodstream during the fast. And my goal with for podoprotein is usually, you know, you don't need any more than one gram per pound of body weight for protein to maximize muscle growth. But I actually aim higher for that because there are studies that a higher protein intake than that would yield some greater fat loss or you put on less fat in a surplus. So I actually eat maybe 1.5 grams per pound at max and usually maybe 1.2. So I weigh eighty four kilograms, which is in pounds is like maybe a hundred and eighty pounds, a hundred and ninety pounds at max or a hundred and eighty pounds, I think. So, yeah, I'll eat a 180 pounds up to 200 grams of protein a day, which is my goal. And and that is why the protein shakes are quite important for me. So I I use the protein shakes as a convenience. If you don't want to use protein shakes, then just eat. Eat regular food. Break the fast early. Have two meals instead of one. I use the protein shake just for convenience. So I do like a one and a half meals a day because the protein shake is easy to digest and it's also beneficial for kind of the workout. But yeah, that's it. High in protein, regulate my carbs based on my activity levels. I'm not super concerned about fat. Like I don't need to be eating a high fat diet. I get adequate intake of fats from the eggs, the salmon, the meats, the nuts, the g got the cheese on the liver. So I don't need to inherently bump up my fats, and I and I autoregulate my carbs based on my ACE levels. So I actually put it all into the chronometer as well to look at what are the actual macros, approximate macros. So as you can see, the total calories for this entire meal would be 2,200 and my goal would be my maintenance calories, my BMI BMR and activity level will be around 2,400 calories. So it's a small deficit, which is fine. What are the percentages? Protein 41%. Carbs 31%. Fat 28%. And, you can see all the foods are here. Broccoli or like, I don't necessarily weigh the food. I'll just broccoli, which would include also the coverts and stuff. Brazil nuts, four Brazil nuts, two ounces of liver pate or liver itself. Some salmon. Potatoes, four medium potatoes. Eggs, five eggs. Cottage cheese, one cup of cottage cheese. Whey protein, two scoops. And beef, two cups. So that will be covering one of the actual intakes of the macros. As you can see, the protein is, you know, high. 228 grams of protein, a 175 grams of carbs, and 71 grams of fats. So if it were to be a rest day, then maybe the carbs would be around a 100 grams or 80 grams. And the fat would probably be like a 120 grams or something like that. You don't need a crazy intake of fat for anything. Like, you can get away for men, you can optimally see a highest testosterone production with fats if it's around like 30 or 40%. So, you don't need to be like a high 80% fat diet to have like optimal hormone levels. And the lowest would be around like ten-fifteen percent. You don't wanna be low fat, but you don't wanna be super high fat either. And I much rather would allocate my rest of the calories, the macros to a protein and the carbs. You can see nutrients also pretty much covered, All the I mean, calcium may be a bit low, but I do think that I get adequate intake from the dairy and the whey protein. Yeah. That's kinda it. So as you can see, it's a pretty simple diet. It's very convenient. It's, automatic almost. I like I don't really think about what do I need to eat. The foods are taste great. I get adequate intake of all the macros. I get adequate intake of mic micronutrients. And, yeah, it works. It works for me. I I like it. I'm not planning on changing because I'm still seeing great results from this. And, yeah, if you want to try out this kind of, interval fasting, any kind of interval fasting, it doesn't have to be one meal a day, then definitely check out my metabolic cataracty master class and the metabolic cataracty book itself. It, goes into all the details about the specific type of fasting that I do and all the other, possible variations that you can also try out. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Syeem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.