Interesting because, you know, one of the things that you're known, online is this, experiment that you did with, icing your testicles. So I think, like, it was a good icebreaker between you and the audience. They're like, you know, we've explained, you know, what why did you do it and, how does it work and what were the kind of results? Yeah, man. So I actually stumbled across the practice, like, scrolling through some, bodybuilding forums a long time ago, and I've read some some people logging their experience, you know, like, applying an ice pack to their, testes. And I was like, I sort of looked into the research and, you know, I came across some studies sort of, demonstrating beneficial effects on fertility. And so there was like a one particular study that demonstrated that, ice in the testes for, like, eight to twelve weeks improves a variety of sperm parameters. And, obviously, being a biohacker, I am similar to you, Tim. I ended up sort of just trialing it myself and, you know, I started I grabbed an ice pack and started applying it, you know, regularly every single night. And, I thought, there's some there's definitely something to this because, you know, I was obviously waking up with, better morning wood and noticing more energy and things like that. So, yeah, man. Then I then I sort of did blood work before and after, twelve weeks, and I managed to get my testosterone all the way up to 988 nanograms per day later. So yeah. Yeah. That's pretty pretty crazy. And, the the testosterone level is also quite high. We can talk about it a little bit later of how you did it. But, you know, what's the, like, potential mechanisms of this colds improving, I don't know, like sperm? Yeah. So the the the research sort of looked at how, anytime the testes are two degrees too warm, so anytime they're outside, you know, increased by two degrees, outside outside of core body temperature, they're actually it actually arrests spermatogenesis. So it's it actually impairs fertility. So the practice is based around, you know, we're cooling the testes, but we're also one of the mechanisms that hasn't been fully explored is the, vasoconstriction that occurs. Just like when we have a cold shower or jump into an ice bath, we get severe, you know, vasoconstriction. I think the same sort of will apply with the testes. We're getting major vasoconstriction up against the actual gonads, and then that's followed by, like, a rebound sort of vasodilatory response, which makes sense. Sort of just bringing more oxygen nutrients to the testes to help with their, function. Right. So you wouldn't want to basically have, some something hot on on your lap sitting like a laptop or something that that would also inhibit this aspermatogenesis. Exactly. Yeah. And that's a one of the leading causes of, infertility is, just generally, like, you know, being exposed to AMFs and, just heat in general is having a deleterious effect on sperm parameters. You know, definitely one of the leading culprits behind, infertility for sure. I also, you know, gotten a lot of questions about, like, the sauna. So would that also have, like, this negative effect? Yeah. So part of my recommendations when it when it comes to sauna usage is that I think all men need to need to bring an ice pack in with them, using the sauna. I know it sounds sounds crazy, but, I mean, I I've got my own infrared sauna here, full spectrum, you know, mid air and far infrared. And, I always make sure to bring an ice back in. And, it just makes sense because traditionally, they viewed the, the the sauna or, like, heat exposure as a mean as a male contraceptive a long time ago, like a method of contraception. Right. And, is there any, let's say, you know, like, prescription or protocol with the ice pack? Like, how many times a day would you need to do it? How long per e session? Yeah. So, there is no, like I mean, I'm trying to sort of, describe, like, a bit of a protocol, and that would be, like, ten to fifteen minutes up to three times per day. And I think the best way to sort of start is and one thing that all men need to know is that we don't wanna be applying the ice pack directly to the skin of the testes. We don't wanna burn the skin. A lot of guys think that it's, you know, applying the ice pack there, but it's just gonna damage the skin and burn the skin. So instead, you wanna apply it directly up against the the underwear, the intensity thing. Right. Yeah. Okay. Gotcha. Yeah. That was a good clarification.