If you're unhappy in this life, like, why do we need, you know, all these extra years? It it is about helping others. It is about sharing the best of you with the world, becoming like a better version of yourself. It's basically about giving more than you take. That's that's this kind of secret of happiness. Welcome to the Sim Lund podcast. I'm your host, Sim Lund, and our guest today is Sergei Young. Sergei is an investor and a serial entrepreneur. He's the founder of the one hundred million longevity vision fund. His latest book, The Science and Technology of Growing Young, talks about how to improve your longevity. This episode is brought to you by BioOptimizers. They're giving the listeners of this podcast an exclusive offer on one of their best selling products. It's called magnesium breakthrough and is the most full spectrum magnesium supplement out there. Most supplements contain only one or two forms of magnesium, when in reality, there are at least seven that your body needs and benefits from. You can save up to 20% off the best magnesium supplement on the market if you head over to simlond.com/magnesium. That's simlond.com/magnesium. Sergei, welcome to the show. Hi, Sim. Hi, everyone. I'm so happy to be with you today. Yeah. I'm also glad to speak with you. And, yeah, you were recently written, this amazing book about, how do you optimize your longevity and potentially increase your lifespan. But before we get into the book, like, how did you get into, like, longevity itself? What made you interested in it? Yeah. So, our journey to health always starts with a problem, always start with a wake up call. And, like, eighty percent of people around me have the same experience. You've got a, like, a wake up call, like, huge shock, which is usually significant deterioration of your own health, of the health of the people that you love. So that's unfortunately the story. For me, it was lung cancer of my father back in 2005. He survived, but the quality of his life has never recovered. And and, I just discovered that I've been genetically predisposed to have, high cholesterol level back in 2014, and they wanted to put me on drugs, on statins. And, I didn't really like the idea of, you know, taking statins, drugs every day for the rest of my life for another forty years. At this time, I thought I'm gonna be living another forty years. Right now, I have a much more ambitious number. And, so I just started to experiment, using foods, supplements, physical exercises to just optimize my health. And, apparently, I solved this high cholesterol problem without any statins, and, I thought, okay. If our body has this amazing ability to heal itself, to be healthy, there's so many things that I can do. And then fast forward, a few years later, I I founded my new fund called longevity vision fund, which invest in in different longevity technologies. Basically, bringing affordable and accessible version of health care to the world. Right. Yeah. There's a usually, people start to change if they're, like, or already too late in a sense that, they have something Yeah. Yeah. Bad problems. It's never too late. Yeah. But you're right. Yeah. That's that's fortunate reality. Like, health is always important, but never urgent. And that's that's a problem with our relationship with health. Mhmm. Yeah. And, of course, like, the prevention is the, kinda, best, way to go about it. Exactly. And it's like look. From I'm investor. Right? So from economic perspective, it's 10 to 20 times cheaper, and then it also helps you to sustain the quality of your life. You can obviously treat cancer stage four, like, at the late stage, but, like, recovery rates are twenty to thirty percent. So it's, like, sixty to seventy percent, sorry, seventy to eighty percent probability of, dying, but, also, like, it's just very difficult to sustain the quality of your life after this kind of treatments. Yeah. So we need to be preventive and proactive about this whole thing. Yeah. You mentioned that you have, like, a very ambitious number for your age. So what is how old do you wanna be? Oh, look. There's there's inflation going on in the world. Like, who wants to live to thousand years, like, three hundred years? For me, the the, objective is two hundred years. And, I wanna live every morning I wake up, and I start with my mantra. My mantra is I want to live to two hundred years in a body of 25 years old man. Mhmm. And I'm 49 these days, so it's, it's still ambitious on both sides. Right. Yeah. Of course. You if you were to be super frail or, it's your quality of life would be very low. I I think most people wouldn't want to live to 200. So it's a Of course. Yeah. Yeah. So the youthfulness is still, kinda paramount. But, how do you do it? Hello? How what do you do for yourself, to reach that number? Yeah. So, if you look at the book, I'm talking about kind of three periods of time. One is what you can do today to live to 100 healthy and happy years. So and I do believe in today's world, unless you're genetically unlucky, very unlucky, it's possible to live to a 100 years. And, you know, I call it's it's five longevity buckets. We can discuss it. Like, what are the things I'm doing now? And I'm, and I I get a lot of people in the longevity field, so I I kinda know what particular routines they, they use. And I'm I'm pretty sure your audience is pretty familiar with that. So that's one. And that's actually, like, the bonus chapter of the book. It's called who wants to live forever, and it's about 10 longevity choices that you can do today. So that and the chapter is, like, twice as long as any other chapter. So a lot of things you can do today. So then the major part of the book is is what I call a near horizon of longevity innovation. So, I'm talking about technologies and and scientific breakthroughs, which gonna be available to us in the next ten to twenty years. And just to give you an example, it's so I'm talking about gene editing, gene therapy. I'm talking about, longevity in the field, new class of drugs similar to longevity supplements. We're gonna have longevity drugs pretty soon in the next five to ten years. Whether it's gonna be informing, rapamycin, or anything else or a drug developed by artificial intelligence, we'll see, but we're gonna have it. And, organ regeneration. Similar to old cars, we're gonna be able to replace organs inside our bodies. So that's that's like a near horizon of longevity innovation. This is the main part of the book. And my final two chapters, is the chapters about the far horizon of longevity innovation. So while near horizon is available to us in ten, twenty years, this will help us to break this barrier of the maximum lifespan, to live longer than hundred and twenty years. I mean, you know, and our audience knows that the oldest person on Earth, she lived 222, and she died twenty years ago. She was French. And, so this will help us to live 220, hundred and fifty years. But then the far horizon of longevity innovation, which basically technologies, which will be available to us in the next twenty five to fifty years, will help us to live, you know, for as long as possible to two hundred years. But that's changing from biological view of human body to more engineering view of human body. And, like, far horizon of longevity innovation, will will bring you technologies like human avatars, either robotic ones or virtual ones, human brain AI integration, nanobots inside our body. And we're all gonna be full of sensors, and we're gonna, yeah, we're gonna create Internet of bodies similar to Internet of things, the concept that we know today. The same thing will happen with our body. We're gonna be full of sensors. I'm full of sensors today. So I have, you know, WHOOP. I have, Apple Watch. I I just installed in my again, for another fourteen days, my continuous glucose monitor. I'm using Oura Ring to monitor my sleep, Zeopage to monitor the work of my heart. So this is all gonna be implanted in us, and it's gonna be run by artificial intelligence in decentralized way. So the it's gonna be like a global system to manage our health. But, again, twenty five, fifty years from now, we need we still need to stay on longevity bridge. We still need to be healthy and happy before that. Yeah. Because you can still, like, get hit by a bus or something. Well, statistically, well, let's let's let's I'm not big fan of immortality. I'm not sure we need to discuss immortality a lot. But, like, technically, I don't think immortality is possible anyway because there's always this black swan event where, like, you've been hit by a bus or anything else then. And and, so that that's kinda one. And second, I do think if you take out the depth from the human cycle, we're not gonna be humans. But, like, living adding ten, twenty, fifty healthy and k p years to my life, I'm all for it. I have plenty of plans on this planet and on, you know, going to Mars as well. I need three more years to go back and forth. Yeah. Yeah. Well, yeah, that's a kind of differentiation between, immortality and just, extending lifespan. So Yeah. This is interesting. And, like, we do invest a lot in technology and and the science. Right? So even if you try to model this this whole concept, like, when it's not gonna be one day when you're gonna decide whether you want to be live indefinitely or gonna be immortal or not. It's always gonna be your serious of life extension decisions. Like, every two, three, five years, you you will need to say yes or no to extending your life. Okay? And that's that's a different concept, and that's that's just a lot of, control responsibilities and a lot of freedom on our side, not on the side of just mother nature defining where when you're gonna die. So it's more of like, instead of reaching this omnipotent state of immortality, you're, like, just cons constantly having to, push the deadline further. Yeah. Right? Yeah. It's called longevity in scale velocity. It was, invented by David Gogel, and Aubrey the Grey. And, and the like every framework, it's just simplification of reality. But in the end of the day, like, in the last few decades, we've been adding one or two years of lifespan, for every decade. In the future, we're gonna be eating at least another ten years within ten years. So that this is what is happening. So some people say that the the, escape velocity is gonna happen, like, in 2035, if I'm not mistaken, or '30 '24, 2045 or something like that. So when do you think that is gonna happen? Yeah. So I I do think it's it's very difficult to predict when it's gonna happen. And I do know that whatever we have today, whether it's, you know, power of early diagnostic. Right? Diagnostic comes to our home. That's that's a that's a theme of the chapter called DIY diagnostic or power of, like, early, you know, early diagnostic through checkups and medical screening as well. We don't have technology today to extend our life, so I can predict when longevity escape velocity will will be available to us. So if you think about, what, like, what particular technology can help us to do it, it's it's two options. One is gene editing. Unless we create the new, like, a generation or of humans or human beings two point zero, in our current biological form, it's gonna be very difficult to reach longevity escape velocity as well. So that's that's one thing. And or if we're gonna completely if we're gonna go completely digital, and then man and machine will become one. We're gonna integrate with computer power, with, with, nonbiological objects or parts of us, and then that's the other. Or or you can you can go just, like, virtual and create your virtual avatar, and, he or she will live, forever. But, like, I'm not a big fan of it. So my job is to change as many lives as possible. In fact, my mission is to change at least 1,000,000,000 lives. So I'm actually interested in a in a big numbers, bringing, bringing technology based, data driven, very affordable version of health care to the world. My dream for the health care service to be like a basic service that every government will offer to their citizens for free. Mhmm. And I do think that the the scientific breakthroughs today and and and technological discoveries are giving us this opportunity to do it in the next ten to twenty years. Well, that's a good good, good to hear, and, we'll we'll hopefully so. But but, given the given you talked about the avatars, like, that kind of brings into a lot of the questions about, like, consciousness and stuff. Like, would that be would it be actually you, or is it like a separate entity inside of your avatar or something? Exactly. How do you look about that? I had a I had a great conversation. I was interviewing two guys for my book, for the avatar question. One was, Ron Yavoritz, the CEO of, Magic Leap. And the other one was Peter Jackson, the man behind, Lord of the Rings, Avatar movie, and Hobbits movie as well. So I asked them this question. So they truly believe that, you know, any recreation of ourself in a virtual reality is not gonna be us. So and, obviously, we all want to stick to the material world. Right? We so much enjoy in this life, so we don't need to go virtual. But, is it helpful? Probably yes. Would it be like a massive solution for us to live longer? Yeah. I'm not sure we'll you know, a lot of people gonna be, having fun, and and, a lot of people would want to live in the virtual reality. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it's like the matrix then. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's exactly the metaphor that I had in mind. Right. But let's start with some of the, you know, some of the basics or, like, the reverse factor, some of the basics. Like, what are the, what can they do right now? So to say, like, what can people do right now to have, like, a positive effect on their longevity? What we know that works? What we can do today to live longer. So you had a lot of amazing guests on the podcast, so I'm not gonna spend a lot of time explaining that. And and some of the things is really familiar to our audience. When I have my thirty second and, again, it's five longevity buckets. Bucket number one, this is where I spend my time when I have thirty seconds on longevity. I just push people to do their annual medical screening. This is the most important day of your life every year. Well, my wife has a different idea what is the most important day of of my life every year, but, for me, if this year was June 8, I went to San Diego in California to human longevity center and done comprehensive screening. And and this is comes back to our early discussion, the power of early diagnostic. These days, if you do, like, early diagnostic of four killer diseases, which are responsible for for ninety percent of bats after age of 50, which is cancer, heart disease, diabetes, and neurodegenerative disease, you're fine. You know? You there's so many things that we can prevent. So that's very important. So the second piece is is basically about our life choices or I call it don't die stupid or passive longevity, like a more polite version of that, like tobacco smoking. And here in Europe, we have, like depending on the country, like, twenty five to thirty percent of the adults is still smoking tobacco. It's not that rare, by the way. The fact that we don't see these people on the street or in the restaurant and so kinda prohibited now by regulation, but they're still small. So it's this is statistically minus ten years from your life. Not using your seat belts in the car all the time is minus two years from your life. Riding motorcycle is 17 times more dangerous than driving the car. So the, like, mortality rates from motorcycle accident is, like, 17 times higher than car accidents. Or when we'll have an option yeah. I mean, if you can use driver's car, where a computer drives a car, mortality rates from driver's car's accidents is, like, 10 times lower than when it's human driving that. So or, you know, like, I I yeah. I'm I'm the lucky one. So I went to, like, South Pole and North Pole, right, on on this planet. But, it was all calculated risk. When I had an offer to to go to and and climb Mount Everest, it's like five to six percent mortality rate. I'm like, no, guys. I'm father of four. Yeah. I I I want to hang out for another hundred and fifty one year on this planet. I don't wanna take this risk. So this this is a typical mindset that you need to have. Yeah. Second is dive get it going. Like skydiving or something like extreme sports. Punchy punchy jumping. You shouldn't do this. Yeah. I mean, it's, yeah. I mean, you probably seen doctor Amin, a a neurologist and a and a brain literally a professor and and, and doctor, from California. He basically said, like, every time we release the dopamine through this, through this, like, extreme experience, and we just borrow from the future. Right? So it's like it just it's really what it really does is just brings to your harm hormonal and emotional volatility, and that's basically it. So it's not really kinda good for for your sustaining and long term health. The third one is about diet. There's a lot of disagreement what actually extends our life, but there's one agreement in academic community that calorie restriction, taking less calories, 15 to 25% less calories every day, will bring you another two, three, or five healthy and hopefully happy years in this world. It's actually easy to say. It's very difficult to do, and I'm pretty sure your guest and you have a lot of ideas how to, like, what's what should be your diet routine. But, like, what I do, I do fasting. So I fast thirty six hours every week. This is helpful in terms of reducing your calories, and I am really heavily, vegetables based. So if you take a lot of vegetables, stay very low in getting tons of calories. And, obviously, I took out all the sugar from my diet, and diet of my kids, and they so they when they when they write a resolution to, Santa Claus, they they always say, well, can we have a, like, a real pasta, not pasta without butane? Right. Or can we have some candies in in our home? So these kind of things. The fourth one is physical activity, and then we have this view of physical activity, which is very binary. So you're either, like, running marathon or you become an Ironman or Ironwoman. And, or I'm just sitting at home and watching TV. That's it. So I do think it's something in between. You can always use your wearables to measure, like, 10,000 steps a day. And and and I do believe this is, you know, 50 or two thirds or, like, 50% or half or two thirds of your physical activity agenda for the day. And it's it's it's just a lot of things you can put on top of it. You know, cardio, stretching, heavy lifting is actually pretty important after you turn 50 or 60. But, like, if you if you if you can integrate walking in in so many parts of your life. And the thief is, mental health, or what I call, peace of mind. It's, sleep. It's mindfulness and meditation and sense of purpose. If if you're unhappy in this life, like, why do we need, you know, all these extra years? And, it it is about helping others. It is about sharing the best of you with the world, becoming like a better version of yourself. It's basically about giving more than you take. That's that's this kind of secret of happiness. Yeah. That's a good good overview, and I agree, with all of them that, kind of the fundamentals we already know work just, you know, don't over eat, don't become obese, manage your product biomarkers, exercise, and, manage risk and social connections and those kind of things. Those are the, the main fundamentals. And if you if you look at the blue zones as well, the where where people live, very long, then, they follow those same principles that they don't necessarily, yeah, go for marathons, but they do have this low level of, physical activity all the time. Yeah. And they or they'll or eat. They eat, like, you know, different kinds of foods. They eat a lot of vegetables, but they also, like, drink wine and stuff like that. So, yeah, like, it's kind of a balance in the way of living. Yeah. That's true. I mean, it's basically these people. And, it's not only in the concept of these zones, but, you know, everywhere people live longer, they they usually live closer to the sea because then then there's prevalence of, you know, fish based omega three in your, diet, more wild fish if you want rather than farm fish as well. And it's it's an it's, usually, it's, it's a very rough terrain. Right? So you you just forced to, you know, use bicycle or do walking rather than drive the car all the time, like in The US, in the big cities. And it's, it's a smaller village, smaller communities where a lot of, social support that you receive. It's also very important for, for longevity. Mhmm. Yeah. That's that's true. Like, the hills may make you just, you know, exert more energy when you're climbing them, and the I think the altitude also has also effect on the cardiovascular system. Yeah. I agree, by the way. But, you mentioned the intermittent fasting. So, that's what I really do myself as well. How do you do it? Like, do you do it every day, or how do you walk through it? What I do no. What I do, I just every week, I I fast thirty six, hours. In fact, today, I was speaking on on Tuesday. I'm in the middle of my fasting day. So I finished my last food is on, Monday evening. Mhmm. And then I start on, Wednesday morning. Okay. Sometimes I start, like, Sunday evening, and then I finish on on Tuesday morning. It's basically two nights and one day. Like, two nights you sleep in anyway, so you're not eating while you sleep. And, so that's one. And then the other thing is, and just during the day during the fasting day, I just, you know, drink herbal tea, one or two coffees, a lot of water, and that's it. And I'm fine. I'm really enjoying this. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's more, it's pretty easy. Like, once you could use to it. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Like, we we like, you're really fast. Your body really kinda used to fast. And, after, you know, four or five sessions, your your body is actually hungry for that. It missing this, this beautiful lightness that you have in the end of the fast. Yeah. I do do it on, the other days, like this time receiving eating. Yes. So I'm well, I'm on the other days, I'm trying to avoid breakfast. So then I just have, like, a lunch and and a dinner. So if I can feed, into intermittent fasting, that's great. It's, like, six hours. So I I I have food at twelve and it's, in afternoon and then at five or 6PM, and the rest, I'm trying not to eat. Mhmm. Yeah. I'm not always successful, but, like, without the cheap days, it's just, very difficult to enjoy your life. So my cheap days is in is on Saturday. Well, that's good to hear. Because that's that's also like, at least, like, psychologically, it can be, also beneficial for for longevity. Yeah. I like I I've been diagnosed three times with excess of, healthy living. So I'm I'm always going to the extremes. And, what I actually find that once you go to the extreme, your body starts to work, against that to to bring you to the balance. So, like, any balanced view is is is healthy. You know? Any radical extreme, it might not be sustainable. Yeah. Yeah. That's right. But, what do you eat then? Like, do you like the you mentioned that color restriction is beneficial for longevity, and, interval fasting helps to mimic that. But do you but do you then restrict your calories on the regular days as well, or do you let the fasting let to create this calorie? No. So I I do, I do follow quite a strict diet, like, every day. And in my diet, it's just easier to tell, what I eat rather than what I'm not allowing myself eat. So it's heavily vegetables based with, how do you call it? Like, a fresh vegetables and, and Greens. Cooked cooked, yeah, and cooked vegetables as well. And, I very rarely eat meat. It's probably once every two weeks, and I need to know the source of this meat because I'm really, I'm really not in a position to, you know, integrate industrially produced meat in my daily, diet. And the problem with industrial meat is is not about the meat itself. It's about the things which should not be there, like antibiotics, growth hormones, equally bacteria as well. And, like, in US, I think it's in US, 70% of antibiotics is consumed by animals on the farm and by fish in in farms as well. This is ridiculous. Right? We're just developing this antibiotic resistance by eating this. So and for fish, I, you know, I I usually enjoy wild fish either from Atlantic or Pacific Ocean, and it's this is, like, the best thing that that you can do. It's and it's I think it's a good source of, protein and and fat as well. So I know quite a lot of people who are on a vegan diet, but it's just very difficult for me to with my travel profile and and my working profile, I've been a father of four kids. There's always something tempting, for me. But, so I'm just on a balanced diet, heavily focused on plants, on vegetables. Yeah. It also makes new fruits. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it makes it easier to, adhere to a calorie deficit as well. You're, like Exactly. With a higher fiber intake. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. Like, even if I would have, like, a half of my table full of vegetables, I'm still gonna be fine on the calorie side. Mhmm. Yeah. Then, what about all, like, eggs or dairy, those kind of things? On your question on dairy, so I eliminated dairy probably, like, five years ago from my diet, and I really enjoy it. So I don't have particularly, it's, like, super scientific view, like, while dairy is is bad for our health. But just experimenting and eliminating the dairy, it was it felt really good, and I never, you know, come back. Even, like, for coffee, you can always use coconut milk or, you know, any other alternative, milk as well. There's two problems there. One and, again, this is I'm I'm pretty naive actually in, in this regard. So, like, one is that, like, a dairy, for for for dairy to be processed in the opposite side of your body, it needs to become fermented. Right? Because at the age of one, probably after we we grown up, we we lose this, like, ability to process the dairy in in a current form. So, like, the the dairy products will need to be, like, for two or three days inside your, body, inside your gut, get fermented, with a lot of gases, you know, toxins, and then after that, you can process that. This is one thing that that, I basically understood what is happening with, when we try to process the areas and say, well, the other thing, again, about industrial practices on farms. For for cow to lactate, they give a lot of hormones. And, again, this is it's just a lot of hormones in, in dairy products. But, obviously, I mean, if you have, the benefit of your neighbor who's doing completely organic farming and, in a peaceful and eco friendly way, that's that might be the opportunity to reconsider. But, yeah, I don't have this this luxury. Yeah. Yeah. I think, yeah, the the quality of the data is huge because the, you know, pasteurization and the antibiotics and, growth hormones, those things, they do may make the, you know, dairy product itself more inflammatory and, things like that. But, you know, if if it is, like, whole raw dairy or, like, yeah, organic, then, it can still be, like, a good source of, like, calcium Yeah. And, nutrition and, you know Yeah. Yeah. Have you have you noticed noticed any, like, biomarker differences between, being on the area versus not being on the area? No. But, like, just looking at the quality of my skin and the quality of my gut processes, like, you know, gazes, you know, a lot of stuff, it's it's it's just been completely different for me. It was really comfortable. I'm always like, my relationship with food, yeah, went 100% positive, after I eliminated this. Okay. Well, that's good to hear. What about exercise? What kind of exercise do you do? Yeah. So I'm I'm, I had particularly difficult COVID case back in December, 2020. So it was, twenty days I spent in the bath with, with the fever. So I I have this positive of that. What I've heard people with very strong immune system tend to overreact to COVID. So that's my kind of positive explanation of what has happened. So I'm just recovering from it was pretty difficult. So for the last six day sorry. Six, months, I was doing mostly, yoga, stretching, pilates, and and, that's it. And a lot of walking. And, right now, I'm starting to integrate, like, a cardio, swimming, to my life as well, and more high intensity interval training is my new big, passion. I mean, in the course of fifteen or thirty minutes, you can you can just get a lot of effect. And I was just I I just got a book printed, on high intensity interval training. I still haven't, read this. But, apparently, it's actually worked pretty well in terms of your, like, body resilience and and, you know, helping your body to, to build, immune and and physical systems as well. What about, like, weights, resistance training? You mentioned that. So I've, I I didn't really enjoy the I was doing weights probably five years ago, and I didn't really enjoy it. Just, like, personally, it was, not really kinda interesting for me because my mind is very quick, and I'm, like, always say, oh, I need, you know, it needs to be, you know, busy. It's probably before I started the meditation on mindfulness. I need to try again. But, like, literally, after age of 55 or 60, you have to do weights at least once a week. Because what is happening, weights are, like, so good for your bone system and your cartilage as well. Like, people who's done heavy lifting are professional sportsmen. They have, you know, zero risk in in in terms of the, you know, bones, density or, you know, any other age related disease in this field. So it's it's almost like, you know, prescribed by you know, for everyone who's to turn 60. If you can, you'll really enjoy it, and it's really good for your bone health and bone density. Yeah. Did you or, like, how often do you do it then? The weight Yeah. So, like, for weights yeah. For weight lifting, I've done every week. I had just one one hour session. And what what I heard, again, in terms of prevention, it's once once a week, even for one hour, it's kinda fine. And the rest is just basically you need to be passionate about this whole thing. Yeah. What what kind of, like, let's move on maybe with, like, some of the supplements or the Yeah. More drugs or Yeah. Compound compounds you take. Yeah. So, so on the supplements, I just, on, yeah, on sergeyyoung.com, I've developed a lot of, different, how do you call it, infographics on sergeyyoung.com's, and, there's there's, part in the book dedicated to supplements as well. So on supplements, first of all, I'm big believer in supplements because of their placebo effect. I'm typical placebo man. If I believe in something, it works. So and, literally, in some of the, so we do invest a lot in in, like, drug discovery and specifically with the help of artificial intelligence. And, like, in some of the trials, when people test drugs, like, placebo group is like the your biggest competitor because people tend to react to placebo sometimes in the same way, like, to the chemical substance. So on the supplements, I've there there was a point of my life when I was taking up to, like, 40 different subs, supplements, kinds of supplements. So it it was more pieces, like, morning, lunch, and, and evening. Right now, it's, I'll show it to you. It's less than that. So well, I have this is because I'm I'm I'm usually having, like, two, two, meals a day. So it's, similar to that. This is what I have, and this is, for tomorrow. This is my evening portion. So, what do I take? Vitamin d three, I think we all, we we don't have sufficient level of vitamin d. And and because we're always under the roof, we don't have relationship or exposure to to sun. We it's either you had any car or in a subway or in the office or you're at home. So, like, where is this vitamin d will come from? So that's that's kinda one thing. Second, omega three is is super important. So I'm taking, like, the most supercharged version of omega three. It should be from wild, you know, fish. And, it's combination of, like, seaweed and omega three supplements. I like that. I I actually do a I'm I'm big fan of seaweeds, and, taking actually I have six months rotation schedule. Like, every month, I would take, like, a different seaweed, in form of supplements. And, this is what I learned from Japanese. Like, from every nation living close to the sea, it's, this is a great component of, this as well. Because of my liver problem and my high cholesterol, I tend to take, quite a bit, quite a bit of milk thistle. So that's then. For my brain, I take gimco biloba. I spent quite a bit of time in Shaolin Monastery in in China learning different arts. And, I was surprised. Like, Ginkgo is, like, their, you know, tree number one, and they they big fan of, of that. So, yeah, like garlic for your heart. And, obviously, if you look at garlic supplements this day, whether it's oil or powder, it's all odorless, so you you don't have, like, a social distancing problem or opportunities by taking this. I I think it's actually very important to take care of your health, sorry, heart health and your vessel system by taking garlic supplements as well. And I do rotate this. It's I'm I'm not I'm I'm taking this for, like, thirty days, and I'm taking, depending on the supplement, one or two or three or even the five times off, and then I on a rotate. What else? And in terms of longevity supplements, like, the only thing that I'm taking is NMN. Where's my NM? Yeah. So the one that I take is, it's from, what's the Alive by Nature. It's Stablingo. So I like the fact that I I just take, like, you know, four pieces, you know, under my tongue, and, like, every morning, I can absorb it. So NMN is, like, the only thing that I'm I'm taking on a regular basis. And I'm not taking any drugs like, metformin or rapamycin. I do think, they may be promising in a longer term, but in the age of 49, I don't feel like I need to be on metformin. And I don't have, so I'm measuring my glucose with my, Freestyle Liberlink with my glucose monitor. So I'll just, do like this. Yeah. And it's always fun to see the number. So I kept everything you know, everything is okay on my glucose level. So I, yeah, I'm I'm not sure if metformin's metformin is extending lives of everyone or the people where which are predisposed to have, you know, high diabetes risk. So that's the but we will clear this in the next five to ten years. That's just so Yeah. There's a there's a chapter in the book called longevity and appeal, which basically says about different candidates for longevity drugs. And they if you ask me, there's, like, at least fifty percent of chance that it's not gonna be existing drug. It's gonna be the drug developed by artificial intelligence. So this is what we invest, through longevity vision fund. That's a bit lengthy, answer, but, yeah, I'm big fan of this topic. Yeah. That's a great yeah. Like, it's, like, it's those are a lot of the supplements I take myself as well, like the garlic and, the vitamin d and the n m n. I take it as well every once in a while. And I agree with the metformin that if you are not diabetic, then, maybe you don't need it because it can also have, like, some negative effects on, like, exercise performance. And so I'm seeing for that. Yeah. Yeah. That's true, by the way. That that's actually, like, the biggest, side effect that people mentioned. People who are metformin, it's, saying it's just reducing the efficiency of your exercise. I don't think it's that bad, but I'm I'm just, yeah, I don't I don't think I am at the age and and and and the state of the health which would require to be on Metformin, there. And it's yeah. In in some of the countries prescription drugs, so you you just you really need to see the doctor and have dialogue with your doctor before you take in this, this risk. And what about rapamycin? So I it's I I don't even know, like, whether we need to, count on rapamycin as a longevity drug. It's a monosuppressant. And and, like, I'm not a big fan of suppressing my immune system. Let me put it this way. And, again, it's I I don't think it it does matter what Sergei Young or any of us think about this cold. There's needs to be a trial, when in the course of, you know, three or five years, we'll test these drugs in the context of their longevity side effects, and and that's it. And and this is what is happening with near Barzilai, and I'm on the board of American Federation of Aging Research. We're working seriously on launching the TAME trial, which will test Metformin in the context of h, h related diseases drug or or or longevity drug. In the next few years, it's gonna be three thousand people. We're gonna receive results of that, and then we'll it's gonna be pretty clear whether we we, we can count on it on it. Funny fact, from Nir Barzilai, a very good friend, professor, who is, leading the TAME trial, in the context of American Federation of Asian Research. Meet you know, there's, like, placebo group in every trial and and, like, in this case, it's metformin group. So, placebo, for this trial was much more expensive than metformin. Can you imagine that? This is generic drug. It's been here for, like, fifty to sixty years. So and this is just reconfirm that longevity and health is not necessarily, like, expensive thing that you couldn't really afford. Like, I was just looking at this study. Like, the typical pushback that I got in you when I speak in The US, like like, Sergei, we don't have money to live on on a healthy diet. Come on. I mean, you just go to the store and you can buy vegetables. This is like your cheapest diet you can have, and you can cook them. And half of the vegetables, you can just take raw or even more than that. Right. So, statistically, it's actually $1,000 less per household when people switch to more vegetables based on again, I'm not talking about becoming vegetarians or vegans. I'm talking about just, you know, bringing a lot of vegetables to your thing or, like, all this power of wearables, like, you know, Apple Watch or Whoop or Fitbit or Garmin. Yeah. It's not wearables anymore. It's our personalized health care devices, and they can prevent so many diseases. And they all they would do, they will just include, like, you know, glucose monitor there in a few years and, blood pressure monitor, and it's gonna be 90 to 95% of things that you need to measure about your health. Yeah. Yeah. That's that's that's, like, amazing thing about technology that you can have is a real real time feedback about your, status. And then you can see, like, okay. Today, I have, like, this worse that's or you like, if you have, like, some sort of a detective that looks at maybe cancer cells or something about in the future, then, you can see it. Okay. It starts to form, and you can, like, eliminate it faster. Yeah. Yeah. I agree. Well and, of course, you mentioned that the it's expensive. Like, well, fasting is free, and, calorie restriction is also free. So Exactly. It's still possible. Exactly. And, like, walking is free. Last time I checked, walking is free as well. And, meditation, like, people need, like, zero help with meditation. You don't even need an app or or ink or sorry. Not or ink. Muse string. Yeah. Muse device to meditate. Yeah. You just, you know, sit calmly in, in, in a silent space and, you know, trying to manage, your cortisol level and, you know, switching off the the all these random thoughts in in your head. So there's just there's so many things that we can do for free. Just an excuse. Yeah. What about, like, more of these advanced technology, like, or the therapies? Like, have you tried any stem cells, PRP, or something like that? Yeah. So I had a lot of offers because of, like, my community. I had a lot of offers to do stem cells injections, and I always said no to all of them. Well, if you have particular, health condition, which would radically improve the quality of your life, then I think you should consider the stem cells. But, yeah, this I think it's just a little bit more than 10 conditions, in US, which is approved by FDA when you can basically kinda use the stem cells, regimen. The rest is, like, people go to Bahamas, to Panama, to Mexico to do, stem cell treatment. I'm not a big fan of it. I, yeah, I I do think, you know, I'm in the age of 49. Yeah. I can with within the current scope and and availability of the science and technology, I can be healthy, and happy for another, what, ten, twenty years, and then we're gonna see the solution to the stem cell. Is it super promising technology? Ex yes. A 100%. I'm pretty sure. Do we understand all the downside of using that and all the risks? I don't think so. Right. Just takes more time than to Yeah. Yeah. Just yeah. I know we we want everything now, but it's like human biology and human health is the most complex thing that you can do. And, well, it's the other myth. Like, people like to people would like to to find, like, a silver bullet to fix their health. Like, what are the one thing that I need to do to stay healthy? There's no such a thing. If one thing would exist, then it's either mother nature in the process of evolution, or, scientists in a form of scientific research will find the answers to aging. So it's always the combination of things. It's always managing complexity of your different, you know, habits and and decisions in your lifestyle. Yeah. That's right. But the is there any like, if you were to guess, like, what would be, like, the magic bullet in the future? Or, like, what is the most potential thing? Yeah. So I do believe it's genetic and gene therapy. And, well, that's like the way for us to fundamentally, redefine ourselves as a human. And you know what? I mean, look what we have done in the last thirty years here, with with this field. Like, thirty years ago, it took US $3,000,000,000 and thirteen years to sequence human genome. Right now, just few hours and, you know, what, couple of $100. That's it. Like, thirty years ago like, twenty years ago, gene, like, gene therapy, genetic thing was available only to, like, handful of people who had very severe disease, had nothing to lose on this earth. Well, today, we all participating in, in a huge global experiment of gene therapy because Moderna and and, you know, other COVID vaccines are the outcome of gene therapy. And I do think it's a positive experience. People have their own use on on vaccines. I have mine. But in the end of the day, like, what was that? Moderna vaccine, yeah, was developed in the course of two days. I mean, obviously, it was a lot of hard work for, like, decade before that. But in the end of the day, it's, this is this is why we were so fast to respond to COVID. If COVID would happen would have been happen, like, fifty years ago on this planet, like, the death toll will be only completely different scale. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. Yeah. The technology can be great for sure. Like, and, would you would you imagine that this process will be, like, even faster in the future? Like, you can, you know, do it within an hours if, another event like this happens in the future. Yeah. Yeah. Sure. I mean, we we live in a world where technology is exponentially, you know, developing itself, all the time. So it's it's the speed of technological innovation gonna be, you know, faster and faster. Well, by the way, my view is then speaking of gene editing and gene therapy, like, in ten, twenty years from now, the biggest obstacles, is gonna be not it's not gonna be in in the field of science, not gonna be in the field of technology, but it's gonna be in the field of ethics and regulation. Yeah. Yeah. I I I yeah. Like, we build all these technologies to extend our life, but we still haven't been alive that we want to extend with inequality gap, our bad relationship with mother nature, outdated social constructs in our society, you know, all of this. We need to fix it before people will embrace the idea of living longer. Yeah. I totally agree because the ethics is, that is gonna be the final, like, conflict in a sense that Oh, yeah. Exactly. Whether or not people, embrace it and, whether or not it's gonna be legislated or whether or not it's allowed at the first place. So, yeah, it's a huge, ethical problem in terms of, like, yeah, what does it mean to be human and, what kind of society you want to live in. And, yeah, it's a very complex more more more complex in some cases than the actual science. Yeah. The final chapter of the book called morality of immortality, and and it is about the ethics of, longer living. And, there's so many questions that we need to to solve. And that's why a lot of people, like, if you ask, in, like, at least in UK and US, if you ask people if they want to extend their life, people, like, 65 to 75% of people say no to, to that. Right. I think that that there's this misconception about either associating just living longer with, you know, the frailty and the degeneration or the idea of, yeah, immortality that, you cannot somehow somehow, you're gaming the system in some way or, like, yeah, you're overcoming this evolution or something, but it's not it's, like, just extending the quality of your life in some sense and prolonging the, life that you have. It's not like you're not really really changing, you know, you you are changing it. You are manipulating it, but you're not, like, really changing the fabric of reality. Does that make sense? Yeah. I agree. I agree. Yeah. We we're just full of misconception. We have wrong models to to, to use when we imagine us living longer. Mhmm. Yeah. And also, like, in the process, we will learn about, other things as well. If with, like, gene therapies, we can learn about how can we, you know, prevent cancer. Like, if you ask people, like, do you want to find a cure for cancer? Then they'll say yes. But, do you want to use that same technology to, live longer than no? Like, it's Yeah. Is it like a very contradicting? Look. I mean, it's it's, it's the same. Like, what we've been doing so far, we were just preventing early death. That's it. That's that's our, like, the only driver of life extension. But right now, we're looking at different direction of reversing aging processes inside our bodies. Is there anything, that we didn't mention that you want to cover? No. I think, we did discuss importance of edX. We did discuss that, the key message from the book is we all gonna be living longer or radically longer than we expect. And while we're waiting for all these beautiful technologists coming to us in the near horizon of longevity October from now, it's important to stay on longevity bridge and follow, you know, 10, longevity choices or these five longevity buckets. Like, whatever your, you know, to do list in, in longevity. But the time to change is today, not in ten years from now. Yeah. Well, that's a good, note to end as well. Now before I ask the last question, where can people learn more about you and your book? Yeah. So the easiest way to connect with me is go to sergeiyoung.com. This is my, you know, platform where you can you can find a lot of free stuff on longevity from infographics to kind of free books, access to longevity video academy, or just order the book, on, you know, any platform. And, if you order the book, you can claim the offer from sergeiyoung.com, website. We we give you a present like free longevity academy, couple of other books, one on the diet, the other one on the kids' health. And and because I I'm father of four, so I'm I'm I'm I've developed quite a framework how to teach them to live in a healthy way. And, but, otherwise, just, let's stay in touch. We have very interesting newsletters. This is this is the best way to connect. Awesome. We're gonna put put all the links in the show notes. And my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habits that you wish you adopted sooner? Oof. Yeah. I think it's just, recognition that, of the importance of the mental health and happiness in addition to physical health. Because every time we speak about health, there's a tendency to speak about physical health. Well, I think it's internal harmony. The the your relationship with the world, with the community, with people around you is much more important, determinant of your even decide to live healthy life. So it's only when I discovered my longevity passion and started to to share, you know, the best of me with the world working on my all my pro bono, longevity projects. I've discovered the true passion and, became happy. So that's that's that's probably important, for me. And I wish I would learn it not in, when I turned 43, but much early in life. Well, that's a really good advice because, yeah, like, if you if you did live forever but you hated it, then it's like, eternal suffering. Yeah. It doesn't make any sense. I agree. Right. Well, it was a great talking with you, and, yeah, looking forward to your future work. Thank you, team. Thanks to everyone in our audience, and please stay healthy and happy.