There is no one magical pill that will make, you know, all of the bad stuff go away and will make you live forever. Right? So it needs to be an effort on a daily basis. Welcome to the Simlod Podcast. I'm your host Simlod, and our guest today is doctor Elena Serranova. Elena has a PhD in stem cell biology and autophagy from the University of Birmingham. She also has a master's degree in translational neuroscience and is the founder of NMN Bio. In this episode, we talk about the details of the process of autophagy and how does it work with NAD. This episode is brought to you by SelfDecode. SelfDecode is a genetics decoding company. You can get personalized health recommendations based on your DNA and the latest scientific research. They have numerous different DNA reports for different areas of focus like weight loss, longevity, gastrointestinal health, cognition, and even mood. Recently, SelfDecode came out with our two point o software that incorporates artificial intelligence in generating DNA reports. It's the most advanced and comprehensive consumer DNA service in the world. You can get a 10% discount with the code seam at selfdecode.com. Head over to selfdecode.com and use the code seam for a 10% discount on your personalized DNA reports. Doctor Relena, welcome to the show. Yes. It's, it's a pleasure to be here. Thank you for having me. Yeah. I'm, excited to talk with you, because, you know, you're one of the few, scientists who actually does, you know, research about this thing called autophagy. And, that's something that, I am really, interested in myself and a lot of people are also curious about. And, yeah, you have, like, a full, like, a smaller profile full of different kind of, studies that you've been involved with about autometry and those kind of things. So how did you become, let's say, like, an autology scientist? Yeah. So I'm actually an interdisciplinary scientist, and I guess that I always was, really eager to learn. And, I sometimes call myself an information junkie because I really love absorbing new information. So I actually started my studies with psychology and I did my bachelor's degree in psychology, a bit of cognitive neuroscience there, and and then I realized that I I'm really fascinated by the human brain. So I started studying neuroscience, at first myself, and then I found this really, interesting master's degree in translational neuroscience, which is basically neuroscience and genetics. And this is when I first got involved with, wet lab biology research and I got fascinated by it again because I got to grow cells and and do cool molecular biology experiments on them. And this is when I decided to continue my studies, in this area, and I I did my PhD at the University of Birmingham in The UK in autophagy and stem cell biology, where I was studying, different mechanisms, related to neurodegeneration in stem cell derived models. And the main mechanism that I was studying was autophagy. And this eventually led me to studying, other areas such as NAD biology and, cell metabolism and so on. Yeah. Those are really, like, really popular, all these topics, like stem cells and NAD and autophagy. So, yeah, you must be feeling like, you know, on top of the world in terms of, choosing, this right topic to pursue in your Yeah. Well, it's, autophagy is a very essential mechanism as we will, you know, talk about it today in more depth. And it's very crucial for, you know, for multiple cellular functions. And without it, cells literally cannot survive. And on top of that, autophagy is also related to to NAD as well. And this is when I came across, you know, the these popular, subjects such as NAD boosters. And this is why I started my current company as well, which is NMN Bio, which offers, antiaging supplements with with with focus on NAD boosters in particular. Mhmm. Yeah. So, yeah, maybe let's start with, what is the Tabatia and how does it work? So you have, like, some slides also that you prepared for us, and, yeah, you can just share the screen. Mhmm. Absolutely. I would be happy to do this. Let me just this here. So, and ta dang. Just bear with me, please. So what is autophagy is the question of the day, and we will start by stating that autophagy is, is basically a vital homeostatic pathway essential for cellular survival and human health. So what does this actually mean? We're going to talk about this in great detail today. First, we will provide an overview of the autophagic mechanism. So it starts with the formation of the so called Phagophore, which is a double membrane structure, and what the Phagophore does is that it engulfs different dysfunctional organelles and aggregates from proteins and other compartments of the cell that need to be digested because they're not serving the cell anymore And this process can be triggered by multiple pathways. Some of them are mTOR dependent and some of them are mTOR independent. And, there there are some agents, some pharmacological agents, natural compounds that can activate all these pathways. For example, rapamycin is a hot topic right now, but it actually, acts through mTOR. And then, you know, there are other agents such as carbamazepine or trehalose, which is actually a disaccharide that you can put in your coffee instead of your sugar and activate your, your mTOR independent autophagy pathways as well. So back to the phagophore, what it does is that it engulfs all the cargo that needs to be digested and then, the autophagosome is being formed, from from this. Later on, the autophagosome is fused with the late endosome and then the lysosome, which is another, organelle in the cell, and it is acidic, and it contains acidic hydrolases that basically digest this cargo and, they they break it down into, into essential building blocks within the cell such as amino acids and fatty acids. So the reason why autophagy is, so important is that it's because it's implicated in so many diseases and we have seen in in multiple situations where autophagy is somehow impaired or dysregulated, where we're seeing with different pharmacological agents again or natural compounds that if we do fine tune the autophagic process within the cell, we actually can can see beneficial results. So for example in neurodegenerative diseases, the burden for neuronal cells in neurodegeneration is usually dysfunctional mitochondria and aggregate prompt proteins. Those are the top two, kind of, dysfunctional materials that need to be digested within the neuron for it to to function properly. And worse we've seen some, benefits of the autophagy inducer such as rapamycin and and trehalose and so on. And the same applies to liver diseases and myopathies, infectious diseases where upregulation of autophagy is beneficial. In cancer, autophagy actually has a dual role because sometimes the cancer cells are hijacking the mechanism of autophagy in order to survive to to survive, and this is where we're using autophagy blockers actually, and so on. And then in aging, we do see that there is a decline in autophagy that correlates with aging, and it, again, you know, causes accumulation of damaged organelles and reactive oxygen species and so on. So, again, upregulating our autophagy as as we, get old is is quite beneficial for the cell. And this is reflected in how many diseases it's, organ diseases, it's implicated, but also in in in systemic, illnesses such as cancer or or, you know, autoimmune disorders, metabolic syndromes, and even viral infections. So we see how important this, this mechanism of autophagy is and that without it, the the the all all of our tissues would be, doing quite, quite badly. Mhmm. Right. Yeah. Yeah. That's a good, I I also have seen, like, a ton of this research about how involved autophagy is, in everything. Like, it's it's involved with, the immune system, involved with the microbiome, the brain, and Mhmm. Just general eating as I said as well. But, like, you know, I think most people have this idea that is kind of this, thing, like this, like a robot or a Pac Man that is, going through throughout the entire body and cleaning up things. But it's not like, it's actual you can't, like, really pinpoint it or you can't identify this thing called autophagy inside the body. There are these autophagosomes that, illustrate or, reflect the process of autophagy, but autophagy itself as a thing isn't like, it's not like insulin that your body produces and you can, like, pinpoint. It's more like a Mhmm. It's a process. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And this is why, we're seeing how in in in in different concepts when we up regulate autophagy, how many things are basically being fixed within the cell. So we can see here that we have reduced accumulation of, you know, of toxic proteins in the cell, we have improved removal of pathogens such as viruses as well. So autophagy actually has quite a few arms, so there is the bulk autophagy within the cell and then we have the selective autophagy that is responsible for disposing certain substrates. For example, the arm of autophagy that is responsible for, for digesting dysfunctional mitochondria is called mitophagy or the arm of autophagy that is getting rid of viruses that are getting into the cells is called the virophagy. So it's implicated in in, you know, in improved immune responses and reduced inflammatory responses within the cell. It protects the cell from, from, from apoptosis or necrotic cell death. Improved autophagy is also, is also related to reduced cellular senescence and avoidance of oncogenesis. So it's very, very good for you. It's very good for longevity. And if you are interested in, you know, being healthier for longer, autophagy is definitely something that you have to keep in mind and, you you also have to strive to to to be increasing your autophagy throughout your life on a regular basis in order to get all of these benefits. Mhmm. But, yeah, you you also mentioned that you're involved in, like, cancers as well. So it, has, like, some negative side effects as well. So how do you know, you know, how much of this autophagy is good and, when does it become, harmful? Mhmm. Yeah. So, I mean, in cancers, it's a very specific kind of, a kind of situation where you see that, the cancer cells are actually relying on autophagy to survive and this is why you want to actually take autophagy blockers as a complementary cancer therapy, which is a strategy that has been, that has been implemented in various clinical trials and and it has shown some beneficial effects. But, 90% of it of the time, autophagy will actually be good for you. So if you don't have active cancer in your cell, autophagy is is definitely a very good beneficial mechanism for you to activate. Mhmm. Yeah. But, as I understand, then there's always some sort of autophagy happening inside the body in some shape or form. And, it's just that during certain activities, like, it increases exponentially higher. So, yeah, like, what what ways of to increase it and, like, yeah, how much, again, do you need in terms of that? Yeah. Absolutely. So first of all, in order to understand how to increase it, we need to know what activates it. So what activates autophagy is the signal of starvation where we have decreased, extracellular nutrients or growth factor deprivation, which has to do with blocking nutrient uptake. So when we have this environment where the cell realizes wait a minute, so there's actually not many nutrients, around me and, it realizes that it needs to build it needs more nutrients to survive or it somehow needs more, materials in order to build whatever needs to be built. So this is where autophagy is getting activated and then, it degrades all of these unwanted organelles and proteins and, as we previously mentioned, it breaks them down into amino acids and fatty acids. So this is being, fed, back to either protein synthesis for cell survival or, back to the TCA cycle for ATP production, for energy production. So this is what autophagy does and, as we can see here, there are actually multiple pathways that can activate autophagy. This is quite a complicated image and I try to do my best in order to highlight a couple of key, key pathways here. This is actually from from one of our review papers, that that got published at the Journal of Molecular Biology in 2020, where we're talking about pluripotent stem cell models of neurodegenerative disorders by which you can study autophagy. So as as you can see here, there are all of these pathways that that will lead to activation of autophagy and then you also have various, compounds that can activate autophagy, yeah, the various pathways such as for example here there is spiritual in the NMN through the sirtuin-one activation, which is also an indirect activator of autophagy, or trehalose, as I previously mentioned, that you can put it in your coffee, and, this is something that you can literally buy off Amazon, lithium, and so on. And in order to, in order to to to activate this process, the first the the major signal, the major, the major kind of strategy to activate it would be just through fasting. Because when we are fasting, we do have this nutrient deprivation going on, and then, different tissues will get into autophagy in in in different time frames as well. So for example, after twelve hours of fasting, you will get the autophagy ad activated in the liver. And then you other tissues will follow such as muscles and and heart and so on. So, that's, that should be the goal number one, and that's, that's why I personally am fasting for for most of my day. I probably have a narrow window of around three, four hours a day where I'm fasting, and I'm consuming calories, but the rest of it is just, you know, water and, maybe tea sometimes, but but that's about it because I want to activate my autophagy. If you want to take it even further and you want to get more, benefits from autophagy, of course, you can do, a fast of two or three days. Although this is something that not many people can do because it's quite challenging because you get very hungry and it's not easy to do. However, if someone wants to start and and and start getting the benefits of autophagy, they can just, start doing the intermittent fasting on a daily basis and narrowing this window of food consumption as, as much as possible. I know that there are some people that also do one meal a day, and this kinda gives them a twenty three hour fast, twenty three, twenty four hour fast every day. For me, personally, this is kinda hard. I'm not doing it often. I'm, I'm usually just having two meals, within this three, four hour time frame. Mhmm. Okay. So the main, kind of stimulus is this energy stress or, energy deprivation that, your body gets low in certain nutrients, and then the response is to start to recycle them and, you know, clean out the the things that you don't need so that you could feed and survive the healthier cell cell parts. Mhmm. Yeah. That's correct. Okay. Mhmm. I also have a slide here on on how to measure autophagy, which is something that I know a lot of people are wondering. And, in the lab, it's actually quite easy to measure autophagy in the cells because we can measure what's called the autophagic flux by, measuring l c three, which is associated, a marker that is associated with the autophagosomes, the the autophagy, vacuoles, and then, p 62, which is the autophagy substrate. However, this is not possible to do in humans. So and unfortunately we don't have a direct way, to to measure autophagy at the moment, but what we can do is we can measure the glucose ketone index, which is something doable. You can do this at home, and you can measure your blood glucose, and you can also measure your ketones, and both of those measurements can be taken with a prick of a finger, and then you get this, this number, this index that would indicate whether, you are most likely to be in autophagy or not. So for example here, I just I I just took, an even number here just, you know, for for the sake of the example, so it would be easier to to kind of visualize. So let's say your, blood glucose is a 100. Ideally it would be, lower than a 100, after after fasting for some time and then you're measuring your ketones that are now, climbing, you know, above 1.5 and then you divide these numbers and you get, you get this index here. And depending on this number, for example, if it's below 80, it indicates that, there's already a good chance of being in autophagy. And if the number is below 40, for example, it indicates that, you know, it's, there is a pretty big chance of you being in autophagy. And anything, even, lower than this number, let's say, lower than 20, it's actually quite hard to achieve. You would probably be able to achieve it after a few days of fasting, and then supplementing with some exogenous ketones as well, and then you would get a number, that would be, let's say, lower than 20. Mhmm. Yeah. This is this is just, a guide on, you know, how to measure autophagy at home. Yeah. Yeah. Is there, like, any work being done, on measuring it more directly besides the this glucose ketone index? Like, having, like, some sort of, yeah, like, other biomarker. Yeah. That's the challenging part because, let's say we want to measure autophagy in humans, and what happens is that, we don't have a sophisticated way of doing this because let's say you can, you can take a saliva sample or you can take a blood sample from a human. However, even if you do have a biomarker there that you would be able to measure, those biomarkers won't be correlated with the autophagy in different tissues. So that's the problem there and this is why we don't have a more reliable blood test or saliva test at the moment because it's very hard to, let's say, you know, you have a biomarker that shows a value of, let's say, 10 for the sake of our example here in the blood, but then what would be the autophagy in the liver? Maybe it's five, maybe it's 15, maybe it's 20, we wouldn't be able to know. So there is definitely more research that needs to be done in order for us to see how we can kinda calibrate, those values with, with the biomarker test. But at the moment, there is there is nothing else available, unfortunately. Gotcha. What what if you're, eating this very strict ketogenic diet and, you are producing a lot of ketones and your blood sugar is also quite low, so you should get this, very low, glucose ketone index. But let's say you ate something right before, and you still get this very low score, does it still mean that you are having autophagy, regardless that you just ate? It depends on what you ate. So, we do have fasting as a major activator of autophagy, but we also have fasting mimicking diets. So a fasting mimicking diet would be something where, you consume, let's say, less than 750 calories a day, so it's actually quite, you're still quite low on calories, and then you also would want to, to kind of notice where those calories are coming from. So if you're not consuming more than 15 grams of protein, and, you know, you have, a small meal with with not much protein in it and less than 750 calories, there is a chance that you would would still be getting some benefits of autophagy. Gotcha. So you also need to be, careful with the protein then. Mhmm. I mean, I'm on a ketogenic diet myself, and sometimes I'm leaning towards carnivore diet, to be honest with you. I'm I'm quite enjoying my proteins. But what I'm trying to do is that, I'm trying to have some days, let's say one or two days a week, or or I don't know, a few days a month where I'm actually consuming only vegan foods, for this purpose. So I'm low on calories. I'm consuming, no animal protein, and then, those are my kind of a detox days from the, from the high protein diet that I usually have in, and then I'm trying to maintain some of the autophagy benefits as well. Mhmm. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. I gotcha. Mhmm. Yeah. We can hear you. Okay. So in terms of, you know, how to naturally boost autophagy, I think we already pretty much discussed out everything here. You know, the, the exercise that we're doing when fasted, it's also very beneficial for the body. And then when we are, we're having some sauna sessions or some really hot shower sessions, we do have an effect where autophagy is also activated as well. So, all of the above would be, quite a good, you know, starting point if you want to naturally boost your autophagy, and besides that there are quite a few foods that could also help you boost your autophagy levels, and, and maintain it, even when you're consuming some calories. So those would be, something like elderberries or MCT oil, which is basically giving you exogenous ketones, and then other supplements such as, curcumin and berberine, turmeric, milk thistle, and NAD boosters as well because as I previously mentioned, NAD boosters are boosting the sirtuin one activity, and sirtuin one is actually an activator of autophagy through the TFAB and the FOXO transcription factors. So you will get those benefits if you're, consistent with, you know, supplements that can boost autophagy as well. And then, of course, with coffee, green tea, cinnamon, and and some mushrooms, we also can get, this effect where we're kind of boosting the, the likelihood of being in autophagy. Mhmm. How big is that effect? Like, let's say you do, drink a cup of coffee. Like, how much autophagy can you expect to get from that? It's not going to be much, and I think that, the main takeaway message here is that if you're interested in your longevity and in your healthy aging and in, you know, in in having multiple benefits including autophagy, it's kind of a regime that, you need to have on a on a regular basis. So, you know, healthy aging is kind of like a marathon. So every day, you need to kind of be thinking, okay. What can I do today in order to, to in in to enhance my healthy aging? One of the tools is autophagy. And, you know, if you're not fasting and if you're not, if you're eating like crap all the time, if you're eating a lot of carbohydrates, you know, it would be naive to kinda expect, okay, I'll have a cup of coffee or a green tea and I'll get a bit of my autophagy activated and this is it, you know. It's, it it needs to be a battle against aging every day. This is what, I'm usually telling some of my friends and, they're looking at me like I'm an alien or something because I'm very passionate about it and I'm usually, you know, transferring a lot of emotions around as well with this. But yeah. I mean, with with coffee specifically, it's not gonna be a huge effect, but, you know, if you are combining all of those things so for example, my personal, daily routine is to wake up, go, do, a workout for about forty five minutes or, I'm some I sometimes am going for a for a walk or a hike for forty five minutes. And then I will have my coffee. I will have my NAD booster as well in the morning. I will have my NMN, with a teaspoon of, olive oil, which is, which contain, oleic acid that is actually also a sirtuin one activator, and then I will have my coffee as well. So, this is my morning routine, and all of those things kinda are contributing to, you know, to boost the my autophagy. Mhmm. Gotcha. Mhmm. What are the foods, like like, inhibit it, like, besides protein? Or I think the main one is the protein, to be honest with you. I think that's the the the main kind because there are so, meats are nutrient dense in general. So for this reason, you know, any protein would would kinda inhibit autophagy. Mhmm. Gotcha. Mhmm. Okay. And I think that was it for my presentation. Yep. Good. That's good. Thanks for, yeah, sharing. That was a really good, overview. Yeah. Absolutely. Do you have any other questions for me? Yeah. Well, you, did mention, like, the, NAD, boosting as well. Mhmm. So so how does that work? Like, how does how does NAD, contribute to, autophagy, and, how can you, like, leverage it? Mhmm. Yeah. So, NAD is basically a master regulator of human metabolism. So it's a very important molecule in the cell, and it's, it's responsible for for fueling multiple processes, including energy production through the TCA cycle and, you know, the the subsequent ATP production. Not only that, but it also fuels our, our longevity genes called sirtuins. So, those are implicated in mitochondrial production, mitochondrial quality control, on DNA repair, and so all. The list is basically endless. And when we are on a healthy regime where we are boosting our autophagy and we're boosting our NAD with either supplements or exercise as well. And for this reason, actually, we we previously mentioned sauna, but actually any kind of hormesis, any kind of artificial stress for the body, even if it's a cold shower, for example, this would also, have a very beneficial effect because it will also boost the NAD production and activate the sirtuins. So, NAD production and, autophagy enhancement are kinda going hand in hand in the cell. And if you are following those holistic principles of, you know, of of healthy routine on a daily basis, you will get both of them activated. There are even some foods that are containing some, some some some nutrients and some compounds that can activate NAD. For example, broccoli and avocado both contain small amounts of NMN, which is which stands for nicotinamide mononucleotide, which is an NAD, precursor, and it converts into NAD in one step within the cell. However, the amounts that those foods have is quite small, and that's the reason why people are opting for, for an AMD boost in supplements such as NMN, such as the one that we are offering with our company. And, of course, all of our supplements are always third party tested in The UK, and we also encapsulate package and store them in The UK, for this matter. And, yeah, it's basically a part of your, of your kind of longevity strategy. So, it's, this might sound controversial because I'm selling supplements myself, but at the same time I want to say that there is no one magical pill that will make, you know, all of the bad stuff go away and will make you live forever, right? So it needs to be an effort on a daily basis. So you will have a look at your supplements, you will have a look at your autophagy activation, you know, you want to be eating healthy, obviously, no carbs, as less carbs as possible actually, and I can't stress this enough. You know, I think this is one of, the greatest biohacks that, someone could implement is to ditch sugar and carbs because, you know, everything changes once you do that because your insulin doesn't go up and down all all day long, and during the day. So this is a big deal for your body because, actually, this makes you age faster. And, yeah, I mean, I think that once you have this, this this strategy and once you are very conscious about what you're doing on a daily basis for your body, you will get the autophagy activation and you will get the NAD boost in activation as well. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. And, both of them, like, the wood fasting also help with NAD, production then or the similar ones that increase autophagy, like exercise and saunas and, would they also have, like, a boosting effect on NAD? Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. It will have a very good effect on NAD as well. And, you know, another one that is, another, hormesis basically for the body would be when you're working out and you're running out of breath because this means that you're going into hypoxia, and this means that you're having less oxygen that you actually need at the moment. And this also boosts, you know, your, your NAD production and your sirtuin genes eventually because this mechanism kicks in and it says, okay, so the environment is not ideal at the moment, so I need to up regulate multiple pathways in the cell in order to survive and in order to make sure that, you know, everything works as well as it can, because maybe there is some sort of a danger in the environment. Maybe you run into, you know, to to hide from a predator or something like this. So it's kind of a evolutionary conserved mechanism of survival. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. With NAD, would does that have also, like, negative side effects similar to autophagy like that? Would it help with cancer? Because I did find some one article from the Texas NAD. If they if they have, like, some these mice maybe if they have, like, some pre genetic disposition to cancer, then this NAD actually also contributes as to, like, the negative side effects of that. Yeah. Well, what happens with cancer is that we're still are trying to elucidate the link between cancer and NAD because there have been multiple studies. So there there's been another human study, for example, where there were patients that previously had skin cancer, and they've been, given NAD NAD boosting supplements. And, actually, not only they didn't get more cancer, but the, the the NAD supplementation actually made sure that more healthier cells are produced. So, what we're seeing is that, there is more there needs to be more research in different kinds of cancer in order for us to understand whether there are some cancers that are more sensitive to, to NAD boosting or not. It's quite complicated, but at the same time, there is no solid evidence in in human studies at the moment saying that, NAD boosting compounds can actually give you cancer or contribute to growth to existing cancers. However, if someone does have, a tumor, you know, they they should definitely check with their doctors first before taking an NAD supplement. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. That's a good idea. It generally is something that usually people, may want to consider if they're already, like, middle age and, the elderly. And the younger people, for them, their body is already supposed to be producing sufficient amounts of NAD and pathology. And for them, maybe the supplementation route maybe not that like, at least, like, all not all the time. They don't need to do that all the time. Periodically, maybe, but, consistently, regularly, may not be, like, the best strategy. Yeah. I think that, the peak of our NAD production is around 25 years of age, which correlates with our hormonal peak. So, after 25, this is where people usually start complaining about, getting tired more easily or having less focus and things like that. And I literally haven't met any one person that would tell me, look, you know what? I actually have never felt what you're talking about. You know, everyone is usually getting tired around the age of 26 or 27 more, more easily. And that's, that's the age where, you know, you need to ask yourself whether you would like to try it out and to see if, you know, an NAD booster would be beneficial for you. Although, as I said, you know, if you are at this, young age, you actually should be having a healthy lifestyle anyway and, you know, be exercising and doing all the other stuff, which most of people, don't do nowadays, unfortunately. And, you know, we're talking about, you know, the current pandemic and, you know, this COVID infection and everything, but the actual pandemic is the pandemic of obesity and diabetes and prediabetes because I've seen some some crazy statistics recently that were talking about, something like, maybe up to eighty percent of adults in the in the Western countries, having prediabetes. And I said, what? Like this this can't be true? This is ridiculous. And then I looked around and realized that, yeah, everyone is eating desserts every day and it's it's the norm. And actually, actually this is very sad because it's not the norm and shouldn't be the norm because that's definitely not what your body needs. It doesn't need all this insulin spikes all day long and this is what we're doing, you know, like everyone's stuck in every two hours or whatever, biscuits, chocolates. This is, this is so wrong. Yeah. I can't stress how wrong it is. So, you know, the and that's part that's the part of the problem. That's part of why young people already start having this this decline in energy as well because they're actually not very healthy. And even if you are considering yourself healthy and this was this was an epiphany I had, like, something like three years ago because I do have normal weight and, I do have a normal BMI. And I I was, like, skinny for for the most of my life, and I was actually telling myself, oh, yeah. I'm actually healthy. I'm fine. And then I started working out on a more regular basis, when I was finishing my PhD. And I realized, oh, wait a minute. I actually don't have any endurance at all. You know? I'm not healthy just because I'm skinny, just because I'm not a bit I'm not healthy, and I need to find it, keep on pushing myself. And, you know, I've been working out much more regularly lately, for the past, eighteen months or so because, you know, I'm I'm not tied to my lab work, anymore after the finish of my PhD. So that's definitely a good factor there. Mhmm. So, yeah, I, I I I kind of think that, it's a very it's a very important thing to kinda get people informed about the benefits of healthy lifestyle. And there are some catchy phrases that they they would hear here and there on the Internet, but actually, no. I would urge anyone that is listening to us right now to ask themselves, it's okay. On a scale of one to 10, how healthy, I I actually am. Okay? And then you can have, you can have a cheat sheet with with different measurements saying, okay. In terms of nutrition, on a scale of one to 10, how healthy my nutrition was today? And then on a scale of one to 10, how much did I work out today? Or, you know, healthy biorhythms, sleeping as well is something very important because this is where our body is regenerating. And sometimes we're, you know, like, people are going to sleep at ridiculous times at, like, four or 5AM, and then your circadian rhythms are are all wrong. And this makes you, you know, age, worse and age faster. And this is definitely not help. You know? So it's a I think that it's a holistic approach to aging that, what matters. And so I'm sorry. I got a bit of topic here, but I'm just really passionate about the subject. Yeah. Yeah. I I agree completely that, people nowadays are older biologically than they are chronologically. So they are following these bad lifestyle habits that accelerates their biological age. And, yeah, you can be, let's say, 25, but if you have the body of a 35 year old or forty forty five year old, then, yeah, you will feel tired and, exhausted all the time. So, yeah, what matters is more surely, like, the holiday lifestyle habits contribute to the, process of biological aging and things like, high blood sugar, diabetes, metabolic syndrome, obesity Yeah. Poor poor sleep, all those things that will reduce, like, the energy levels as well as, you know, just the general, health distribution of your health in general. Yeah. I think that's kind of the, missing link of what what should be focused on. Yeah. That's a very good point because, actually, there are quite a few things that actually drain our NAD levels because we do have multiple enzymes competing for, the consumption of NAD. One of these, class of enzymes is the sirtuin genes that we already talked about, and then you have the PAR genes and the CD 38, which is a marker of inflammation. So, as we age, CD 38 is being increased in the cell, and And then you're having because you do have those senescent cells in the body. So senescent cells are the zombie cells that are just sitting there and, you know, doing nothing, just secreting some of the planetary signals to turn, the neighboring cells into senescent cells as well. And this is what we have if we don't actively get rid of them. And by the way, on that note, there is, there are different supplements you can take as well such as quercetin that would get rid of your senescent cells and things like that. And then, you have the senescent cells that are, increasing with age. So your CD38 is increasing with age, which consumes NAD and then and now your sirtuin genes don't have enough NAD to kinda be referring other things in the in the cell. Not only that, but there are actually some some some other, things, some, during your day. So for example, if you're being exposed to sunlight, you have, DNA damage on your skin. So now your NAD is being drained because all of this DNA damage needs to be repaired. So it's all about living on a daily basis and kinda analyzing what are the consequences of what are you doing on a daily basis because, you know, being exposed to to the sun, for a prolonged period of time is definitely not good. Yeah. So also saw, like, in the summertime, there was a study that found the the, the body uses NMN to actually, repair or resist, like, the UV radiation. And if you are, you know, not having enough NAD or not enough having enough NMN, then you're gonna get burned also much faster because you don't have, like, the resources. Exactly. Yeah. So it's all about preserving your, your internal resources. And NAD is definitely a very important resource to to kind of think about and to kind of preserve as well. For sure. Yeah. But, in regards to autophagy, is that something also that gets lower as you age? Unfortunately, yes. So our ability to, to kinda be in autophagy is decreasing with age. However, I think that, you know, if you are conscious about it and if you're doing your fasting on a regular basis, if you're doing intermittent fasting, you you can make your body kinda to to get used to be in autophagy as well. So, again, it's like a long term kind of process where you need to be implementing the intermittent fasting on a regular basis in order to make sure you're you're still getting as much autophagy as possible. Mhmm. How would you, you know, like, rank these, things, in terms of, the autophagy? So, fasting is one, but exercise is also someone asked coffee is like, which one do you think is, like, the best for, boosting the autophagy process, and, which ones may not be, like, you know Mhmm. Not not not worth it? Yeah. I think that fasting is number one, then exercise would be number two. And then, you know, you would probably have, you know, MCT oil, for example, which which is boosting your exogenous catons. So for this reason, it it it kinda, it contributes to to, you know, to increase in the topology as well. And then from there, number four would be, everything else that we mentioned, something like elderberries and mushrooms and and the coffee and everything. So it's the least important one, but, you know, again, you do everything as a system on a daily basis, and then you get the optimal result. Mhmm. Okay. Gotcha. And, for your own lifestyle, you are doing in order to have zinc or what are you what else are you doing? Like, are you taking any of these autophagy boosters, like, you know, rapamycin or, metformin, anything like that? Yeah. So rapamycin, I wouldn't take because rapamycin is acting on mTOR. Right? So as we previously mentioned, they are mTOR dependent total 50 pathways and mTOR independent. So mTOR is also, responsible for growth and translation in the cell, and this means that, we don't know what would be the long term consequences when we are taking an mTOR dependent, autophagy booster, because, we we still don't know, many things about how mTOR works and if we are, suppressing it because rapamycin is a suppressor of mTOR as mTOR is actually a negative regulator of autophagy, so if mTOR is switched on, autophagy is switched off. If you switch off mTOR then you get autophagy. So for this reason I wouldn't take rapamycin but I would consider taking some some mTOR independent supplements. So, you know, microdosing with lithium, for example, could be an mTOR independent autophagy strategy. And then, trehalose, as I previously mentioned, I wanted to try spermidine. I I've heard a lot of it. I've seen some studies in mice and in cells as well, with regards to spermidine. Vitamin d has also been shown to be an mTOR independent autophagy activator, so I am regularly supplementing with vitamin d. So then, yeah, that's that's my strategy in terms of supplement for autophagy. And then, of course, I'm taking my NAD boosters. I'm taking, NMN from NMN Bio. We are launching our second product now in a few days, actually. It's called TMG, trimethylglycine, which is a glycine molecule with three methyl groups on it. And then, it's an excellent, addition to supplementation with NMN because NMN is utilizing the methyl groups, but then you're giving them back with the TMG, So it's quite a nice supplement. I also take berberine instead of metformin. So, because I live in Europe, it's actually hard to to get metformin here, and I would probably need, a prescription, which I don't have because I don't have diabetes. But berberine is the, the the herbal analog of metformin, and, I'm taking this on a regular basis as well. What else do I take? I really like my rhodiola, which is an oatropic, no nootropic herb, magnesium threonate, which is also good for your brain, but also for sleeping, glycine as well. So, yeah, I kinda have my own stack, of supplements as well. Nice. Yeah. Those are pretty good ones. I think, like, melatonin is also, some something that does active histology because the well, the hormone hormone itself, the natural hormone, also regulates the the process of pathology in in your sleep. So maybe the supplement will also have this side effect. I actually I also have experiment with melatonin. It's a very interesting supplement. I'm still trying to kinda see what is the optimal dose for myself in terms of melatonin because if I take something like one mg, it's actually too much and then it's, it's kinda hard to wake up. So I need to get another supplement that would be, that would have less melatonin. But, yeah, it actually has been shown to have multiple benefits on health, including autophagy and also increasing insulin sensitivity, which is a study that I recently have seen somewhere and I I I thought that it's very interesting because it's a sleep hormone, but surprisingly, it has to do with, with regulating insulin levels as well. So quite an important hormone and quite an interesting supplement in my opinion. Yeah. Absolutely. Like, it's almost like an antiaging hormone besides the sleep that, it, and, the, brain and a lymphatic system and, yeah, bone bone health and so, yeah, many many many other things. Mhmm. Yeah. Absolutely. Very interesting. You also mentioned this, trehalose, and, most people haven't heard of it. Like, so what is? Mhmm. Yeah. So trehalose is just a disaccharide. So this means that it's basically a sugar. It's a natural compound. It's natural sugar, and, some people just replace, replace their their regular sugar with trehalose. However, you know, there are pros and cons because it is a sugar. So if you have too much of it, it's going to to, you know, to have, an insulin spike, to result in an insulin spike. So that's not very good, I guess. So, yeah, you know, opinions vary on this one because, ideally, you wouldn't, be consuming any sugars at all. But, you know, if you want to put something in order to make your coffee, you know, a bit more sweet, then Trejalos would be the way to go instead of regular sugar. And then I also personally am using, a ketogenic creamer for my coffee as well, that I really like. And I think you also recommend one of those in your, on your website. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Like, the MCTs are a great way to boost the ketones. And if I'm not mistaken, at least, like, I there is research shows that the ketones themselves don't, suppress automatic even if there's, like, a a bit of more calories. So, that can be something I can get away with a bit more calories if we're eating that, like, like the, MCT top of a diet. Yeah. Yeah. So definitely very good stuff there. Yeah. What else? Like, is there something that we didn't cover that you want to talk about? I think we covered pretty much everything. I think this was a lot of information, actually. So, I would be very curious to, to kinda read the comments of your audience to see what they think about this episode and whether there is anything else that, they would perhaps like us to cover in the future as well. I would be happy to kinda, come over to the channel again because I really enjoy this this conversations. And, yeah, I think that, the take home message is to stay healthy for as long as possible and to actively work for it, on a daily basis. Yeah. Absolutely. That is. Before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? Mhmm. Yeah. So they can head over our website, which is at mnbio.co.uk. And we actually have quite a lot of resources on the website as well. So we have a blog with, blog posts written either by myself or a scientific writer where we explain, you know, more things about NAD, sirtuins, NMN, and all of this stuff. We're trying to, always have references to the studies that were mentioned in the blog post and so on so people can come and read, about this and, of course, they can get, some of our NMN, from the website as well and, very soon they will be able to get the TMG as well. And we're also working on a couple of proprietary products at the moment, and, hopefully, we will be launching those very soon as well. Awesome. Yeah. We're gonna put the links in the show notes. And, my my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you had at the sooner? To cut the sugar from my life. Yes. I wish I had this advice sooner because, you know, I I didn't realize how important this is. And when I started studying it myself, you know, I was just so surprised, how important this is and how simple this advice is and how people are, you know, unaware of how important this is for their health. Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. It's, well, yeah. Well, maybe, like, depends on your age. Like, if you're young, then you can probably get away with it, and, you can recover from that because your body, is more resilient. Whereas if you're, yeah, like, in your forties or sixties, then, having, like, a sort of, like, a bad diet, or excess sugar consumption, has a worse negative effect on your health because you already are low, you know, these resources, and it's harder to recover. But in your in your young, years yeah. Like, although, like, a lot of kids, eat, let's say, sugar, and then, they're still healthy in their later life because their body was so, like, insulin sensitive and very, adaptable to that. Yeah. Absolutely. I mean, you will get away with it, better, but at the same time, we are seeing increasing rates of of type two diabetes Yeah. All around the planet even in, you know, in teenage years, which is really heartbreaking. So I think that, you know, like, you you can, deal with it better, but this doesn't mean that you you still, should consume it. You know? Yeah. Totally. So yeah. Like, it's, very easy to avoidable for most people. Yeah. Well, it was great talking with you, and, yeah, super excited about all the things that are coming out with NAD and, as well. And, yeah, looking forward to your future work. Yes. Thank you so much. Thank you. Bye bye. Bye.