Welcome back to the channel. My name is Seem Lund, and in this video we're gonna talk about jacked grandpa. We're gonna talk about a 72 year old Chinese bodybuilder who reportedly looks like he's 30 years old. So make sure you click the like and subscribe for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. Alright. This is the article that was published in the men's health. 72 year old bodybuilder shares training and dark secrets that keep him as fit as a 30 year old. So his name is Xinmin Young, and, he's from China. So, yeah, he's, 72 years old. And, yeah, he definitely looks very fit for his age, muscular, lean. A 72 year old Chinese bodybuilder claims exercising every day and sticking to a diet plan that includes eating six to eight eggs for breakfast are behind his youthful looks. Bodybuilder Ximin Young started bodybuilding in 1984. He says that in the following thirty seven years, he has exercised daily, which he says has contributed to him having a normal blood pressure, normal blood lipids, and the bone density of a 30 year old. You son of a bitch. There's actually an older video about the same guy, Ximin Yang from 2018 that already looked at it, his, exercise and the diet habits. So I think we'll just, you know, play for it and hear from, the horse's mouth, so to say, hear from what he has to say about it. Yeah. The first thing, well, I wouldn't say that he looks like, 30 years old. The Internet, you know, overblow things, but I would say that he maybe looks, yeah, for now when he's 70, 72 years, he will look maybe like 60 years old for sure. Like, he definitely has, like, ten to fifteen years younger, looks to him. So he's definitely not like 30 years old. But, yeah, regardless, the bone density thing, I do believe that because bone density is built primarily from a resistance exercise, a weighted exercise, that's the best thing to increase your bone density. And, your bone density is actually one of the, you know, one of the most important things as you get older. You, have this stronger, resilience against the falling. You're you're less exposed to hip fractures, etcetera, because your muscle mass, your bone density, all those things go down with age. And as a result of that, you start to experience accelerated aging because you have less insulin sensitivity, less bone density, less strength. You have a lower metabolic rate. You have higher blood sugar, higher cholesterol levels, higher blood pressure because of having not enough muscle mass. And doing resistance training is the only thing that essentially, maintains that muscle mass. So, you know, he's been doing it for thirty seven years, but, you know, even if you even if you start in your fifties, it's still possible to build muscle, and it's more important to do so, than it is in your twenties or thirties. Do it. Yeah. That's that's the, misconception about the body weight or BMI that just having a higher BMI doesn't necessarily mean that you're unhealthy or that you're obese. So most bodybuilders, even if you are even if you have, like, a little bit of extra muscle mass because of training or something, then your BMI is gonna be above what is considered normal or what is considered normal body weight. So, yeah, like, the BMI is pretty outdated in in a sense. It's much better to look at, yeah, your body fat percentage, your muscle mass, lean muscle mass, and your biomarkers in a sense. If those things are in check, then it doesn't matter really what your BMI is, because, yeah, like the weight to height ratio doesn't take into account the muscle mass. Yeah. That's I I agree with that as well. The circadian rhythms, are important. So, yeah. It's much easier for your body to stay healthy if you are following the optimal circadian rhythm. Going to bed around the same time and waking up in the morning, preferably, like, around sun sunrise because then you would also start these circadian clocks. And what we have found, from recent studies is that, the circadian clock system has a huge impact on the speed of your biological aging, so to say. If the clocks are out of sync and, or they're damaged then your your aging is gonna be accelerated, whereas if you have them synchronized and working properly then, you're gonna age, you know, at best you're gonna age at a normal rate, but, you know, chances are you can slow down the process because of that. So this is the diet then is breakfast. So he eats he eats like a basically a basic bodybuilding pro diet, chicken breast, eggs, some vegetables, etcetera. I'm not sure. He he didn't mention, in the article nor in the video about what he eats for lunch or such, but I would imagine that it's something similar, just high protein, maybe like a bit of more carbs and not, you know, overly high in calories. So, you know, obviously, that that is just what has been found to work a lot for our bodybuilders. You know, the bodybuilders are following this diet for decades, and, we know that it yields, you know, beneficial results for body composition, higher protein intake. And a higher protein intake, for his age isn't also not gonna be, that detrimental to aging. Like, there's a misconception that protein accelerates aging. But what you when you look at the studies, it's actually that, the protein intake can actually protect it against those all of these similar age or diseases like muscle loss, bone frailty, metabolic syndrome because of that. Protein rocks. But I think a lot of people are asking, like, whether or not he's natty. Like, is he taking steroids or not? So because, you know, it is very hard to maintain such a good physique at his age in 72 years old. Is he natural? Well, I think that, well, given that he's been doing the bodybuilding for a long time, it wouldn't be impossible to be natural. Like, I think that if you are training every day for thirty seven years and you're eating a clean diet, then it would be pretty, achievable to have, like, a set trial body composition even in your 72 years old, because it like he's not a huge guy. Like, you know, this if if you were to swap the face with someone who is 30 years old, then, I think that most people will say, hey. That's a natural body because of the way he looks. The only thing is the age that says, like, hey. Maybe he's not but, you know, I think that he's been doing it for so long. He's built up such amount of, like, muscle mass. He's definitely smaller than he was in his, you know, thirties or forties. And he has lost muscle, so to say, but he hasn't lost it completely because of the training stimulus. He's still there. In this picture, he's nineteen ninety eight, like twenty years ago. So he's he was in his, like, fifties, like the masters division. Here he looks a bit more juiced up, so to say, for someone in his fifties. I think that it could could still be considered natural, but maybe, you know, obviously, maybe he's on, like, TRT or something. I wouldn't be surprised by that. Taking the TRT for someone who is 72 years old, it may actually improve the quality of his life and health as as well because of the increased in testosterone, increased muscle mass, increased bone density, and those other things. And for sure, he maybe has taken something in his past and now he's on, like, TRT or something like that. Alright. Let me know in the comments what you think about this guy. Is he naughty or not? What do you think about his physique? Are you going to keep training? What are you gonna do in terms of your aging? Are you gonna do it in your later years? And, yeah. Click the like and subscribe for future videos as well. Thanks for watching. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.