Hey. Welcome back to the channel. My name is Sim Lund, and in this video we're gonna talk about how do you direct your food into muscle, not fat. Basically, how can you make sure that the food you do eat, the calories you consume, how can they be used more for muscle growth and leanness and fitness instead of fat storage. So make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. So the idea for this video came from my own Instagram post, about a new gen partitioning of how to direct your food into basically muscle and fitness instead of, you know, gaining fat. In the beginning, there's a story. It's Jack and Tom. They're twins. One of them is obese and the other one is muscular. Jack is Jacked and Tom is Tom. He's a bit fatter. Why is Jack Jacked? Well, that's because his body is mostly building muscle instead of fat. So he's in a basically, in this situation where his body is utilizing the food in a way that promotes, fat not fat storage, but instead muscle growth and, muscle hypertrophy. This is this phenomenon is basically called the nutrient partitioning. How does your body use the fuel that it has? Are you going to be using it for, fat storage, building muscle, or, you know, burning it off for energy? Like, those different kinds of scenarios are all possible. And your own lifestyle and the eating habits, they're going to determine what is going to happen to the food that you eat, because, like, our own bodies are all very different. Some are have a very high metabolic rate. Some people have, let's say, more muscle mass. Some people have less, muscle mass, more fat. And it always a reflection of the signals that your body is basically receiving from the environment and what how does it basically partition those nutrients that you're receiving. The biggest lever that is going to determine or the biggest signal for building muscle is going to be resistance training. No doubt about it. Lifting weights, calisthenics, any kind of resistance training, that is the biggest or the loudest signal as well that signals the body that, hey, you need to build muscle because it's a adaptation requirement. You need to have this strength. You need to have this muscle tissue because you're in an environment where you are lifting things. And, in order to survive, then, you need you need to have muscle. Whereas if you weren't under any resistance, you're like sedentary, like, you know, in bed rest, in a hospital, or in outer space, then you're gonna lose, a bunch of muscle because there's no, there's no signal, there's no stimulus that is, enforcing the requirement for muscle. And the body basically or an epigenetic level as well starts to, use the foods that you eat more for fat storage because there is no need to have muscle. Muscle is a very expensive tissue, and unless there is a real dire need for having muscle, then, you're not gonna build it either. So that's why there needs to be this loud signal from resistance training that would tell the body that, hey, you need to have some muscle. Yeah, buddy. Resistance training also increases your insulin sensitivity which, helps you to direct the nutrients that you do consume into muscle cells. So, muscles muscle glycogen stores are finite. There's only a certain amount of muscle glycogen in in there and, things that deplete the muscle glycogen are usually just, you know, resistance training and heavier intense training. If you don't deplete your muscle glycogen, then, you know, those muscle glycogen stores are not never gonna be fully tapped into and, there's always this potential for over spilling. Whereas if you do resistance training, you not only become more insulin sensitive, it's easier for you to store those nutrients as a muscle glycogen instead of fat. But at the same time, you also have just, you know, the depleted glycogen stores that, you know, you imagine it's like a kitchen sink that things that promote insulin sensitivity are, you know, having a bit more muscle mass again, depleting your muscle glycogen stores and resistance training. All those things basically help to shuttle nutrients into the muscle cells, and then they're gonna be used for, muscle growth, muscle, basically glycogen synthesis instead of fat storage. The other scenario is insulin resistance, or being full on your liver on your muscle glycogen stores. Those happen when you're, like, over eating calories, over eating carbohydrates, and you're being sedentary. You're not really doing anything that stimulates insulin sensitivity and, you actually become insulin resistant. So it's much easier to gain fat if you're insulin resistant. It's much easier to get, diabetic if you're insulin resistant, whereas the opposite is the case if you're insulin sensitive. Diabetes. One key thing when it comes to exercise timing and, eating is that your body is actually the most insulin sensitive after after resistance training. So you lift weights, you, basically deplete the muscle glycogen stores, and you become very super insulin sensitive. So in that scenario, you don't even need insulin to shuttle, glucose into muscle cells because you activate these glucose transporters like GLUT four, which then, directly helps to shuttle, glucose into the muscle cells even if you don't even if you're insulin resistant, for example. Like, even diabetics are able to do that if they lift lift if if they lift the weights before eating carbs. So, weight lifting is the most best thing. For instance, sensitivity and nutrient partitioning because it directly tells your body to, you know, this is what you need to do with the nutrients. You need to build muscle and burn fat. And that's why generally I am a big proponent of, let's say, if I do eat carbs, then I would much rather eat those carbs in a post workout scenario because, then those carbs would be used only for, or primarily for glycogen resynthesis and recovery instead of, like, fat storage because you're more likely to store the carbs as fats if you, eat them while you're being sedentary. Like, you know, for example, in the morning eating carbs, you know, contrary to popular belief, you would be more more prone to store the carbs as fats in that scenario because you are, like, sedentary. You haven't moved around a lot. You're in ketosis actually in the morning and you're burning fat, so you don't really need to have carbs in the morning. You will much rather have them post workout, when it comes to, like, optimal nutrient partitioning. Different macronutrients also affect nutrient partitioning. You know, obviously, protein is generally the most, you know, anabolic macronutrients. It's It's gonna help with the most muscle growth as well as fat burning because protein has a high thermic effect to food. It consumes a lot of calories to digest it, and it also stimulates the muscle protein synthesis directly. So if you do eat, protein, then, generally, you will have a slightly higher lean body mass, and the studies also support that that people on high protein diets, you know, generally always lose more weight, and they generally have always higher bone bone density and higher muscle mass as a result of that. Obviously, overall calorie intake is also very important because if you even if eating a clean diet, but you're over eating calories, then it doesn't matter how optimized the routine is or how nuanced or how strategic it is. If you're still over eating calories, then you're still gonna eat fat. You know, you may gain some muscle, but you also still, like, gain some fat. So that's why calorie intake matters. You know, you shouldn't overeat calories, and, any, like, excess calories beyond a certain point are going to eventually end up as body fat. So if you're bulking, so to say, you're doing dirty bulk with, thousand a thousand calories of surplus, 1,500 calories, 2,000 calories surplus, then the majority of those calories are going to be still as stored as fat. And your or a small amount of it is gonna end up as muscle tissue. So there is only maybe, like, 500 calories at max that you need to be in a surplus to build muscle. You don't need a ton of calories to build muscle. You don't you just need to apply the mechanical tension from training. You need to progress it with overload, get stronger over time, and maintain consistent with your protein intake. So, yeah, like, the myth that you need you need to be doing, like, very bulking is wrong because you're gonna end up gaining a bunch more fat than you would with muscle. And, yeah, like, the leaner the bulk, the slower the bulk, then the more permanent and the less body fat you're gonna gain as a result of that as well. It's a trap. So at the end of the day, you can choose. Like, you can choose what kind of a body you have. You can choose, how the food you eat is going to affect your body composition. Is it going to be helping you to build muscle, or is it going to help you to make become obese or burn fat or whatever it is? Different kinds of methods do that, different kinds of signals. Generally, the signals that help with lean muscle mass and less body fat are, you know, lifting weights, exercising regularly, being insulin sensitive, eating slightly higher protein intake, and being moderate with your calories. The signals that promote fat storage instead of muscle growth are being sedentary, not moving around, not exercising, eating excess calories, surplus of calories, and being low in protein, and thus you become insulin resistant, which then, prevent your body from utilizing the nutrients in this, better way. One pro tip I can also give you is that, I think that you should never want to become, too fat, basically, because once there is, like, a certain threshold after which, like, if you get too high in your body fat percentage, then, after that, your all your biomarkers are gonna go bad. Your, insulin sensitivity goes down. Your blood sugar levels go up. Your blood pressure goes up, and you develop this visceral fat around the organs, etcetera, after, like, the certain thresholds. Than so that's why you never want to go beyond that threshold. So for men, I think that maybe is around, like, 16% body fat and, for women, maybe 22%, something on that. And after that or beyond that, thresholds, your biomarkers are gonna be much worse and your insulin sensitivity is much lower. So if you cross that threshold, then, after that threshold, it's much easier for you to store fat and it's harder to build muscle. Whereas if you're below that threshold, then you're very insulin sensitive. The foods you eat are always going to help you to build lean tissue. You're gonna have better biomarkers. You're gonna have better insulin sensitivity, and the nutrient partitioning is by default much higher. So that's why bodybuilders, even though they're eating, like, massive amounts of food, they may be eating, like, junk foods, crazy like cheat days or something like that, just because they're, like, very low body fat, they're maybe, like, 8% body fat, just because of that, the nutrient partitioning is still excellent. Their insulin sensitivity is super high because they're training hard and they're lean, whereas someone who is, you know, maybe above, let's say, 20% body fat and they eat the same food, then their body is gonna react much worse to that same food because they're insulin resistant. They don't have that insulin sensitivity and their nutrient partitioning is so poor that, the food they eat is just gonna end up as body fat. So that's why, yeah, you never wanna get too, high in your body fat percentage because the lower your body fat percentage is, then generally your nutrient partitioning is also better. But that's it for this video. I hope you got some valuable information from this. Make sure you click a like and subscribe as well for future videos. Thanks for watching. My name is Siems. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.