You might have seen some of these viral clips of this Russian kid named Hasbulla Magomedov. There's some clips of him preparing for an MMA fight, practicing boxing, fighting skills, and just talking shit to everyone. Well, the thing is that Hasbulla isn't actually a kid. He's 18 years old, but he looks like he's five. In this video, I'm gonna talk about who is Hasbulla and why is he so small. So the first time I stumbled upon Hasbulla was on Instagram when I saw one of these videos where he was having a brawl with another one of these kids named Abdulrozic, who is also 17 years old. As I understood then, they were supposed to have, like, an MMA match with each other, like a clout fight for just the views. Now it at first glance, it looks like they have some massive beef between them, but, you know, I I guess they're just, you know, acting a little bit and overhyping it just to make it more entertaining. Their fight was organized and promoted online by another Russian MMA fighter called Azhar Tomayev. For comparison, Tomayev is 19 years old, just one year older than Hasbulla and two years older than Rozic. Now, of course, there's a lot of people who think that this kind of fight is, like, unethical, immoral, offensive, discriminative, or whatnot. But but, you know, they may be true, but at the same time, you know, Hasbulla and, Rozyk themselves, they, you know, enjoy it, so to say. They have built their brands off of these kinds of things, and, you know, they're gonna have any they're gonna have followers regardless of, what they're doing. They're just, you know, they're posting online, and, yeah, they seem to enjoy it themselves. So why is Hasbulla so small at the age of 18? There hasn't been any public announcement about the specific disease Hasbulla has, but it's speculated that Hasbulla and Brozic both have a genetic disorder called growth hormone deficiency that inhibits the production of growth hormone by the pituitary gland. It stunts their growth and prevents physical development other children go through, like growing in height, puberty, deepening of the voice, bone enhancement, muscle development, etcetera. So, physically, they stay as a child in terms of the physical theaters because of that's before their body would start to, like, ramp up its growth hormone production. They may also have a form of dwarfism like other known people such as Peter Dinklage from my Game of Thrones. However, Hasbullah is even smaller than the average person with dwarfism. Hasbullah is around three feet four inches or one hundred and one centimeters, but the average person with dwarfism is about four feet or one hundred and thirty centimeters. And Hasbullah's weight is around sixteen kilograms. So it's a bit still a bit shorter and smaller than the average person with dwarfism. Growth hormone, also known as somatotropin, is a peptide hormone produced by the pituitary gland in the brain that promotes cell growth, cell replication, and regeneration. Growth hormone stimulates the production of IGF-one that has anabolic effects on muscle tissue and bone. Children have very high levels of growth hormone, which is one of the reasons they're growing at such an accelerated rate in their youth. Adults also produce growth hormone, but their physical growth holds around their twenties. Growth hormone deficiency can be present at birth or develop later in life. Sometimes it's temporary, sometimes permanent. It doesn't usually impair growth until the first few months or years of life. The main cause of growth hormone deficiency is genetics, physical trauma, or even some infections. In most cases, it has to do with inadequate pituitary hormone production or problems with the pituitary gland. This condition affects about one in seven thousand people in both males and females. It can be treated with growth hormone replacement therapy where you inject growth hormone. Children who have been diagnosed with growth hormone deficiency and then prescribed growth hormone injections can even catch up to normal weight and height in a few years. The Argentinian football player Lionel Messi was also said to have been diagnosed with growth hormone deficiency at the age of 10, but he was treated with growth hormone injections. I don't know specifically whether or not injecting growth hormone in adulthood would work, but I think that, you know, it probably doesn't, and it's too late to actually see, like, some visible or notice significant changes in your height if you start injecting growth hormone in your adulthood. There are actually growth hormone mutations or disorders that promote the opposite, gigantism and excessive growth. The most famous example is probably the professional wrestler Andre the Giant, who was seven feet four inches or two hundred and twenty four centimeters and weighed five hundred and twenty pounds or two hundred and thirty six kilograms. Andre the Giant had a growth hormone disorder called acromegaly that causes gigantism through excessive production of growth hormone. This not only results in greater height and body mass, but also has many other health problems. Excessive size as well as excessive growth hormone production promote things like high blood sugar, diabetes, high blood pressure, headaches, vision problems, risk of stroke, heart attacks, and chronic fatigue. Andre the Giant died at the age of 46 to congestive heart failure, probably due to a combination of these factors. He He was also notorious for drinking insane amounts of alcohol. There are stories of him drinking over 100 beers and 20 bottles of wine in one sitting. In ninety five percent of the cases, acromegaly is caused by a benign tumor known as pituitary adenoma that starts producing excessive growth hormone. Treatment includes surgical removal of the tumor, radiation therapy, or different medications. But a lot of the time, some people ask me, you know, is there a way to boost my growth? Is there a way to increase my height, get taller even in my twenties, etcetera? So, I think that, you know, probably probably not there's probably not, that you can do a lot in terms of that. Like, even if you are injecting growth hormone in your twenties, your, let's say, physical the window of your physical development is, let's say, closed. And, yeah, like, you might have been able to do so in your, let's say, early puberty or a childhood, but, I don't know. I I haven't heard about any people actually growing in height by injecting growth hormone or something like that. Disappointed. Things that naturally increase growth hormone levels are exercise, solo and fasting, lifting weights, and sleep. Approximately 50 to 70% of the daily pulses of growth hormone occur during deep sleep. If you want to know how to sleep better, get more deep sleep, correct the circadian rhythm, sleep wakefulness cycles, and improve overall recovery, then check out my Total Sleep Optimization video course. Make sure to click like and subscribe as well for future videos about similar topics. Thanks for watching. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.