Welcome back to the channel. My name is Siim Lund. And in this video, I wanna talk about carb cycling. What is carb cycling? How does it work? What are the different types of carb cycling you can try? And I'm also gonna share with you, my own personal, carb cycling strategies of how I do it, why I do it, and, how you can do it as well. Make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. So what is carb cycling? I mean, it's pretty self explanatory. It's, just the way you're eating where you're cycling between your carbohydrate intake. You have the times where you eat a low carb, fully ketogenic, maybe zero carb even. A lot of times you go through a moderate carb intake and also high carb intake. And the reason why people do it, well, most commonly is used for weight loss and trying to, like, manipulate your macrolitic ratios in order to help with body composition purposes. And, yeah, like weight loss and bodybuilders, especially to kinda use it, for this body composition purposes. I personally do that also for that reason. So, I do enjoy, like, ways of being low carb and ketogenic, but also enjoy, periods where I'm eating high carb. You eat carbs. So how would you go about cycling your, you know, carbohydrates? I mean, I said it's simple. You just eat carbs. On some days you eat low carb, some days you eat high carbs, some days more carb. What would be, like, you know, how hypothetical scenarios, how to do it? I mean, there's no, like, real rules. Like, you could structure it in many ways, but, I'm going to basically try to give you, like, an optimal blueprint for that. When it comes to macros, then you still still want to get your protein regardless of the amount of carbs you're eating. So because protein is very important for muscle growth as well as fat loss, satiety, just general health and bone density, those kind of things. So you do want to be eating like a slightly higher protein intake. That's what I recommend at least. I do like to keep the protein relatively high like between 30 to 40% is my kind of, I think a good sweet spot for that is pretty high. But when when it comes to either a low carb day or a moderate carb day or a high carb day, then the difference between them is just the other macros. A low carb day is anything less than 20% carbs. So So if unless you are trying to get into deep ketosis, then you don't need to be eating any, any, let's say, less than that. You don't need to be eating any less than, you know, 20%. You can get away with 20% as well. Like, on keto, you probably need to eat, like, 5%, but you can get away with even, like, 20%. And the fat, given if you were, let's say, doing low carb days for fat loss, then you don't need to be eating, like, a bunch of fat either. Like, you don't need 80% fat to, be on a low carb day. You can keep the fat even at 40%, 30%, and create a calorie deficit through reducing the fat intake. On a moderate carb day, that can be anything from 30 to 40% calories coming from carbs and the rest of the macros are the same. And on a high carb day, what just happens is that you reduce the fat and you increase the carbs. So carbs can be anything from 50 to 60% even depending on how many carbs you're eating. And you can even, yeah, reduce some of the protein intake a little bit, because the carbs can be a bit protein sparing as a result. And, on a high carb day, what I like to do is definitely keep the fats, semi low, because of, you know, if you get high carb, high fat together, then you may be just overweight in calories, and that's gonna be bad, for, obviously, body composition purposes. 48 body fat. What kind of different types of, carb cycling there is? There's many. The main ones that I know of and the main ones that I think are the most effective ones are just regular cyclical ketosis, which means that you eat keto for a certain amount of days usually for five to six days. And on the seventh day, you have, like, a car briefy day. I've done it. It's, works pretty good, and you do maintain some good aspects of, you know, ketosis throughout the week. But, you know, the first days after the car refeed, you may feel sluggish. You may feel low energy. You may feel actually you got the Keto flu again. So in that sense, it does take a lot more days than just one day out of your week to maintain this optimal performance. So you do feel, like, slightly sluggish the day afterwards. The other version is carb backloading, very common one, which will be, like, applied to a twenty four hour period. And that means that you eat low carb the first half of the day, and you have carbs for dinner. Basically, you backload all the carbs into your dinner. So let's say you eat from, 8AM until 8PM, then the 8AM to 6PM period will be low carb, and six a 6PM to 8PM will be where you have the carb dinner. And, yeah, the macros themselves are kinda different, but just backloading the carbs into the evening, the rationale behind it is that you, would get, like, better sleep a bit. If you eat carbs for dinner, then you get the serotonin boost. You get tired, get the carb coma and that crash a little bit because if you exercise before the, carb refeed or the carb dinner, then you still shuttle the glucose into the cells without the need of insulin even if your insulin sensitivity drops, the longer you stay awake, so to say, like your insulin sensitivity drops at night. What I like to do is just auto regulate my carbohydrate intake based upon my physical activity. So the easiest thing to remember is that if you exercise, they need higher carbs. If you exercise more, they need more carbs. If you're resting, you're not exercising at all, then eat less carbs and keep the carbs, like, low. If you're doing cardio or something easier, then you could eat a bit more carbs, but not as much as usually. I would like to prefer to exercise, or eat my carbs after resistance training because that's when my body is the most insulin sensitive exercise activates this gut four receptors that shovels glucose into the cells, very fast, without even needing insulin. So that's why I like to eat my carbs basically post workout always and I do this carb back loading. On the days that I work out, I have maybe approximately if I were to guess maybe like 250 to 300 grams of carbs. On my rest days, I may have like anything from 50 to even less sometimes. Maybe like a 100 grams max on my rest days. On another workout day, I have 200 to 300 grams carbs. On a cardio day, I don't eat, like, super high carbs, but I do eat slightly more carbs to recover from that, maybe, like, a 150 grams. Another workout day, more carbs. So, yeah, like, I auto regulate basically my carbs based on my physical activity. The more I exercise, the heavier, the more intense exercise I do, the more glycolytic activities I do, the more carbs I eat, and the less exercise I do if I rest, then I eat less carbs. And if I do, like, more fat oxidizing exercises, then I eat also lower carb. But it isn't it isn't, completely, set in stone. Of course, there are rest days where I also eat high carb, and there are workout days where I eat the low carb. So I'm not, like, you know, set in stone with that. I'm not, like, die hard with that. But this would be, like, the general blueprint I do try to follow that. It's easy to remember. Just eat carbs based upon your exercise. And as a result of that, you can, maintain this metabolic flexibility. And, yeah, it's obviously, it's not the end all be all. The calorie deficit is still most important part and overall health, but I find it just a good way to manipulate the macros and kind of still get the benefits of both ways of dieting, get the benefits both both benefits of the low carb dieting and get the benefits of a high carb dieting without necessarily going too far with one or the other. So not going, too keto and not going too high carb. Diet the carbo load. But that's basically it. That's how I do it. If you want to know how to do carb cycling and meal timing, then check out my book, metabolic pathology or the metabolic pathology masterclass video course. Thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.