Welcome back to the channel. My name is Siiblund and in this video we're gonna talk about what's the difference between a regular dry sauna and an infrared sauna. So both of them are effective ways of getting the benefits of the heat but they do have, like, some minor differences. So I'm gonna talk about what are the differences, and I will tell you which one would you get if you had to only choose one. Make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. If you haven't seen, then I have actually, like, a really long video as well, like, an hour long video about basically all the benefits of the sauna and heat and, all the studies and those kind of things, the main studies about that. So you can check it out as well. The link is in the description. But as a brief overview, I'll tell you, like, shortly what happens during the heat is that you basically experience this hypothermic conditioning, your body temperature elevates, your heart rate increases, you experience this small amount of heat stress that has this hormetic benefit on the body. One of the biggest effects you see from the heat is that you see a decrease in the cardiovascular disease markers, your risk of cardiovascular disease and stroke goes down, you experience less muscle atrophy, your risk of neurodegeneration goes down, and your health span tends to increase, which is all the result of this, hypothermic conditioning. And a lot of these effects are mediated by many things. Most of it is coming from just the improved heart health, improved blood flow, endothelial functioning, nitric oxide, lower blood pressure, as well as the activation of these HHR proteins that repair protein aggregates and repair misfolded proteins as well. So it's just a way the body helps to repair the damage as well as basically get stronger from a fitness perspective. You get like a small exercise mimetic effect that just mimics some aspects of exercise. The difference between the infrared sauna and the regular dry sauna is that the infrared sauna kind of, heats your body from the inside out. So you have these infrared light bulbs, heating your body, penetrating your body deeper into tissue and going deeper in there and that's where your body starts to increase its core temperature and starts to get those benefits as well. Whereas with the traditional sauna, you have the stove and the stove heats the air around you and, it heats up the room so your body will heat from the outside in basically. So here are the main differences between the dry heat sauna and the infrared sauna. So with the regular sauna you see a much higher temperature. You can heat up the room much higher. Usually it's gonna be around like 70 to 100 degrees whereas with the infrared sonars the temperatures tend to stick around like 50 to 60 degrees Celsius. Some may even go up to 70 but usually most of the time it's gonna be 50 to 60 degrees Celsius. But despite that you still get, like, adequate effects in terms of the heat shock proteins. You still get, like, the increased blood flow, increased hypothermic conditioning. So even though the temperature is a bit lower, in the infrared, you subject that your body subjectively still experiences almost the same amount of heat stress because of the infrared wavelengths kind of penetrating you deeper into the tissue. So in terms of that, I think they're kind of similar in that you think or you feel as if the dry heat sauna is hotter, which it certainly is but it doesn't mean that it has like more health benefits. Disappointed. When it comes to the sweating side then this one I think depends out on people. Some people sweat more in the dry heat sauna, some others in the infrared sauna. With infrared, I think, the sweat can be a bit greater because the temperatures aren't that high. And, whereas with the dry heat sauna, because the temperatures are significantly higher, then you actually shut down some of the sweating as well a little bit. So if it's too hot, actually, then, you're not gonna sweat nearly as much as it is, like, mildly hot. No. The both of them have is that both of them, yeah, do improve your heart health. Both of them increase blood flow. Both of them make you excrete toxins and heavy metals. Both of them have a beneficial effect on the immune system and can kill off infections. And, yeah, both of the benefits in terms of the health are very similar. So it doesn't matter which one you take. The, basically, you get some some the dry heat sauna does the same thing as the infrared sauna, so to say, so you get similar benefits from that. Now the only difference between them is that, the infrared sauna actually has an additional benefit that you don't get from the regular sauna. So that is the infrared wavelengths and the infrared wavelengths penetrate your tissues and, skin much more deeper, or, you know, the regular sauna even doesn't do that. So there is no penetration from the regular sauna, whereas with the infrared sauna, it goes, much deeper and has like some, unique additional health benefits that you get from that. And the study is also find that, yeah, the, infrared sauna does have benefits on the cardiovascular disease risk factors. It improves arterial function, endothelial function and just improves the outcomes when it comes to heart failure and overall cardiovascular health. Some additional benefits is that the infrared also improves skin health. So, yeah it can improve things like cellulite, just skin condition itself, wrinkles and those kind of things is what you don't really get from the traditional sauna but you do get it from the infrared. And there are studies actually they're finding, yeah infrared radiation you know, it is not like significant. It's not crazy results but it's still good enough I think for a lot of people to consider using infrared as well. You know, this is the regular sauna. And this also applies to the brain. So the infrared can also penetrate deeper into the skull so to say penetrate into the brain and stimulate like neurogenesis and synoptogenesis in there, has this positive hormetic effect via that And again, maybe a more maybe actually more beneficial for neurodegeneration than the regular sauna because you get both the heat as well as the, skull penetration with, the neurogenesis effect from the infrared wavelengths. So in conclusion, as you can see, both of the regular sauna and the infrared sauna have, positive benefits on health. Both of them have heart disease prevention effects both to improve neurodegeneration or reduce the risk of neurodegeneration. But I would say that, the infrared actually has some additional unique benefits that you don't get from the traditional sauna. And, obviously the infrared isn't that hot in terms of the temperatures and it may not provide as much as when I exercise mimetic effect. You may not improve your cardiovascular disease risk factors as much as you would with the regular sauna, but like the infrared wavelengths themselves can be, you know, much more preferable in terms of, you know, the skin condition, cellulite, joint pain, maybe arthritis as well as the neurogeneration for your brain. So you are able to penetrate deeper into the tissues and provide some additional benefits from that. If I were to choose only one or the other, like, you know, no other choice than to just use one, then I would say I would choose the infrared because of the, yeah, the additional uniqueness of the infrared wavelengths. But fortunately I have both. Like I have both the traditional sauna and the infrared. On a daily basis I use the infrared for a little bit and I use the traditional sauna maybe once or twice a week or something like that. One of the best infrared sauna brands is Clearlight because they have a low EMF, sonars and that the wavelength is also appropriate. So So I think that is kind of the one of the best, brands, out there when it comes to infrared saunas. Alright. That's it for this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.