Hey. Welcome back to the channel. My name is Sim Lund, and in this video, we're gonna talk about the new US plan to create super soldiers using this anti aging supplement. And, we're gonna talk about what kind of supplement it is and what kind of effects does it have, and does it have, like, any potential for, you know, military performance and soldiers. So make sure you click like and subscribe for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. So last week or so, there was this many articles about new anti aging supplements being used in the US military to enhance performance, etcetera. And I'm I'm just gonna spoil it. It's, NMN, it's a NAD booster, etcetera. Disappointed. And this article I found specifically from nmn.com. US special forces to test anti aging pill based on NAD plus special operations command anticipates clinical trials next year for a human performance small molecule that may combat the degenerative effects of aging and injury. The special operations command is partnering with the company, Metro Biotech, advised by antiaging specialist, doctor David Sinclair, to test the NAD plus, boosting supplement. So what is NAD then? Well, basically, if you haven't heard about it, then NAD is this major coenzyme in the body that is involved with a lot of different kind of processes, mostly with energy production, DNA repair, just energy metabolism, and that sort of thing. And as you get older, your energy levels tend to go down, which then leads to the the, let's say, accumulation and culmination of all these different kinds of, degenerative diseases, Alzheimer's, osteoporosis, obesity, interresistance, and aging in general. And using NAD supplements has been shown to, at least like in animal studies, to have some benefits on slowing down this process as well as raising the NAD levels back up again so that you would basically slow down the process of, biological aging. There's more, Harvard scientist and anti aging expert to David Sinclair leads the board of advisors for Metro Biotech. Although details about the pills composition remain murky, Metro Biotech and David Sinclair have developed anti aging products like MIB six two six with the molecule nicotinamide mononucleotide NMN, which is a precursor for for and boost level of n 80 plus, a crucial cofactor involved in over 400 metabolic reactions in cells. So the military is always kind of, you know, looking out for these different kinds of technologies, as a supplement and compounds to, enhance performance and, create, like, super soldiers. And, although, like, I don't think, like, NAD is any anything like miraculous. It's not a super crazy, drug. Like, it's not as good as steroids probably if, if the, special forces started to take steroids, they would probably have a bit of a better performance enhancing effect. And if it started to take, like, some other gene therapies or genetic engineering, then those things would be probably more effective. The NMN and NAD, they have to do mostly with, just dealing with some of the damage that you may experience in combat and when you are in, like, the special forces or any kind of this high high stakes, high physical job like, firefighters, policemen, any kind of, you know, any kind of a vocation that is involved with a lot of stress, a lot of trauma, a lot of, concussions, a lot of, let's say, yeah, just aging related diseases, neurodegeneration, physical degeneration, all those things, they can be benefited from NAD. And, I think the biggest benefit that NAD has actually has to do with, the circadian rhythms and sleep and that sort of thing. So, NAD is involved with the regulation of the of the circadian rhythms through sirtuins. So sirtuins are just longevity genes that regulate your metabolism, regulate DNA repair, as well as the circadian rhythms. And, sirtuins use NAD basically to conduct their processes. So if your NAD levels are low, then your circadian rhythms are gonna be misaligned. And with misaligned circadian rhythms, everything else begins to fall apart and, your body isn't basically able to produce the hormones the right way and to not produce energy as either. So whereas the with the NAD boost, you can counteract that and, yeah, that essentially would mitigate the, age or diseases. Because, you know, no doubt about it being in the military, being any kind of this high stakes job, would accelerate your aging because of the stress, because of the inflammation, because of the sleep deprivation, because of the circadian mismatches and those things. So using, the NAD supplement, NAD boosters for those vocations would make the most sense. I could do this all day. And it's also, like, not that expensive. You know, it may it may appear to be a bit more expensive for, compared to, like, vitamin d or compared to magnesium supplement. NAD boosters are, substantially more expensive than that, but it's not as expensive as, something else. I don't know. You know, like some peptides or some some, other things that the soldiers could use in the special forces. So let's look at the Metro Biotech website as well. So they don't have any products yet, but they do have, like, a few articles and pages. So, Metro International Biotech is a privately owned clinical stage pharmaceutical company that has established the most comprehensive portfolio of proprietary proprietary NAD plus precursors in the world. MIB six two six is the one that they were mentioning here and some kind of NMN. So David Sinclair is on the team, some other doctors. What we've achieved, manufacturing a naturally occurring proprietary human clinical grade NAD enhancer. Designed and synthesized over 100 novel NAD plus enhancers screened for optimal therapeutic properties. So that's interesting. Like, I haven't heard that there's, like, you know, over a 100 novel NAD enhancers. Like, a few natural ones are, you know, niacin, nicotinamide, nicotinamide riboside, NMN, tryptophan, those kinds of things, nicotinic acid. So there are, like, natural compounds that boost it, but, yeah, like, they're probably doing it more the synthetic route and, more artificial route, kind of new compounds that they can patent, basically. So they're still using it as a way to create the products to sell and make money out of, like this MIB six two six. I'm pretty sure that it's patented, proprietary blend, and, yeah. You son of a bitch. This also got me thinking of, okay, like, the US special forces are taking, NAD boosters, So I haven't heard, like, anything like that from, the Russian side or the Chinese military. So, you know, I think that, you know, it's definitely not as good as actually good training, so to say. You you still have to train well. You have to be a good soldier, etcetera, etcetera. So it doesn't have, like, any actual performance enhancing effects. It's not giving you night vision. It's not increasing your endurance, beyond a certain limit. It just helps you to recover faster and raises you back to a baseline, so to say. And maybe part of the reason that the US military may need to take like an NMN is that, you know, the average US citizen, I would imagine is a bit less healthy than someone in China or the or or Russia, for example, because there's a worse diet, etcetera. So their NAD levels would be much lower naturally, much faster because of the poor lifestyle habits and the increased inflammation and that sort of thing. So maybe the Russians and Chinese don't even need NAD because their own NAD levels are much higher. But, yeah, generally, I do think that, soldiers, especially special forces, even like nurses, doctors, firefighters, pilots, policemen, all those, high stakes jobs, they can definitely benefit from, NAD, NMN, which one, whatever it is, mostly because of the circadian aspect, the sleep aspect, the DNA repair, the reduced inflammation, and, yeah, just the improved recovery by using that. So, yeah, like, most average people don't really need to use that, unless they are, like, super old, like, in their fifties or sixties, then that is the time, they may benefit, from starting to take, NAD. But like I said, if you already have low NAD levels when you're young, then, it can still be a pretty good supplement to take even then. Alright. Let me know in the comments what do you think about this. Have you taken NAD? Have you taken NMN? What are your experiences? And, yeah. Also, make sure you click like, subscribe, hit the notification bell as well for future videos about these kinds of topics. Thanks for watching. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.