Hey. Welcome back to the channel. My name is Eblond and in this video, we're gonna basically go through my DNA test results. And, I'm going to look at, what my genetics tells me about my, you know, predisposing conditions and what other things I need to pay attention to. And I'm also gonna be going through the DNA through the SelfDecoder software. So if you haven't heard, then SelfDecoder, I think it's one of the best DNA, let's say, analytic softwares and the services out there because they use the most amount of data possible and they're also, like, very ethical in terms of their, way they handle your data. So, like, most of these DNA companies, twenty three and me and the ancestry and me and those things, they, you know, yeah, they they take you take the tests, you they tell you the results, but they also sell your data secretly. So that's kind of a really bad thing, but Celtic code doesn't do that. They have a really strict policy about that. So that's why I think that's one of the best kind of, most accurate or most ethical DNA services out there. And they're also the most accurate one because, they use instead of, like, using a handful of, these, you know, studies, they use this AI software that incorporates millions and millions of these studies and creates these reports based upon, your results. And, yeah, in this video, we're gonna basically go through that almost play, like, through what, what this healthy code is more about, and, we'll go through all these different reports on, like, gut health, joint pain, diabetes, weight management, and those kind of things and see what the what the reports tell me about my genetics and I'll just, you know, comment. If you want to try out a selfie code, then, yeah, you can also try it out. You can head over to celticcode.com and use the code, the seam. You will get a 10% discount. As a disclaimer, I am also, like, invested into Celtic code, but the reason why I invested into Celtic code in the first place is because I think that the the best that the best, DNA service out there and, yeah, because of the same reason ethics and the accuracy. So, yeah. It's not because of, it's not because of, like, I'm not saying that they're the best because I'm invested. It's the other way around. I invested because I think they're the best. So, yeah. That's it. Right. Let's get to it. Initially, we'll just play this is kind of the initial, this is, one of the introduction videos just to, maybe give a brief, overview about, what SelfDecode is more about. Decode, we're personalizing health care with recommendations based on your unique DNA, lab test results, and environment. Getting started is simple. Order your DNA kit or upload your existing DNA file to your dashboard. Upload your lab tests or order labs from the South Dakota lab shop. Start using South Dakota to optimize your health. Remember, you can get personalized recommendations with just lab tests or only a DNA file. But to take full advantage of South Dakota's holistic approach, we recommend using both. You might not realize it, but DNA kits only analyze a portion of your DNA, about 700,000 variants. However, at SelfDecode, our AI turns 700,000 variants into 83,000,000 variants using a Yeah. That's a huge difference. Like, 700,000 versus 83,000,000. So, yeah, I think the yeah. They have new new AI two point o, software that is, no no one else basically has this kind of a software. This is called genetic imputation. This provides the data we need to give you the most accurate analysis and recommendations. When you log on to South Dakota, you'll meet Decodee, your AI health coach. He'll ask you key questions about your health and environment in order to personalize your entire experience. Then you can start exploring all of South Dakota's features. Each wellness report gives you an overview of your genetic risk for a given health topic. You'll also get prioritized list of diet, supplement, and lifestyle recommendations based on your DNA and other health data. When it comes to labs, you've probably had your doctor tell you if you fall outside the normal range. However, with SelfDecode's labs, you'll get an even more accurate picture of your health by understanding how far you are from the optimal range because normal doesn't always mean optimal. Start implementing the changes from the list of personalized recommendations and track levels over time to watch them improve. When you find a recommendation that you'd like to try, just add it to your regimen and start building the perfect health regimen for you. No more generic health plans. At South Dakota, we believe that the future of health is personalized. That's why every recommendation we give is tailored to your unique body. Our team of world class scientists, doctors, and engineers have done the hard work for you and have made SelfDecode easy to understand and easy to use. So let's get started. It's time to change the way you approach health and finally get to the bottom of your health issues. It's time to give your body what it actually needs. It's time to live optimally. Yay. There we go. So, yeah, it's a very simple process. Like, I already uploaded my DNA file into here. I'll use the legacy first version as well before, which is also really insightful. But, we're gonna go through, the two point o, the new, AI analytics variant. So there's these are the reports. They also have, like, constantly updating new reports. So the newest ones, I haven't checked out yet. They're still generating the reports, XM ops, or RSUs, gut information. I'll maybe, like, you know, follow it up in the future, but, they already have, like, a quite a list long list of the ones that you can already check out. So, I think we'll just start from the top and, go through these reports to, see what my DNA tells me about my health. So the first is a gall gallstones. And as you can see at the top, there's already the, just the summary immediately. I have an average risk of gallstones. So I've never had gallstones myself and I never I've never had any issues with that. But, yeah, I do think that it may be something that, I could be predisposed to or it's like, you know, average risk. The risk themselves are also, like, you have to keep in mind that just because you have a high risk of something, it doesn't mean that you necessarily have to get it, or you're going to get it. It's a very, like, a risk it's just a risk, so to say. Like, some people have high risk of cancer, but they never get cancer. And, but, you know, if you if you have a high risk for cancer, for example, then smoking for you or, following a bad lifestyle would be much more dangerous than for someone who has low risk of cancer because their genetics isn't predisposing themselves to get cancer. So if you have high risk of something, then you still have to be, let's say, cautious of certain things to avoid getting that particular condition, whether that be heart disease or cancer. And here are also the recommendations based upon the results. And, number one is gonna be maintain a healthy weight, two, choose healthy fats, three, fiber, four, avoid cigarette smoke, five, vitamin c. And on the right, you can also see, the impact. Basically, the, impact shows how strongly a recommendation will affect your health in a certain area and the the evidence, which is, the amount of scientific, evidence to support it. So it's a it's a five point scale, five point scale, and, the recommendations are basically it's gonna give a score how big of an impact or how much evidence there is to support it. For healthy weight, there's a high high impact for gallstones in terms of, preventing gallstones and the evidence is also that, four out of five that, maintaining a healthy weight is important for gallstones. Whereas with vitamin c, for example, the impact is only two out of five and the evidence is also two out of five. So vitamin c may help with gallstones, but the impact is small and the evidence also isn't that strong. So you can and all the all the studies are also referenced in the report below, but we'll get to it shortly. Here is a little, like, introduction about the issue. What is the gallbladder? How does it work? How do gallstones are formed? Yeah. Like, it says, like, most people have two to 20 stones. The Guinness world record was 23,000 stones. So, yeah, like, it's a kind of a good report overview. It tells you what kind of variant of the gene is gonna be predisposing you to get the particular condition, and, yeah. Then there's gonna be more overview about your genetics. So this is the more detailed overview. As you can see for me, it says my risk is average and, it's slightly in the middle and slight maybe like a little bit higher. I'm I'm I'm fifty fifth percentile in terms of my risk for gold stones. My risk is greater than fifty five percent of the population and lower than forty five percent of the population. So I'm like, you know, basically in the middle somewhere. More information about the gallstones in The United States. Up to eight percent of men and seventeen percent of women have gallstones. Besides gender, other risk factors include pregnancy, obesity, rapid weight loss, fasting for long periods, gut surgeries, inflammatory bowel disease, which is, true. And you can see it's also the reference reference studies. We'll click one of the references, takes us to an article, PubMed article that talks about, the, association of the gallstones, and I think that is like age, mean age and the gall stones. Yeah. We'll keep scrolling down. Experts recommending seeing a doctor if you have any signs and symptoms of a gallbladder attack including gut pain lasting for several hours, nausea and vomiting, fever or chills, a yellowish color in the skin or white eyes, white or or skin of the whites, a dark urine or light colored stool. Up to 30 up to thirty percent of differences in people's changes of developing gallstones may be attributed to genetics. And genetics involved in gallstone formation may influence cholesterol metabolism, bile metabolism, and liver function. So, yeah, most of it, comes from, yeah, which is like a liver and bile, gallbladder, kind of those kinds of organs involved with, the metabolism of gallstones. And you have, like, some, let's say, bad liver function or bad, bile production genetically, then your increased risk of gallbladders or of gallstones as well. What are the recommendations then? I'm gonna go through the recommendations again. Number one, maintain a healthy weight. The impact is high, evidence is also high, and there's also, like, these studies. People have a healthy weight when they don't have too much or too little body weight or body fat. Tells you the BMI, tells you other things. Here we go. Here's the, association with obesity and the gallstones. Overweight and obese people may be at a higher risk of forming gallstones. In fact, the risk may increase by about sixty percent for every five unit increase in BMI. The link may be strongest for women. It gives you the studies and references. Experts recommend eating less calories and getting more exercise to achieve and maintain a healthy weight. Weight gain even within the normal body weight range may cause gallstones to form. There's also a link between excess body weight and gallstones, with insulin resistance and insulin resistance may promote gallstone formation by increasing cholesterol in the bile, decreasing gallbladder movements, and promoting toxic bile acid formation. So that's good to yeah. Like, obviously maintaining healthy weight is important for other things, but, apparently also helps with, gallstones. Number two, we choose healthy fats. There we go. Peep in large amounts, saturated and trans fats may have a negative impact on your health. Experts say you should add more poofas, pollensated fats, or optimal health. Higher intake of trans and saturated fats is linked to gallstones. This is because these fats are more likely to raise blood cholesterol. And, yeah, like the gallstones are they contain cholesterol as well. So, high blood cholesterol may raise the amount of cholesterol in the bile. Elevated cholesterol in the bile is a major major cause of gallstone formation. On the other hand, a diet rich in healthy fats may help reduce cholesterol and prevent gallstones. There we go. Fiber as well. Experts agree that eating foods high in fiber may help prevent gallstones. They recommend eating more fiber rich foods and vegetables. The fiber is going to reduce toxic bile acids, boost beneficial bile acids, and reduce cholesterol, which will then reduce gold gallstones. And number four, avoid cigarette smoke. Let's see what it's current and former smokers may be at an increased risk of gallstones. In fact, the risk of gallstones may increase by eleven percent with every 10 cigarettes smoked per day. So, yeah, I've never smoked. Like, I've, you know, I've tried it, but I've never been, like, a regular smoker. Never. And, yeah. So it's a bad, not only for heart disease and cancer but also bad for gallstones because the smoking may impair also cholesterol metabolism, more into people with your CETP gene variant. So I have this variant which is bad for, the gall gallstones and the smoking also has a negative impact on that. Lastly, vitamin c. How vitamin c helps with gallstones? Experts say that vitamin c two thousand milligrams a day may prevent gallstones. It likely helps by preventing the buildup of cholesterol in the bile. Likewise, low intake of vitamin c is linked to developing gallstones. Please note that supplementing with vitamin c is linked to a slightly higher risk of kidney stones in men. Talk to your doctor before taking vitamin c. So, yeah, that's good to know. You don't wanna be getting kidney stones if you're thinking that you're, like, reducing your gallstone risk. So, yeah, I don't think that high vitamin c intake may not be necessary. At least, like, regular, it's not recommended to take, like, a high dose of the vitamin c all the time because of, you know, your body actually may need some of that small amount of stress and oxidative stress. If you're healthy, generally, you're you're getting the vitamin c from whole foods, then you shouldn't take, a vitamin c irregularly. You should take it only if you're, like, getting sick or something like that. Let's move on with a kidney health. Let's look at, what the the DNA tells me about my kidney, kidney health. Summary, I have a reduced risk of chronic kidney disease, which is good, and, risk is very low, low risk. What are the recommendations? Maintain a healthy weight again, strong evidence, a strong impact, exercise, avoid cigarette smoke, balance potassium intake, a Mediterranean diet, and a plant based diet for, the kidney health. What does it tell us about kidneys? Just the overall information about, how the kidneys work and, yeah, what what kind of genes are involved there? Variants of certain genes like ALPL and GPX one have been associated with higher levels of, phosphorus. And excess, phosphorus can cause a buildup of, calcium in the kidneys, which has been linked to kidney damage. That's good to know. Excess phosphorus, yeah, is bad for also like magnesium status. It reduces magnesium status. So you wanna make sure you're not getting enough phosphorus in in in the first place. So here we go. Overview. My risk for kidney disease is low. I mean the eleventh percentile. So my risk is greater than eleven percent of the population and lower than eighty nine percent of the population. So yeah, I'm in the green zone. My risk is very low. My risk is lower than eighty nine percent of people, which is good. I've never had any kidney issues and, yeah. Never had any kind of problems with that. Alright. Your kidneys are part of your body's natural detox system. They filter your blood and remove excess water, salt, minerals, and waste. All of these materials leave your body as urine. If something goes wrong with this system, chronic kidney disease can arise. Chronic kidney disease has five stages. These range from kidney damage stage one to total kidney failure stage five. Early stage kidney disease is often detected by tests looking for high blood pressure, protein in the urine, and waste in the blood. However, obvious signs and symptoms may not appear until later stages. These can include changes in how often you urinate, fatigue, itching, twitching, or cramping muscles, and foot and ankle swelling. According to the CDC, about fifteen percent of American adults have chronic kidney disease and most don't even know that anything is wrong. Factors that contribute to kidney problems include male gender, African American ancestry, cigarette smoking, obesity, high blood pressure, diabetes, low birth weight, aging, and genetics. To manage kidney disease, a doctor may recommend medication, diets low in protein, salt, or phosphorus, weight management, avoiding cigarettes, and reducing stress. So, yeah, like, usually, they say that the, you know, protein is bad for the kidneys, but there isn't no association between healthy people and, kidney disease with a protein intake. So if you're, if you don't have any health issues and you have, like, low genetic risk for kidney disease as well, then the high protein diet does nothing to your kidneys in a negative way. It may actually be beneficial. So yeah. But but if you're, let's say, already have preexisting kidney damage, then, yeah, reducing the protein intake can be a smart idea, at least in the short term. But, yeah, other other than that, you don't really need to worry about the protein intake. So recommendations, again, maintain a healthy weight. Experts agree that a healthy weight can support kidney health. Being overweight or obese may increase the odds of this condition up to three times, which is bad. Exercise. Experts agree that thirty to sixty minutes of moderate exercise most days of the week may support kidney health. Increased physical activity is linked to an eighteen percent lower risk of kidney disease. So, yeah, I do exercise, every day at least, yeah, thirty minutes and and up to sixty minutes and sometimes more even. Cigarette smoke experts agree that cigarette smoke can increase the risk of kidney disease. This is especially true for heavy smokers and people with high blood pressure or diabetes. Smoking may increase the odds of kidney disease in people with your n o s three gene variant. So I have this n o s three gene variant. Let's, you know, check it out what it is. And the smoking increases the risk of kidney disease from that. Nitric oxide synthase three or Enos, NOS three. So, yeah, you know, nitric oxide helps with blood vessels, vasodilation, and, mutations have been linked to several diseases such as chronic spasm, stroke, Alzheimer's, high blood pressure, seizures. So I have this, n o s three and, the smoking is gonna be bad for that. We'll see, like, whether or not this n o s three pops up in other other reports like the heart health or something like that. Number four, balanced potassium intake. The FDA recommends getting forty seven hundred milligrams of potassium every day, and, potassium regulates blood pressure and supports kidney function. It's important for the kidney health. Both low and high blood potassium are linked to complications of kidney disease. So, yeah, like, the biggest sources of potassium, I I think I do think that I get, this four fourteen seven hundred milligrams a day from Whole Foods. I don't take any potassium supplements and, you know, no potassium salts. The foods that I eat, you should have potassium. Like, I eat a lot of, carrots, tubers, leafy greens, as well as potatoes. Potatoes are actually, the highest source of potassium. Like, one medium potato can have, like, a nine hundred to one thousand milligrams of potassium. And, I eat them, like, regularly, but not every day, but but quite quite frequently. So the bananas actually have only a four hundred and twenty milligrams. So, yeah, it's much lower than, the potatoes. So potatoes are actually a really good source of potassium. Mediterian diet, which is, you know, the slightly lower carb, healthy fat type of a diet, plant based diets, I don't think that it's mostly because of the higher amount of potassium, that contributes to that. And the impact and evidence is kind of average for plant disease in terms of a kidney health. Alright. Next up, let's move on with shoulder and neck pain. The report is coming up. My risk is high, increased risk of shoulder and neck pain, which is bad. I don't, I've never had any shoulder or neck pain, which is good. So yeah. But the genetic risk is still high. I do have, like, maybe, some other family members that can have it every once in a while, but not personally not me. I like, you know, lifting weights. I do mobility exercises. I I stay healthy. I sleep well. So I haven't had any, like, any no joint issues at all. Recommendations based upon this, number one, reduce shoulder and neck strain. Try to reduce tension in your shoulders and neck. So I don't know what that means, but, you know, obviously, you still need to apply some tension and some pressure and stress to those regions to strengthen them. Like, if you didn't lift any weights, then your joints become weak and, doing resistance training is one of the best ways to strengthen your joints and actually prevent getting pain, like preventing yourself from getting these mobility issues and those kind of things if you practice with good form and yoga and whatever, any other kinds of good things, for that. But, you know, in excess, if you do with bad form, you're doing the wrong exercises with, you know, poor form, then, yeah, you're you may still get some injuries. Exercise therapy, topical capsaicin, which is interesting. So capsaicin is the kind of active compound of, cayenne pepper and topical capsaicin. Applying it to the neck and shoulders apparently then will have a pain relieving effect, I would imagine. But the evidence and impact is, quite low. Although it would be interesting to try it out, like, if it starts to, like, itch or scratch or I would imagine, like, burns burns the skin. Acupuncture, low impact, low enhance, hot and cold applications, medium kind of impact. How would you feel if you had to carry 40 bananas or five pineapples with you everywhere you go? It probably get pretty tiring. Right? With the average human head weighing in around five kilograms, that's exactly what your neck and shoulders contend with on a daily basis. So, yeah, your head is pretty heavy then, and, it's an important organ and, you know, your neck is all you're almost yeah. So, like, even more important in terms of, like, connecting your brain with the spine and whatnot. So you wouldn't want to have, like, a weak neck anyway. You want to strengthen your neck at all costs because, you know, it's a very fragile tissue, you know. You can you can easily break it if you fall onto your head or, someone else someone else can also snap it very easily. So, yeah, training your neck is something that most people never do, but it's still something to kind of, think about. Like, different kinds of there's a neck bridges initially, neck circles. You can also do it with weights, but yeah. But it's also, like, very easily you can injure it very easily if you overdo it. But some sort of, like, wrestlers do a lot of these neck bridges and, those kind of exercises. Other, like, deadlifts are also, like, pretty neck heavy. Like, you're pulling the deadlift, like, ah, then you're forced to kinda tighten up your neck and the traps also then that does will strengthen the neck to a certain extent. Let's say my risk is pretty high, super high in the eighty ninth percentile. So my risk is greater than eighty nine percent of the population and lower than eleven percent of the population, which means that, yeah, I may get chronic shoulder pain and neck pain more than eighty nine percent of people, which is still, you know, fine. I've never I've never had it. So so far so good. About one in five adults struggle with shoulder or neck pain, which I would imagine is quite debilitating or disturbing to have some sort of a chronic pain in your, like, joints. So number one, a reduced shoulder and neck strain, which means poor posture, prolonged sitting, poor sleeping position, injury, overuse, stress. Okay. So that's a, like, a more, yeah, a reasonable approach that, different kinds of like the smartphone smartphone look that way you're looking at your smartphone all the time with this, you know, crooked look. You know, like, you know, hinging downwards and in this very kind of compromised position. So that is like the smartphone, shoulders and smartphone head is definitely, something that I do think that will help will will damage, you know, your neck, and, shoulders as well, like this forward position rolling over. So, yeah, you don't wanna be doing, basically too much sitting and too much computer work where you are in this forward leaning position all the time. And if you do, do that, like, most people are forced to do that and they choose to do that so that you you have to kind of rebalance it with the other way around of, you know, opening it back up with different kinds of stretches and mobility exercises, which I do, quite regularly. It's more on exercise therapy, strengthening and flexibility and stretching, which I already talked about. Topical capsaicin. Capsaicin is a compound that makes chili pepper spicy. Capsaicin creams and patches. Long term capsaicin use may reduce pain sensitivity, which is interesting. So I would imagine that you're, yeah, using it topically and, after a while your body gets used to it. So it becomes less sensitive to pain, which is something that I also believe in general. Like, if you are, let's say, in a very, like a bubble wrap, you're living inside a bubble wrap, you're never experiencing any pain and discomfort, then, yeah, your your body will get soft and you will be very sensitive against those things. Whereas if you, you know, gradually expose yourself to different kinds of physical things, that cause a little small amount of pain and then your pain sensitivity goes down and your pain tolerance goes up so you can tolerate it, much more easily. Acupuncture that is a kind of medium or low low evidence. Hot and cold therapy is also kind of medium, which I would think I would if I were to get any sort of like neck pain, shoulder pain, then I would use the hot and cold the first. I already do the sonar quite regularly. I don't do the I don't do the acupuncture and I don't do the topical capsulation but I do strengthen and exercises. Next up, fatigue. What does it tell me about my fatigue and energy? Slightly increased risk of fatigue, like above average above average risk. What do I need to do? Optimize sleep, try to get seven to eight hours of good quality sleep, which is high evidence and high impact, address food sensitivities, iron supplement iron, stay hydrated, coenzyme q ten, and vitamin d. So fatigue would probably describe your chronic fatigue and being tired all the time, not having any energy. So yeah. My risk is greater than sixty nine percent of the population and lower than thirty one percent of the population. Well, I would say that, I'm not genetically, like, a super energized person. Like, I'm not like a like a, I don't know, like, energy ball, so I don't have, like, this unlimited energy, or depends on it, you know, situation. I'm I may be I may have that every once in a while, but, yeah, like, I'm genetically not super hyped up all the time or super energized in in a sense. I'm not like a, you know, fatigue person either. I never had any chronic fatigue or anything. I always have energy, but the energy is more like stable. I'm never like this super amped up. I don't have like the super amped up energy and I don't crash either. Like I'm always stable. I'm always stable and I'm able to have this energy for many hours. Like I'm I never get tired when I'm working. I never get tired even if I'm I'm doing like a lot of exercise. So my n h is very stable and long endurance. Like, I can go for days and days without getting tired. But yeah. Let's say my fatigue risk would be slightly above average because of probably some risk factors. These kind of genes. Up to forty percent of differences in people's chances of having chronic fatigue may be attributed to genetics. So, yeah, that's interesting. Like, forty percent of your risk of chronic fatigue maybe up to genetics. And, that can be from, like, sleep, that can be from the immune system and stress response and, brain chemistry as well. So it lists out all these, gene variants for each of them. COMT is a common gene, t n f I l six I r four. So what do we need to do to prevent chronic fatigue? After my sleep, try to get seven to eight hours. Yeah. Which is obvious. If you don't sleep, then you're gonna get tired. I sleep pretty well. I can get away with, like, pretty less sleep. I can sleep only, like, you know, two hours and still be fine and without really, having a negative effect on my energy levels, on my fatigue. But if I were to do it, yeah, for, like, weeks or something, then, yeah, probably will catch up on me. And maybe maybe it would be that, because of my high risk of, fatigue, I would, crash a bit sooner maybe. Like, if I were to not get any sleep for seven days, for example, then maybe I would get the chronic fatigue or or like, you know, some aspects of this fatigue, faster. But who knows? I've never been without sleep for, like, seven days. Number two, address food sensitivities. The impact is a medium. So, you usually when you when you have like these food sensitivities and allergies then, it's gonna sap away your energy because of keeping your body under inflammation and, autoimmune response. So, you know, it will drain your energy levels and, keep you tired because of that. So, yeah. I don't have, like, any food sensitivities, like zero. I have zero allergies. I can eat all kinds of foods. I can eat like all the gluten and I've never never had any issues with that. So I think that is something that I don't really have to worry about. Iron. So some iron is, you know, obviously be important for hemoglobin and oxygenation of the, of the body. But let's say supplementing iron may not be the most, you know, effective way of actually raising your hemoglobin and, improving oxygenation because, you need copper to activate the iron and to also produce red blood cells. So, yeah, like, I wouldn't supplement, like, iron, especially if you're, like, a male because males already have higher iron levels and, that can cause, like, excess iron accumulation. The idea would be much smarter to raise your iron status, which can be which can be done by increasing your copper intake. So copper from liver, dark chocolate, beans, those kinds of foods, oysters have more copper and that copper will help to activate the iron and absorb it better. So if you have low iron then it may not be that you're not eating enough iron. It's, actually maybe that you're not eating enough copper, which is good to know. Like, what we talk about in the mineral fix quite well. We list out all the history about that and as important. Stay hydrated, you know, obviously water is important and dehydration can also definitely reduce performance and energy. Coenzyme q ten, which is one of the mitochondrial supplements. I do take a co q ten, on a daily basis about, yeah, three hundred milligrams a day. So, yeah, it helps with energy production and fat oxidation. You could get it from most of whole foods, but I do take the co q ten as a supplement because of it may also help with that like, you know, heart health and longevity. And lastly, vitamin d sunlight is the main source of vitamin d. And I do take like a vitamin d. Sometimes my vitamin d levels are pretty okay. Like, there are sixty nanograms per deciliter usually and the optimal zone is, yeah, between sixty to 80. So you have just pay attention to your vitamin d, levels. If you have low vitamin d levels and you are feeling fatigue, then, yeah, that's probably gonna be something that contributes to that. Next up, chronic pain. I'm a I'm a try to get it a bit faster than otherwise, it's gonna be like a two hour episode. But I'll just, you know, go through some of the main points here. Chronic pain. I have reduced risk of chronic pain, and it's a very low risk, which is good to hear. And acupuncture helps with the chronic pain hypnosis, topical capsulism, again, PEA, which we'll see what it is and the physiotherapy. So chronic pain probably refers to just, you know, muscle pain and aches and that kind of thing. My risk is low. I'm in the fourth percentile. My risk is greater than four percent of the population and lower than ninety six percent of the population. So, I basically experience less chronic pain than ninety six percent of, people. My risk for chronic pain is lower than ninety six percent of people, which is something I do think that can be true. I I don't have I have, like, a pretty high pain tolerance and pain threshold. So, yeah, Might be my genetics. This includes lower back pain, headaches, widespread pain, nerve pain. Okay. What do I need to do? Acupuncture. So the needles, thin needles or like the acupuncture mattress can also be something like that maybe usually for relaxation sleep. Hypnosis. Okay. There isn't like a whole lot of high quality evidence to support hypnosis for chronic pain. I've never tried like hypnosis either. Topical capsaicin again for the pain response, PEA, which is palmito palmitoilethanoanomide. It's a compound naturally made by the body to help combat inflammation. It is also made by plants and other animals. Good sources of PEA include soy lecithin, soybeans, egg yolks, and peanuts. Well, I do eat egg yolks, so, might be getting some PEA from that. And physiotherapy, obviously. Yeah. Like, if you have imbalances, muscle imbalances, poor mobility, then, your risk of chronic pain will also increase because of that. You're like putting your body under a different, jeopardized positions. Insomnia, average risk of insomnia, which is good. I've never had insomnia. I sleep pretty well. I sleep fast. I fall asleep fast as well. Psychotherapy, Discuss psychotherapy with your doctor. Strong evidence and strong impact. Okay. That's interesting, that the psychotherapy is the biggest one that helps with insomnia. Relaxation techniques, light exposure, obviously, the circadian component, reduce caffeine intake, acupuncture, and avoid sugary foods. So how many people have insomnia? What's the statistics? Every year, one in three people in The US experience issues getting a good night sleep, but thankfully these problems are short lived for most. I think the statistics for insomnia is pretty crazy like, like forty percent of people experience some form of insomnia or some form of like sleeplessness, at least once in their life, if I'm not mistaken, something I've heard before. Okay. My risk is fifty sixth percentile. My risk is greater than fifty six percent of the population and lower than forty four percent of the population. That's good to know. Sound like a summary in the middle. If your internal clock is disrupted, it can lead to insomnia. People with insomnia have trouble falling asleep, staying asleep or both. In fact, insomnia is the most common sleep condition in The US. In fact, about one in four Americans are struggling with it. Right. What do we need to do? Psychotherapy. So psychotherapy or talk therapy involves talking about your health with a licensed therapist. It may improve the way you react to certain experiences. So maybe, like, helps to, like, react to outside events better that cause less stress and less anxiety because I think the insomnia would be mostly, like, there's rumination and psychological turmoil in your head that's keeping you up. And obviously, psychotherapy psychologists can help to untangle those issues. Relaxation techniques are strong evidence and strong impact. Relaxation techniques such as yoga and meditation can release stress in different ways. Most of them focus on breathing and help you get rid of negative thoughts and emotions. Stress often makes it difficult to sleep. This is because cortisol and other stress hormones can throw off your body's internal clock. Yeah. The circadian clock that is the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Clicking on the study for a moment, interaction between circadian rhythms and stress. Life on Earth had adapted to day and a cycle of evolution of internal so called circadian clocks that adjust behavior and physiology to the recurring changes in environmental conditions. In mammals, a master pacemaker located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus receives environmental light information and synchronizes peripheral tissues and central non suprachiasmatic nucleus cocks to a gear of physical time. Regulatory systems such as the HVA axis and the autonomic nervous system, both being important for the regulation of stress responses, receive strong stronger circadian input. So, yeah, the the, cortisol rises mostly in the morning and the that's where you're supposed to have, like, this peak in cortisol and at night when you're falling asleep, your cortisol should be low. Whereas if you are, you know, stressed out before going to bed, then, yeah, your your cortisol may be actually elevated before bed, which is, you know, obviously bad and disrupts the circadian rhythm and keeps you up. Relaxation techniques that may improve sleep include listening to music, mindfulness, yoga, lavender, aromatherapy, and a massage. So there you go. A light exposure, sunlight or bright light during day can benefit your body and mind. It boosts mood, boosts performance and energy, and improves sleep quality. Experts recommend getting at least five to fifteen minutes of midday sun two to three times per week. Well, that's a little that's a really weak recommendation like a five to fifteen minutes, two to three times a week. I would say that you need to do that every day and several times a day. And, yeah, the research does find that the more sunlight and more daylight, you get exposed to doing daytime, the more melatonin you produce at night and the better you sleep. So, yeah, I would say, like, at least sixty minutes a day, you should be outside exposed to sunlight and do that every day. If you don't have the sunlight or it's cloudy, then you can use all these, like face lamps or the bright light devices that I have next to my here as well. So I've been using that when it's cloudy or in the mornings when the sun isn't out yet. So, yeah, you still need some, this light bright lights to kick start the circadian rhythm. How light exposure affects insomnia. Many behaviors that alter your sleep schedule may have a negative impact on your internal clock. These include traveling across different time zones, working night or irregular shifts, and increased bright light exposure in the evening. You can over expose your bright light in evening by minimizing your screen time. Yeah. So using the blue blockers is obviously a good thing. And getting a healthy dose of sunlight is the easiest way to get more bright light during day. And number four, reduce caffeine intake. Yeah. Obviously, if you drink coffee, then, you're gonna stay up. I personally have, I'm a fast metabolizer of caffeine, so my liver metabolizes caffeine faster than a slow metabolizer. And, yeah, personally, I don't really of course, yeah, if I drink coffee, like, immediately before bed, then I'll stay up and I'm not be able to fall asleep. But I can consume the coffee and caffeine even, like, maybe 6PM and still be fine by going to bed. Whereas some people, they need to cut off their caffeine intake, even before twelve at at noon. So they need to consume consume coffee only like in 10AM or 9AM and 7AM, something like that without interfering their sleep because they have like a slow metabolizer gene. Acupuncture, again, I'm gonna avoid sugary foods. How sugary foods help with insomnia? Avoiding sugary foods. Eating large amounts of sugary foods may make it harder to sleep. Sugary foods spike your blood sugar insulin and insulin can trigger the release of chemicals that keep you awake. Well, there you go. Keeps you excited. Allergies. Next report. What's my risk for allergies? I don't have any allergies. No food sensitivities. Never had it. My risk is average. Average risk, what to do, allergy, immunotherapy, nasal cleansing, exercise, probiotics, butter burr, acupuncture, and nasal light therapy. So, yeah, allergies anything like, gluten, dairy, histamine, lectins, whatnot. I'm set forty forty second percentile. My risk is greater than forty two percent of the population and lower than fifty eight percent of the population. So I'm below average. Like, I don't have any allergies. My family members don't also have, like, any allergies. Like, I don't know anyone. Maybe, like, a few of them have, like, one person I know has allergies to bees, like, bee sting. They can die to that even. My brother has some allergies against, like, hay hay fever, but it's, I don't think that it's genetically, caused. It's more like epigenetically maybe. Let's see. Allergy immunotherapy. I need to do that. Allergy immunotherapy involves safely exposing someone to an allergy trigger. First, the allergen is diluted, then a person is exposed to a small amount of it. More and more of the allergen is added during this process. So they're describing the microdosing, the microdosing the allergen in small amounts to strengthen the, immune response against that and over eventually overcome the, allergy. So, yeah, like, I think that it's, for sure, it has strong impact and strong evidence apparently for treating that. If you have, like, a serious allergy condition, then you don't wanna be doing that, but it's apparently still possible to regain your, you you rebuild this this response to the allergen and strengthen it and not have the allergy response that severe. So, yeah, as a healthy person, if you don't have any allergies, then avoiding these all these allergens can also be bad because your body will eventually lose the reference experience how to deal with that. So if you avoid all gluten all the time, you avoid all dairy, if you don't have any allergies, you're not gluten intolerant, you're not lactose intolerant, and you're avoiding those allergens, then who knows? Maybe, like, in five years or so, you may actually develop some sort of a bad response to that because you avoid it. So that's why microdosing those things on a, like, a semi frequent basis is a good idea to introduce those compounds into a system and and, keep the immune system adaptable towards or against them. So that's why, yeah, having a bit of, like, some things that have gluten and, these bad foods every once in a while can actually be a good thing. Nasal cleansing. So this is like the neti pot strategy. If you suffer from respiratory allergies, experts recommend cleansing your nose with a sterile salt solution. The process flushes out allergen and helps relieve congestion. It's cheap, safe and easy to use. Yeah. Yeah. The, Neti potty, you pour the salt water into your nose and the salt is also like, you know, antibacterial, antiviral and, also cleanses. Helps to remove all these pathogens that may be there in inside your nose. Exercise, probiotics, butterbur. Butterbur is a shrub that has been used in traditional medicine for thousands of years. Okay. Some sort of a herb, acupuncture, nasal light therapy. Maybe, maybe like the red light could also be there. Yeah. Red light, infrared light, and, UV light helps with allergies in in the nose. But the evidence wasn't, like, that strong. How much do we have left that we have? Okay. We have about 10 left 10 reports left, so, we'll get faster. Heart health, slightly reduced risk of heart vessel issues, which is great below average risk, which I'm happy to hear. Avoid cigarette smoke, obviously, the most important thing, for, heart health. Exercise, choose choose healthy fats, optimize sleep, maintain a healthy weight, nuts, fiber, and relaxation techniques. I'm in the thirty fourth percentile. My risk is greater than thirty four percent of the population and lower than sixty six percent of the population. In The US, one in three deaths from heart disease could be prevented. And, yeah, like heart disease, the one the number one killer, like medical, killer in the world And, yeah, fortunate to have below average risk, which doesn't mean that I couldn't get it. Like, if I turned obese and get metabolic syndrome, smoked and drank alcohol and that's something, then I'll probably get it. But, yeah, I'm not doing those things. I'm not, I'm not having, like, any bad lifestyle habits. So, yeah, we'll keep it at this, short. Tinnitus. So this ringing in the ear was my risk of tinnitus. Increased risk of tinnitus. Super high risk, which is bad. Avoid loud noises. No. I like to listen to metal. So, and, but I don't I've never had any tinnitus issues. So I think that's fine. Melatonin, consider supplementing with melatonin. I do that sometimes. Avoid cigarette smoke. Sound therapy. Ask your doctor about sound therapy. I'm pretty sure my doctor doesn't know anything about sound therapy. So yeah. Tinnitus risk is at ninety three ninety third percentile. Your risk is greater than ninety three percent of the population and lower than seven percent of the population. And, yeah, it's pretty high. Ghost sounds described as ghost sounds which is tinnitus. Well, I'd I'd never had any ringing in the ear or something like that which is maybe also maybe that's also like another this hermetic, adaptations that because I am listening to slightly louder and heavier music than my body and ears have developed some, like, resistance against those things and then my risk of getting tinnitus in the future is also lower. Like I listen to metal when I'm sleeping even sometimes. When I'm taking a nap, I'm listening to like death metal in my ears and it actually helps me to sleep better because of somehow, like, you know, blocking out the outside noise or something. So yeah. At least my tinnitus, hasn't at least for the time being hasn't had any issues, with that weight. But I I would imagine that if I didn't listen to heavy music and I was like very silent all the time silent music all the time, then I probably would be very sensitive against loud noises as well, you know. If you are used to being in a very quiet environment all the time and you go to some some somewhere noisy, then, you would freak out a lot more. Whereas if you are used to, like, let's say working in a night club or something, then of course, yeah, your ears are gonna get damaged and your you're gonna get hear loss eventually, but, your tolerance for the loud noises is also higher. Alright. Weight, reduced risk of being overweight or obese and low risk is great. Very, very low risk. What you need to do, limit calorie intake, obviously, exercise, eat more protein and less carbs, which I agree, fiber, vegetarian diet after my sleep, and green tea. I'm in the second percentile for a weight loss and which is I'm at the absolute lowest part when it comes to risk of obesity. My risk is greater than two percent of the population and lower than ninety eight percent of the population. So only two percent of people have a lower risk of obesity than me and, my risk is lower than ninety eight percent of people, which is great. I've never been obese. I've never been, you know, overweight. So that's good to hear. But I I I could easily if I wanted to, like, if I wanted to get fat, I'll just eat whatever and I'll still get fat, you know, obviously. But let's say this refers to probably a combination of physiological, genetics and psychological traits that you have, like, a maybe more, better satiety control and a better better energy intake. You're not, like, habitually overeating. You get fuller faster and, you may have, like, a more spontaneous energy expenditure. You're moving around more frequently. Those things will all contribute to that. So, yeah, limit calorie intake. I'm not gonna go through that. I think so. Cholesterol. Let's see. A slightly reduced risk of high cholesterol, below average risk, which is good. My cholesterol level is usually well, my HDL is pretty high, super high. My LDL is slightly above well, it's definitely above 100. They say that the recommendation is to be below 100, which is pretty hard to achieve. But yeah. It's not like 300. It's not 500 like some people may have, which is still fine. My HDL is although super high and the the ratios between the HDL and the LDL are also optimal and, really good. What do you need to do? Exercise, maintain a healthy weight, choose healthy fats, fiber, plants, sterols, and stanols, berberine, spirulina, and dietary antioxidants. Below average risk, thirty six percentile. Your risk is greater than thirty six percent of the population and lower than sixty four percent of the population. That's good to hear. What it was that stress? Increased ability to manage stress, low risk. That's awesome. Psychotherapy, again, relaxation techniques, purple passion flower, massage, L theanine, valerian, exercise, avoid cigarette smoke, ashwagandha, spend time in nature. I do some of those things. I don't do the psychotherapy. I don't do the passion flower. I don't do the, valerian. I don't take Ashwagandha that often either. But my risk is, greater than five percent of the population and lower than ninety five percent of the population. So it's very low, which is awesome. So, my ability my risk for stress is, better than ninety five percent of people, which is good. So I'm not I'm not I'm not as stressed out as ninety five percent of people. And, Yeah. I I do think that I I've never never had issues with, like, stress management and, I'm never I've never been burned out or something. I've never, hit the wall with with, like, working too much or, yeah, also like just being able to tolerate stressful situations and being able to be in some sort of like uncomfortable situation without stressing out. I think that is, yeah, does describe me pretty well that my ability to tolerate stress is pretty high and it's higher than ninety five percent of people apparently. So that's kind of a true true statement and true finding from this genetics. Okay. Well, I'm not gonna go through the, what to do. I mentioned them. Blood sugar. What does it tell me about my diabetes risk? Reduced risk of type two diabetes, low risk, which is awesome. I've never had any blood sugar issues or insulin resistance. Maintain a healthy weight. I avoid sugary foods, resistant starch. So this is the cooked and cool potatoes, which I eat quite regularly. Mediterranean diet, cinnamon, which helps with insulin sensitivity. I consume that also pretty regularly. Zinc, I take that sometimes. Relaxation techniques and alpha lipoic acid, which, ALA usually helps with, you know, fat oxidation and also, like, antioxidant defense, which could be something to take. Like, it's a pretty good antioxidant supplement, like, much better than vitamin c, I think, because sometimes okay. What's my risk? Your risk is greater than thirteen percent of the population and lower than eighty seven percent of the population. So it's, yeah, in the very low end low risk for diabetes. My no one in my family has diabetes. Not that I know of. Neither type one nor type two. Joint pain. So what was my shoulder shoulder and neck pain was high, but my joint pain my joint pain risk is low, which is interesting. And I've never had any joint pain issues, exercise, maintain a healthy weight, topical capsaicin, curcumin, avocado, soybean, unsaponifil unsaponifilibils, something like that. We'll see what it is. A topical arnica gel, a topical black seed oil. My risk is greater than sixteen percent of the population and lower than eighty four percent of the population, which, is good. It's very low risk. And, yeah, I I have had I haven't had any joint pain. I haven't had any injuries. I did have, like, some, like, a little bit of a tennis elbow a few years ago, but it was only, like, for a few weeks and it recovered. Now it's, like, stronger than before, stronger than ever. But, yeah, generally, I don't have like any issues with that. Let's see what was the, avocado soybean onset bonifevils. ASU are extracts from avocados and soybean oil. These extracts support joint health to suppress some sort of supplement. Taking ASU three hundred to six hundred milligrams a day for one point five months or more may slow the progression of osteoarthritis. It may also reduce the pain and improve joint function. Note that ASU may be less effective for hip osteoarthritis. So the impact and the evidence somewhat like medium. So it's not like super strong evidence, but, yeah, maybe something to try if you do have, some pain. Topical arnica. Arnica is a daisy like flower that grows in the mountains. People use arnica creams for muscle or joint pain, swelling, and bruises. This is also like very medium evidence for that. And black seed oil, medium evidence, medium impact. Black seed oil, asthma, high blood sugar, high blood pressure, allergies, and joint pain. I don't take a black seed oil, although a lot of people ask me all the time what I think about black seed oil. So I I I haven't done, like, that much research about it. Anxiety. Increased risk of anxiety, which is I've never like, I I I just like not right now at, as an adult, I've never had any anxiety. Maybe maybe when I was in school, maybe a little bit, but not like super crazy. Not not that I could not nothing that I couldn't handle or something. Like, of course, everyone gets anxiety some form every once in a while in, like, stressful situations, but, I've never had, like, chronic anxiety or something like that. And right now, I never get anxiety even while I'm not doing public speaking or, even if I'm doing something, important, then, yeah, I don't really get anxiety. Psychotherapy, reduce caffeine intake, exercise, avoid cigarette smoke, lavender, relaxation techniques, lemon balm. Anxiety risk at ninety eighth percentile. My risk is greater than ninety eight percent of the population and lower than two percent of the population. So it's super high and, so it's like the risk. So yeah. Like if I were to not do any personal development work and not do any mindfulness work and not do any, yeah, not do any kind of stressful and anxious things, then maybe my risk would be high. But because of like epigenetics is still important than genetics, my lifestyle, my habits, my personality has, at least for the time being, has, overcome that that I don't get any, anxiety basically. And, the parts of your brain, the process threats tells us is the amygdala which is the fight or flight response and frontal areas of the brain override the amygdala and help you respond logically. So, yeah, like there's always this the reptilian brain, the crocodile brain that causes this fear response and anxiety, the kind of primitive part of the brain and the prefrontal cortex, the neocortex, the frontal lobes, those are the ones that the human brain that rationalizes things away and makes it helps you to overcome these things or suppress them or, you know, help to manage these fear responses. So if you have, like, strong prefrontal activity, then, yeah, the amygdala is not going to be able to hijack your brain. You're not gonna get angry. You're not gonna get stressed out. You're not gonna get anxious. You're not gonna get fearful because your prefrontal cortex overrides that. Like, meditation helps to probably strengthen that. Meditation and the mindfulness will help to, develop the, the ability to suppress your amygdala. Next up is mood. We have three left. Mood. Mood is a increased risk of chronically low mood. High risk for chronically low mood which sucks apparently. Psychotherapy, exercise, light exposure, SAMe, five HTP, and saffron. Ninety six percentile, my risk is greater than ninety six percent of the population and lower than four percent of the population. So chronically low mood, I think I would I think it would it's not like depression. It's a like, it's like a different thing. Maybe it's just, you know, this melancholy or, slightly yeah. Like, low mood. Basically, not not being that excited. Maybe I do think that, it does, describe me a little bit. Like, I'm not, again, like, a super hyped up person. I'm not I'm not, like, some sort of joyful in that sense. And if I were to be, like, left to my own devices or if I didn't do anything, if I were to be just in my default state, then I would maybe fall or revert back into, like, a lower mood, so to say, like, chronic lower mood based upon my genetics. But again like, I don't live in like a box or something. I don't live inside my genetics. Of course, there's things that you helped you overcome that and it's not that it's it's not like determined in a sense. What does it tell us about the thing? It it ties it in with depression. Depression is is more than just a low mood. People with depression tend to have low motivation, problems with concentration, changes in appetite, poor sleep quality, aches and pains, thoughts of self harm or suicide. So I've never had, like, you know, those problems. I don't have low motivation. I have high motivation. I have good ability to concentrate. I don't have changes in appetite. I sleep well. No pains and aches. So, yeah, I don't think that that that's a big problem with for me. But I think that if I were to, you know, if I weren't if I weren't to do the things that I do, if I were to be like a NPC, non player character, then I would probably get into, like, some sort of a low low chronic low mood or depression. But, you know, yeah, I'm living my own life, so it doesn't gonna happen. Irritable bowel, let's see. Irritable bowel, average risk of IBS. Average risk, reduced stress, exercise, gluten free diet, peppermint oil, probiotics, and psychotherapy. I never had any gut issues. No, leaky gut, no, IBS, IVD, no kind of things. Fifty fifth percentile. My risk is greater than fifty five percent of the population and lower than forty five percent of the population. Yeah. So something that I'm not gonna touch upon further. Blood pressure, increased risk of high blood pressure, high risk, exercise, avoid cigarette smoke, potassium, reduce salt intake, reduce caffeine intake, reduce alcohol intake, and hibiscus. Eighty fourth percentile. My risk is greater than eighty four percent of the population and lower than sixteen percent of the population. But my, blood pressure is low. It's actually lower. It's actually low. It's like sometimes can be below the reference range. Like, can be too low sometimes because of I think the biggest thing, the reason for that is just being low body weight or body fat, exercising regularly and doing intermittent fasting as well because fasting lowers blood pressure quite a lot. And, I do that very often. So, yeah. I think that that is one of the reasons why my blood pressure tends to be lower. But in my other fam like, my family members, my mother tends to have a slightly higher blood pressure. My father may also have a higher blood pressure. And, my grandmother from their side of the family, they all tend to have, like, a slightly higher blood pressure. So I do think that is accurate in terms of that. It's just that me, I've done the I've done the things that the right things that lower the blood pressure, so to say. So for me, it's not, at least for time being. So if I were to yeah. I had to be pay attention to things like tobacco use, calorie intake, stress, alcohol, those kind of things, to make sure that I don't get high blood pressure. Exercise is important. Boy, cigarette, smoke, potassium. Yeah. Like I said, get four forty seven hundred milligrams of potassium a day. Potatoes are good for that. Reduce salt intake. I don't restrict my salt, and I think that it's not relevant if you have good health and if you have low insulin and low blood sugar and low blood pressure as well. Like, if you have low blood pressure then you actually need may maybe maybe you need more sodium and salt to raise your blood pressure. But my mine is normal most times. Reduce caffeine intake caffeine intake. I don't, restrict my caffeine, although I just usually drink only one cup. One to two max, cups of coffee a day. Alcohol intake, I don't drink regularly. Hibiscus. Yeah. So that's it. This is my report. There's also the fuel that I committed to that still generating eczema. Well, I've never had eczema. Never had no one in my family. Also has it psoriasis. No one in my family has it for me neither. Gut inflammation. I've never had it. My own family members either, but I'll check it out maybe later. So these are the reports. You know, there's also the first legacy, initial one that is a bit more comprehensive. Well, not too comprehensive, but they have more reports at the moment because it's been out for, like, years, whereas the two point o beta is still being rolled out and they generate more reports down the line. But the first legacy is also like a pretty damn also. It has the same kind of reports, introduction, moods, anxiety, c n r one, some sort of related to sleep, ADHD, PTSD, COMT, cognitive eczema, allergies, hair loss, joint inflammation, lupus, tinnitus, chronic fatigue, blood sugar, acne, food sensitivity, pain, weight loss, migraine, COVID nineteen, t p fifty three, gut cell, thyroid, longevity, m t h f r, essential mineral sleep, vitamins, cardiovascular inflammation, fitness. So, yeah, those are really good reports, for that. It's just interesting to just see. Let's compare. Let's compare, the legacy, weight loss report. As as you remember, my, my my two point o, report said that my weight loss is very good, like like a very low risk. And this, legacy the legacy report says relatively lower than average risk of experiencing excessive weight gain, relatively lower than average risk of experiencing appetite and eating behavior related issues. Slightly better than average overall metabolism. I believe it's different. So it doesn't tell the percentages as it does in the second one, but, yeah, this one also says that it's a lower lower risk of obesity, which is good. These reports are also like a bit more longer, more kind of science and things of that. So, yeah, those are really amazing, just full 36 page report for one thing. And they they have many, many reports and they constantly updating and constantly updating and then you can choose to get it after the fact later. You can also get, the lab results. So I haven't done labs with them yet, but they, they also provide labs lab tests that will just send it to your home, and, then you can combine it together with your DNA, reports. Alright. So, as you can see, the self decode is pretty damn awesome. You can learn a ton about your genetics and what kind of risk factors you may have. I definitely learned quite a lot. Like, it explained some things about, my health and it explains some things about my physical fitness and, maybe like psychology. So, yeah, I found it pretty damn useful. I think it was pretty accurate. Maybe, like, 90% of it was accurate, surprisingly so. And, yeah, I think that's pretty damn awesome. Like, the recommendations themselves are also, like, you know, backed up by science. And, if if anything, if you don't apply the recommendations necessarily, you will still learn about maybe certain risk factors. Like, if you have a risk factor for you have bad APOE genes, then, like, high saturated fat diet may not be the best for you, for example, or someone something else like you have the blood blood sugar genes, then, high carb diet may not be the best for you. So, yeah, the genetics are quite invaluable and, your genetics doesn't change. You do the test once and, based upon that, you can get some, you know, more actionable things that you need to do, for your health. So instead of just guessing, instead of shooting in the dark, you actually know, okay, these are the things that I need to pay attention to. And I think that is, you know, almost invaluable information in terms of, like, personalized health care. Personalized health care is the future, and the personalized health care is very, you know, something that we all kind of need to take into account in a sense. Like, we can't really follow what other people do. We have to know, okay. Well, how does it apply to me? How does it apply to me specifically? And, yeah, what, you know, what things do I need to know. If you want to check out, Self the Code, then, yeah, you can use the code, Seem at selfthecode.com or you can head over to get selfthecode get.selfthecode.com/seem. And, yeah, you'll be able to get this at 10% discount for the entire, entire thing. Alright. That's it for this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is sim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.