Hey, welcome back to the channel. My name is Siim Lundz and in this video we're gonna talk about sunlight and balls. Does sunlight have a positive effect on your testosterone levels? And is, like, shining sunlight on your balls actually a good way to rate your testosterone sperm quality, and those sort of things. Balls, man. So make sure you click a like and subscribe for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. So the idea behind this video is that there's, actually, like, this, a few years ago even there was this trend called perennial sunning or, similar where you basically expose your butthole and your testicular testicular region to the sunlight, and this is quote unquote essentially going to help you to absorb the sunlight much faster, increase your vitamin d levels much faster, and also has, like, some other health benefits because you're directly shooting the sunlight into your balls and your nutsack. And so that essentially is gonna maybe bypass some of the time needed to see those effects and is quote unquote, like, you know, faster way of having those benefits. And this is actually one of the most original videos as well that, you know, illustrates this, idea. So I'm just going to play a little bit, and we'll talk about the science behind it afterwards. In a mere thirty seconds of sunlight on your butthole, you will receive more energy from this electric moon than you would in an entire day being outside with your clothes on. I was tripping balls. So, yeah, you get the point. I'm much pretty sure that it's not true that you need to only spend thirty seconds shooting sunlight into your nussock and your butthole, and you're gonna basically get the same response as you would if you were to be naturally, outside with your clothes on. So, yeah, like the more skin you do get exposed to, to the sunlight, the more vitamin d you're gonna synthesize and, you know, the less time you also need to spend outside. But, yeah, I'm not sure, like, the thirty second rule is accurate. But regardless, you know, we'll leave it at that. What about the testosterone levels? So, the first kind of study that actually looked into whether or not this, let's say, light exposure has a benefit on your testosterone and, sex hormones if you shoot it on the testicles comes from, like, nineteen thirty nine. So this is a very old study and, yeah, it's it was called Influence of Ultraviolet Irradiation upon Excretion of Sex Hormones in the Male. So basically, I'm gonna summarize the study that, they took these small quartz mercury lamps, now in the market, and, the lamp consisted of 52% infrared, 20% luminous, and 28% ultraviolet rays. The duration of exposure to the light was eight, ten, twelve, fifteen, eighteen, and twenty minutes, each succeeding exposure being increased over the preceding one. And they did it over the course of, like, a week or so, if I'm not mistaken. And all the patients, they suffered from depressive states. Three patients were fifty fifty four years of age, manic depressive psychosis and depressive features. So these people weren't, like, you know, particularly healthy people and, they, yeah, like what they saw that after five irradiations of the chest, the hormone output was raised to 150 IUs per liter, which was an increase of 120%. The next series of irradiation was applied solely to the genital region and its immediate vicinity, the remainder of the body being carefully protected from all rays. After five irradiations during six days, the androsterone excretion was raised from 70 to two zero five IUs, nearly 200%. So we see this graph as well. Five irradiations of chest up to like 150 IU's. Three irradiations of chest was 120, and five irradiations on the, genital region was 200. So it's, like, a significant, you know, increase higher level, much higher than that, etcetera. So yeah. There is, you know, some, let's say, but it's like a very old study. It it hasn't been replicated like this way as well. And, you know, it's definitely tells you that, you know, maybe there is something to it that you expose your, let's say, testicles to sunlight or any kind of, this kind of, ultraviolet, UV radiation, at least like in a hermetic dose in the right amount because, like, excess excess damage, excess UV radiation is definitely, you know, something that is harmful to your health and that causes, you know, DNA damage, skin damage, and that sort of thing if you get it, like, from our artificial source especially. And, you know, it also makes sense that it may have, like, a testosterone boosting effect because, you know, up to 95% of the testosterone is produced in the testes, at least for men. There are, like, some other studies that also find that, continuous light, like, not from, like an artificial sort, but, like, a continuous light exposure in in general has a positive effect on spermatogenesis on and testicular steroid genesis in rats. So, male rats exposed to continuous light for seventy days showed an increased weights of testes, accessory sex organs, serum levels of FSH, LH, testosterone, etcetera, etcetera. You know, there's been people like, Ben Greenfield who has also talked about this, but he has done it with more like red light therapy. So why could that be? Why would, let's say red light and UV radiation have positive effects on the testes and testosterone production? So I'm gonna read, like, an article actually by Red Light Man. The testes produce testosterone, they produce sperm, and they also require a lot of ATP because of that. Like it said in the article, sperm production is highly dependent on ATP production. So you need ATP energy for, producing essentially, sperm and also just being healthy in general. So, red light therapy has a positive effect on the mitochondria by boosting mitochondrial function and into doing also increasing ATP production. So, So, with the red light, the red light wave, especially, they, have been yeah. In a lot of studies, actually, haven't shown to have a positive effect on, testicular function as well as sperm motility. So effect of 655 nanometer diode laser on dog sperm motility. So, if you shoot red light on the on the balls of our dogs, they're gonna have basically better sperm quality and the sperm motility. In quails, in Japanese quails, there's also, seeing that red light on the testicular region has, you know, better effects. So greater testis weights were found in birds under higher light intensities. So, yeah, red light, I think it's more like the red light especially that is responsible for this increase in testosterone and, and the sperm quality exposed to the testes because, like, sunlight is composed of many things. So So sunlight is composed of many different wavelengths. The visible light is, you know, the rainbow the rainbow color. And, usually, you know, during daytime you have a lot of blue light. You get everything during the sunlight. But, in the morning parts, earlier parts, you get more blue light, more green light, and in the as the day goes on, in the later part of the day, it's gonna be more orange, yellow, and red. So red is gonna be primarily during the sunset, etcetera. So during the daytime, you get more this blue light and blue light, you know, it's not bad. It's not harmful to your health. You need blue light to basically produce cortisol, to wake yourself up in the morning, to, you know, help with things like autophagy actually. So, yeah, you would need blue light and you need it more more so in the in the morning. Like, blue light at the nighttime is, harmful to your sleep and it's gonna be bad for just, you know, overall recovery. And blue light are from artificial sources, blue light from the, let's say, screens, blue light isolated blue light, isolated blue light, only blue light that you get from a smartphone, or let's say, the blue light that you get from, the, the glass, the window, that is actually harmful to your skin and just overall health because you're getting this isolated blue light only. And, that is, you know, causes DNA damage and, it's harmful to your, let's say, oral health. So you don't want to actually get the blue light in isolated forms. You want the blue light with together the red light and the other wavelengths because they're gonna basically have, like, an anti inflammatory effect that counteracts the blue light. So, getting it from the sunlight is, you know, the healthiest way of getting the blue light, compared to using this as, you know, screens. When you're using the screens and you wanna use, like, some filters or, well, these, filters or, well, these, see through blue blocking glasses to protect your eyes, to protect your skin, and, to protect yourself from DNA damage. But regardless, I think that the most of the spermatogenesis effects, the testosterone boosting effects of sunlight on the testes come from the red light. And, yeah, if you shine red light on the testes as is seen on these studies and animal studies and as as shown by Ben Greenfield is that, it does raise your at least, like, a positive effect on the testosterone levels as well, whereas the blue light is not so. So, you know, arguably if you were to say, like, okay, which one is better, like, you wouldn't need to be necessarily shining your balls on the sunlight, to get these benefits. You could also do it only with the red light, you know, That's because the red I think the red light, yeah, is is probably the biggest reason why this testosterone boost happens. Alright, everyone. Chill. You don't wanna be overheating your walls, so that is definitely a harmful thing, for sperm sperm quality especially because in one of my previous podcast as well, we talked about how excess heat in the testicular region is gonna lower sperm quality, whereas cooling it off with, like, ice packs and, cold baths or cold water is gonna actually help with testosterone production, improves blood flow, can help with, like, erectile dysfunction or something by doing that and that sort of things. So, you know, whenever you are doing, you know, sunlight in your balls or something, then, make sure you're not overheating them either. And, yeah, I would say that any more than, like, ten or ten minutes or something is probably too much, because of, you know, the same reasons. Like, you don't wanna be basically frying those balls. You wanna get the therapeutic dose and after that, help with actually the recovery by having some cold there maybe or something like that. And the same applies to the red light. With the red light, you get only the red light, which is, the therapeutic wavelengths, and you avoid the blue light. So you don't wanna getting the blue light from from there. And, you know, if there were to be, like, some ideal time of the day to do it, then, yeah, maybe, like, in the afternoon is probably better because then there's less of this blue light and, only primarily this red orange, light that you get. So, yeah, you know, if you have, like, the red light thermostat, then you're gonna biohack it anyway. So you're actually doing the red light into the right region where where it matters, and you're only getting the beneficial wavelengths that, actually have these, effects that you're looking for. My fault. My fault. Alright. That's it for this video. Let me know in the comments. Have you done this? Are you doing this? Are you doing the red light or are you doing the, sunlight? Click like, subscribe, notification bell as well for future videos. Thanks for watching. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.