Welcome back to the channel. My name is Seem Lund, and in this video, we're gonna talk about how I did 100 pull ups for an entire month, and I did it last summer. So we're gonna talk about why I did it, how I did it, and what were my results. You are stupid. Make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about these kinds of topics. Do it. Alright. So I'm gonna begin with, like, some of the backstory. I did it, last year, 2020, during the summer because of, you know, there was the lockdown, and I didn't have access to the gym. The gym gyms are closed. And because of that, my kind of, you know, training wasn't as intense as it, could have been because, you know, although calisthenics is great, it's awesome. I do love it. I do it all the time. I do, like, weighted calisthenics as well. Like, the weightlifting is kind of easier to progressively overload and it's easier to add, like, heavier weights and increase the intensity of of the exercise. And, because of that, I decided to kind of compensate for the lack of intensity by increasing my frequency of my training and decided to do, like, this sort of high frequency, higher volume type of training for pull ups, so that, you know, I would still basically keep making gains. But now let's maybe show some of the results. On the left, you can see that there's me at the beginning of, like, 2020, maybe January or February. And, yeah, you know, I I've always done, like, a ton of pull ups of, you know, training calisthenics for years, and I've always, you know, had pull ups in my routine almost, you know, almost every training day that I do them. On the right picture, this is me now, which is 2021. And as you can see, like, you know, the the kind of it's the same kind of definition, same body body type, but, you know, substantially a bit wider, you know, more more muscle for sure. So during this time period of, you know, going back to the gym, I've, added weight lifting back into my routine as well. I've, you know, increased the intensity of the exercise. So it's this is not purely the result of just the calisthenics of the thirty days. This is also the combination of the calisthenics plus more weight lifting and the more weighted calisthenics. Hey. Wait. Alright. So let's talk about kind of the idea of why would I do it or how would I be able to do 100 pull ups every day for a month because, you know, that is, you know, quite a lot of training, a lot of volume. A lot of people aren't able to do even, like, 10 pull ups, and they're gonna be sore for, you know, days. So how how was I able to do, you know, 100 pull ups all the time, for days? So basically, you know, when it comes to training, there are different variables, you have to keep in mind when it comes to, let's say, building muscle and strength. And the three main ones are intensity, volume, and frequency. So intensity is basically the percentage of your one repetition maximum. How intense is the exercise? How heavy is it? How much how much weight are you able to lift in relation to your maximum? And the volume example will be amount of sets and reps and exercises. And frequency is kind of the how often you're doing it, how frequently per week, how many times a week are you training a muscle group. So let's take the pull up example. I didn't do this pull up challenge for, like, 100% of my intensity all the time because that would have been basically very hard to recover from given that I am training every day. So instead of going 100% or even 90% of my one repetition maximum with the pull ups, I was going only, like, 70% and I was basically keeping the volume also semi, you know, moderate. I wasn't do overdoing the volume. I was doing, like, four sets of 20 to 25 pull ups, and that is, like, 70% of my maximum pull up records. And I would because I was doing it basically every day, I was able to get away with it without interfering with a lot of my recovery process. If we were to be doing, let's say, 100 of my maximum with the pull ups, four, five sets, which would be, like, on an average training day now or something, related to that, then I wouldn't be able to do it every day because my you know, I wouldn't progress. I would get, kinda weak and, hit a plateau as a result of that. And this kind of high frequency training isn't like a new thing. You know, it's actually done a lot by different kinds of professional athletes as well. So Bulgarian method is a very commonly, a very notorious training method for, weightlifters in particular who, also train at, like, this high frequency almost every day and even even, like, several times a day at high intensities. So here is the kind of routine or the plan that I followed. This is the weekly plan, and I would repeat it for the entire month. So as you can see, on Mondays, I would do, four to five sets of 20 to 25 pull ups, which is, for me, is around my, like, 70% maximum. My maximum pull ups would be around, like, 35 or so. So if I really wanted to push, like, I had a ton of extra pull ups in my tank. So the goal of this type of training isn't to reach failure. You don't wanna reach failure because you're gonna burn out if you have to do it every day. And, my main goal was to just get a good pump get a good pump in the back, get a good pump in the lats. And whenever I was noticing that, okay, it's kinda starting to struggle a little bit, then I kinda backed off and I never went usually beyond 25 reps for that, and I left a few of them in the tank for sure. And I repeated it for four to five sets depending on how many reps I got. The next day, I wasn't going for the same intensity. Like, I wasn't going for the same amount of reps because, you know, you do want to basically have some downtime from the intensity as well, not going at the same intensity every day. So on the on the second day, I was going actually for five to six sets of 15 to 20 reps. So less, reps, less intensity, but more volume, more sets. Or maybe some days I I might have even gone for, like, seven sets at only 10 to 15 repetitions or such. So even dialing down the intensity even further. I was always going how I felt. You know, I felt like especially sore, super sore, super tired, then I would reduce the intensity and increase the volume, but still kept the frequency there. I was just showing up regardless of, how I felt, but I was, you know, manipulating the variables of the training. Instead of going higher intensity, I would dial down the intensity, and increase the volume as a as a result. The third day, Wednesday, I would go for a little more more intensity, because, you know, the last day was lower intensity. The next day would be higher intensity. So three sets of 30, thirty, thirty five, 35 around there, 33. So, yeah, higher intensity but less volume. I would, basically, manipulate the variables from that angle. The next day, again, would be similar, five to six sets of 15 to 20, which is lower intensity, higher volume. Friday, four to five sets of 20 to 25, again, like, you know, moderate 70% intensity. Saturday, it was, like, more like a rest day. So a rest day for 10 sets of five to ten, pull ups. So I did them more over a longer period of time, but the intensity is even less. You know, that intensity is probably around, like, 30% intensity, but the volume is super high. And, yeah. It was like a rest day pull ups for me. And last day last Sunday was again four to five sets of 20 to 25, pull ups. So there you see, you know, this is the training week that I followed. And, yeah, every day, about 100 pull ups every day and manipulating the variable. So it was never the same intensity and the same, frequency all the time. Yeah, buddy. So what would be, like, the rationale behind doing, like, a high frequency training, training every day? Well, you know, from a muscle building perspective, it's actually can be quite, good or even somewhat more optimal than low frequency training. So as you can see from this, basically graph, I've outlined the differences between high frequency and low frequency training. Low frequency being dark green, high frequency, light green. So let's say you train a muscle group, once or twice a week. Let's say chest you train your chest on Monday, you activate you know, you elevate muscle protein synthesis and the muscle building signals so the body will, you know, start to build chest muscles as a result of that. But the signal stays elevated only for, like, up to twenty four or maybe at maximum forty eight hours. So the signal isn't elevated for the rest of the week that long. So if you're training their muscle only once a week, then the muscle building signal, especially in that muscle group, let's say the chest or the pull up, would stay elevated, you know, only a few days after the training. If you trained the muscle group second times as well on the week, then the muscle signal would, you know, spike up again, but there's still, like, a few days that it isn't elevated and a few days that you're not building that particular muscle. On the contrary, if you train high frequency, you're activating muscle protein synthesis, in a muscle, let's on the same day, but you're also keeping it more elevated basically all the all the week, because if you're training your muscle once, twice, three, four times a week, then, you have, like, this muscle building signal elevated all the time. So higher frequency training, you know, at least like for most people, for let's say natural athletes as well has a, you know, better muscle building effects because of this, so to say, because you're able to, keep the muscle muscle protein synthesis elevated, more often and for longer periods of time compared to training your muscle only once a week. Like, you know, you could get away with training your muscle two times a week for sure. Like, this is pretty good, but training your muscle only once a week really annihilating the muscle, going max intensity, max volume, but only doing it once a week, you know, yeah, you're gonna may you may be making some gains, but your speed of making that gains may not be as, optimal as you compared to if you were to do it, two times a week or, you know, more, three to four times a week. So, doing the pull ups every day, it may not have, like, a maximum muscle building signal because the intensity is somewhat low, but it still has some, effects. I like, I I don't really recommend doing it all the time. Like, you wouldn't wanna be doing the pull ups every day for the rest of the week or the rest rest of your life because you're not gonna you're not gonna see, like, a lot of progress. Eventually, you're gonna plateau off. So because you do need some max intensity as well. You need to have some days where you are going, like, real near maximum intensity and, like heavier weights. But for that, you also need more time for recovery. The pump. So what about you? Like, should you try to do the 100 pull up challenge every day? Well, depends on how many pull ups can you do. Like, imagine if you are able to do only three pull ups, then trying to reach 100 pull ups every day is gonna take a long while. And, yeah, it's gonna be a massive time sink for you, and it's not gonna be that defective. Instead, what I recommend to everyone do is to, yeah, assess, like, how many pull ups can I do? Let's say, you can do 10 pull ups at maximum, then, dial it down to, let's say, 70%, 60% and, do that for maybe four, four sets of, of, of pull ups at around 60 to 70% and repeat it for not maybe not every day, but, like, every other day. Look what happens. Maybe you will, you know, increase your strength rapidly. Maybe you just break a plateau. Regardless, it will be like a good, novel stimulus, to your training and definitely something you can try out. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.