Hey. My name is Sim Lund, and I recently stumbled across this study that was published a few weeks ago that showed how humans are able to reverse their biological age by three years after just eight weeks. What? I don't think that three years is especially, like, significant, but at the same time, the eight week thing is, quite, good in in a sense that it kinda shows that you can change your biological age quite rapidly. So in this video, we're gonna talk about what was the study, what did they measure, what are the results, and also my own opinions about this. If you're new here, then click like, subscribe as well for future videos about this kind of health and fire hacking. Do it. So here is the study and the the title is, potential reversal of epigenetic age using a diet and lifestyle intervention, a pilot randomized clinical trial and was published in the journal Aging in April 2021. They took 43 healthy adults between the ages of 50 and 72, and they put them on a eight week treatment program that include a diet, sleep, exercise, and relaxation guidance as well as some supplemental probiotics and phytonutrients. Then they measured the DNA methylation age and, that is used to gonna assess the person's epigenetic or biological age. It basically uses DNA methylation data to predict the age, the biological age of a particular organ and the cell as well as, you know, the entire person. Methylation is the process of adding methyl groups to other molecules and transferring them around. Methyl groups are atoms with a single carbon unit that attaches to hydrogen. The role of methylation is to control almost every reaction inside your body starting with digestion, your brain plasticity, and ending with genetic expression of DNA repair. Studies using Korvath's Koch have found an association between age related diseases like cancer, Alzheimer's, and osteoarthritis with accelerated epigenetics. Studies on over 41,000 participants have found that each five year increase in DNA methylation age was associated with an eight to fifteen percent increased risk of mortality. So now let's look at the results of the study. I'm I'm gonna just read it, compared to participants in the control group, participants in the treatment group scored an average 3.23 years younger at the end of the eight week program according to the Horwath DNA methylation age cock. The authors also point out that, yeah, that the it's a small study. There's only 40 people and it was like not that long, only eight weeks. And, yeah, they are aware of that. So you you can't really based upon like your entire life decision upon this study and there are some many var variables that they probably didn't control for. For exam for example, like, I think the maybe the majority of these health results, these, younger age, they it came probably from just, weight loss. They stopped eating junk. They reduced their calorie intake. And as a result of that, they got healthier, and their biological age also decreased as a result of that because one of the only ways we know so far of actually, you know, extending lifespan in other species is calorie restriction and, eating less calories. It just needs to better metabolic health, lowers the the kind of burden on the system, and has, like, some other epigenetic effects as well. One of them being, like, the activation of these many different longevity pathways in the body, like sirtuins, increased NAD, autophagy, FOXO proteins, Yamanaka factors, and, other things. These longevity pathways get turned on in response to, like, calorie restriction as well as exercise, proper sleep, and, you know, independent fasting, which are all part of this study. Winning. So here's actually the specific diet that they were recommended to follow for the entire week. The the guidance was three servings of liver and one serving being three ounces. So they got, nine ounces of liver per week, which is actually pretty good. That's gonna rounds up to a little bit more than one ounce per day, which is perfect. Like, you can cover almost all of your micronutrient needs with, just an ounce of liver every day. And, yeah, it's quite awesome to see that these these authors included liver into this diet. And, you know, calorie restriction itself, it's not it's not guaranteed to work if you're, becoming deficient in your nutrients and micronutrients. So you do need to be covering your micronutrients as well, not just be, you know, like a calorie deficit. In addition to that, five to 10 eggs per week, which is also almost one egg, maybe one and a half eggs per day. Guidance per day, the foods that they ate every day were two cups of dark leafy greens chopped packed, including kale, Swiss chard, collards, spinach, dandelion, mustard greens. Doesn't include salad greens such as romaine, iceberg, and spring mix. Yeah. So all these dark leafy greens, kale, Swiss chard, they're very high in all these methyl donors and, yeah, generally considered much more nutrient dense than, let's say, romaine or iceberg feathers, because iceberg feathers is just, you know, it's just a grass or, greens with a little water. It doesn't have, like, really nutrients, whereas kale and Swiss chard, they are this dark they have these dark pigments and beneficial effects on the microbiome and also these methyl donors like folate. Two cups of cruciferous vegetables, broccoli, cabbage, cauliflower, brussels sprouts, bok choy, mustard greens, watercress, and radish, Swiss chard as well. So these are also quite impactful in turning on many of these longevity pathways in the body through like sulforaphane that release the glutathione and other like these anti antioxidant defense systems. And last, in top of that, the three additional cups of colorful vegetables excluding white potatoes, sweet corn. So that will be for the glycemic variability so that they would want to kinda keep the blood sugar more controlled, which is, you know, true, at least like in animal studies, like higher insulin and IGF one signaling especially does appear to be associated with shorter lifespans. So, yeah, you basically don't wanna be you don't wanna become hyperglycemic and hyperinsulinemic. So if you are, you know, starting to develop the symptoms of diabetes because of eating too many carbs, And then that definitely has a shortening effect on your health health and lifespan. One to two medium beets, four tablespoons of pumpkin seeds, four tablespoons of sunflower seeds, one plus serving of methylation adaptogens to choose from, a half cup of berries, a half teaspoon of rosemary, a half teaspoon of turmeric, two medium gloves of garlic, two cups of green tea, two cups of oolong tea. So you would have to choose one one from that. And, yeah, like a rosemary has a ton of antioxidants, turmeric as well, berries, green tea for the EGCG, and garlic also for, like, the sulfur and helps with, like, glutathione. And lastly, per day for for the every day was also six ounces of animal protein, which is, you know, approximately, like, 160 to 100, like, 80 grams of of meat from, like, grass fed. I would imagine, yeah, it's just like meat. So it wasn't like, you know, it was like very plant centric. It had a ton of, like, salads and vegetables, these dark leafy greens, but it wasn't vegan. It wasn't, it wasn't even, like, plant based actually. Like, if you eat six ounces of of animal protein plus some eggs and liver every day, then I wouldn't consider it, like, even plant based. It's it's almost very balanced. It's like a very paleo type of diet. And also two servings of low glycemic fruit. So I'd imagine just like berries or, maybe like apples. The general guidance was to prefer organic, stay hydrated, don't eat between 7PM and 7AM. So do some times of eating. It wasn't like complete interval of fasting, but it was like twelve hours of fasting and twelve hours of eating. And include some healthy oils, e g coconut oil, flaxseed, and pumpkin seed oil. Avoid sugar, candy, dairy, grains, legumes, beans. Minimize plastic food containers. The supplement was, phytogenics, which is pretty probiotic probably. Or oh, no. It's the the polyphenol powder basically of these berries and vegetables, to get, like, more of these phytonutrients in probably two servings daily, and UltraFlora, which the probiotic exercise minimum of thirty minutes of exercise per day for at least five days and at an intensive of 60 to 80% of maximum exertion. Sleep, average seven hours. Breathing exercise. Yeah. So there it is. Nice. So what do I think about it at? I think it's really good. It, does, you know, cover a lot of the essential nutrients, basically all of them with the liver and the egg yolks and some meats. But at the same time, you also get all these different beneficial polyphenols and other methyl donors from these dark leaf darky dark leafy greens and the vegetables. So, yeah, I do I do really like the diet. It's pretty good. I think a lot of people will be able to, like, lose weight with it, but at the same time, it'll also, you know, improve their health. So, yeah, I do think that it's a really actually good diet, surprisingly surprisingly because most of the time, these diets tend to be, too biased or very, very one-sided. They either go, like, full vegan or full, like, say, keto. So yeah. But this was on, like, a really good diet. It actually is very similar to what I eat, just I eat more of. I eat more more calories probably. I eat more carbs and some days I eat more, more meat, more protein. But, yeah, generally, I do include a lot of these dark leafy greens, cruciferous vegetables almost every day, beets for sure, rosemary, garlic, and the turmeric. I do consume them almost every day. And I actually have taken the same DNA methylation test as well. Maybe not the same from the same company, but I have taken the DNA methylation test based upon the Horvath clock myself last year in 2020. And, when I took the test, I was 25 years old in the in my passport, but the test results showed that I was actually 16 years old. So my biological age was 16 and which was like nine years younger. And I think that's, you know, that's quite quite a good results, you would imagine. And, but at the same time, like, I wasn't, like, surprised about it that much, because, you know, I have, like, a really good diet. I do actually, you know, a lot of intermittent fasting. I exercise regularly. I eat, you know, most days I eat once a day. I do, let's say, more this time machine eating than, the other people do. And I do think that that has a pretty impactful effect on this methylation, DNA methylation process because you're activating all these longevity pathways in a much more profound way than you do with just, regular atomizing eating. And funny enough, like, I'm not necessarily, like, restricting calories, although I'm not overeating them either. And I because of I'm doing more this, let's say tighter eating window, the calorie restriction isn't that important in terms of the longevity pathways because, it has been shown in many studies that intermittent fasting mimics the effects of calorie restriction. So you get the same benefits of longevity without necessarily having to restrict the calories if you do your, if you kinda confine your eating window in a smaller time frame. And, yeah, I think that's that's one of one of the biggest reasons why my test results were, you know, that good. Good. But in the meanwhile, you can also check out my many other books about these similar topics of longevity and, health span, which, you know, are centered around intermittent fasting, diabetes eating, as well as the kind of similar diet protocol that kind of balances both, nutrient density from animal foods as well as the phytonutrients and polyphenols from plant foods. You can also check out my metabolic pathology masterclass that gives you a twelve hour video course about this entire topic. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.