But, you know, let's talk about the testosterone experiment. So, you know, that's quite high for natural testosterone. So how did you do it? And, you know, what were the things that you maybe experienced as well? Yeah. Well, I mean, I I did devise, like, a a full protocol. I I outlined it, in in some detail in my, in my testosterone course. But, essentially, what I did was, I focused on lowering prolactin, increasing, monounsaturated fat intake and saturated fats. So both those types of fats. I was shifting my, protein sources primarily to organ meats. So eating liver, kidneys, chicken hearts, things like that, rich in zinc, co q ten, selenium, all these vital nutrients, heaps of cholesterol. I mean, so I was focusing on, you know, high cholesterol diet alongside, like, five grams of taurine every day plus, like, vitamin b one. I was using couple of herbs like cisternge. I was using a a a couple of I mean, there was one pharmacological intervention that I guess it's not really directly shown to increase testosterone, but it's, cyproheptadine. So that sort of helped with lowering serotonin. So, yeah, really focusing on optimizing and driving up dopamine and and lowering serotonin, I think, really helped. Okay. So what what do you think about this, you know, this trend that over the past few decades, this, testosterone level average testosterone levels have been declining because of maybe, like, xenoestrogens and, you know, by lifestyle and plastics and chemicals in our environment. Yeah. I mean, there's some crazy stats going around now. I mean, they say that, like, in thirty three years or so from now, all men in the Western world will be infertile, which is pretty scary stats. I mean, you've you've seen you've seen the diagrams that graphs yourself, the trending decline is so severe. Mhmm. And I think you definitely hit the nail on the head. There's, you know, EMF exposure, plastics, microplastics, nutrient deficiencies, poor sleep, obesity, insulin resistance, lack of exercise. There's so many factors, you know, playing a role in the decline in both fertility and testosterone. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. So that kinda funny funny thing that, like, physically, you know, men are, let's say, more resilient, but at the same time, like, their sperm is also very fragile or very vulnerable to, very, like, you know, the small things like EMF or, I don't know, the, the xenoestrogens and plastics and things like that. Yeah. It is funny like that. And I like to look at I like to look at, testosterone as, like, the resilience the resilience hormone because it does help a man sort of become more robust and withstand stress because there was one particular study that looked at how testosterone can, help, increase a man's willingness to withstand adversity. So how long a man could withstand severe adversity and struggle was the higher the testosterone, the longer they could last in, like, struggling sort of thing. Right. Right. Yeah. And, what what's your, like, testosterone now? Like, have you changed anything? I mean, I know it was a while ago when I got my test done. I'd hoped to see it a little bit higher by now. I mean, I've been experimenting with some things that may help increase it further, but, I think yeah. Definitely, environmental things affect that. At the time that I did the test, my sleep was excellent. I was sleeping, like, eight hours a night straight. I was definitely in a caloric surplus. Mhmm. Whereas right now, I wouldn't I I don't know if I would be in a caloric surplus. I'm I'm doing the one thing that's changed is that I'm doing 20,000 steps a day. So I'm I'm not sure what sort of impact that's gonna have on my hormone status. Okay. Gotcha. But what what what what are maybe, like, some of the best, like, exercises or, you know, exercise is important for testosterone, but there's also, like, the aspect of chronic, overtraining and, yeah, not having enough time for recovery. So, you know, what would be like a good, way to balance those things and optimizing it? Yeah. Well, from from the exercise perspective, leading up to that blood test, I was doing two leg sessions per week, and those leg sessions were very heavy, like, six to eight reps roughly. And then, you know, followed by I did two sprint sessions per week as well. I'm convinced that sprinting has some phenomenal effect on, testosterone. I've seen evidence that shows that it increases DHT, significantly. But in terms of, like, there was absolutely no, long duration cardio, nothing beyond twenty minutes. That's been shown to have a deleterious effect on testosterone. So, yeah, avoiding avoiding the the the long the low in the list, low intensity steady state. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. Yeah. And, you know, what I also like to do is that, focusing more on this very low intensity, like, you know, walking is actually very low effort way of, getting your steps in and getting cardio without, you know, yeah, starting to interfere with, like, muscle growth and without interfering with these hormones and things like that. So it's a very, yeah, like a better way of unless you are, you know, trying to deliberately increase your endurance or something, then, yeah, like a minimal effective dose or minimal effort is a kind of a better way to go about it. Yeah. It was it was tricky because I was trying to balance, like I mean, I was trying to really optimize for testosterone, but at the same time, I was trying to, like, maintain aerobic capacity and, like, it's you know, you're trying to optimize for some different goals. But in the end, I think, the combination of icing, certain exercises, certain sleep protocols, couple of herbs, supplements, I think that all and then obviously really healthy thyroid function. My, my t three my t three levels are, like, basically, like, bordering on hyperthyroid. So I think that definitely having a better metabolic rate is definitely gonna help as well.