There's there's molecular reasons that all all this works, but, you know, trust me that the the data is very clear that this is the way to go if you wanna be healthy in your eighties and nineties. Hey. Welcome back to the channel. My name is Sim Lund. And in this video, we're gonna react to, doctor David Sinclair on Joe Rogan's podcast where he talks about how fasting and, like, these different kinds of stressors, how they affect your longevity. Make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about health and performance. The other thing is, which I do, is to skip meals. So it's not that hard. I I now feel weird if I eat a meal for breakfast nutritious, three meals a day plus snacks, never be hungry, is killing us. It really is. And we know that if you do these things to animals in controlled settings, they live longer, a lot longer, 20, sometimes 30%, because they're healthier for longer. They don't get cancer and heart disease and, dementia. So I don't know why we don't all do that. I just think we just like to sit around and eat both once. Right. So, yeah, he refers to this, one of the biggest, or the one of the best ways to actually know how to extend lifespan in other species is calorie restriction, as well as like intermittent fasting, time restricted eating eating, mimics those same effects as calorie restriction in research. So, you see those that, like, life extension benefits, even if you're not really reducing that many calories or at least, like, not as much. So you probably still won't get away with overeating, but at the same time, you can, you know, you can eat a bit more calories without feeling that you're suffering or without feeling that you're Starving. Because the inward fasting is a similar stressor to the body as calorie restriction, but it's almost like it's, like, magnified in a way. So, if you're eating constantly throughout the day, then you're still, you know, providing your body nutrients and you're not allowing your body to basically turn on these longevity genes and pathways in the body that are associated with this small stressor that it experienced from fasting or exercise and calorie restriction. It's good. It feels good to just eat chips. So do what just feels good. Yeah. Oh, for sure. Yeah. But is there, like so when you talk about, how eating one meal a day can extend your life, is it because when you're eating all the time, you're taxing your digestive system, which taxes your resources, or is there some sort of a a mechanism that leads to decay of the human body from overconsumption? Like, what is it? Yeah. So overconsumption or just consumption in general makes your body complacent, and we know this in great detail at the molecular level. There are genes that respond to how much you're eating and what you're eating and whether you're exercising, and these are called longevity genes. And they give our body resilience and fight aging and slow down, but we can now measure the biological clock so I could take your blood. So here's yeah. Again, mentioning that I just, talked about as well that there are these different longevity genes in the body, longevity pathways that are most of the time, they lay dormant. They're turned off because you're not really needing them. They only get activated if your body is under some kind of a stressor, like environmental physiological stressor, that, you know, tells the body in essence that, hey, you need to, you know, slow down the aging process. You need to become more resilient. You need to slow down these, reactions. And into doing, you know, you see this, decrease in the speed at which you're aging. I wouldn't say that, you know, one meal a day is necessary to see those benefits. Like, if you're not over eating calories, you're exercising as well, then you see those benefits even as little as like sixteen hours of fasting or something with two meals a day, etcetera. So, yeah, you don't need to, you know, push it that hard or that far with this, fasting and times you're eating. You know, Sinclair, as he says later, he's eating one meal a day. I've been doing it for the past few years and, yeah. I don't think it's inherited, like, superior. In theory, it would be more effective. But like I said, you can also turn on these, gene longevity pathways, with things like calorie restriction, fasting, exercise, saunas, colds. All these, hormetic stressors, have a similar effect. And I've actually written, like, an article about it as well, like, different articles, videos about these, longevity pathways And the main ones, I'll just, you know, briefly mention them. There's the growth hormone incident, like, incident IGF-one growth signaling pathway. So this is, you know, the one usually related to, growing and, it gets turned on if you're spiking your insulin, you're eating something that has calories and, especially carbohydrates and proteins. So you're elevating this, growth signal if you're eating, and this suppresses the other longevity genes such as, you know, cell recycling through the process of autologie, or sirtuins, which are also this, another one of these longevity genes proteins. So, yeah, just eating all the time may, suppress these longevity pathways. Disappointed. And, next one is FOXO transcription factors, which are kind of stress resilience, you know, proteins that regulate energy homeostasis. So when your body is under energy stress, if it's doing this hormetic stress by fasting, exercise, calorie restriction, anything cold, then, it's going to, you know, also activate this antioxidant defense systems, promote autophagy, regulate your energy metabolism, and, that sort of thing has, like, a beneficial effect on longevity because of that. And next up is sirtuins and sirtuins and NAD plus, which is, you know, Sinclair is an expert in. So sirtuins are also similar to these longevity genes or proteins that, have a similar effect as FOXO proteins, but they also regulate things like NAD. So NAD is a very major coenzyme in the body that is, responsible for, you know, virtually everything starting from energy production, ending with, digestion, ending with just methylation, and, almost everything requires some NAD. And with low NAD, you see this accelerated aging because because your body doesn't have, like, the resources. And, sirtuins get activated in response to this energy stress, which then helps with the recycling of NAD and production of NAD. And, yeah, fasting does it, exercise does it, calorie restriction does it, even different kinds of foods that do with, like, these different dark polyphenols, pigments, vegetables, cruciferous vegetables, berries, those also activate sirtuins and then help with NAD plus, you know, you actually also need to be circadian rhythms. Your circadian rhythms also need to be aligned when it comes to the sirtuins and NAD because both of them are regulated by the circadian rhythms. So if you're, let's say, doing everything right in terms of fasting, exercising, eating a good diet, eating these, polyphenols, but your, sleep schedule sucks, it's out of sync, with the natural environment, or you're sleeping very irregularly, then, you may not actually see those benefits get fully turned on because of this circadian mismatch. A lot of the NAD is, most of the NAD is produced through, let's say, circadian rhythm alignment. So you need to have actually the circadian rhythms working working properly before you do anything else. And lastly, there's also these JawaNaka factors which are relatively new, and if I'm not mistaken, they also got like a Nobel Prize for, a few years ago. But they're just like these reprogramming factors with these different kinds of complex names that regulate cell rejuvenation and reprogramming so they have, like, an epigenetic effect on your system. The general open experience. And what is going on with eating? So if you have one meal and say this meal comprises, 2,000 calories or whatever, and you have this meal at 6PM and you fast for twenty four hours until you eat again at 6PM. If you have this one meal a day, why is it better to do that than to have, say, you know, smaller meals of, like, 500 calories multiple times per day, little snacks? Well, because going back 6,000,000 back, you know, we're in the trees and then in the savanna, our bodies were designed, well, or evolved to respond to adversity, and we've removed that from our lives because it feels good. But we need adversity to be resilient and to fight disease. So what I'm saying is that period of hunger, and it's not even hunger these days. I don't even feel it. I feel great if if I don't eat. And it takes a few weeks. So anyone wants to start, make give it some time. Give it a couple weeks. But what's happening in the body is you're turning on these adversity, hormesis response genes with all the longevity genes, and they make the body fight aging and diseases. And so by by eating through the day, the traditional, oh, you can have breakfast, So I'm gonna just add a little bit to that, yeah, there's actually is a lot of research about these, hormesis and longevity genes, having a positive effect on, life lifespan. Hormesis, you know, describes this, dose specific response to a stressor, like you experience an injury or you experience some kind of physiological stressor, like heat, colds, exercise, dietary restriction, calorie restriction, fasting, and your body responds to it. Like, okay, we are under this stress, and therefore, you know, we have to, I don't know, slow down the process of aging at least for the time being in this temporary state. We, hold it at least for the time being so that we could resume it in the future. So I think that that needs to be thrown out the window. Kids are different. We're not talking about kids talking about adults. And we're not talking about malnutrition or starvation too. Let's be clear. But we are talking about lengthening that window of not eating. So if you always are are satiated, fed, your body says, hey. I just killed an, you know, a mammoth. No problem. Don't need to worry about survival. I'm just gonna go forth and multiply and screw my long term survival. So this is all about long term survival by making the body freak out that there's tough times. And that's running away, like running away from a cat, like the Savannah, and being hungry or you know, there's there's molecular reasons that all all this works, but, you know, trust me that the the data is very clear that this is the way to go if you wanna be healthy in your eighties, nineties. So yeah. I'm not check I wouldn't, like, you know, say that you need to do the one meal a day or something like that to live longer because, you know, all the longest living people in the history, like the ones who lived until 125, then they didn't do any of this fasting or they didn't do any one meal a day or something like that. They ate, like, regularly. But the reason they, you know, probably had good genes, but at the same time, they also experienced these different kinds of beneficial stressors. Like, they didn't overeat calories. They had some form of calorie restriction. They probably had a diet higher in these polyphenols and phytonutrients. They, exercised regularly in terms of, you know, staying physically active, not necessarily going to the gym and, that sort of thing. So, yeah, that is true that we are living in a very, let's say, protective environment. Our environment is very safe. We don't experience any positive stressors. We don't experience any alterations in the heat, the colds. We are eating all the time, snacking. We don't exercise, etcetera, and that is making us weaker and that weakness is accelerating our aging. So that is definitely true. So we do definitely need to implement these different kinds of positive stressors into our life, like, fast some some sort of time restricted eating, then some, you know, not over eating calories, losing weight, that is a very important part because the I would imagine that the fasting is not gonna work. It's not gonna have a positive effect on your longevity if you're still over eating calories and if you're still obese. So you have to kinda lose the weight first. And fasting maybe, like, just a beneficial one of the one one method of many that is, helping you to do it. And, of course, exercising regularly and maybe engaging in some other of these positive hormetic stressors, like, the cold, the heat, heat, and that sort of thing. Alright, everyone. Chill. If you like this video, then make sure you also click like and subscribe. If you want to know how to implement these kinds of hormetic activities and stressors, positive stressors into your life, then check out my book, Stronger by Stress. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.