Animals that are very long lived, they actually stay fit to the very end. And the human centenarians, people who live to their one hundreds and beyond, they also have extended period of healthy lifespan. So that's really what we are working for. Welcome to the Sim Land Podcast, Ami Ho, Sim Land. And today, our guest is doctor Vera Gorbonova. Vera is a professor of biology at the University of Rochester and a co director of the Rochester Aging Research Center. She has published over 100 publications about longevity, sirtuins and aging. This episode is brought to you by donotage.org. Do Not Age offers different kind of molecules as supplements that have been seen to have a longevity benefit such as NMN, trimethylglycine, apigenin, and hyaluronic acid. Doctor Vera is one of the advisors of Do Not Age, and I'm also taking their products. You can get a small 5% discount at donotage.org if you use the code SIIM, s I I m. Doctor Rera, welcome to the show. Thank you. Yes. I'm glad to speak with you. And, it's, you know, this longevity field is very, exciting, and there's always, like, this new discoveries being made. But, you know, maybe let's start with, how did you become like a longevity scientist? What what made you, like, interested in it? Well, I think extending human lifespan and health span is just a very, very exciting topic. You know, if you if you are a scientist, biologist, and many topics seem exciting, but then the question is, do they seem equally exciting to many other people besides you? And there are some topics that only make very few people excited. But with aging and longevity, it's just relevant to everyone. And this is what was very attractive to me that, first, it's a very fundamental biological problem because every living thing ages and finding out how that happens and how this can be prevented. It's just very important scientifically without even thinking about the application of it. But then, you know, from human standpoint, extending health and life, this is so relevant to everything that's going on now in society that, you know, that just seemed like really a worthwhile problem to study. Right. Right. Yeah. It is, like, some of the biggest one of the biggest problems, mankind and, humans have been thinking about, you know, since the dawn of our species all the time. And, like, how do we like, what is death, etcetera, and, how do we solve aging? But, yeah, like, from I agree with that. Yes. Like, people were looking for the fountain of youth, and you can see it in all the novels and the fairy tales. Yeah. Exactly. And from a, like, a practical standpoint is also very, useful because, you know, aging, wastes a lot of resources in essence that, you know, that you had these comorbidities. They, take a lot of resources. And, if we were to solve, let's say, this, deterioration of the human body and, that happens with aging, then we would also have just more, like, productive years and, you know, more just, more, I don't know, just a more functioning society as a whole. Yeah. You are exactly right. A lot of resources being spent towards the end of life, when people become frail. And the yeah. But it's also a lot of human suffering. So when we talk about extending lifespan, we are not talking about extending frailty years. We are talking about healthy lifespan. And, it is very clear that from model organism that we study, that, you know, animals that are very long lived, they actually stay fit to the very end. And the human centenarians, people who live to the one hundreds and beyond, they also have extended period of healthy lifespan. So that's really what we are working for for to achieve it for everyone so that everyone could live to 100 and keep active. Yeah. Yeah. That's that's that's one of the big misconceptions about, even even, like, you know, extending lifespan doesn't necessarily equal, like, immortality. Like, you can still die. It's just that you're extending this, yeah, like, the functional health and the functional health span that you can stay, quote, unquote, biologically younger for longer. That is what but that is actually what is, meant by the soul engaging. It doesn't mean, like, immortality than things. It's more it is there's an idea behind solving all these comorbidities that happen with aging, like, cancer and diabetes and, newer degeneration and those things. Yeah. That's extremely important because so far medicine was approaching every disease separately. But now in developed nations, aging is really the underlying cause of all those diseases, diabetes, cancer, heart disease. If we slow down aging, then we take care of every every such disease. Yeah. What do you think or what what has your research led to? Like, what is causing aging then? What is making us, you know, age? Well, it it's a very complicated, of course, scientific problem. So it doesn't it's unlikely that there is just one single cause, and people talk about multiple organ systems and molecular system deteriorating over time. Recently, I think one of the most, there is a lot of attention that's going to epigenome deterioration. So our DNAbel, we know that mutations accumulate over time, and there was always a lot of debate. Does it explain aging process? But now we start thinking beyond mutations because mutations is when DNA sequence changes. But besides that DNA is packaged in a certain way in the cell so that it can be organized and accessible to other enzymes. And over time, this packaging starts to deteriorate. So, like, you can't even find what you need to find. It's like, you know, a drawer when everything is disorganized. Let's say you need this gene to be active, but you can't find it. So that is one of the very big problems, that over time, not only we have mutations, but we just have this general disorganization of the DNA, and it affects function of the cells. Like, for example, in the young tissue, if it's a liver so every liver cell works like a liver cell, and they're very uniform, and they work together very nicely. But in the old liver, one cell does this, one cell does that. So that really creates dysfunction on the organ level. And that is, you know, one of the problem. I'm not saying this is the only one, but this is one of the processes that kind of controls a lot of what's happening inside the cell. So if the DNA is not packaged correctly, that means the right genes are not activated correctly, and then maybe wrong genes are activated when they shouldn't. Mhmm. So all this leads to functional consequences. Right. Yeah. Like, so, genetically, we are, like, programmed to age. Like, the the aging is in in the genes, but the epigenetics determines the speed of that the process. Like, does it speed up? Because, like, some people are, you know, very old and, get this comorbidities even in the forties, whereas others are, you know, living very healthily until their nineties and, one hundreds. So it's like this yeah. The epigenome is still, you know, affecting, the speed of this, you know, the aging aging clock. That's true. Yeah. Because it's it's wrong to think that there is, like, a aging gene that just kind of kills us. Right. But more what's determined is the rate by which things start to deteriorate. And, for example, if you are a mouse, everything starts to fall apart by one year of age. But if you are a human, you know, that happens much later, maybe in the fifties and sixties. And also humans are very different from each other. For some of us, it happens later sooner or later. So, yeah, there are these differences in how well we can deal with this damage because, let's say, when DNA is opened due to some damaging event, then it can still be repaired and put together, but, it's never 100%. And maybe when we are young, everything is being repaired very nicely. But when we get older, things are not repaired anymore. Okay. Nice. So but but what are the things then that, what are the things that, you know, speed it up or, like, make the aging happen faster? Things that speed up aging? Yeah. This, epigenetic sense. Well, so it's mostly, you know, inability to restore proper structure over time because, let's say, when you need to activate a gene so that chromatin needs to chromatin, that's the packaging of DNA, needs to open up. But then once this gene is no longer needed, it needs to be put packaged back. And then or if there is a break in DNA that's induced from damaging agent or from some free radical passing by, again, there are systems in the cell to repair it. And if the system works very well, then, you know, we can handle damage. But when those repair systems start to fall apart, so that's when the problem begins because our cells do not no longer keep up with the damage. And, really, my belief is the function of these repair systems, what really determines how well we deal with challenges and stressors. So it's a well known fact even if you think about kind of generic stress. Old people are much less capable of dealing with stress. So that's really that kind of concept of resilience. When we are young, we're very resilient, but then it starts to deteriorate. So there are various ways. You know? There are all these repair systems that provide us with resilience, and those systems start to be less efficient. So, if we want to extend the lifespan and really get to the whole basics of it, like the underlying cause, so I would think we need to find ways to stimulate those repair systems. So maybe, like, a few examples of them are, like, telomeres and, DNA repair and, that sort of thing. Right. Right. So stimulate DNA repair. Well, telomeres, you know, this is a very beautiful concept because of its simplicity. They shorten and that induces genomic instability. You know, it shortening does cause problems, but for majority of people, that's not really the main driver because our telomeres just don't get short enough to cause serious disease within our lifetimes. So I would say telomeres are important, but it's not that, you know, once you make them a little longer, that's going to solve all the problems because for many tissues, many people, you know, telomeres are okay. I mean, there are certain people who who have really short telomeres, then it's a problem, but sort of average telomere is enough for our lives. Okay. Right. So it's not that, so it's not that this is the, like, the main reason why we age that the telomeres aren't the main main reason? Doesn't look like that. There was a lot of excitement about telomeres, you know, when they were first discovered. Mhmm. But right now, it doesn't seem like this is really the universal cause of aging. Right. So, we do things like DNA is more important than DNA repairment. Yeah. I would say DNA repair and also that maintaining epigenome structure is more important. And telomeres also play into the mix because, DNA they're also part of the DNA. And when telomeres get very short, that also contributes to kind of disorganization because genes that are close to telomere, most of them supposed to be silent. But if telomeres get short, then those genes start to be activated and often that's undesirable. So it's, you know, it can contribute to the mess. But even beyond telomeres, just keeping DNA well organized is very important. Mhmm. Okay. So, what are some of the ways then, you we can do that of, keeping the DNA more organized? Yeah. Well, that that's a good question because, right now, many researchers are working on it, and there are different approaches that people try. It's not that we have really a good way of doing it yet. We're just learning how to do that. There are many enzymes in the cell that their job is to keep DNA well organized. And sirtuins are just some of these enzymes. And, my group works specifically on sirtuins six whose job is to, take DNA, especially those parts of the DNA that have to be silenced, that we actually don't want them to be active. And so two n six keeps them silent. Mhmm. When cell two n six function starts to decline, so then we get activation of different parasitic elements in DNA, like there are so called transposons, that were first discovered in a maze by Barbara McClintock. So she found those selfish genes in DNA. They just live there like parasites. They most of the time, our cell keeps them silent. But when we get older, and that's what was already published more recently by us and other researchers, that as we get older, transposals start to be activated because those systems that keep them silent start to fail, and these parasites get out of control. So, again, another reason to keep them silent. Otherwise, they start to be expressed, and they cause inflammation. And inflammation is really underlying a cause of many age related diseases. We want to reduce that inflammation. So what we are looking into is how to activate sirtuin six. Mhmm. Because if we activate it, then, hopefully, we can, keep DNA more organized and also keep those transposals in check. Right. Right. Right. Yeah. I actually saw this recent study as well, that the the restoring SIRT six levels was able to, like, help with the longevity or, like, helps with restore some of the longevity of some mice and things. And there are also some other studies where there's where the, if the SIRT six genes are basically, like, deleted or, mutated, then they don't live longer at all. So it's it appears to be have, like, some very important role in, just longevity and aging. Yes. Yes. So SIRT six is really interesting because it has, you know, this very profound connection to longevity. And the paper you're referring to by Hein Cohen's group, so they were even looking at a different function of sirtuin six, its role in regulating metabolic genes. I mean, again, regulating genes, so that's what sirtuin six is doing, but also metabolism. And they found that adding extra copy of sirtuin six was making mice live longer. And then, Raul Maspaslavsky group several years before showed that if you mutated, then you get this very progeric, short lived mice. So, really, it looks like SIRT six, easily longevity gene, and many people are looking for activators, obviously. Mhmm. Well, it's not that we have, something that, you know, a a drug like activator that ready for people to take it, but there are natural compounds, that, show some activity. Yeah. Yeah. How do how do the sirtuins work then? Like, what is the mechanism that they have, these longevity effects? Well, so sirtuins, they are enzymes. They can modify other proteins in the cell. And what's there are sirtuins, it's a family of genes. So when we say sirtuin, some of them, they have very different functions. Some of them are in the mitochondria, some in the nucleus. So right now, we are talking more about the nucleus, sirtuin six. And it works by taking DNA and, also recruiting different, other proteins that are responsible for packaging DNA and the silencing regions of DNA that should be silent, like transposons, for example. And, also, it participates in activating genes. For example, genes involved in stress response. So if we experience stress, then we need cert two and six for, you know, the optimal response to stress. So, yeah, that that's kind of put it simply, the mechanism of action. So it is two enzymatic activity. It can, deacetylate proteins. It can mono ADP ribosylate proteins. And these, modifications, they serve as signals for proteins to take action and, for example, compact DNA or open it up. Mhmm. So that's sort of mechanism of work. It was shown that CYP26 can be activated by certain fatty acids like fish oil, you know, which we know is a healthy thing. Mhmm. And, also, it was shown that CYP26 can be activated by fucoidan, which is a polysaccharide from, brown algae. And what I find really exciting that, brown algae fucoidan, even independently of c l six, was shown to have many health benefits. Mhmm. And, people consume a lot of algae in Japan and South Korea, and these are two countries with the highest life expectancy. So they must be doing something right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That is they consume a lot of it, and, there's, many nutrients in there, like iodine and, k vitamins and those things. So, yeah, like, even besides, there's a two wings. It's, generally, like, a pretty healthy food. But, like, what is the human research, in, in in sirtuins and longevity? Like, does it does does that find also that, sirtuins have, like, this direct effect on longevity and lifespan? That's a good question. So we have, a paper that we are, you know, in the process of publishing. So I cannot, you know, reveal too many details, but I can just say that we found a mutation in human centenarians. And so people that live beyond 100 in cell 26 that makes cell 26 more active. So it's still it's a rare mutation. Not every person who lives to 100 should have it. It's rare, but it it's found more frequently in centenarians. So we see this link between more active cert six and living to 100. Okay. So that's, pretty interesting. Yeah. Because sometimes, like, people, the reason why they live longer, like, centenarians have to do with actually, yeah, the genetics. Like, the Mhmm. Certain, like, sirtuin genes or FOXO protein genes as well. Those are usually they have, like, a higher expression of them or more copies of them. Right. So we collaborated with the group of, Yousin Sue from Columbia University, and she found this mutation. And then we engineered this mutation in cells, and we looked at, you know, the activity, the function, and we see that it gives enhanced function. Yeah. And, of course, there's also, like, very difficult to do this human research because, like, humans live, like, very long. Like, if you try to give someone, like, a, let's say, sirtuin activators or increase their sirtuin genes, starting from their, like, let's say, teenage years, then it's gonna take a long time to see, like, whether or not it's actually working. Right. Yeah. So we cannot do real lifespan experiments on humans, but recently, there were different biomarkers developed. Like, another great colleague, of ours, Steve Horvath, he developed this methylation clock biomarker. Oh. And, another experiment, we are right in the process of doing it. So we express silt two extra dose of silt two n six in human cells, and then we culture these cells for some time, and then we send them back to Steve to look at methylation age. And we will see if it made the cells younger. So I don't know the result yet in just doing this. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But also I've also used the, methylation clock, and it's something that, like, there's always, like, changing, so to say that, it's not permanent in essence that if you are doing, let's see, some good, healthy lifestyle changes and you see your, methylation age, decreasing, then you have to kinda keep at it. So to say, because if you reverse back to your bad lifestyle habits, then those you're you're gonna basically come back. You're gonna rebound to, like, a just a higher age, so to say. But if you're if you don't keep up with the healthy habits, then, you're still gonna you have the potential to accelerate your age even if you have decreased it in the past. Yes. Yes. No. It's a very good biomarker. It it's real. It is really very, very useful for people, you know, trying all antiaging interventions because you can do take, use that intervention for maybe six months and then test your mutilation agent. You see which way it's changing. So it's great. You don't need to wait two hundred years. Right. So what are some of the ways to, activate sirtuins then? You mentioned the sirt six activator and some other things. Well, fucoidan, you know, this is something we are studying right now. We are very excited about this compound because of other health benefits that were already demonstrated, but we now link it to sirtuin six. And then, you know, besides that, all kinds of healthy behaviors actually activate sirtuin such as exercise, calorie restriction was shown to activate sirtuin. So there is really this nice connection between sirtuin activity and all those, healthy behaviors we already know about. But, yeah, with fucoidan, that's really very promising. It's interesting that fucoidan is not, you know, the molecule is variable because it comes from algae and different algae have different slightly different chemical formula of it. So we find that certain, preparations activate cert six while others don't. So it's important also to know which one you are taking. Mhmm. Right. But you've I've also you know, a lot of people have heard about resveratrol being, like, this a sirtuin activator. Like, does what do you think about that? Well, you know, it's been very controversial because some people saw benefits of resveratrol. Other people said, oh, well, they couldn't, replicate sirtuin, but that's sirtuin one activation. So that's, you know, a different member of sirtuin family. With sirtuin six, I'm not aware that resveratrol works on it. So resveratrol may have other benefits beyond the sirtuin activation, and there are many people now researching it, for other benefits. But in terms of silt two n six activation, yeah, I don't think that's been demonstrated. Okay. Is there anything else? Like you mentioned, fish oil, any other compounds? Well, in terms of compounds, you know, that's probably all. Well, there are other, you know, flavonoids from berries that some there are some reports that they activate sirtuin. So I think in general, eating berries is a good thing. Mhmm. But, there hasn't really been, you know, a very strong activator. You know, blueberries, yeah, so there are some studies showing that blueberries have effect. So, yeah, I think we still very much need to find more potent activators of sirtuin six. And, at this point, I would say, yeah, from natural compounds, flucoidus shows the greatest effect. You know, another detail about it, and that is, you know, more sort of technical thing, but, I mentioned that there are two enzymatic activities in sirtuin six. So it can deacetylate proteins, and it can add a molecule of sugar ribose. So these are two different enzymatic activities. Many people were looking for activators of distillation, just because of the simplicity of the assay involved. But now we see more evidence that the second activity is more important. So that's really where we are focusing. And with fucoidan, we see that it activates both of these activities, which is probably, you know, the best that we want. Okay. Well, that's interesting. Usually, like, the all these darker pigments, berries and, like, dark dark leafy green vegetables, they have, like, this, flavonoids and, antioxidants that have, like, the sirtuin activation because, like, they they do cause, like, a small amount of stress to the body, and sirtuin are almost like, stress reaction genes that turned on by exercise and fasting and calorie restriction. So they are experiencing, like, a small small amount of stress, by consuming those, compounds. Yes. Yes. Yeah. So some of them may induce stress and then activate sirtuins. There are other compounds that may be directly binding to the to sirtuin protein and, helping it. So, yeah, you know, these are, all good strategies. But, yeah, there is more work that needs to be done to find really potent activators. Mhmm. Yeah. But, you also mentioned in your your, like, your papers and research that, so twins are basically needed for the function of NAD, which is also like a very common, this longevity enzyme. Right. So it's a little bit the other way around. NAD is needed for sirtuins. Right? Because it's a cofactor. So sirtuin is for the enzymatic activity. They need to bind the molecule of NAD. And, there are studies showing that as we get older, NAD levels decline in our cells. So that's why, you know, people are taking things like in a man or in our supplements to boost NAD levels, so that improves the function of the cell of the mitochondria and also improves sirtuin function. Mhmm. Right. But what is NAD then? We're gonna like, a brief primer. Well, it's it's a cofactor for it's required for sirtuin, for the function of the mitochondria. Almost like a needed for, like, all these, different processes in the body, like, in each process. So it's a it's a very important molecule in the cell. For the proper functioning of the cell, we we need an AD, and boosting NAD levels. So that's been, you know, very Mhmm. There was a a lot of interest in that, and, yeah, people are taking supplements and, reports, you know, that they have more energy from that. Mhmm. Right. Right. But how does the body, or what is the reason why this NAD decreases? So what is the you know, what what does it do go in? There is still research going into that. That's a very good question. Why does it so there was previously, there was a somewhat simplistic explanation saying that, well, there is more DNA damage, and it activates enzyme called PARP one, or other PARPs which use NAD when they are activated. But more recently, that doesn't seem to hold true because, you know, otherwise, you would inhibit PARP one and, you know, solve the problem, but we need PARP one. It's very important to for DNA repair for maintaining our DNA in proper shape. So PARP one may consume NAD, very transiently upon stress. PARP one will consume NAD, but it's unlikely that this is really the cause of the decline during aging. There is something else going on. So there was, more focus lately on another enzyme called CD 38, which is, you know, enzyme that's part of the immune system. It may be activated as, you know, sort of part of age related inflammation. And it's a very strong consumer of NAD, so people are looking, oh, maybe we should inhibit this enzyme. Although we still don't fully understand why is it activated and what what what is it doing. So before, you know, I recommend, oh, let's just inhibit it. No. I think we still need to study this better and understand what's going on. And, you know, just taking extra NAD supplement is probably safer than, you know, try to inhibit some potentially useful answers. Right. Right. Yeah. Because, yeah, like, if you, do something like that, especially on the genetic level, then, you may don't you don't know, like, the downstream effects of what's gonna happen. Like, you know, if you turn off this gene, what's gonna happen to other genes and those things? Right. And what we don't want, we don't want to weaken immune system. So before we fully understand what's going on there, we don't Mhmm. Any of these supplements, they proven to be safe as well, so people are taking them. Although, you know, still long term safety studies, we we don't have them yet. These are all fairly new interventions, but short term, they seem to be safe. Right. Yeah. Like, what I was also seeing is that, most of the NAD gets lost for, like, inflammation and also these repair processes. So if your body is under high amounts of stress and, damage, basically, then it uses NAD to, you know, conduct these repairs repair processes and use as they're doing. So, yeah, if you're just under that much to load, and the stress, then you're gonna get lower NAD faster. And part of the reason why maybe, like, younger peeps younger people have higher energy laws is that they don't get damaged that easily. So to say, like, they have a high resilience, and their their antioxidant defenses are also more, robust. Whereas with age, you see, these antioxidant defenses also going, down and weaker, which then increases the burden on the NAD system as well. So it's like a downward spiral almost. Right. Right. So it's like, you know, the same kind of the same work that takes more effort for older organisms so it consumes more energy. So that is true. I think another important point is that NAD decline doesn't explain everything. So for example, with sirtuin six, it needs NAD for proper function, but it's not that sensitive to NAD concentration. So you need just a little bit for sirtuin six to be active. So I think it's it's still very important to find specific activators of cell six because we cannot just get away by taking NAD. That's not enough. Mhmm. Okay. So what are the different ways of, let's say but let's start with, like, the natural ways of increasing energy first. Like, how does the body produce its own energy in the first place? Well, it's just, you know, it's part of the vitamin b complex, so I think, you know, it's important that you eat a healthy diet. But beyond that, you know, it's very difficult really, to change that. I think it's, you know, it's very important from multiple perspectives that people eat healthy diet and exercise, but, otherwise, you know, again, it's also maybe, you know, when you start interfering with these systems, like, you know, if you take too many group b vitamins, there may also be certain undesirable effects. So I think we have to be very careful with, what we take. But, with NAD itself, I think, you know, those supplements seem to be safe, and, there are beneficial effects that are now being reported not only in animals but also in humans. Mhmm. Yeah. The main ones are, the nicotinamide riboside and, NMN. Mhmm. Yes. Those two. What is the, like, what are the differences between them and what does the research show? Like, which one is better or which one? Well, this is a very, you know, new field with a lot of controversy and debate, and some people say, no. Only NMA and only NNR. To me, it seems that they're both doing the same thing, and one is converted into the other, you know, within cells. So the question is which one is more stable, which one is better able to enter the cell and enter the mitochondria. And, you know, I think the jury is still out. People take either one and report beneficial effects, so I cannot really vow which that one is better than that. Mhmm. Which one do you think which one do you think personally is better than? I don't know. I think either one is fine if it's a comes from reliable source and you know that, you know, the pill you are taking actually was, you know, the company where you purchase it uses third party laboratory to evaluate, and you can see that, you know, that's really the that is really what is being advertised. I think either one is fine. Okay. Yeah. I I I personally also think that, yeah, like, there is, like, new one subtle nuances between them. Like, nicotine on my drive by side, once it enters the cell, then it gets converted into NMN eventually anyway. And whereas, like, if you take NMN directly, like, how does that, you know, work, etcetera? I I do think that both probably work, so to say. And, yeah, the small differences. Well, yeah, there was a lot of debate. You know? We were, just, had a conference on NAD metabolism, a couple weeks ago, and, you know, there was a lot of discussion which one is better and also how do they enter the cell because people were looking for a transporter for a transporter for NMN, you know, can it get into mitochondria? And recently, they identified the transporter. So it seems like either one is fine, and there is a transporter for either one. So Mhmm. You know, I think as as long as, really, the pills are good quality and contain, you know, what they should, that is fine. Yeah. Is there, like, any, like, I also seen, like, some, research that it has, like, some negative effects on, like, cancers and things if if, like, there's Well, you know, it does worry me somewhat, because, you know, NAD, well, it's not really energy. It's more like a cofactor that's needed to produce energy. Mhmm. But cancer cells, they sort of, you know, they require a lot of energy to grow. So, maybe for people that, are at higher risk of cancer, I would be careful, before taking those extra supplements because it boosts, growth of any kind of cell, but the cancer cell would be very undesirable one to boost the growth. So it is a concern, and we don't that's when I said we don't have long term safety data, whether long term supplementation really promotes cancer development or not. So we we don't know. Mhmm. But, you know, that is something to keep in mind and especially, I guess, if, for example, somebody had cancer and is a survivor and in remission, maybe for those people, yeah, would be careful. Maybe you don't want to, sort of provoke it. Right. I mean, then for people with low risk, then, you know, why not? Yeah. It's it's almost like, the cancer is just there hijacking the energy that is created with NAD. So, it's not that the NAD is directly boosting the cancer. It's just that the energy that's created from energy NAD is stolen by cancer, so to say. Like, they just cancer You're right. So NAD itself is not, you know, it's not the it's not going to mutate the cell or, you know, make normal cell into a cancerous cell. But if there are sort of sleeping cancer cell, like, in remission and, like, all of a sudden, they get this energy boost, maybe, you know, to make them grow. Right. Yeah. So it's, yeah, like, nuanced or context dependent. Like, most, people who don't have any, like, say, cancers, or, like, serious ones, then then for them, it's probably safe, whereas who do who do have some some of the matter, then, they should be more careful. Yes. Yes. That's true. Gotcha. But what what about, like, this different I've also heard a lot of benefits about, epigenin and, hyaluronic acids. Those are also, like, considered at least, like, one of new compounds involved with, like, longevity. Well, I can comment on hyaluronic acid because that's something we study. Yeah. So there are many benefits. It's already been used somewhat, you know, in the clinic for arthritis treatment, injections in the knees. But what we discovered that in naked moras, so these are these long lived rodents that live 10 times longer than mice. They have a lot of hyaluronic acid in the tissues, and then, it's a it's a unique form of hyaluronic acid because hyaluronic acid, it's a sugar. So there are molecules of sugar, the long chain, and those chains in the mora at the maybe 10 times longer than in human. Mhmm. And so that was very different. And the properties of hyaluronic acid really depends on how long the chain is. So the short oligomers of hyaluronic acid, they can be pro inflammatory, and they usually appear at the site of injury. But longer molecules do the opposite thing, so they're anti inflammatory, and they are connected to you know, they protect the cells from damage. So that that's really the connection, and we see that in the MORAD, there is a lot of flaluronic acid in the joints, and and they're very resistant to osteoarthritis. We couldn't even experimentally induce osteoarthritis in them. Nice. They're also resistant to myocardial infarction. So you do surgery on them to induce infarction, and there is no almost no damage to the heart. And they have a lot of hyaluronic acid in the heart. So it seems to really work for them. And we made the mouse where we put naked mole rat gene for synthesis of hyaluronic acid in this mouse, and these mice live a little bit longer. Not like naked mole rats, but, about 10% longer. Mhmm. Yeah. And they have less inflammation. So that's another, something we would have expected from, you know, anti inflammatory effects of it. So it's a very interesting molecule, and it's very safe again because it's normal part, of the tissue. And that's why, you know, it doesn't really do any harm because it's anyway, it's part of, connective tissues and most animals. Why do the naked mole rat have so much of it? Like, I know they live on the grounds in these, tunnels, but, you know, what is the reason that they would have developed something else? Reason. You know? What we think that's because we also find it in other subterranean animals. We find a lot of hyaluronic acid in the blind morat, which is a very different creature, not related to naked morat, but it also lives underground, and we find they make a ton of phaloidy acid. So we think they evolved it, because, they need to squeeze through those tunnels, and they need very stretchy, flexible skin. Mhmm. And naked mole rat skin is very supple. You know? Mhmm. Or it, it's funny that those mice that I told you about that we gave them extra gene from naked mole rat. They also have very supple skin. Right. So probably evolution, that's why subterranean animals increased production of hyaluronic acid. Another reason could be that subterranean animals, they experience a lack of oxygen, so they need to be resistant to hypoxia, and the hyaluronic acid may also be helping, protecting the cells in hypoxic environment. So if you think about humans, we never really had this kind of evolutionary pressure to increase our hyaluronic acid because we don't live in tunnels. We don't, don't, you know, experience hypoxia, but we can borrow it from naked mole rats. By, taking the hyaluronic acid? Yeah. Well, you know, this is still kind of an open question because, it's a very large molecule. So if we take supplements, we don't know if they get absorbed, in the same form or it probably gets broken down in the digestive tract. But there are studies showing that even, you know, taking extra hyaluronic acid has benefits. So maybe even if it gets broken, but when our cells receive, you know, that extra building blocks, so then it stimulates production of hyaluronic acid in our tissues. Okay. Well, that's interesting. Funny funny. Yeah. Like, how how a lot of these, long living animals do, live under this, slightly harsher conditions, like, you mentioned hypoxia and these tunnels and things. So, yeah, like, kinda goes to show that this adaptation or resilience against stress is pretty important just as a whole overall, strategy. That is true. It could be adaptations to stress, or it also could be somewhat different reason, because those extreme environments, that also means that not many other creatures living in the same environment. Right. So these animals can be more protected from predators, and that allows them to evolve adaptations for longer lifespan because they just don't get eaten too quickly. So for them, it beneficial to live longer. Right. So you also have a have to have a gun to protect yourself against the predators. Right. Because if you think about, you know, what animals have very long lived, so you think naked mole rat. But there are other you know, there is really a correlation between how protected the creature is and then how long its maximum lifespan is. Like porcupines, for example, they live up to twenty years, which is quite a long time for a medium sized rodent. But because they have these quills, you know, not many predators can take them. And, for example, birds, on average, birds live longer than mammals because they fly. So, again, it makes it easier for them to escape predators. Oh, well, that's interesting. Are there any other, like, interesting compounds, you're excited about or interested in? Well, you know, we are very interested lately in different compounds that could help suppress those transposons or genomic parasites. And I mentioned SIRT six activation, but here, well, you need to first activate SIRT six, and then it helps. But then there may also be compounds to directly, silence transposons. But, you know, here, again, we are now we are not talking about, sort of supplements that are perfectly safe. So these are actual drugs. So there are drugs that are used antiretroviral drugs that are used against HIV, for example, or hepatitis. They have they can also inhibit transposable elements, but there are side effects. So at this point, of course, these drugs are not recommended for healthy people. But what we are interested in is how to make alternatives that are safe and, don't have that those side effects, but can just be specific against transposons. And then we can, you know, maybe directly address, that cause of aging if we can silence transposons. Right. And that would then that is more like, yeah, like, towards gene therapy and that sort of thing? No. Well, those could be the small molecules. So the this family of drugs that I'm talking about, they're called NRTI or nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. So they inhibit the enzyme reverse transcriptase that HIV virus has. I mean, the problem with those enzymes well, they also inhibit transposons. But the problem with them that they have some side effects. For example, they can poison mitochondria. So when people take them for a long time, there are certain side effects, and, yeah, that's not everyone shouldn't just run and start taking them unless the benefits really outweigh the risk. Mhmm. But they were those compounds were developed to specifically target HIV. And we are thinking, you know, developing similar compounds to target transposals only. And that may have fewer side effects, and, you know, that's just one of the directions. Right. Gotcha. What do you think about, like, rapamycin and the metformin? Well, you know, the benefits were demonstrated, especially for rapamycin. For metformin, I think, you know, it's fairly safe for people with diabetes, obviously. Now for a the effect in mice was very modest then, let's say, with metformin. You need to really hit the correct dose. If you're a little bit above, then it actually is not beneficial. Mhmm. So I think for people with diabetes, obviously, metformin is a great choice. I don't know whether it's a good idea to take it for people without diabetes. I think the the jury is still out on that one. For rapamycin, you know, similar I mean, it's not similar. It's different. So with rapamycin, the effect on laboratory organisms like mice and worms and flies is very robust. So it really extends lifespan in these model organisms. Now is it good for people to take? In an here comes, it also has side effects. Mhmm. And some of them are pretty serious because it's an immunosuppressant. Right. And, it is used by transplant recipients to suppress the immune system. So all these studies in mice were done in mice that were kept in sterile laboratory conditions, not in the wild ranging mice. Mhmm. So I I would say rapamycin is a good proof of principle that you can delay aging, by slowing down certain metabolic processes. But, just taking rapamycin by itself, you know, I wouldn't recommend that I'm not taking Right. Because of those side effects, we don't want that. I think there may be safer alternatives developed, obviously Mhmm. To rapamycin. But at this point, you know, there was a big clinical trial by Restore Bio that initially, they had promising results for short term trial with rapamycin, then they increased the their population. They've done a bigger trial, and then that one didn't work, which also is somewhat discouraging. Yeah. So I don't know. You know? Some people, promote that, well, you can take rapamycin not continuously, but let's say you take it once a week and it does certain effect and then your system recovers so you can rebuild your immune system. But Mhmm. I I don't know. There there are too many side effects. Right. I think I would take just take it as a proof of principle idea, and then, you know, we can build on that and try to develop some safer alternatives. Mhmm. Yeah. So, like, a good example of this, like, the downstream effects that you want to avoid. So, like, rapamycin works by suppressing the mTOR complex, and mTOR is, you know, growing. It it has been shown to, like, promote all growth, like, all cell growth, cancer cell growth, as well as muscle cell growth and those things. So, yeah, like, if you're suppress mTOR, then, yeah, you may inhibit some, cancer growth and the aging. But at the same time, you also may develop the increased risk of, like, osteoporosis and frailty and sarcopenia and those things because you suppress Exactly. Right. You don't want to be frail, you know, again. Yeah. Exactly. So, yeah, it's a yeah. I think, yeah, they're probably also, like, safer alternatives unless you have, like, some specific condition. But, yeah, it's been a great talking with you. So we'll we'll start wrapping things up. Before I ask, last question, where can people learn more about you and, your work? Well, I can invite people to visit my web page for my laboratory and, you know, it's a Vera Gerba Nova, University of Rochester. I don't have a Twitter account. Maybe I should I should get one. I'm always thinking about it, but, otherwise, I think, you know, through my publications is probably the best way. Okay. And, yeah, we're gonna put all the links in the show notes. And my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or a habit that you wish you adopt sooner? Well, I think eating healthy, eating lots of fruits and vegetables, seaweed, of course. Right. And, some moderate exercise. Just the basics. Yes. Well, you know, one thing I tell my students, you know, it's difficult for people to calorie restrict on consistent basis. It just doesn't work with human psychology. But, you know, maybe skipping lunch. You know? I'm eating breakfast and dinner, and I'm trying not to have lunch, and that helps my productivity. Yeah. Yeah. That's a good good advice. And I agree there that the intermittent fasting can, like, mimic a lot of these benefits of calorie restriction and, yes, much more, like, a preferable way for people to do, like, do some this this kind of thing. Alright. Well, listen. I it was great talking with you, and, yeah, looking forward to your future work. Well, thank you. It was my pleasure.