And and there's basically three main reasons why we're deficient in minerals. One, our foods are now more nutrient depleted. Two, people just aren't selecting the right foods to hit optimal intakes of all minerals. And then three is the chronic disease states. Welcome to the Sim Lund podcast. I'm your host, Sim Lund. And today, we talk with doctor James DeNicolantonio. Doctor James and I wrote a new book called The Mineral Fix, which talks about how to optimize your mineral intake for energy, longevity, sleep, immunity, and so much more. This book is the bomb. It's the most in-depth book about minerals I've seen, and it contains up to 700 pages and over 4,500 references. It's perfect for anyone who wants to eat a diet that covers all your mineral requirements and improve their health. You can get the mineral fix from Amazon. It's a bomb. James, welcome back to the show. Same. Thanks for having me. Yeah. You're, almost a regular on the podcast already. And, yeah, for a reason, like, we have another book coming out. Yes. Indeed. Yeah. And, this one is gonna be focused on, like, minerals and, like, why why would we, like, why write a book about minerals and, like, why worry about your, like, mineral mineral intake in the first place? Yeah. I mean, I'm excited, really excited about this book because it was probably the biggest request that I got from my followers is, after I was publishing a lot of magnesium, they really wanted, like, a book on on all all the minerals. So I think you and I coming together, was perfect. You know, you're you're really good at piecing together a lot of the science, and it's something I've published a lot on. So and it's a huge issue, and we'll we can get into the reasons why. But I think, I think people are gonna be pretty blown away by this book because it's just so evidence based, almost 5,000 references, over 750 pages. So it's just, it's a beast. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I agree. And, it's a pretty, big big book and very thorough. At the same time, like, we I I I believe we make it also, like, pretty simple and kinda easier to comprehend. Like, it does go into very scientific detail, but at the same time, it also maintains this, like, a, like, a user friendly kinda aspect to it. Right. I think we did a good job in regards to a lot of the times if if there's something pretty in-depth, we create figures to sort of simplify it. Maybe let's start with, like, what is the importance of the minerals in the human body in the first place, and, how does it affect, let's say, just our overall health? Right. So so there's 17 essential minerals and five possibly essential. And so the 17 essential are broken down into seven macrominerals and 10 trace. And they do all different types of things, but, essentially, their primary function is cofactor. So these enzymes in our bodies can work. But, I mean, that's just the bare minimum in regards to what minerals do. They they literally are the shields for oxidative stress because they make up our antioxidant enzymes. They help us produce and activate ATP, help us produce DNA, protein. So literally every function in the body in some way is dependent on minerals. So if you're not getting enough, you know, a lot of people realize if you're eating badly, like, if you're eating sugar or you're eating seed oils, that's bad for your health. But if you're not getting optimal intakes of minerals, that can also be just as damaging. Yeah. Yeah. That is a pretty, like, a profound, realization, like, a lot of people, like, shoot or let's hope that they have. And I I definitely kinda understood a lot more about, these, how deep it actually goes with the minerals. Like, they go, like, straight into just a pure energy production. Like, you you need, like, magnesium for energy production and some other minerals to, like, say, break down carbohydrates and fats and, produce protein, or, like, you know, synthesize protein. So, yeah, it's a very, kinda different viewpoint on, like, nutrition itself. And, it's a very kind of paradigm shifting, I believe. Right. Like, we we go into and we have figures on why minerals help through glycolysis, how we produce ATP by breaking down glucose, how minerals are important for feeding pyruvates, and acetyl co a, right, into the Krebs cycle, and then how even into the electron transport chain, we show all the minerals that are actually, you know, contained in the complexes that help us form ATP. So we try to take both, like a a real world approach to this, but then also, like, kinda zone in on the mitochondria too to show you how important minerals are. Even from even from the fact of even protecting the mitochondria, like things like manganese superoxide, which is actually in the mitochondria to protect it from oxidizing. Yeah. And, one, like, really scary statistic that we talk about in the book is that how prevalent, let's say, these mineral deficiencies actually are. So, like, I believe it's, like, one out of three people in The US have, like, up to 10 mineral deficiencies of the common essential minerals. Right. Yep. Exactly. So, and those 10 would be potassium, magnesium, calcium, chromium, copper, zinc, iron, molybdenum, and boron. I think I hit all 10. And essentially, it's due to a plethora of reasons. And and there's basically three main reasons why we're deficient in minerals. One, our foods are now more nutrient depleted. Two, people just aren't selecting the right foods to hit optimal intakes of all minerals. And then three is the chronic disease states. So the damage to the gastrointestinal tract, so we're not absorbing minerals well. The high inflammation is taxing and increasing the burn rate of minerals. Kidney damage is increasing the excretion of minerals. High insulin levels are spinning minerals out in the urine. So those three key factors are why so many of us, are depleted in so many minerals. Yeah. And, yeah, like, the there's the thing that, yeah, your body you you like, you don't develop these, let's say, mineral deficiencies, overnight. And at the same time, the consequences of having, like, a suboptimal magnesium status or suboptimal chromium status isn't also gonna affect you in, like, even within the months, it's gonna take, like, years. And, maybe, like, you have several decades where you actually get some severe sickness because of this chronic, low intake and the deficiency of a particular mineral. And, yeah, like, that's where, like, things, like metabolic syndrome come from diabetes, insulin resistance, yeah, weight gain, and those sort of things. Right. Yeah. Exactly. And and then there's, like, a really quick there's a point there's a where you hit in your body where you have so much damage that you rapidly then become depleted in your minerals. So whether it's you hit a point where your intestinal tract is so damaged or you start spilling albumin. Once you start spilling albumin out in the urine, a lot of minerals are actually attached to albumin like copper, zinc, even some magnesium. So when you, if you test for microalbuminuria, which is common in diabetics, you, it's guaranteed that they're actually losing minerals through the loss of that. And so when once you start breaking down the barriers in your body, whether it be in the stomach or for the kidneys, then then essentially you can't even hold on to the minerals that you're either consuming or have in your body. Yeah. Yeah. It's pretty delicate, let's say, balance. The way your body deals or, like, stores those minerals. It's, it's relatively easy to, like, lose them. And, let's say if you're already in a disease state, your, let's say, poor kidney function as well as, like, poor gut condition, like maybe a malabsorption conditions like celiacs or, like, intestinal permeability, then you're also, like, at a disadvantage in, getting those minerals from your foods because you're, like, at a reduced absorption rate. Right. And then you brought up a key point, balance. Balance of the minerals is also important. So not just absolute amounts, but also keeping them in balance. So that there's three main minerals that there's pretty good data on what the balances should be. So for example, zinc and copper should be around a two a 20 to one ratio for zinc to copper. Sodium potassium really should be about a one to one ratio. You can for potassium to sodium, you could go a little bit higher than one to one, even two to one. And then magnesium and calcium have to be balanced as well because magnesium helps calcium, from essentially being coming overloaded in the cell. So and really the best ratio for calcium to magnesium is probably around two to two and a half to one. So gotta keep those minerals in balance to have optimal health. Yeah. You you mentioned that, you know, that the minerals are, like, needed for the antioxidant defenses and, like, just your body's resilience. So how how do they, let's say, affect your strength of your immune system and, like like, the antioxidant defenses? Right. So a lot of people kinda think of antioxidants just being vitamins, like vitamin c or vitamin e. But, really, the first antioxidants in any living organism was really minerals. So you had essentially, like, blue green algae, you know, three billion years ago producing the oxygen and creating all this oxidative stress, and they utilized selenium and iodine as their first, antioxidants. And in humans, we actually utilize those pretty similarly. So iodine can bind to polyunsaturated fats directly protecting them from oxidative stress, and then the formation of thyroid hormones also act as antioxidants. Even reverse t three acts as antioxidants. So the antioxidant effects of our thyroid hormones are like a 100 times what vitamin c and glutathione and vitamin e is. And you need minerals to form your thyroid hormones, particularly iodine, but also selenium. So so not only from that aspect of directly, inhibiting polyunsaturated fats from oxidizing, which minerals are important for particularly, like I said, iodine, but you also need them as cofactors for your own antioxidant enzymes. So we I sort of mentioned manganese superoxide dismutase, which is in the mitochondria protecting the mitochondria from oxidative stress, which you get reactive oxygen species just going through the electron transport chain. So you need to have that manganese superoxide in there. But you also have glutathione in there too, And the levels of glutathione are directly dependent on your selenium status, your magnesium status, and then how we handle other oxidative stress. Like, superoxide anions, are produced from NADPH oxidase, and most chronic diseases have an increase in NADPH oxidase in the production of those superoxide anions. Now those are harmful because they can combine with nitric oxide and form the harmful peroxynitrite. So what's interesting though is you have superoxide dismutase that can sort of get rid of and neutralize the superoxide anion, and that depends on copper and zinc. And so if you're low in copper and zinc, you can't neutralize the superoxide. It combines with nitric oxide, reducing your nitric oxide levels, increasing blood pressure, leading to atherosclerosis and heart disease, and then you form the toxic peroxynitrite. So it goes to show you how just having a low mineral status can lead to high inflammation. Yeah. Yeah. That's a really great example of that and a very important one as well that yeah. Like, you know you know, like, mammals and, animals that breathe that breathe oxygen, they're just aspect of breathing itself creates this, oxidative stress and reactive oxygen species a little bit. And, like, digesting food does it, and not to mention all the, like, environmental pollutants and stressors that were already exposed at a high rate. So, all those things just increase the kind of burden on our antioxidant defense systems. And, yeah, if you're, like, deficient in some particular minerals and nutrients, then you're at, like, a huge like, you're very vulnerable to to just all the damage that we're bombarded by from the outside world. And, like, that is where, like, disease also comes from. Like, your body becomes overwhelmed by this, constant bombardment. Right. Exactly. So even the cytokine storm, there's a ton of damage to the proteins in the lungs. How we actually heal, oxidized proteins like methionine, cysteine is through these, complexes that depend on minerals. So thioredoxin reductase, is one of them that requires selenium to help actually sort of take care of the oxidized methionines and amino acids in the body. So if you wanna heal from oxidative stress and protect and have your shields up from oxidative stress, gotta have your mineral status up. Yeah. That's for sure. And you mentioned, like, copper and zinc are the one of the main components of the superoxide dismutase, system. Right. So though so there's three different types of superoxide dismutase. The the two in the cytosol and in the blood are copper or zinc superoxide dismutase, and then the mitochondria has the manganese superoxide dismutase. Right. Is there, like, is there, like, any particular, like, how would, let's say, having a high optimal level of those minerals in your blood affect the antioxidant defenses then versus, just being nourished or, like, eating them? Like, is there a different if could you still have, like, this high defense system, like, for for example, if you're fasting, but you have, like, a prior to that prior to that fasting, you have, like, a optimal level of those minerals. Would you still be protected, or would it be that you need to kind of constantly on a regular basis eat those nutrients, in order to have those defenses optimized? Well, that's that's the hue that's kind of the real crux of our book is that the RDAs don't get you to the optimal levels of your antioxidant defenses because that's what they're they're not based on those type of measurements. They're essentially based on balance studies and making sure you're not actually deficient. Or at least ninety eight to ninety nine percent of the population isn't deficient. But if you're looking at the reduction in antioxidant enzyme functions or any enzyme that depends on a mineral, that's kinda how you wanna look at optimal intake levels. And so if you were to actually look at the enzymes that are dependent on, let's say, vitamin c, for example, you need to consume at least, like, a hundred and twenty to a hundred and fifty milligrams of vitamin c to make sure those enzymes are actually highly optimized, which is completely different than the six to eight milligrams needed to prevent scurvy. Right? So you have this the the, you know, 10 to a thousand up to potentially a thousand fold difference in, preventing deficiency and optimal intake. So I'll give you another example would be magnesium. You only need, like, a hundred and fifty to one hundred and eighty to prevent deficiency, but the optimal intakes are more around the six hundred milligram level. So it just goes to show you that if you're looking at antioxidant enzyme defenses, it's much higher than just the RDAs. Yeah. Yeah. And another example of that would be, like, chromium. So, like, the minimal adequate intake for chromium is, like, suggested to be, like, thirty three millig micrograms. But, optimally, like, if you're, let's say, insulin resistant, then you need, like, 200 or more even to kind of combat that insulin resistance and help your blood sugar management, to work properly. Yeah. That that one's a a really good example. You're right. Because thirty micrograms is the RDA for essentially for most adults. And then almost all of the studies show that actually probably a thousand micrograms is the optimal for insulin resistance because it Yeah. The thousand micrograms typically always beats out the two hundred, but at least 200 to help out insulin resistance. So there there there's a huge discrepancy between thirty micrograms to prevent deficiency and a thousand for improving insulin resistance. Yeah. And there's also the thing that, what's normal isn't definitely not optimal. So, like, you know, if you look around you, then most people are, like, considered normal, that, they are somewhat, metabolicly inflexible. They somewhat have metabolic syndrome, incident resistance, obesity, those things. So if you want to be normal, then, yeah, keep doing what you're doing. So there's a huge difference of what what it means actually to be optimal and healthy. Right. And and well, the and the other thing is is that people shouldn't get confused that you can just start taking supplements and boosting your mineral status, and that's gonna fix everything because you need to be insulin sensitive to even utilize a lot of your minerals in the first place. So you could be taking a lot of magnesium potassium, but if you're insulin resistant, you can't drive it into the cell for it to work well. And you'll start kicking it out in the urine too. So, really, the first step is to try to fix you know, eliminate the harmful substances that are causing you to be insulin resistant in the first place. That's automatically gonna boost your mineral status because you're gonna be able to utilize those minerals better. Yeah. Yeah. It's, always somewhat easier to take away the bad things than, the requirement for, like, adding new things also drops a lot, and, it's just easier. Right. Maybe let's talk a little bit then about some specific minerals. For example, like, you know, magnesium and calcium, those are, one of the kind of like, there are different minerals that kinda work in pairs and, kinda contribute to each other. So magnesium and calcium are, like, one of them. Right. And I think, you know, calcium sort of gotten a bad bad rap recently, and that's primarily though because we're taking calcium and getting it through supplements, spiking blood calcium levels because people are taking five to six hundred milligrams all at once, and it's sort of unnatural. But getting calcium through the diet is extremely important, and it's one of the most common nutrient deficiencies. But the problem is is you can't just throw a calcium capsule at someone and say, okay. You're all set now. It doesn't really work like that. So really calcium should be coming if you tolerate them through things like either natural mineral waters or dark greens, or even, you know, just because a lot of animal foods aren't aren't very high. But you can get some decent calcium, though, too from, like, pastured milk or, pasture cheeses too. Those are great sources of calcium because they're more bioavailable, actually, than calcium from vegetables. So, you know, I think, you know, calcium I get most of my calcium through mineral waters, actually. So Yeah. Because that actually helps bring, other minerals too, like magnesium that a lot of people are deficient in. Yeah. Yeah. And, like, calcium and magnesium both are important for the bones and the cardiovascular system. So, yeah, if you're, like there are some association between high calcium supplementation and, this calcification and atherosclerosis, because of the same reason that you mentioned, you get this massive, dose of, calcium. Whereas that that association does not apply to dietary calcium. So dietary calcium is actually, the opposite effect of that, and you need to get your, like, calcium primarily from, like, cold food sources. And, yeah, dairy dairy products are good for that. And the leafy greens, as well as, like, you know, bones, the bones of sardines. For example, if you eat the sardines, then you can eat the bones and get some calcium from that as well. Right. The one key so I that that's true. Yep. And then we did have a nice figure showing that about four hundred and fifty milligrams of magnesium was associated with the lowest coronary artery calcium score, the CAC. Yeah. And also calcification in the aorta too. 450 was they didn't measure. I don't think that I think people just didn't in the diet consume more, but I bet you if they had 500, five fifty because it would be even less. And we we even had a couple of references showing that six to seven hundred milligrams of magnesium, I think, was associated with even the lowest risk of diabetes and insulin resistance. So that's sort of why we sort of have this optimal range between four hundred 600 in the book. But, yeah, there's this balance between calcium and magnesium, and a lot of people are just deficient in both through the diet. So the one key thing here is that oxalates make calcium not very bioavailable. So I do I consume spinach for the magnesium and the potassium, but a lot of people think it's a good source of calcium and iron, but it's not. So the the oxalates make it a low source of bioavailable calcium. And because because it's nonheme iron, it's only 2% bioavailable unless you're consuming it with things like vitamin c. Or if you add meat to it, for some reason, adding meat to nonheme iron increases its absorption, but you don't wanna just rely on greens for, like, iron bioavailability. Yeah. And there are some other, like, the phytates, and, like, phytonutrients can also, decrease, calcium absorption. Right. And I believe it's, like, coffee coffee or and but in in some studies, it was shown that the not per se, like, just the coffee and the, you know, the phytates in the coffee, but also the caffeine itself, like the stress response, can redo make you excrete some calcium. Right. I mean, that's a good point too, and we cover this in the book as well that stress can cause magnesium deficiency. Because literally when you start releasing more, you know, cortisol, you start releasing more noradrenaline, you start pushing magnesium out in the urine. So everyone being super stressed in this type of environment too is just kind of taxing their magnesium status. Yeah. Some some people are, like, at a higher risk of, you know, the calcium deficiency and, let's say, osteo osteoporosis that can, result from that. Like, peep women from with menopause, usually tend to be more, like, at a risk of, this, osteoporosis because of the, menopause promotes, like, calcium excretion, estrogen and things. Yeah. The drop in estrogen. Yep. Exactly. Their calcium balance goes down. So it doesn't you know, coffee seems to be, you know, you always wanna consume organic coffee. But coffee can get people into trouble if they're postmenopausal and they're not having enough calcium in the diet because it does push out some calcium in the urine. And if you're not matching that, that's one mineral that calcium can cause certain people to potentially become depleted at. Yeah. And what about magnesium? Not a whole if it if the dose is causing you to have a lot of diarrhea, it can because there's a decent, sort of, like, you know, in the bile, you have this sort of sort of, like, reabsorption recycling of a lot of magnesium and calcium. So diarrhea can definitely cause deficiencies in both. So what I've kinda switched over to is I found a my own personal optimal intake for coffee, and that seems to be about a half of a cup of coffee, maybe a little bit higher, maybe 60 to 70% than a full cup. And I've noticed that by by going down from by taking the caffeine down from, like, a hundred milligrams to maybe fifty, I don't get the caffeine blues anymore. So I can do, like, a half a cup two to three times a day, and it seems to keep me nice and activated and focused, but then I don't get those those caffeine blues. Yeah. Yeah. I I I also tend to do best if I do, like, only one cup of coffee or something today, and, that's, yeah, that's where you avoid all these, negative side effects from it. It. And, yeah, you prevent the the dependency of it either. Like, you you don't become, like, that you need to have the coffee to wake up. Right. So what happens is people are overconsuming it. So it's it's sort of like it's just like with sugar. When you start increasing, like, a super physiological spike, then there's, like, this depletion in the body where now that's, like, the caffeine blues where your brain's not functioning as well. So if you can keep the spikes less, then the troughs will be less. And so you'll you'll be more stable throughout the day. Yeah. But, at the same time, like, coffee can also be good for things like preventing iron overload, which is what I think one of the best, kind of, compounds or, substances for preventing excess iron. Yeah. It's great it's great to consume if you're, like, a heavy meat eater or you're someone who has, like, hemochromatosis or someone who's dealing with, like, you know, iron overload. Coffee is great to pair with animal foods, not just from the binding of the free iron, but reducing some of the oxidative stress products that come from eating cooked animal foods. Yeah. Yeah. And iron deficiency or, like, you know, there's this, like, misconception as well as, like, a controversy about iron in relation to anemia because anemia is like a very, very widespread, you know, medical problem across the entire world. But, usually, people treat it with, like, adding additional iron. But, you know, as we talk about in the book, that's not really hasn't been shown to be, like, that effective, and it's not actually the root cause of the issue. Right. There's been a lot of studies showing that, just giving iron supplements to people with, quote, unquote, iron deficiency doesn't help a lot of them. It can if the true deficiency is due to iron, but taking it as a supplement too is leads to more oxidative stress as well. And it's really not the best way to to treat iron deficiency anemia. You really wanna get, you know, it from food if you can. And there is this misconception that if your iron deficient anemia is due to low iron intake because it makes sense, but it can also be due to the inability of your body to get sort of iron onto transferrin and move iron around in the body. And in order to sort of change iron from that the form that gets onto transferrin, you need good copper status, because that is important for moving and even getting iron out of the liver. Exporting out of the liver requires copper. And a lot of people are deficient in copper simply because most foods that are consumed in The United States don't have a lot of copper in them. Yeah. So copper is more of like the helps or like it promotes the actual active form of hemoglobin, basically, that, I I believe it's a caruloplasmin is the enzyme that is copper dependent, and that is gonna helps to activate hemoglobin, which then leads the proper oxygenation of the tissues, that is, not present in anemia. Right. It's so, yeah, copper copper to iron is sort of like magnesium to vitamin d. Right? Like, magnesium activates vitamin d to the active form, and it helps vitamin d actually move around the body, and that's kind of exactly what copper does with iron. Mhmm. Yeah. And, what would be, like, a ways of getting this, optimal amount of copper and, yeah, iron as well? Probably the best way would be to pair muscle meat with the liver. That's probably the best way to do it. You can also get, good amounts of copper and oysters, but oysters are also very, very high in zinc. And a lot of oysters have, contamination with cadmium. So you gotta be careful how much. You probably don't wanna consume more than two ounces of oysters per day. But obviously it depends on where where they're being sourced from. But one of the one of the highest foods that kept coming up in our book of minerals was mussels. Like, mussels are so high in manganese and copper. It's actually second only to liver is the highest food source for for copper. And I I myself kinda like suffer from not picking mussels. Like, I just don't include it in my diet, but I probably should because just a couple ounces of mussels is gonna boost chromium and boost manganese and copper. And and those really are the minerals that a lot of people are deficient at. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Mussels and, seafood is very high in all of the minerals. But I I believe it was also, like, very dependent of the source, and, like, the particular amount of those minerals in the sea or in the, like, soil for that matter. So yeah, the matters a lot on there, like, a region. And if we're, like, getting, like, you know, farmed, farmed seafoods, then those minerals are probably not, there in the adequate amounts. Right. True. Yeah. What about liver? Like, you know yeah. Liver is, like, one of the most nutrient dense foods, but, like, too much liver is probably also not good because of getting, like, maybe too much copper and other nutrients. Right. I think the the perfect amount is between a half to one ounce of liver per day. That's gonna help give you vitamin a, folate, and it's also gonna help you give give you copper, which a lot those three nutrients are very deficient in most diets. And when you pair that with most people should be consuming probably about 12 ounces of pastured red muscle meat or the b 12, the protein, the zinc, and the iron. And then women need, you know, more than twice the amount of iron than men. So women need eighteen milligrams to hit the RDA for iron. Men only need eight. So, very important for for women to get animal sources of iron because it's 10 times more bioavailable than plant sources. But what if you, what if you don't eat, that much meat? Like, what is a plant based source? Well, there's there's you gotta make sure you're combining, the vitamin c with things like beans and and spinach and and and other greens that are somewhat higher in iron to try to make it more bioavailable. If you don't eat a lot of animal foods, try to have the try to have your portions of meat with those plant sources because the heme iron and when you eat meat, it boosts the bioavailability of non heme iron. Yeah. That's a good tip. Like, yeah, I I do believe, like, like, there's there's a whole lot of you can achieve with just, like, one single ounce of liver. So if even if you are, like, on a very plant based diet, just eating one ounce of liver can, go whole it can do a lot of wonders, for your nutrient intake. Exactly. Yeah. If you're smart and you select certain organs and for someone who's primarily wants to be plant based, it it does go a long way. But I I still feel that most people would would be optimal if they consumed a minimal of 10 to 12 ounces of red muscle meat. Per per week or per day or Per per day. Per day. Otherwise, it's gonna be very difficult for you to hit your RDAs for protein, iron, zinc, and and b twelve too. And so, you you know, if you're not doing that, then all of a sudden you gotta be taking b twelve injections or supplementing sublingual b twelve, and it's just you're sort of piecemealing what you could get from real food. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. But what about, the frequency of, eating those foods and getting, like, those minerals? So, like, yeah, like, it's it's probably another good idea to, like, have this massive spike in those nutrients and, like, not not get any on for the, like, the rest of the week. So how would you, like, spread it out, across the entire week? Right. So that's why, I don't like people consuming very large amounts of liver all at once, like, once a week. So instead of instead of consuming, like, seven ounces of liver once a week, I think it's better to do, like, a half ounce to one ounce every single day if you can or maybe one to two, three times a week. That's a better way to do it. And, you know, typically I have at least I probably consume one to one and a half pounds of pastured meat, but that also mean that is also coming from things like liver too and hearts because I consume muscle meat with I get them as blends because most people hate the taste of liver. And so if you can buy blends from companies that are already like 75% muscle meat, 25% heart and liver, you can get get those from places like White Oaks Pasture, North Star Bison, Force of Nature meat. And then if it's still too much for you, you can just add more ground beef to that and you can either make like taco meat or you can actually just grill them as burgers and you barely taste the liver. And then I'd like to add to to to that on top of that. So animal food, you have to balance, most people should be balancing animal foods with what I call alkaline minerals. Because what ends up happening is is when you consume animal protein, the liver oxidizes the sulfur containing amino acids and the binding and cysteine to sulfuric acid. Okay? And then bicarbonate has to take care of two of the hydrogens and then you're left with this negatively charged sulfate. And in order to eliminate that, if you don't have good amounts of alkaline minerals like potassium and magnesium, the body has to produce ammonia to get rid of that sulfate, because it has to maintain electro neutrality. So sulfate is negatively charged. It takes ammonium to excrete that. So if you're not getting these alkaline minerals, which could actually bind to the negatively charged sulfates, your your body has to produce a lot of ammonia, which can damage the kidney. So there should always be this balance between animal foods and some type of alkaline minerals, either from plant foods or, like, bicarbonate natural mineral waters to balance out the acid from animal foods. Yeah. And that acidity will also promote, like, the excretion of calcium and, magnesium maybe? It it absolutely can. And so we didn't know this until the sixties when we did balance studies on people. And a lot of people don't believe in this because our bodies have this buffering system where it's very difficult to change the pH of the blood. So the body will maintain a really good pH for a long time, but your bicarbonate could be in the tank. You could be stripping muscle, bone, connective tissue, and you could be producing massive amounts of ammonia, and your urine could be very, very low pH, which is indicating that you have low stage chronic metabolic acidosis. And so getting the alkaline minerals is super important for balancing out the acid. Mhmm. Yeah. And, like, I believe, like, bicarbonate waters can also do the trick so that you get this also alkaline effect from that. Right. So I drink Gerald Steiner, but there's many other natural mineral waters that contain bicarbonate. And I get this question all the time. People say, well, won't the bicarbonate affect the stomach pH? And not really because it's a very low dose, but you're consuming it throughout the entire day. So it adds up over the weeks. And so it's completely different than taking, like, a sodium bicarbonate tablet. Right. So for example, people take, like, twenty grams of sodium bicarbonate before, like, their athletic performance. Jeryl Steiner only contains one point eight grams per liter. So it's a very low slow infusion, and it's already contained in fluid. And we absorb water very quickly within fifteen minutes. So it's not gonna, like, sit in the stomach for hours sort of like, you know, combining with the hydrogen and forming carbon dioxide. Mhmm. It's not gonna suppress the acid very long. So if you are worried about the whole, changing the pH of the stomach, you can just what you can do is not drink a whole lot of bicarbonate mineral waters, like, within one to two hours after eating if you're if you're truly worried about affecting the pH of the stomach. But, again, unless you're consuming large amounts, you're really not gonna affect the pH of the stomach that much. Yeah. Yeah. That's good, good advice there. And, it's a, like, it's a way, like, if you if you, yeah, get it throughout the entire day, then your body absorbs that bicarbonate and kinda stored it away into the, you know, basically, storage bank for the bicarbonate. And then when when it needs to, you have when when it needs to, like, buffet the acidity, then you have, like, a larger storage of that to pull from. Whereas if you take, like, a sodium bicarbonate before a meal, then, yeah, some of that, bicarbonate will affect your stomach acid and can cause, like, heartburn or indigestion as a result of that. So spreading it out is, the way to go because then your body's able to deal with it, better and to kinda use it more efficiently. Right. And a lot of a lot of carnivores are probably suffering from, chronic metabolic acidosis. So I've asked some of them, what what's your bicarbonate level? And even the high quality carnivores, their bicarbonate levels are around 23, which is not optimal. That's essentially the bicarbonate level of a 60 year old. You want bicarbonate to be like 25, 26, 27. And before athletic performance, you want it to be above 30. It's called peak alkalosis, sort of protect the body from the acidosis that occurs. So it's very it's pretty simple to to look for if you have acidosis. You just have to know what to look for. You'll have low, urinary citrate. You'll have high ammonium in the urine, and you'll have low bicarbonate. Now, technically, low bicarbonate, most people say it's not low unless it's lower than 23. But really from a low grade acidosis standpoint, anything like 24 or lower is highly suggestive that you're have too much acid in the body. Yeah. Yeah. So would it be like a good to take or, like, if you have, like, bicarbonate water to drink it, like, doing the fastest state as well because, you are more acidic while fasting, and not having eaten? 100%. So by by day two of a fast, like, a complete fast, you are you're in a state of mild chronic acidosis. The bicarb level drops. Even the pH is right on the borderline of, you know, typically what we call we call it acidosis, but really it's acidemia. It's it's it's higher acid in the blood. So the pH is teetering around 7.35, which is just borderline, but you're definitely in metabolic acidosis. And the reason is is because the key the keto acids are acidic. So you're in this chronic state of higher, ketone levels, which are acidic, and it's putting you in a state of acidosis. So the the magnesium loss that occurs with prolonged fasting and the calcium loss that occurs with prolonged fasting in the urine is due to the metabolic acidosis. It's pulling it from bone because you're not eating any, but you're spilling a 100 to a hundred and fifty milligrams of magnesium for the first five days of fasting. So where is that magnesium coming from? It's coming from bone due to the metabolic acidosis. So if you just took natural mineral waters with bicarbonate to offset the acidosis, plus they're providing calcium and magnesium, you're gonna prevent most of the harms and reap all of the benefits. Yeah. Yeah. And the mineral waters are generally also a very good way to get the minerals and because the absorption is higher. And, like, we we we show in the book that or the studies show that, drinking the mineral water alongside with your meal actually increases the absorption of the minerals from that meal, while at the same time lowering, like, postprandial blood sugar and postprandial, like, hyperlipidemia. So it's a very one of the best, like, just drinks or beverages to just, include. It's quite amazing actually whether we found out from the book. It is. And we we cite another study too that drinking seven ounces of mineral water seven times a day, that slow infusion increases magnesium absorption and retention by 40% versus consuming large amounts like twenty, twenty four ounces twice a day. So it's that slow infusion, which which mimics more of an evolutionary intake. You would have just drank water throughout the day, and it would have been natural. It wouldn't wouldn't be these artificially softened waters. It would have been natural waters that contain bicarbonate, that contain magnesium, that contain calcium. So it's something that I do, but, you know, you can get bicarbonate by consuming fruits and vegetables too. So if you just like berries, you can get it because the citrate will convert to bicarbonate. The malates, the gluconates that are in vegetables is what actually converts to the bicarbonate. So a lot of people sort of have sort of think that it's the magnesium, the potassium that is sort of the alkaline part of it, And it is and it isn't. It's really the anions, negatively charged anions that are turning into bicarbonate, and the positively charged cations are combining with sulfate, preventing the body from forming ammonia, which is toxic to the kidneys. Yeah. Yeah. So what are we would be, like, some of the kind of best brands, for the mineral waters that you maybe use and what you would know? I would say, Gerolsteiner is good. That's the one I use. Magnesia, is really good too. It's actually higher in magnesium, but lower in bicarbonate. So if you're someone who just doesn't get a lot of magnesium in the diet and I'll tell you what, like, there's there's some tests too that you can test your urinary magnesium to see if you're deficient. I bet you a lot of people would be pretty shocked how low their magnesium in the urine is, which typically indicates you're holding on to magnesium. So the waters, like you said, are the most bioavailable way to get magnesium and calcium. They're just and most people think, like, dairy and milk is the best way because it is a very bioavailable way. But mineral waters are just as good. They both have about a 34% bioavailability. So, San Pellegrino's okay. It's not as high in magnesium. It's more higher in calcium, and it has, I think, a little more sulfur. So you have to match the sulfate content of waters. You gotta be a little bit careful because that sort of creates that that leads to more of the acid load coming out in the urine. Mhmm. So you just gotta match it with fruits, vegetables, bicarbonate. Yeah. Yeah. And the book has, like, a graph for, like, the top mineral waters from both North America and, Europe. So, like, there's maybe, like, 40 or 50 of the biggest brands and their their content. But maybe let's talk about some of the, less known, like, minerals that are not necessarily considered, like, essential by the authorities, but, they are still, like, really important and, like, there are some serious consequences to being deficient, like, maybe boron. Let's start with boron. Boron. Yep. Boron's probably the best example because there's there's studies in humans showing that if you consume about three milligrams, you're improving testosterone, you're improving bone health, you're reducing bone loss. And so we don't even know the the true optimal intake. Is it three milligrams? Is it five? Is it ten? Who knows? But, you know, the upper limit is around twenty to twenty eight milligrams. So you have a fairly large range you can go to. The problem is is nobody's consuming boron because the foods that are high in boron are very are typically restricted in our diets. Mhmm. So you the highest sources are things like raisins, peaches, dates, blackcurrants, and avocados. So for most keto carnivore people, like, those foods are, like, off limit. Right? So it it's but a little bit of raisins can go a long way because they're so high in boron. So Yeah. You know, if you work out, you're lean, you have muscle, you know, you don't have to worry about, like, you know, half ounce of raisins. Yeah. And, prunes as well. Like, these are dried fruits tend tend to be, really high. But, yeah, like, you you the you mentioned the three milligrams seems to be, you know, kinda good optimal at least, intake. But, yeah, like most people in the West tend to get only, like, one milligram or, you know, around one to two milligrams. So it's a, yeah, like, a definite example of where, the kind of average intake is definitely not really meeting the kind of requirements because there's no no, like, specific RDA for the, for the for boron. And, like, the World Health Organization recommends you get, like, at least one milligram, which is, you know, considered maybe, like, the minimal, like, bare minimal for just the, survival. Yep. And, you know, I admit to my diet isn't perfect in getting boron. And so I do take, probably twice a week, a trace mineral supplement that gives me boron, chromium, and molybdenum. So, you know, those, like, quote unquote nonessential sort of, you know, the overlooked minerals, let's call them. Mhmm. Yeah. Chromium as well is another example of that that, it has been shown to, be good and beneficial for, like, diabetes and its resistance, but it's not, there isn't, like, a specific, RDA for it. Right. And and, really, the only real good source of chromium is mussels. I mean, some seafood, like lobster, crab, and shrimp are pretty good too. But who's eating lobster tails and crab every day? You know, it's expensive. I mean, some people might eat some shrimp every day, but but shrimp is still not super, super high in chromium. I think three ounces of shrimp will give you around 22 micrograms of chromium, whereas that same amount of mussels would give you, like, a 120 micrograms of chromium. So your top five foods in chromium are essentially not consumed in The United States. And then you have broccoli that's the next step below that, which is maybe 20 micrograms of chromium per three ounces, which is, you know, you you want probably a 100 micrograms of chromium per day optimally. And we lose a lot of chromium through sweat, not on a quantitative level. You know, the studies show you might lose seven, seven and a half micrograms per hour of exercise. That might sound like a like not a lot, but we only absorb 1% of our dietary or supplemental chromium. So in order to replace seven microgram loss in sweat, you have to consume 700. So if you're someone constantly hitting the sauna, you're someone who lives in a hot environment, you're sweating a lot or exercising a lot, you probably need a chromium supplement. Yeah. Yeah. And, the chromium, is used, like, let's say, bodybuilders and the fitness people as a, like, the glucose disposal agent is quite known for that. It's one of the main ones that are maybe next to, like, berberine or something. And, yet it does have, like, a bigger effect the higher your blood sugar is. So, you know, if you're like, you know, let's say if you eat if you're, like, insulin resistant, you're diabetic, or you're, like, ate a high carb meal, then the chromium would help you do is essentially enhances the action of insulin and helps you to clear the bloodstream, faster from the blood sugar so you get, like, less of the negative side effects from that, hyperglycemia. So, yeah, like, you know, even healthy people can benefit from it. It just depends on the situation. Like, you may not need to take, like, a chromium supplement if you're eating, like, a low carb diet. But, if you're, like, eating a high carb meal or you're, like, yeah, you're exercising a lot, sweating a lot, then you probably do need to, like, maybe eat, let's say, like, more muscles or just take a supplement. Right. I think so there's two factors. So exercise seems to sort of liberate, chromium because it's needed to help just enzymatic function. Right? And that goes up with exercise. And then you kinda you lose it in the urine. So exercise doubles your urinary, chromium losses. And then when you like you were saying, when you consume a high carbohydrate meal, it liberates the chromium from the cell, and then you lose that. It's like it's like the body doesn't have this great way of, like, retaining chromium once it's released to be utilized. So you triple your urinary loss for chromium when you consume a high carb meal. And so if you're constantly eating high carb meals, you're exercising a lot, you're losing the chromium through not only the urine when you exercise but also through sweat. And because it's so the biovelty is so low for chromium, it's just that seven micrograms will be a killer to your chromium status if you keep doing that over the long run. Yeah. And we cover, we talk about the top like five minerals that are lost in sweat in the book, and we have a nice table of exactly how many micrograms or milligrams are lost. And we sort of list it in a hierarchy of importance. So you have your obviously salt loss, which is sodium and chloride, but you also lose copper, iodine, selenium, and then the chromium. And really copper is a huge one that is lost through sweat because again, dietary copper has a fairly low bioavailability, only about 33%. And most people are only consuming point nine milligrams of copper per day, but they're losing point four milligrams through sweat. And in order to absorb point four milligrams, you've gotta actually consume more than point nine. This is only about 33% bioavailable. So if you're sweating an hour a day and losing point four milligrams of copper and you're only eating point nine, you've actually lost more copper than you've taken in and you're slowly gonna become depleted. So it's, salt is super important, chromium is very important, but also copper and then selenium and iodine too get lost in fairly large amounts. Yeah. And the last one you mentioned was molybdenum. So what's the role of molybdenum? Molybdenum helps us sort of detoxify sulfites. You know, you can they formed, in the manufacturing process of, like, wine, and so it helps us detoxify that. So if you're consuming a lot of sulfites, you're sort of like depleting your molybdenum status. And, you know, molybdenum, the really the only good source of molybdenum is liver, which kinda takes us back to why molybdenum actually falls in the, 10 minerals that most people are deficient in because liver is really the only very good source of it. Yeah. And, molybdenum is also, for fixating nitrogen, which is, you know, basically, you know, just your your body tissue and protein and, as well as, like, detoxifying the ammonia that, we produce. And, like, also, in addition to liver, there's also beans that was, like, surprising high in, molybdenum, and, like, this is different. Black eyed black eyed beans, lentils, that's a little thing. Yeah. Black eyed peas. Yep. Yeah. Yeah. Are there are there anything else that you wanna cover about the book? Like, anything we didn't or, like, something that people would specifically need to know? I think I think we hit a lot of the important points. I think people should what what people should know is that a ton of research and effort went into this book. It's something I I'm sure me I'm sure you're proud of. I'm super proud of it. And if you wanna know the optimal levels for all of the 17 minerals that we talk about, this this book is for you. Yeah. Yeah. I think it's, you're probably not gonna absorb all the information in, like, one one go or one read. Like, it's probably something that you you you'll kinda probably have to, you know, reach back at the the bookshelf for, like, several times, and, get some insights, cool insights from there. Like, know, like, what are the best foods for some mineral and, what are the symptoms of maybe being deficient and what kind of tests you need to do and, that sort of thing. So today, very, very in-depth. And, yeah, I I do really enjoyed writing it as well as researching and learned a lot, new things as well. Yeah. I I think you're right. We didn't even mention that we cover the best ways to test for many of the minerals. We cover every single chapter that has a mineral. We cover all the foods in highest level to lowest level so people can understand which foods to select. So I think it's overall, it's it's a great balance of science, but like what people can can really do to help their own health out. Yeah. Absolutely. Well, yeah. Where can people get it? Where can people get the book? Yeah. Amazon, is where the book is available, and then the Kindle will probably be out in a couple weeks. Yeah. Awesome. And, yeah, pick where where can people, learn more about you or follow you? So my website is doctorjamesdinec.com, and I'm pretty active on, Instagram and Twitter at doctor james dinec, d I n I c. Awesome. Well, we'll put all the links in the show notes, and, yeah. It was a good good show. Yeah. Good talking to you soon. Yeah. You too. Bye.