Hey. Welcome back to channel. My name is Simland, and, today, we're gonna take a look at what's in my fridge, what's in my pantry, what's in my freezer. I'm gonna show you the foods that I usually eat on a daily basis, and, yeah, let's get get to it. Make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. I guess we'll start with some of the basics. Eggs, we grow our own hens and we get eggs on daily basis. So I include them for mostly choline. I think the choline is the best, like, nutrient in eggs. And, yeah, I like taste of them as well. Carrots and turnips, really like them, for, potassium and some other just, you know, general taste. They're kind of good for the microbiome as well. Cruciferous, so broccoli and cauliflower, I like them for, you know, obviously contain help to boost sulforaphane and glutathione, but, they also have, like, you know, dim in broccoli that helps with, like, estrogen and, it's just, you know, good for that reason. They also taste quite nice, actually. Apple cider vinegar. So this is good for blood sugar management. So it, if you take this before eating, carbohydrates, then it becomes or it bonds the blood sugar response. So, also an AMPK activator, which is, you know, good for ketosis and, other other benefits. Fruits. So I don't eat, like, a ton of, like, tropical fruits or things like that, but I have apples, which are local apples, and oranges. Orange is a crude vitamin c and, also helps with, you know, postprandial rises and triglycerides and those things. So, these are the kind of main fruits that I eat. Berries. I love berries. They're much more lower glycemic and lower sugar than fruits. So, they're definitely, like, you know, healthier. My favorite berries are dark cherries and blueberries. So blueberries have, like, different kinds of anthocyanates and polyphenols, help with liver health actually. Whereas cherries, the main benefit of cherries is that they're melatonin content. They're actually super high in melatonin. So if you eat them in the evenings, that's gonna help with, you know, sleeping better and muscle soreness and those kind of things. Here we have Brazil nuts, which are my favorite nuts. They're super high in selenium. And, yeah, those are one of the tastiest ones. So I eat maybe three or even four Brazil nuts usually per day. From the dairy side then, I love curd or cottage cheese. And, this is some sort of, yeah, curd from Estonia and it's super high in protein. It's really good calcium and tastes also great. I do have a lot of, homegrown, fermented foods. So these are pickles. I have also, like, just pickled, cabbage, yeah, kimchi made, self made, and, just different kinds of vegetables in a can. Super good. Good for the gut and microbiome. This is liver pate, and it's actually deer made of from from deer, deer's liver. So I hunt. I, have access to wild game, and, this liver is, yeah, one of the best or my favorite ways of consuming liver. It's the tastiest and the kind of most easiest way to do it. I don't consume, like, a ton of cheese, but if I do, then it's something like, blue cheese or this kind of goat cheese. Sheep cheese is this one. But, yeah, cheese is also kind of good for vitamin k two. Although, like, yeah, that's one of the only reasons why I would consume it. But other than that, I don't really I'm not a big huge consumer of cheese. Olive oil, I think it's, yeah, one of the healthiest oils, very high in polyphenols and oleic acid, good to the brain, cardiovascular health, and, yeah, very kind of staple. Cord liver oil. So I like like this stuff as well. I do eat fish regularly, but this cod liver oil is a daily supplement. It's essentially like a food. And this is one of the highest quality cod liver oils out there. It's fresh wild raw, and, it's not like this regular fish oil that tends to be oxidized. So this is a good quality high stuff. If we do eat chocolate, then, this is a really high quality, 90% pure chocolate. So this this tastes like, you know, super bitter, but I like it. Actually, it's very nice. It has MCT oil and coconuts all natural. And, yeah, this is actually one of the tastiest chocolates. The same brand also has, ghee, pure ghee. So, I think ghee generally is a bit better for cooking than, things like butter. And, it kinda tastes a little bit better as well. This stuff here is the krump. So if you, noticed then I've launched or started this crowdfunding campaign for Crump. It's a hemp flower granule, and it's super high in protein. The only ingredients are hemp flower and pea protein, and this thing is is going to become the number one, plant based protein in the world. I'm pretty big believer in that and, yeah, that's gonna be replacing things like, you know, Beyond Burger and soy burgers, and it actually is a plant based protein that's actually good for you. So if you're interested in supporting this, project and getting access to this, granule, you can use it, you know, the same way you would use ground beef. The exception is that it's, you know, organic and, a 100% plant based, then, yeah, head over to Indiegogo, and you can find the Crump campaign there, or the link is also in the description. Right now on the stove, we actually had this, this is like a traditional Estonian dish. So it's, this cabbage that you cook over the stove, and it tastes super damn good. It's, not fermented, but it tastes really nice. It's cooked cabbage almost, and it tastes almost like sweet. So, yeah, this is one of the more traditional Estonian, like, Christmas foods, but, I like to eat it, you know, throughout the year quite regularly. One thing I recently started incorporating more is different kinds of, seaweeds. And, this brand is also from Estonia, organic baby seaweed, and this combo and dulse. So this is super high in iodine. And, obviously, that's good for the thyroid, and, it's tastes really nice. You can use it as seasoning. Let's open it up so you can see it. This is, you know, just the natural salt that you would get from the, seaweed, and it tastes super nice. So I do have some meat cooking up right now as well, and this is wild deer that, my family and I have hunted. And, this is yeah. Really, I think, yeah, make, you know, one of the highest quality proteins, in the world in terms of the cleanness. So, yeah. Some other things that you may not see was like, you know, potatoes. The potatoes are in the cellars. I'm not gonna bring them off here, but, yeah, essentially, I eat, yeah, carb cycling on, my rest days, I'll eat less carbs. On workout days, I'll eat more carbs, but the protein is relatively high all the time. And the fats are also adjusted based upon my activity levels and what I'm doing in a particular moment. Alright. That's it for this video. Make sure to click like, subscribe. Notification below. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.