When you look at the science and you see them, you know, glucose spikes and crashes create cravings, hurt our fertility, make us have wrinkles, impact our mental health, it becomes obvious that we should all care about it. Welcome to the Seam Lund podcast. I'm your host Seam Lund and today our guest is Jesse Inchospe. Jesse is known on Instagram as the glucose goddess where she documents her experiments with blood sugar monitoring. She has a master's of science degree in biochemistry. This episode is sponsored by Magic Spoon. Magic Spoon is a healthy version of all the unhealthy cereal you loved as a child. It's very high in protein, low carbs, zero grams of sugar, gluten free, grain free, soy free and with only natural flavors. The main ingredient is actually whey protein. There are many different versions of the nostalgic flavors such as frosted, fruity, cocoa and peanut butter. My favorite one is the cocoa. They actually taste better than the original formulations with more crunchiness. Magic Spoon cereal gives you zero grams of sugar, 13 to 14 grams of protein and only four net grams of carbs in each serving. If you want to try out Magic Spoon then head over to magicspoon.com/seam and use the code SIIM to get $5 off any order. Magic Spoon is so confident in the product that it's backed with a 100% happiness guarantee. So if you don't like it for any reason, they're gonna refund your money, no questions asked. So head over to magicspoon.com/sim and use the code s I I m to save $5 off your order. Jesse, welcome to the show. Thank you, Sam. Thank you for having me. Yeah. You have, like, a really, like, a cool and, fun Instagram account where people people can see how you actually, you know, experiment with the different kinds of foods and how it affects your blood sugar levels. And I think it's very, like, educational and, like, eye opening a lot to a lot of people, to see, you know, what the actual you know, kind of refuting some of the myths about, like, what is good for the blood sugar levels and that kind of thing. So, maybe, like, let's start with, you know, why did you start using the CGM in the first place and, like, starting creating a a content around it? Yeah. It's a good question. So I've been on kind of a health journey for the past ten years. When I was 19, I broke my back. I had a bad accident. And then since then, I've been just trying to figure out how our bodies work and what we need to do to feel good in the morning. So I studied biochemistry, and then I went to work in the field of genetics in Silicon Valley in San Francisco. And while I was there, I had the opportunity to put on a CGM, and this was 2018. And, so I put on a CGM for the first time, and for me, it just it just kinda clicked in my mind that this was gonna be something that was gonna help me tremendously because all of a sudden, I felt like I could speak with the inside of my body. You know? I could get feedback from my biology on what was happening. So I became just really fascinated by this technology, and I tried to understand, you know, what is the set of rules I could define that will allow me to understand how to keep my glucose level steady and how to avoid the glucose spikes, which which are bad for you. So I dove into all the scientific papers, and I started running experiments on myself. And I discovered some pretty awesome, useful, cool stuff. And so after showing my friends and my family, I put the information online on Instagram just so that more people could gain access to it. And then it just sort of blew up, by itself. I think people became very interested in seeing nutrition science explained through, you know, my own glucose data illustrating the concepts. And I think that was really key and interesting. Yeah. Like, I think it's relatively new, and even loud. Even now, there's not a lot of people who actually use it, and there's not a lot of them. It's not, like, that easily accessible, although they're, like, some new companies are coming out, with, commercial CGMs and things. But, you know, before that, you were able to just get it from a doctor who prescribed it to you. But, you know Yeah. And, actually, so, you know, I'm French, and so I would get them in France where it's they're over the counter. So So it was really, really easy. But in The US, it's quite complicated. But in Europe, it's pretty it's pretty easy to get them online. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's true. But now it's more like, yeah, these specific apps that, are tailored to the CGM and, like, given, like, these graphs and stuff. That Correct. Yeah. They all they all use the sort of the same base hardware. The actual device is the Abbott Freestyle Libre, and then each company has built their own, opinion, their own solution for what the best glucose app is. So it's quite cool to see, you know, how they differentiate and what markets each of them serve. Yeah. But I I think maybe a lot of the questions people may ask is, like, if you don't have diabetes, like, why would you use it? What would you use this EGM if you don't have, like, any, Yeah. Actual diabetes? It's a good question. And for the vast majority of, the past, we we thought that only diabetics should care about their glucose levels. But since 2015, we have really good data that shows us that actually eighty percent of people who do not have diabetes still experience big glucose spikes every day into the prediabetic or diabetic range. And with those spikes come consequences that impact us short term and long term. So more and more studies have come out really explaining that actually everybody should care about their glucose levels, and we're very much at the beginning of that. But when you look at the science and you see that, you know, glucose spikes and crashes create cravings, hurt our fertility, make us have wrinkles, impact our mental health, it becomes obvious that we should all care about it. And then but I would say, like, there's a difference between caring about the glucose levels and wearing a CGM. I think the work that I do is trying to help people who don't have a glucose monitor actually, implement a lot of the hacks that keep your glucose level steady. Right? And so I think the first step is to do that. And then if you wanna go further, it's to wear a CGM. But they still cost, quite a bit of money, and so I don't think everybody can afford that. And I'm trying to serve the the part of the population that can't afford a CGM but wants to get their biggest levels healthier. That's my work. Right. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I agree totally that, you know, let's say, these are big swings and, most people aren't aware, actually, like, what their regular blood sugar level is. And, yeah, it has, like, a huge impact on health, you know, not only, like, diabetes, but also, like, metabolic syndrome and, yeah, premature aging and those things can be, caused caused by this just excessive amounts of a blood sugar or higher elevated blood sugar all the time. And, yeah, if you don't actually you know, With a CGM, it's easy because you can just see all the time, like, twenty four seven what the data is compared to, like, a finger prick that you need to kind of Yes. Use it regularly. So it's much more convenient, at least, like, in the short term to use, like, and see, you know, what kind of, responses you have because it's very, like, individual as well. Like, some people may, you know, shoot up quite a lot to a particular food like a banana, whereas others don't or, like, some are allergic to, let's say, gluten or whatever, and their blood sugar rises. So it's it's always, like, a 100% individual, and there there is no objective, you know, response to every people, every person. I wouldn't I wouldn't say that. No. No. No. Every person has a different response to the same food. But if you look at the science, you know, there are very big key principles that work for everybody. Oh, what So you and I so you and I, if we eat a banana, we might have a different blood sugar response. But if both you and I had some apple cider vinegar before or had the banana with some nuts, both of our spikes would be proportionately smaller. Right? So the principles apply for everybody. Then to see within a category of food, you know, which fruit spikes you more than the other, that's the individual where that's where individual response comes in. But, no, we have we have very established principles that work for everybody. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. Like, I agree with that. Yeah. It's just, yeah, like, some individual, yeah, nuances and, like, how big the spike is gonna be, that is, like, individual and depends. Totally. Yeah. Yeah. And another reason I think it's cool when you are able to get a CGM is that, you know, it really sort of motivates you to do well when you see the response of your body into implementing one of the hacks to share, for example. It's good reinforcement to actually see the hack app play inside of your body. And I think, that's also one of the great things about CGM is just to get feedback in real time on what you're doing. I think it's really awesome. Yeah. Yeah. And it's also fun. Like, it's, like, you know, fun to use it and, look at the data and look at the graphs and becomes like almost like a game, like a gamified Yes. Way of the same way, like, with the sleep tracker. Like, if you track your sleep, then it becomes like this. You wanna score higher points and actually do better and, makes you actually make better health choices Yes. More more careful with, like, overeating carbs or whatever. Totally. Exactly. Have you have you tried a lot for a long time? How how long have you had one? Well, I've tried one, like, maybe a year ago. I'm going to try again, this time. And, actually, I'm gonna with my girlfriend, we're gonna do, like, together Nice. For for this time period, and we're gonna, yeah, see, you know, how we're gonna, you know, different differentiate between each other, from the blood sugar. And, yeah, I think it's, you know, quite fun. That's really cool. Very fun. You'll have to share the results with me in periods. Yeah. I'll do, like, a video probably about it. Nice. Nice. But what have you learned? Like, what are the biggest lessons you've learned from your own CGM use? I think before I wore a CGM, I had this belief that in order to keep your blood sugar levels steady, you had to cut out all carbs. I thought that, like, that was the the solution. Turns out, there's a lot of stuff you can do to still eat carbs, starches, and sugars and keep your glucose levels steady. And my first experiment was around pasta because I love spaghetti. And so, I think the first night I wore a CGM, I had spaghetti for dinner, and I saw a huge spike. So my first challenge was, how do I eat the spaghetti without such a big spike, without, you know, all the consequences on my body that the glucose spike might, bring with it. So my solution was I started implementing, a spinach salad before the spaghetti. Because if you have fiber before you have starches, the fiber coats your intestine, and then you actually absorb less of the glucose from the starches. So you're eating the same spaghetti, but it's creating a smaller glucose spike. So I started doing that. Then I discovered, the whole science of vinegar and how vinegar actually tells your muscles to soak up glucose faster when it arrives into your bloodstream, making the spike even smaller. So now I had the sequence that okay. Before the spaghetti, I'm gonna have the big spinach salad with a vinaigrette. And then with the spaghetti, I would also add protein. So I would have, like, soft boiled eggs with it as well to sort of create this nice package for when the starch lands in my system. It doesn't it doesn't actually diffuse glucose as quickly and as violently. It's, it's tapered by the fiber. It's still done by the protein and the vinegar. And all in all, I was able to have spaghetti dinner without a spike. So that was a pretty cool first experiment for me. Big success. Yeah. Yeah. It's a fiber is one of the biggest ones that lowers the blood sugar response, and Yeah. The vinegar is great. And even even things like, you know, protein and, the different kind of polyphenols, like, there's some, you know, some research about how, like, you the meal actually before the following meal determines how your blood sugar response is gonna be. So even if you eat, like, an egg before for breakfast, then your your lunch blood sugar response is gonna be lower because if you have, like, this protein and satiety from the egg and or like whey or like whey protein, you consume, like, whey protein a few hours before the carb meal, then your blood sugar response is also gonna be, smaller from that. So it's yeah. You could Absolutely. There's actually a lot of, like, you know, ways to hack it, so to say, so make it more healthy and less impactful on your, blood sugar levels. Exactly. And it's really, really cool when you start discovering this stuff. And it opens up, like, this whole world of experimentation. You know? And it's not just what you see on the glucose monitor because you actually feel it. You know, you actually feel less tired after the meal. You have more energy. You feel lighter. You sleep better. So it's really cool because the impact is instant on your mental and your physical health. Yeah. Yeah. What what is, let's say, you what would you consider high? Like, what is what what what are some levels of, you know, your normal blood sugar response, and where do you consider something that starts to be more, you know, elevated? And, where do you let's say, where do you not want to go? Like, where is, like, the diabetes range? So if you look at the medical guidelines, they say a few things. So they say that your fasting glucose levels should be under a 100. And then they say that after a meal, you should never go above a 140 milligrams per deciliter. And that's that's the medical guidelines. If you look a bit further in the studies, but they're really early, so we don't really know for sure. It seems that actually an ideal fasting glucose levels glucose level is more like underneath 90. And then if we look at, in healthy individuals and people who don't have diabetes, if we look at the glucose spikes, it seems that actually the objective might be to reduce any spike of more than 30 after a meal. And the thing with glucose is that the lower, the better. You know? But you wanna be careful because sometimes you can lower your glucose levels by by adding other stuff into your diet that might cause other consequences. So if you add a bunch of, like, vegetable oil to your meal, your glucose response is gonna be lower because the fat is blunting the glucose survival, but you're giving your body all this unhealthy fat. Right? So that's one one example. Another example is, like, alcohol. If you have a glass of wine before whatever, a cocktail or something before you have a meal with a lot of starches, the glucose spike will be lower because the alcohol is going to your liver, and it's actually preventing your liver from producing any glucose. So you'll see a smaller spike, and so it'll be, oh, I have to drink wine before every meal. Actually, that's not the case. Right? Glucose is just one of the variables that we have to look at. So it becomes quite complex when you when you start wearing it and testing it on yourself, which is why what I try to do on my Instagram and in my book is to sort of simplify everything and just say, what are the big principles that allow people to have steady blood sugar levels without doing things that might cause other issues? Yeah. And that's super interesting. Yeah. Yeah. Because yeah. Like, obviously, let's say metabolic syndrome, which is, let's say, super bad for health and increases risk of heart disease the most would be you know, it involves not only high blood sugar levels, but also, like, hydrolycerides and, low HDL inflammation. Yeah. High blood high blood pressure and, yeah, just waist circumference and those kind of things. So, yeah, it's gonna be very important to know those things as well. But Yes. What is yeah. Like, what happens you know, let's say you eat only you don't do anything for blunting the blood sugar. You eat, yeah, just, you know, straight up white bread or something like that. What what is what is the spike gonna do? You know? What is Inside the body? Yeah. What's the effects? Yeah. So there's three main mechanisms of how spikes lead to consequences in the body. The first one is that every time you have a glucose spike, the glucose enters your cells and it overwhelms your mitochondria. Your mitochondria are really happy when they get some glucose because that's how they make energy. But if you give them too much glucose, they sort of freak out and they go and strike and they're strike and they're like, I can't handle this big spike. Like, I'm shutting down. Your mitochondria becomes stressed, and then they start producing these molecules called free radicals. Free radicals lead to oxidative stress, lead to generalized inflammation, and this is just this sort of chain reaction of stress from a glucose spike inside your body that leads to the development of diseases. Second thing oh, and by the way, if you eat something sweet, so that has glucose and fructose in it, that has table sugar in it, basically, this process happens even more. So that's something to keep in mind as well is that if you see two spikes, one from, let's say, a piece of toast and the other one from, like, a cookie, if the two glucose spikes are the same, the one from the cookie actually has a hidden fructose spike as well. Anytime you taste something sweet, especially in desserts and pastries and that kind of stuff, if you see a glucose spike, there's an invisible fructose spike as well happening that harms your body even more. So the first mechanism is this mitochondrial stress that leads to oxidative stress and inflammation. The second one is aging, as you mentioned. So with every glucose spike, glycation happens in the body more and more. And glycation is aging, and it's the reason why our organs fail and we eventually die. So the more glucose and fructose spikes, because fructose also makes it go faster, the quicker you age. So that happens internally with your organs, but also externally. You see wrinkles and, you know, from from the outside, you look older as well. And then third process by which glucose spikes impact our health is that every time there's a spike, your pancreas produces insulin to take the glucose away and store it into your liver, your muscles, or your fat cells. And this is good because it helps your body, prevent the damage from the glucose pectin would be too high, but it has its own consequences. You know? Too much insulin over time leads to the development of of insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, etcetera. And importantly, these three processes, they go even faster if you're having if you're eating something sweet. So that's why it's always better to have something starchy than to have something sweet. Right. So, would you say so you're saying that the like, even just the even if the spike is, like, let's say, higher in the short acute term, then that's worse than, a chronically slightly elevated blood sugar. So I'd say that Absolutely. If you if you're if you spike it once to, like, two hundred milligrams, then that's worse than having a hundred and thirty milligrams all the time. So I'm not sure exactly, like, you know, I don't know exactly the scale of, like, is a 130 the thing, or is is it a baseline of one twenty that's okay versus 200? But what we do know from the science is that the it's the it's the spikes and the dips that create the most the most stress in the body. So it's been studied specifically on blood vessel cells, and they've shown in the in the studies that, yes, you know, a spike is worse than a steady, slightly higher baseline. But I'm not exactly sure, like Where's the limit? Yeah. Where's the limit? You know, if a 200 spike is worse than is better than, like, a one twenty baseline or one forty baseline, like, I'm not sure. But, generally, it's the spikes that we wanna avoid, yeah, because they cause the most damage. Yeah. Well, I personally may may think that yeah. I don't know specific like that. Like, where's the limit? I would maybe guess that, you know, let's say if you were to have prediabetes for ten years, then that's probably worse than, let's say, having cake at a birthday, like, let's say, once a week, once a month or something that like, if you eat the cake, then your blood sugar will rise. But it's but they are if you are other at other times, are you, like, you know, healthy and quite low blood sugar, then, I is that still healthier than having, like, prediabetes for, you know, an entire year or two years, ten years? Like, in the end, I think, like, the prediabetes, having this blood sugar level around, like, a 150 or a 130 or a 150 all the time twenty four seven may actually, over time, just, you know, just accelerate more aging and cause more damage just because it's, you know, twenty four seven, elevated. Whereas even even if even if you eat, like, a piece of cake or, let's say, more cake or that you you actually eat, like, Oreos or whatever, even if your blood sugar goes, like, 210, 250, but it drops back down then but at all times, you're, like, relatively healthy. Like, is it really worse than having prediabetes more than five five years? No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. I I I definitely don't think that that's the comparison we can make. Okay. I think it's more like if you have fasting glucose that's at 92, but every day you have big, big spikes into the one twenty range, that's worse than having a steady 95 fasting that never moves. You know, it's more like it's more like that. We're not talking about Oh, gotcha. Yeah. Yeah. We're not talking about such a big range comparing prediabetes to to no diabetes. I think that would be extending too much. I would look at the studies, but definitely, intuitively, I think it's pretty clear that it would be in the sort of smaller, lower ranges. Yeah. Yeah. So, yeah, like, you would like, the most the majority of the day, you would still want to be, like, around a 100, maybe below a little bit. Yeah. Exactly. Especially at least, like, what I think. Yeah. Absolutely. Absolutely. Yeah. But it's really it's really interesting because, there's also a genetic component to all of this. You know, your fasting glucose level is also related to your ancestry. For example, people of East Asian descent, they just naturally have a higher fasting glucose level. We know that our gut influences our fasting glucose level. We know that stress influences it as well, hydration. I mean, there there starts to be a lot of variables to to sort of understand and peel through. And so I've tried to to simplify all this because it can get quite confusing. Right. A lot of people tell me that they've got a they they got a CGM and that it really kicks for them when they found my work because it allowed them it allowed them to sort of understand and put context around everything so they could make sense of it. Because I think if you're just dropped into the data, it can be very, quite challenging to, like, understand what's happening and what's good and what's not good and what to do. Yeah. For sure. Well, that's good good clarification. Yeah. What what what determines the blood sugar rise in the first place? So, like, you you we already talked about that. My blood sugar response will be something different from someone else's towards the same food. So what determines, how a particular person will respond to, like, a meal? Yeah. So it will be a combination of many, many things happening in their body. So it'll be how quickly they're eating, how hydrated they are, what the composition of their gut bacteria is, their stress level, their age, their metabolic health, you know, how well they slept the night before. I mean, it's just like, you and I will definitely have different responses to a banana because, you know, we're just different people. We have completely different bodies and microbiomes and lifestyles. It also depends what you ate pre previous meal, what you ate the night before, how much muscle mass you have. I mean, the list goes on and on and on. Yes. Which is why I think, you know, while that is interesting, I think most people get a huge amount of value by just sort of applying the the key principles, which are eating your vegetables first when you have a meal, starting your day with a savory breakfast instead of a sweet one, incorporating vinegar, moving after you eat. If you want something sweet, having it as dessert instead of as a snack. You know? Those kinds of things go super, super long way. But when you and your girlfriend do the testing, you will definitely see very different responses. However, as I mentioned, like, if you both eat a banana, you might see very different spikes. But if you both add nut butter to the banana, both your spikes will be smaller. And the thing is you can't really compare two people's glucose spikes and just, like, make a judgment call about which person is healthier because it it it there's just so much stuff going on. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. For example, like, you can, let's say if you exercise before eating the carbs, then it'll also, shuttle the glucose faster into the cells. Like, the resist let's say, near maximum intensity muscle contractions are gonna recruit the GLUT four receptor to to the cell surface that actually drives the glucose into the cell without needing insulin. So if you're, like, insulin resistant, let's say exercise will, bypass that thanks to this GLUT four activation. So you can, yeah, if you exercise before, you can have, like, a better blood sugar response, if you're diabetic and obese than someone who is fit, but they, let's say, eat the carbs while being sedentary and, after waking up, for example. Exactly. And, also, like, if you've been fasting for three days and then you eat a banana, you're gonna have a much bigger spike than if you've been eating for a while. Also, if you're somebody who has ovaries and you have a menstrual cycle, depending on when you are in your cycle, the levels of hormones in your body will be different. And so your response to the same food will be different. So it's just like the constellation of variables is so wild. I mean, it just, like, it blows my mind. Yeah. Are there any, like, like, supplements that help with that? Are are you using any supplements with the blood pill to help blood sugar? It's interesting. I'm starting to look more into that. So the big one that we know works really well is vinegar. So the acetic acid in the vinegar has a huge impact on telling your muscles to uptake more glucose. So So that's really, really useful. Then people find that berberine works, cinnamon works. I'm gonna start experimenting with probiotics and just sort of see if, you know, you can change stuff in your gut in terms of the metabolism of the glucose to actually move the spikes in the fasting level. That sounds really interesting. But I'm not a big supplement person apart from vinegar. I don't really take anything from my glucose levels because I find that what has the most impact is just what I eat, you know, the hacks. Mhmm. And I just don't like taking pills every day. I just I'm I'm not I'm just not that kind of person. Yeah. But there's a lot of stuff to a lot of cool stuff to try for sure. For sure. But you can't, like, out supplement a bad diet. Like, if you're just eating sausage and sugars, it's not because you sprinkle some cinnamon on it that it's gonna make a difference. Maybe if you take, like, metformin, maybe a little bit, but that's not, like, recommended for most people, I think. Yeah. I mean, that's, you know, that's a that's a proper pharmaceutical drug, that's prescribed to people with IVs. So Yeah. Yeah. It's a that's a One one one good, or simple one is also chromium. So chromium, we call it, has, like, a long, let's say, history of use for, blood sugar and insulin resistance and, even, like, cholesterol levels. So what chromium does is just it, basically, activates this, chromodulin, which is this, enzyme that also helps to basically shuttle glucose into the cells. So if if you have chromodulin with the chromium, basically, or chromium activating chromodulin, then you're gonna, yeah, the the blood sugar is gonna be or you need less insulin to get the job done. And, if you you are insulin sensitive, then the incident response is gonna be more enhanced so that the blood sugar would be lower faster. Nice. Have you tried it? Yeah. I take it actually almost quite regularly. Like Really? Because, like, yeah, I I take it, like, on the days, like, I do the sauna or because you lose a chromium from the sweat. So to replenish that, I just take take it, and it in some studies, it also helps with the body composition. So, like, these bodybuilding studies, they find that it helps with that. So some bodybuilders actually use it. Very cool. Very cool. Nice. Nice. Nice. Yeah. I'm gonna look more into this. I think it's really interesting. But so far, I haven't really, dived very deep into supplements. It's my next, my next field of study. How to are there any way yeah. Like, we mentioned a few of them. How to make yourself more insulin sensitive, like, by default to, let's say, b. Because there is some, like, let's say, misunderstanding about insulin. Like, obviously, you don't wanna have high insulin levels, but, like, not enough in incident can also actually, you know, make you have high blood sugar levels because you're not producing enough insulin to shuttle it into the cells. Oh, yeah. No. Insulin is very important. I mean, without insulin, you die. So people who have type one diabetes who have lost or don't have the ability to make insulin, they have to inject themselves, you know, several times every day with insulin to compensate for what the pancreas isn't doing. So it is a vital hormone. It's not like this just this bad thing. We absolutely need it. But it's kind of like, you know, there's the right amount. And then if you have too much of something good, problems start happening. I mean, if you give a human too much oxygen, they pass out. If you give a plant too much water, it drowns. You know? Like, we need insulin, but too much starts creating issues, and it starts reducing insulin sensitivity. And then you need more and more and more, and then that's type two diabetes metabolic syndrome. So it's, it's just important to remember, like, insulin is normal. It's a vital part of our functioning body. It's just when there's too much for too long, that problems happen. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. And I think, yeah, the best things to do is to, obviously, exercise and, build some muscle mass that that makes you more very insulin sensitive. Totally. Eating also foods that help with insulin sensitivity, like, you know, cinnamon and, like, some one one supplement they also like is Inositol. So that also, Yes. Helps with basically producing insulin. And, and you get, like, some foods with inositol like like grapefruit, which is known to help with also blood sugar response. Yeah. So yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Absolutely. But I Why yeah. I'm obviously because, like, some of the controversies also that, you know, if you go low carb, then, you're not really becoming more insulin sensitive. Like, you improve your blood sugar levels and insulin levels, but you're not really becoming more insulin sensitive because you're you're not eating, foods that raise insulin. And, over time, your body actually becomes less efficient at it. So if you eat carbs, then you're healthy and you do all the right things, then still producing the insulin is still going to make a lot, like, more insulin sensitive. And, you so you basically don't wanna be basically keeping the blood sugar low all the time or being in full ketosis because that will eventually also make you a bit insulin resistant. Interesting. Yeah. The the one study that I found that was kind of on this topic is that, if it's it's around fasting and the first meal you have after you've been fasting for a long time. So if you're fasting for a long time, and then you have carbs, your body your body's insulin levels are so low that you get a massive glucose spike. And so you get all the harmful consequences. So what you're saying is, like, you have to remind your body to train itself to produce insulin when it needs to so that it doesn't just shut off the production completely, and then you might get consequences when you do eat stuff that rises your blood sugar levels. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's like chronic ketosis can, gotta cause it. So so cyclical, at least a lot of people I think is, like, a bit healthier. So what do you do? You do cyclical ketosis? Well, I'm not, I'm not, like, full ketosis almost ever. Yeah. I do I do, like, a cyclical. I do fast as well. Like, I eat once or twice a day. So I get Yeah. This period of, this some semi ketosis in the morning. And, when I when I do eat, like, most of the time, I eat, like, still low carb, but I'm not, like, worried about the carbs. I'll just eat vegetables and, things of that. But on some other days, I eat, yeah, like, more carbs with some potatoes or fruits and, especially after workout. So I'll use the carbs to help with, muscle glycogen and, recovery. So, yeah, I I can adjust the carb intake based upon my physical activity. So if I'm exercising more, then I eat more carbs. If I'm sedentary, then I just eat less. Yeah. That makes sense. Nice. When are you starting the experiment with your girlfriend? Well, we're waiting for to set up with the app, but, maybe, like, you know, a few days tomorrow or something. Yeah. So Exciting. Very cool. The video the video should be out, before this podcast comes out. So Nice. So you can reference it. Yes. You can send people to it. Yeah. But let's say you messed up. You ate foods that raise your blood sugar quite high, and you maybe eat, like, a cheat meal or something. So is there ways to, like, repair the damage, or how do you let it go about lowering the blood sugar after meal? Yeah. Absolutely. So, I mean, you know, I'm not a proponent of of never eating carbs. Not at all. Like, I eat a lot of carbs, and I think it's cool to just enjoy them. They're part of life. And so that's the question I get often. It's like, oh, was there a birthday party? I just ate, like, five slices of chocolate cake. That's probably not great for my glucose level. Is there anything I can do? And the good news is there is. So then the two main things are, one, you can always drink some vinegar afterwards, and it will still help your muscles uptake more glucose as it comes into your body. So, you know, a tall glass of water, one tablespoon of apple cider vinegar, white wine vinegar, whatever you want. You can use a straw to protect your teeth. If you do that within two hours of eating this stuff, it's still gonna help you. And then the other very immediate thing you can do when you just ate something that is slightly your glucose levels is to just contract your muscles to move your body. So go for a walk, do some push ups, clean your apartment, go dancing. You know? This is the most effective way to get your glucose levels back down, without increasing insulin too much. Because when your muscles are contracting, they can uptake glucose without needing insulin. So it's like it's pretty good. So vinegar and mussels. Yeah. Like, even, like, going for a walk. Mhmm. Like, a ten minute walk, and I'm almost, like, cutting it in half, I think. Exactly. The blood sugar response. Exactly. Exactly. It's very, very cool. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And most people just, you know, lay on the couch after eating their dinner or something, which is not the best response, actually. So you should go Yeah. It's not the best. I mean, it's also fine, but, yes, I agree. Like, the the short walk is really nice. You know, get a dog and walk your dog or even doing the dishes or, you know, cleaning your kitchen, stuff like that is really helpful. Yeah. Mhmm. So we're talking a bit about, like, fasting and ketosis. So, have you tried, or measuring, you know, looking at how does the fasting affect your blood sugar levels? Totally. I mean, so when you're fasting, you're not eating anything. But what's remarkable is that your blood your glucose levels actually stay very, very steady because as you're using glucose, your liver is producing glucose to put into your bloodstream, so you see something extremely steady. And when you work out and you're fasted, you might actually see a spike in your glucose levels because that's your liver releasing glucose for your muscles to use. So depending on what you're doing, even when you're fasting, you might see some movement. But, really, I mean, fasting and ketosis, that's when you see the steadiest glucose levels of all because you're not eating anything that turns to glucose. You're not eating any starches or sugars. So it's it's like it's a pretty boring glucose curve. Yeah. What's the lowest you've been with the blood sugar? The lowest? God. I don't know. In the eighties, probably. Okay. But the highest, I went to so one thing that really blew my mind is that I once spiked to 200, not after eating, but after a stressful presentation I had to give in front of, like, 500 people. Mhmm. And the stress response in my body was such that the cortisol and everything pumped all this glucose into my system so that I could run away from the tiger that wasn't there. And with eating something, I think the highest was probably one eighty when I ate, like, 12 cookies one day. Yeah. What about you? Well, I don't remember. The lowest I've been has been like, I did, like, once a five day fast, and I measure measured, not with the CGM, but with the finger prick. And, it was not precisely. I don't remember, but maybe in '74 or 60 something of that, which is, you know, quite low. But the highest with when I did with the CGM, that was, yeah, maybe a 180 something like that. I didn't need, like, a cheap meal or anything, but it was just, like, a high more voluminous food of, let's say, maybe potatoes or something. Because, like, even if it's, like, healthier, like, let's say, let's say, whole foods, like potatoes or fruit, if if if it's, like, a large amount, then that can also skew the results, or the blood sugar response can be higher compared to, let's say, one one Oreo cookie probably isn't gonna spike as high as, like, kilo kilo of, potatoes or whatever. Totally. Absolutely. However, in the Oreo, there's also fructose because it's sweet. So it's actually probably worse to eat the Oreo than to eat a bunch of potatoes just because of the presence of those. Right. Stress, stress raises blood sugar. Is it do you see, like, also the diurnal change? Like, in the morning when the cortisol production is naturally higher, is it elevated? I see. It really depends on the day. It's really incredible. So some days, I have a little spike when I wake up. Some days, I don't. Some days, coffee might spike me. Other days, it doesn't. There's so much I still don't understand about the the response of my body to things. But, yeah, I mean, the morning spike is pretty common in most people. I think it for me, it only doesn't happen if, like, I'm on vacation or something, and I I don't have to wake up. I just kinda stay in bed for a long time, then I see less of a spike. But if I know I have to wake up early and I jump out of bed, then that's also you know, my cord is not waking me up, so then I see a spike for sure. You know? Maybe like a using an alarm clock would probably spike it, much higher than waking up naturally. Yes. A 100%. Because you jump and you're like, oh my god. What is this? And so that's that's the stress response that probably creates a glucose spike. Yeah. But, again, like okay. So, you know, glucose spikes are just part of life as well. Like, you're never gonna be able to avoid the glucose spike when you wake up. So I I don't want people to become, obsessive. Like, if this starts being too stressful, like, the spikes and everything, like, just just chill. Focus on the hacks I share because that gets you 80% of the way there. And be mindful, you know, if you have a history of becoming a bit too obsessive with numbers or if you have an eating disorder and stuff like that, just self select when it's a good time or not a good time to wear a glucose monitor. Mhmm. Because it can become it can become a bit stressful for some people. I think for most of us, it's it's just very interesting, and it allows us to connect with our biology in a new way. But there's a small group of a small segment of the population that, needs to be mindful. Yeah. Have you, like, developed any, like, spidey sense around it that if you're not using the CGM, can you still tell, like, okay, approximately how much of our blood sugar is gonna be after the I'm probably right now at, like, 94. I'm not wearing one right now. Yes. I've definitely developed this since 100%. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Nice. And you really can start feeling it in your mental state. Like, you can feel the spikes. You're a little bit, agitated, like, woah. And then the drops I mean, the drops, everybody can relate to that. It's like you feel tired two hours after a meal or you have a craving for something really sweet in the middle of the afternoon. That's most likely a glucose drop after a spike. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I I I think that you do feel a bit different if you have, like, high blood sugar. Like, your blood, almost like the blood flow is also, like, somewhat faster. Like, you can feel the blood flow flowing more rapidly or maybe, like, the heart rate is also increased. Oh, you can feel your blood flow? Well, if it's, like, you know, flowing fast faster than normally, then, You mean the heartbeat? Yeah. But the blood blood flow as well a little bit. Like, you can feel the surge a little bit. Similar to, like, exercise, if you're doing a cardio, then you can still feel, like, some blood surging through your system. But if you eat, like, a high high carb meal, then sometimes you'd also kind of, feel like Yes. You feel a bit, like, heated and a bit, like yeah. I see. Yeah. Yeah. About exercise, like, how does the exercise for you affect your blood sugar? Exercise is great for you regardless of when you do it, what you do it. So it's always a good idea. 100%. What's kind of cool is to see that, if you exercise after you just ate, your muscles are gonna be using the glucose from that meal. And if you exercise when you're fasted, your body's gonna be releasing stored glucose to fuel your muscles. And so in that case, you might see a spike. It's not a bad spike. It's actually your body, going through your reserves of glucose and spending them, which is excellent news. So that can be something that is a little confusing to people sometimes. Like, why do you see a spike when exercise? And I wrote a blog post that's called why spikes when you exercise are good for you. It's kinda like it's one of those instances where spike is not bad. So there's a lot of a lot of stuff to keep in mind. Yeah. Gotcha. But if you spike it during exercise, then, are you still gonna get, like, the blood vessel damage or the free radicals and things? Good question. So you do get that, but the cool thing is that exercise actually has also a lot of inflammatory anti inflammatory effects. And so in the balance, it's actually positive and helpful for the body. It's it's a type of hormetic stress that actually is overall good. Even though it is still a stressor, the positive effects outweigh the negative consequences of the spike. Yeah. I mean, like, exercise also raises inflammation and, creates these, free radicals and direct oxygen species, which are actually a part of some of the adaptations that you get. So, like, if you blunt those as free radicals from exercise, then you're actually not going to, like, or at least some of the adaptations are gonna be smaller if you're blunt, like, with antioxidants after exercise. So you'd actually need some of that information to Yeah. Experience the benefits of exercise. So, yeah, not always. It's they're not always bad. Exactly. It's like insulin is not always bad. Like, you need it. It's helpful for the body. So we have to make sure to not overgeneralize things, and exercise is always gonna be helpful Mhmm. For your body long term. Yeah. Even if there's a spike, it's okay. So you've also been writing a book about this. Yeah. Can you can you talk about it? Yeah. Totally. So it's called glucose revolution. Mhmm. And it's out, March 31 in Europe in English and April 5 in The US. And, you know, I learned so much about glucose, and there's so much information that people asked me to put it all together because it's hard to know where to start. So this book is the ultimate place. It's the one single thing you need to get your glucose levels steady and to start feeling amazing physically and mentally. It's kinda like I like seeing that my Instagram is the trailer and the book is the movie. Okay. But it has way more that's on the end than what's on the Instagram. It has a bunch of stories of people implementing the hacks. I dive into every single condition, physical and mental, affected by glucose. There are 10 hacks in there, while there are only seven on my Instagram. There's my story in there too if people are interested. And it's really I hope it's gonna become, you know, the staple of how to get your glucose level steady. I hope people will start with that. Nice. Nice. And where does it where is it sold? Everywhere that book are sold. So you can get it on Amazon, Glucose Revolution, the life changing power of balancing your blood sugar, but also it's gonna be in bookstores. It's coming out in over 15 languages. So and we're adding more languages all the time. So hopefully everywhere. But if you go on my Instagram, you can click the link in my bio, and it has all the links for all the countries. Yeah. My Instagram is glucose goddess for those who who don't know. Nice. Nice. Yep. We're gonna put all the links in the show notes. And, wanted to ask, like, you know, how often do you use the CGM? Because it lasts for fourteen days. Yeah. So, like, do you use it all the time, or how frequently you do actually use it? So the first two years, I had it on the whole time. And now I kind of cycle. So I do it, like, once or twice per trimester. So, like, about one out of every three months is what I do. Yeah. That seems to be a good a good cadence, because I think all the time sometimes you don't need it all the time. Yeah. But, yeah, definitely at regular intervals is really, really great. So you can see how things are changing. You can check back in with your body. I love it in that way. Yeah. Yes. I think it's good to basically, have at least the other trial run-in fourteen days to get the baseline. And, after that, you if you're, like, healthy and everything is fine, then you probably don't need to drink it all the time. But if you have, let's say, some signs of prediabetes or something, then maybe try it again a few weeks later when you've changed things. But, yeah, like, not all the times I need it. I think everyone should maybe do it, like, once, at least once in a lifetime or something. Yeah. And if you can afford it, it's really it's really just a nice partner to have ongoingly and just to check back in. I think there's a lot of value even for people without prediabetes to to check back in with their glucose levels on a regular intervals. But, it's up to it's up to the person to figure out what works for them for sure. Right. Right. Yeah. I agree. It's been great, talking with you. Before I ask my last question, what can people learn more about you and your work? The best place is on Instagram, glucose goddess. That's the hub for everything. Yeah. Nice. And, my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habits that you wish you had offered sooner? Oh, keeping my phone off for the first hour after I wake up. Nice. That's been a really big change in how I sort of set my my mind and my intention for the day, and it's allowed me to really reduce stress and be much more, effective in what I wanna achieve, what I wanna get done, how I feel. So that's that's a huge one for me. Yeah. Nice. Good advice. Yeah. It probably also keeps the blood sugar low that you're not gonna get, triggered by some news. Or Totally. Absolutely. Yeah. Thank you for having me, Sam. It was really nice. Yeah. It was good to talk. Take care. Bye.