Welcome back to the channel. My name is Simlans. And today, we talk about the top three foods that I eat basically every day. So these are the foods that are part of my regular diet almost all the time. And, yeah, I do like them, and I will also explain why besides, you know, the, taste component, what is the, like, nutritional reason why I consume them. Make sure you click the like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. So number one is going to be eggs. I've been eating, quite a lot of eggs regularly for, you know, almost ten years. And, the reason for that is that, you know, they're one of the highest quality proteins, the most, one of the most bioavailable forms of protein. They have all the essential amino acids. They're satiating. They taste pretty good, and you can use them in many different ways. Like, you can use them as you fry the egg, you boil the egg, you scramble the egg, you make an omelette out of it, you make a pancake out of it. You can add it on top of vegetables and make like a pie or a casserole. Yeah. There's like almost endless options you can use the egg with some interesting studies find that, when you eat eggs, then they do promote more satiety than, like, you know, other foods. And people who eat eggs, you know, let's say for breakfast, then they would, end up eating a bit less calories later in the day as well because of the higher satiety effect of, the eggs. So, they're good for weight loss as well. Yes. Hard to, let's say, overeat eggs. Like, you get sick of them eventually, especially yeah. Like, if you eat, like, you know, I don't know, six or 10 eggs, then I think you probably will get sick, eventually, and you you want to stop eating that. So they are a good way to control your weight as well. They're high in protein, which helps with the satiety. But, yeah, they're just, you know, kind of convenient. Like, you don't really need a lot of time to cook them. They're easy to make and, yeah, they taste good. Excellent. Number two is gonna be a cottage cheese. So cottage cheese is also that I've been eating regularly almost ten years, something like that. And, yeah, this, obviously, is dairy. Some people are allergic to dairy. I'm not I react very good to dairy. Like, I can eat all the dairy I want. And, cottage cheese is one of the best forms of dairy. I think one of the healthiest forms because it's super high in protein. It tastes good. What the studies actually find with calcium and dairy is that people who do eat more calcium and dairy, then they tend to be a bit leaner or they tend to have more muscle and, yeah, just, you know, helps with that for different reasons. Calcium is a good way to bind or calcium will bind to, let's say, fats when you digest them. And, that is gonna be good for, you know, preventing, maybe, like, post too high post dendrocytes in triglycerides or, like, if you're trying to lose weight, then that will also help you to create a calorie deficit by binding to some of the the fats that you would eat. So, yeah, I like cottage cheese. I prefer preferably eat it as like a dessert. I don't really include it into, like, my main course, but I'll have it as a dessert with some berries, some cinnamon, maybe a little fruit. Yeah. Those kind of things. It's a very good, let's say, alternative to cereal. You just, you know, take some pumpkin seeds and nuts and berries and coconut flakes, whatever, mix it together with the cottage cheese. You're gonna get, some nice low carb keto cereal. And, yeah, it's a high protein as well. Before bed, it has, you know, casein. It's gonna be good for slowing down the or casein is gonna be slow more slowly absorbed over the night. So you're gonna stay more anabolic for longer and, not, let's say, lose muscle, especially if you're doing, like, intermittent fasting and those kind of things where your first meal isn't gonna be immediately after you wake up. Cottage cheese. Number three is, cauliflower. So, cauliflower is, one of my favorite vegetables. It's, again, super versatile. It tastes great. It's, easy to make and, yeah, very convenient vegetable. Cauliflower obviously has fiber. It's low carb. It has, like, you know, out of all the vegetables, it's still higher in protein than, like, potatoes or carrots or whatever, but it's still less in calories. So it's very good as a way to fill yourself up and, become more satiated from less calories. It's also very good to, let's say, you know, make things like cauliflower rice, cauliflower pizza crust, mashed cauliflower, those kind of things to replace other higher carb foods. Like, you can replace, the pizza crust with entirely this cauliflower, and you can add eggs there, some tomato sauce, cheese on top, and it's, you know, as as good as the regular pizza, but significantly lower in calories and much healthier for you. And likewise, with, cauliflower rice, for example, you're gonna get much less carbs, on on some cases. Cauliflower is also, contains, obviously, these precursors that help to promote sulforaphane that helps increase glutathione levels and also has DIM, which is good for estrogen balance. So, yeah, it binds to estrogen, and that's gonna be good for males, especially maybe not so ideal for women all the time. But, for men, at least, it's definitely gonna be, pretty darn good. Cauliflower is the kind of, I think, the safest cruciferous vegetable there is. Like, I wouldn't eat broccoli when it's raw because the quadrigens and fiber may be harmful for the thyroid if you eat, like, too much raw broccoli or too much raw cabbage. But, with with the cauliflower, like, I wouldn't, yeah, like, eat raw cauliflower all the time either, but even I I think it's kind of the safest in terms of all the other cruciferous vegetables for that. So I would eat I would still be fine eating, like, a little bit of raw cauliflower. I don't get any negative side effects from that, but I wouldn't do it, like, all the time. You would still want to cook all the cruciferous vegetables, like, either boil them boil them, cook them in the oven, roast them, or make them into like a like a like a puree or something in that. Alright. That's it for this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.