Hey. Welcome back to the channel. My name is Simuland, and today, we talk about the best form of cardio for longevity. So I'm going to be reacting to a clip by Peter Attia who talks about zone two training, which which is the best cardio for longevity, in my opinion, as well as his. The more zone two you do, the better you are able to do both glucose, pardon me, insulin sensitive and insulin, independent glucose uptake. So this makes for very efficient mitochondria when it comes to glucose disposal. And and that's really one of the hallmarks of metabolic health. So what is zone two training? Essentially, zone two training is the aerobic zone between 60 to 70% of your maximum heart rate. So it's, you know, not this super intense type of training. You're able to still breathe through your nose. That's the idea. You're doing like regular jogging and low intensity cardio and this is where your heart is, you know, invigorated or it's invigorated. It's, it's slightly elevated above your resting heart rate but it's not so intense that you can't really sustain it for any longer than, you know, a few minutes. Usually, you're able you are still able to even like the unhealthiest of people, they're able to maintain zone two training for, you know, several minutes in a row unlike sprints, like, you can't really sprint for at max speed for five minutes in a row. Like, almost no one can really do it. Let's say if you have good fitness, then you're able to do a zone two training for even hours and hours. And, this is kinda this yeah. Fat burning zone is what it's called sometimes. It's this low intensity steady state, cardiovascular zone. You're able to breathe through your nose and, yeah, you're getting good exercise. Run. So the reason why this is a good associated with longevity is multifold. Obviously, exercise is one of the best things for longevity overall, reduces many comorbidities. As Peter Attia said in the clip that it does improve your insulin sensitivity and, exercise also does many or clears the bloodstream from any other, let's say, excess energy as well. So it burns through your, blood sugar levels, it burns through your triglycerides, it can help to lower cholesterol. Every, like, excess energy that usually leads to metabolic, dysfunction and metabolic disease is going to be cleared from the bloodstream just because it's being burned for energy, whether that be glucose or fatty acids, they're all getting burned and, depletes the bloodstream from that so that you would be in this, you know, healthier state. Excess energy is harmful to the body, whereas, you know, being somewhere semi, let's say, you know, balance, homeostatic balance is where you function best at. So where does the zone two training start? The zone two training is almost like in the middle of the crossover effect which refers to where you switch fuel sources from burning fat to carbohydrates. So you're not, you know, when you're sprinting, you're burning only glycogen. You're burning carbs for fuel. Whereas if you're walking, you're burning only fat because it's such a low intensity. And, in the middle, around 65% of the VO two max is where you have the crossover effect. You switch over into burning glucose instead of fat and less fatty acids for fuel. So this is where you're also able to do zone two training. The ideal ideally you should do zone two training while still being able to breathe through your nose because that's where you're teaching yourself to stay in the fat burning zone and that's where you're, increasing the threshold at which you can maintain or improve aerobic capacity essentially. You're not so you you don't start to sprint, you don't start to gasp for air, then by that time it's a bit too late. You want to maintain this That's why you train the zone two training that you maintain this nasal breathing and you're not going into the glycolytic state. You're still in the fat burning state which doesn't put that much stress on the body and it also improves your mitochondrial function and just increases overall aerobic capacity. So that's how you build up the aerobic capacity. You don't build aerobic capacity by sprinting, you build aerobic capacity by doing this low intensity steady state cardio and, the threshold for that is 65%. If you get fitter, then you can increase the threshold. You can even maintain the, fat burning state even at like 80%. But you should still do it. You should train it slowly. It takes time to stay and it patience you need to stay patiently in the fat burning state which mostly the easy most easily you're gonna obviously have to measure it with a watch or something like that. But, easiest way to assess it is also why you're breathing through your nose or are you breathing through your mouth? You should always want to breathe through your nose when you're doing this, zone two draining. This is the chopper. Alright. That's it for this video. I think, it's quite self explanatory that cardio is good for your longevity. May many people tend to ignore it or neglect it, but it is quite important. And in my opinion, I agree with Peter right here that the zone two training is the best form of cardio because you're not putting the body under that much stress, you're getting, increased cardiovascular fitness and aerobic capacity, and at the same time, you're also, you know, clearing the bloodstream from excess energy than making yourself more insulin sensitive, improving your metabolic health in both in the short term as well as in the long term. So in any ways, it's, yeah, the best form of cardio. How often should you do it depends on your training schedule, but generally at least, you know, at least 30 at least thirty minutes per week is the kind of minimum in my opinion. And even then, like, you necessarily don't want to be the minimum. You don't wanna be average. You wanna be better than the average. And, that would require maybe, yeah, aiming for forty five minutes per week of doing a zone two training, whether that be on a bike, jogging, swimming, whichever form it is. Alright. That's it for this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.