Welcome back to the channel. My name is Sim Lund. And today, we're doing another Instagram q and a where I'll be answering different kinds of questions. If you want to ask me a question and you wanna get it answered, then the best way to do it is to follow me on Instagram where I do these regular q and a's. And to also subscribe to this YouTube channel where I do a video about the q and a in a longer format. This episode is brought to you by Bone Charge, formerly known as Blue Blocks. My favorite light and sea compensation companies, Blue Blocks, has rebranded themselves as Bone Charge. They're now involved with a huge range of evidence based products to improve your wellness and life in every way. Their extensive range of premium wellness products helps you to sleep better, perform better, have more energy, recover faster, balance your hormones, and reduce inflammation. My favorites are their red light light bulbs because they can be used to create a melatonin friendly environment in your bedroom by shining only red and not blue or green light waves that will reduce your sleep quality. After starting to use these red light light bulbs, I find it much easier to fall asleep and feel less awake before bed. If you want to try out these amazing products that are the cornerstones to my most optimal sleep, then head over to boncharge.com/seamlund and use the code seam 15 to save 15%. Alright. So first question, supplement that reverse insulin resistance. So, you know, before I begin, I'll have to say that, yeah, probably the most important thing you you can do to reverse the insulin resistance is the lifestyle thing, diet, exercise, good sleep, and that kind of thing, stress management. I do think that, you know, there are still a few, compounds and supplements that could benefit or that have been shown to help with improving insulin sensitivity and reducing aspects of diabetes type two. Berberine is probably the most potent of the natural, let's say, glucose is both agents or things that lower blood sugar levels. It's relatively safe. There's no, yeah, you may get nausea or something like that. It may inhibit, like, muscle growth if you take it all the time, but generally it does work very good in reducing blood sugar levels. I do like to take it myself for four hundred milligrams. When I am eating a higher carb meal, that's great for that scenario. But there are other also, let's say, less detrimental for muscle growth as well and actually improve muscle growth at the same time. So things like chromium picolinate that has been used to, help with type two diabetes as well as insulin resistance. And, doses up to like one thousand micrograms is something that I personally take as well on some days where I've lifted. I don't wanna, like, inhibit mTOR with berberine. I wanna take something that actually just enhances insulin sensitivity and helps with glucose disposal. So chromium picolinate, regular one, is perfect for that. I take, yeah, like five hundred to one thousand micrograms on the days of the lift and I also eat carbohydrates. So I'm not gonna take it if I don't eat carbs, but I do and there are like some studies I could also as well in bodybuilders or people who lift and that it improves body composition or nutrient partitioning. So even if you're not diabetic, it's still a good supplement to take in my opinion to help with glucose disposal and maintain better insulin sensitivity. Besides these two, there's also things like magnesium and potassium that you need to have in point. But yeah, those are probably the two most easily accessible and one of the most effective ones that you can take to help with that. Something to remember is also like low sodium, low salt intake can induce insulin resistance even in healthy subjects in the short term. So, yeah, just make sure that you get electrolytes, magnesium, potassium and, and sodium. Best way to gain muscle without fat? So that's a very, you know, kind of broad question generally. But, the answer is still sticking to the fundamentals essentially that, you know, you want to see progressive overload in your training. You want to be in a small calorie surplus and you don't want to overspill with your calories and carbohydrates. So, yeah, just try to aim for the one gram of protein per body weight. Do a good resistance training program that emphasizes progressive overload where you get stronger over time. The main compound lifts are good for that And, yeah, make sure you don't overeat. I like to stick to only, like, 500 calorie surplus if I have wood trying to, like, you know, gain weight. You don't need necessarily more than that. Even less is good enough. Like, over the course of many years, I've gained, you know, at least five kilograms over the course of maybe three or three years of, just eating at a slight surplus. And that surplus can be even as little as 300 calories. Now keep in mind that that surplus doesn't have to be like every day. There can be days where you are in a deficit, but the weekly surplus should still be slightly elevated. And, that would, basically prevent this, excess excess weight gain in terms of body fat. You wanna make sure that the weight that you do gain would be muscle, not fat. And they're like a smaller surplus. Being more patient with it. Yeah. It's gonna take a longer time. But, yeah, if you want to minimize fat gain, then that's what you need to do. What's my workout routine? Well, my workout routine is primarily, you know, I do, gym where I do with barbells and dumbbells usually like two to three times per week. And with calisthenics, I do also like one to two workouts per week and cardio, I do like one to two workouts per week as well. So I do something every day. Let's say on Monday I have a heavy gym session, which today is Monday. And I did a shoulder workout, which was emphasized on, like, pushing muscles. Tomorrow, I'll do, like, maybe cardio. Nothing, resistance training related. On Wednesday, I may do, like, a calisthenics workout. On Thursday, I may go for, like, squats, leg day. On Friday, I may do cardio again. On Saturday, I may do a pulling workout at the gym or just calisthenics. And on Sunday, I do, like, other, gym or or cardio. So, yeah, it kind of depends on the week. But, generally, I do, like, a push pull leg split and train with resistance training, either calisthenics or weights at least three to four times per week and cardio also one to two times per week. I may have like one day for rest, but usually even then I'll do something like, you know, maybe some mobility or yeah, like a longer hike or some easy cycling with a bike, for example. Top five fruits to eat. So I think that, you know, number one is gonna be berries, which isn't fruit at all. Technically, it's a fruit but it's still like berries. But I do think that berries are, you know, much better than fruit from both the micronutrient side and the sugar content side. The calories are lower. The polyphenols are higher. That's what you want. Less calories, more polyphenols, less sugars, and, they're tastier a bit as well. So, I do think, yeah, berries, blueberries, cranberries are my favorite. Cherries, raspberries, strawberries, maybe. Those will be, like, the number one spot. Number two spot would be, you know, I think that the best kind of fruit probably is like apples, because, you know, it has pectin, which is good for our microbiome. And, it helps with actually, yeah, you know, satiety a lot. Apples are pretty satiating. They are very low in calories compared to other fruits. Yeah, high fiber, generally, like, easy snack. Number three would be maybe, like, I don't know. Watermelon is actually like a very good fruit. I don't know if it's a fruit. You know, it has fructose and stuff, but it's not necessarily growing on trees. Regardless, watermelon is high in cicely and which is good for, you know, buffalo. And actually, you know, when when you take, like, a pre workout or when you take citrulline as supplement, then, you know, watermelon is one of the highest source of citrulline. So it's that good. And number four, I like pineapple because of the enzymes. So it has these, digestive enzymes, Specifically for, protein digestion, it has bromelain. And, yeah. It's a pretty tasty one as well. It's a bit higher in sugar, or fructose than, let's say, apples or pears. But I think it's worth it because of the digestive enzymes. And lastly, I would say maybe bananas are pretty like or kiwis, actually. Kiwis are good. I would put kiwis there because they're high, very high in vitamin C. They help with sleep, melatonin production. And, yeah, they're like relatively lower in calories or sugars compared to like a banana. Best rep count for best hormonal testosterone response on big moose at gym. So, the research does show that, the heavy compound lifts with barbells generally produce more of a hormonal response than isolation exercises and machines. So, yeah, barbell squats, deadlifts, bench press, overhead press, rows, pull ups even, those will elicit a bigger growth hormone as well as testosterone response. And the reason specifically on the rep side shows that heavier reps a little bit, maybe like, you know, somewhere around five reps is probably the most optimal response in terms of fatigue to response ratio. And that will be like five reps, maybe three to six reps probably. All of those will have that effect. Eight reps at max. That will be the most beneficial for testosterone. And the load should be still, you know, something that you can only lift for five times. And that usually would have to entail that the weight is like 80% of your one rep max, something like that. That's what the research shows that we, you know, show a lot in our book Win with Doctor James as well. NMN under age of 40 is beneficial. So I think that, you know, technically anyone of any age can benefit from NMN. I mean, it just you know, helps to raise your body's NAD levels. Whether or not you need it is a different story or how much you need it is a different story. Like, I mean, we all need NAD. We all have different levels of NAD. We all have different capacity to produce NAD, different requirements for NAD. You know, if you're very unhealthy, you're also exposed to a lot of oxidative stress in your environment. And, even like, you know, sun, if you get exposed to a lot of sun, for example, then you need more NAD or specifically NMN even to counteract UV radiation. So yeah, it's context dependent of what's your lifestyle and what's your situation. But regardless I mean, if you can afford it, then I mean, why not? In some infrequent doses, if you can't afford it, then I wouldn't have to have it in that sense. Or it's not like the biggest priority. Like the bigger priority would be even like creatine is probably more important as a priority than NMN for any age. But regardless yeah. Under 40, it would be beneficial to take on some days if you're, let's say, underslept, you're jet lagged, you are under particular high amounts of inflammation or excess stress, then you can use that NMN to basically boost your levels in the short term. But I wouldn't say that it's like inherently needed because your body is still relatively healthy or it's not aging as rapidly as it will after forties. So you're still able to basically produce energy yourself. You just may have to make sure that the machinery in your body that does produce energy through the salas pathway is optimized. So that includes, you know, the circadian rhythm, sleep, exercise, and sometimes reading. Those things have to be basically aligned and working properly. Any experience on peptides? Any recommendations? I haven't used any peptides besides BPC one fifty seven, which is essentially like a healing peptide used for usually injuries and, pain or inflammation. Those kind of things. I haven't had like any injuries or any like things to see whether or not how big of an impact it has on me specifically. My wife actually did back then a year ago have like a knee injury from a bike accident which was quite, you know, nagging for many months and it didn't heal that well. When I came with PPC one hundred and fifty seven and give it to her, then that was one of the things that, you know, she did see some improvements. I think obviously she did many other things. She did infrared. She did collagen. She did lifting weights. She did squats. She ate more protein, took essential amino acids. Those kind of things. So glucosamine as well. So there was many things that she did do do, but the BPC one hundred and fifty seven was one of the things that I think that helped a little bit at least. And there is research to suggest at least in other animals that it helps with regeneration. There is no human clinical trials because of, you know, probably because it's so new and people already, you know, it's not approved as a compound or a supplement. And of course the inconvenience usually you have to inject it which is somewhat inconvenient and people don't like needles. The PPC that I gave my wife and the one I took myself is actually oral PPC. So a tincture. So just, you know, the first oral orally available BPC one hundred and fifty seven that is available only through BioPrime supplements. And, yeah that's the one that we use. And I do think that is you know much more better alternative than injecting yourself with needles, which for the average person isn't probably worth it or they just won't want to do it. Best non natural biohacks. So, you know, non what's natural? You know, you could say that taking creatine is not natural, but creatine is, like, a natural substance or, you know, yeah, you create it, artificially, but it's still like a natural substance itself that your body has and produces. So I would say that, you know, infrared, probably red light because you're creating those wavelengths artificially. Those are one of the best ones, for the health. Maybe like peptides, you know, I do believe that peptides probably will be more used in the future. Right now they're just new. I haven't found a reason to take them myself, but in the future they probably will be used more. And I do think that, you know, once the technology advances and the science behind them also becomes more clear, We may probably have like, yeah, this new category of, you know, let's say supplements. Oh, they are not supplements, but peptides that could have some interesting effects on especially anti aging and longevity side. And lastly, maybe, you know, yeah, creatine or something like that. I think yeah. Creatine I'm a huge fan of creatine. I think it's yeah. The most one of the most effective supplements. Although it's, you know, a natural compound. Any benefits to moonlight exposure? So, I don't think so. Like, if any, then it's probably worse because of the bright light. It still can keep you up. I don't think there's any like the wavelength benefit that you get from the sun because it's still reflection of the sun. Right? The moonlight. So that's not something I think, is worthwhile. And on the days or the nights that there is moonlight, then my my sleep quality is generally a bit worse or it's it's a bit harder for me to fall asleep because of the light. So, yeah, the light will definitely keep you up. I don't think there's any, like, direct benefit from the, moon moonshine Or moonshine is different thing, but, you know, moonshine in terms of the light coming off the moon. I don't think there's any benefit to that. I don't think there's any benefit to moonshine, the booze either, but, a different story. Best food post workout? Many thanks in advance. Best food post workout? Yeah. I mean, protein and carbs. Something that, activates protein synthesis. You need at least 2.5 grams of leucine, which you usually get from 30 grams of protein. I would go for a bit more depending on your weight on your protein goals, but at least 30 grams of protein and up to like 50 grams if you're a male, for example. And carbs, something because I mean, people have this, you know, false narrative or idea about insulin and carbs that, you know, it's gonna make you fat. But I mean insulin is the most anabolic hormone in your body. And, yeah, it is very beneficial for post workout recovery and shutting off even like some of the stress response and helping with mTOR activation and muscle protein synthesis. So 30 grams of protein, 50 grams of protein and some carbohydrates. I like potatoes, maybe rice if you're a fan of that. But yeah, some potatoes are good. How How do you know if you have familial hypercholesterolemia with ApoB and ApoA1 markers? Well, I guess you have to do a blood test or sorry, like a genetic test, a DNA test, to know that. So like SelfDecode or some other of those platforms. Any suggestions to someone whose thyroid has been removed? So that's a question I've gotten quite often. I think that, you know, given that the thyroid is removed, it doesn't mean, you know, it would impede with aspects of metabolic rate or like, you know, regulating body temperature and your metabolic rate, etc. Which could theoretically put you in risk of like weight gain and diabetes and those things. But, I think that, there's many other ways to regulate your metabolic rate and, leptin levels even without without, I think that, there's many ways you can regulate your metabolic rate and, leptin levels without, you know, or yeah. I mean, the the thyroid is important, but, you can still raise your metabolic rate with the right diet and exercise and those kind of things. You will still burn calories. Maybe like a higher protein intake would help to mitigate some of the lack of thyroid function. And, yeah, like a higher carb intake as well probably can help that because carbs still have a higher thermic effect of food than fats and they also help with leptin levels. It's much good for brain in case of enhancing memory. I haven't looked into that specifically, but, the generally the polyphenols and antioxidants are good for the brain. So I do think that it's not going to hurt. I think it would probably have, like, some protective effect because, I mean, coffee is, associated with, you know, reduced Alzheimer's and reduced cognitive impairment or cognitive decline. So and dementia. So I think matcha is very similar to coffee in that sense. Do you do protein shake both before and after workout? So me personally, no, I don't do it afterwards. I do it only before or during the workout. So I only do one protein shake in that time frame, not after because I don't think I need it. But if you're struggling with meeting your protein goals, then, yeah, why not? Most important nutrients for adrenal health. I think, you know, let's say adrenals, stress, being fight or flight, then probably carbs. Again, I mean, carbs are probably more important, shutting down like the sympathetic nervous system. In terms of maintaining like resilience, stress resilience, then you probably don't want to overstimulate it. So it's like a fine balance or a different situation between shutting off like a sympathetic stressed out response, which you can do very easily with carbs, even like, you know, simple sugars will shut off it in the short term. But in the long term, if you are like constantly eating that sugar and carbohydrates, then, it will have like, a like a negative effect on your adrenal resilience or stress resilience. So I think that it's a hard answer. Maybe like I would say from a nutrient side, then obviously you need like magnesium and chromium and salt as well. But from a food side, I would say maybe like could be even protein. I don't think that Yeah, fats probably won't have any particular effect on the adrenals directly. But yeah, in a short term carbs in the long term, probably like a protein esque intake. What's the most important thing you do for optimal sleep? Well, I personally think the light environment is huge, so I block out the blue light. I have red light bulbs in my bedroom, and, yeah, that always works very good. How much water to drink in a day? That's, we have another question also on how much water for muscle growth. I don't know if, you know, water definitely helps with muscle hypertrophy indirectly or it's not going to build muscle, but it does help with fluid accumulation in the muscle. So you want to have water inside the muscle. You're going to look bigger, more fuller. You'll probably perform better as well. And, you know, creatine, taking creatine, you know, usually think that creatine makes you hold on to water. Yes. But creatine makes you hold on to water in the right places, which is the muscle tissue. That's where you want to have the water, not under the skin. And, that's actually, you know, one of the benefits of creatine that you accumulate or you hold on to the water more easily, but you hold it in the muscle tissue, which is great for that. How much water you should drink, depends on, you know, how much you sweat and that kind of thing. I think you don't want to like force force feed yourself water and you don't want to go to the bathroom like, you know, I don't know, 12 times or 20 times a day. Usually something like, you know, still eight cups of water is fine if you drink it per day. And maybe like ten, twelve is also fine. There's, yeah, like, no, like, specific answer to give. It depends on, yeah, how much you sweat and and that kind of thing. Next question, how to protect skin from sun damage and photoaging without sunscreen? This may be a bit of a controversial one. I don't think that, you know, it's very smart to use sunscreen all the time. In some situations, it's probably more worth it if you are, let's say, at the equator or, if you're, let's say, used to being at a higher altitude, then you go to closer to the Equator, then it may be smarter to use a sunscreen in that scenario in the short term. Obviously, you're not gonna get cancer if you use sunscreen once or twice. In the chronic, use, I don't think that is, yeah, worthwhile. What you can still do is, you know, you can build up your body's ability to tolerate sunlight and you're gonna get less burned, things like that. You just have to be smart about it. Don't be stupid and be hours out in the sun. You know, there are benefits to sun, of course, but it's still true that it will accelerate photoaging on the skin. It will, you know, cause wrinkles faster. Even if you're just interested in that, then that's still true. Even if there are benefits to the sun. I mean, you know, fasting can be also good, but you can also, you know, lose all the muscle and, be harmful for you in other ways. And that applies to everything else as well. So don't be stupid. Don't be hours out in the sun. You know, you can use, you know, hats that cover your face. Specifically, if you're deliberately trying to cover your face, you can use maybe these I don't know what you called, cabos. These like circle hats that have a wider cover that cover more of the face than like a baseball cap and, a Kaaba hat. That's what it's called. And, there's you can use like, you know, longer sleeved clothes. There's nothing wrong with that. You're gonna use, you know, you have to make sure that you're not basically eating a crappy crappy diet because, yeah, I think that the seed oil intake and high omega six intake can make it more susceptible to get sunburned. I think that you need to have high levels of NMN and NAD, which can counteract the oxidative stress and new variation from sunlight. So, yeah, you still have to do the healthy lifestyle, etc. Be smart about it in gradual increasing your resilience against it. So it's like a hormetic effect. You can use even like red light panels to probably induce that and, build up that resilience. So, yeah, you can maintain that if you have, like, some sort of red light panel at your home. Maybe infrared saunas. I'm not sure about that. I can do that as well. But yeah, I mean, the main if you're not gonna use sunscreen, then you have to be smart in other ways that you have to just, not expose yourself to unnecessary amounts of sunlight for hours and hours and hours. Because, yeah, I mean, even if it is healthy and even if you're not gonna get skin cancer from sun then I think it's still true that it will accelerate photoaging in terms of, you know, damaging the skin. And I mean you can also maintain, skin, let's say, turnover by eating, you know, protein and collagen and those kind of things. But yeah, the the sunlight will still accelerate photoaging regardless from the aesthetical side, just the aesthetic visual side. Why does sauna in the evening? Won't it make your body try to lower core temp and help sleep? So, I mean, I think that the sauna will just raise your body temperature. I don't think that it's going to cool it down because, you know, if you take the sauna in high heat especially, then you will maybe be, like, heated for many hours after that. And, and this causes a cardiovascular workout as well. In a small effect that, you know, elevated heart rate, you can be stressed out maybe for a longer time. If you're a healthy person then probably not. But like elderly folks who do this one in the evening, probably they will have like a harder time falling asleep. So it's better to do it like at least like five or six hours before a vet. If you're under 40 years old, what is the best longevity supplement beside NMN? I think that the best longevity supplement that everyone should consider taking or two of them, I think, are like glycine and creatine. So, yeah, glycine for the methionine balance that is pretty much for all ages. And, glycine also for glutathione, collagen lowers blood sugar, helps with inflammation, helps with sleep. So, yeah, glycine is one of the yeah, everyone probably you know, could take it with no real concern or no real reason why not to, because you're also not getting that much glycine from diet. Creatine is very important, you know, for elderly because of improving muscle strength and muscle mass and bone density as well as cognition. So creatine is a longevity supplement. It helps with cognition, bones, muscle strength, fat loss. Those commetylations. Yes. Yeah. Very good. And in your forties or under forties, then chicken creatine, it's going to like build up your reserve in terms of muscle mass and muscle strength and bone density. Because it's much easier to build strength and bone density in your twenties than it is in your forties, not to mention in your sixties. Although it's still possible, the changes that you will see in your sixties will be minuscule compared to the changes you could see in your twenties or thirties. So you need to kind of cap out or maximize your potential in terms of lifting and, fitness to maximize your bone density and muscle strength because muscle strength is more the most associated with longevity more so than muscle mass. So even if you're not trying to build muscle mass, muscle strength is still quite, good and important. To do the best seafoods based on micronutrients, I think the best seafoods are, you know, oysters, mussels, clams, maybe lobster, more so than most fish, in terms of the one at least in the micronutrient side. Like you get a lot of zinc and chromium and manganese and molybdenum and copper from these oysters and mussels. From a macro side then I mean, yeah, like oysters have good macros, but like fish is still a better macro from that. Like salmon has probably like the perfect macros. But, it also has good micros. It doesn't have just, you know, that much chromium and zinc and those kind of things. So yeah, I mean, my favorite ones are just, you know, salmon and herring is very high, actually high in source of creatine, more and more so than beef, funny enough. So herring, salmon, mussels, clams, oysters, as well as like the sea vegetables like algae and nori, wakame, those things. They're also very good. They're high in iodine and, yeah, they're great. Thoughts on HMB superior to leucine in your opinion and worth adding? So, yeah, I do take HMB. I take it, because of my extended fasting window. So I, like, eat one meal a day with a protein shake in before that. I take HMB in the morning to reduce the muscle catabolism. And, yeah, that's something that, you know, that works for me. I've tried it. It works for me. And the research about HMB shows that it's not like some sort of anabolic agent. It's not gonna help with muscle growth as long as you're eating, like, you know, good diet and getting enough protein, etcetera. You probably don't need HMB to add, especially if you're eating like three or two meals a day even. You know, one meal a day scenario, the reason why I do it is because, I think that, you know, one meal a day can be of course, it's much harder to build muscle with it, but it can also, like, you know, mimic some aspects of sarcopenia in the sense that you aren't you don't have like a long enough time frame to stimulate protein synthesis and it's harder to do that. So, you know, you want to make sure that you cut off as much catabolism from your day, unnecessary catabolism from your day as you as possible. And HMB for me is the rationale for doing that. You know, yeah, you produce HMB from the metabolism of Leucine. So why not just take Leucine? The problem is that, you know, you need a lot of Leucine to get some HMB. So to get three grams of HMB, which is what I take and which is based on the research, kind of the optimal amount or the maximum amount that elicits some, anti catabolic effects. Three grams. To produce that HMB, you need sixty grams of leucine, which which is, you know, you need 600 of protein, which is, you know, impossible. And, yeah. That's why I take HMB supplement. It works for me. I don't recommend it for people or it's not worth it for people who are eating regularly or they're eating like super high protein diet. But in this one minute of the scenario, it's that works for me and worthwhile. For the elderly, I also think that it's worthwhile. So like if you're 50, 60, then I think that can be a good supplement to take as well to basically help with the sarcopenia side and reduce muscle catabolism. And that's the last question of the q and a. I didn't answer all of them. If you want to get your own question answered, then follow me on Instagram at simlund. And I'm doing these q and a's quite regularly there. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is SIEM. Stay optimized, stay empowered.