Welcome back to the channel. My name is Seam Lund. And in this video, we're gonna react to another video by Brian Johnson, who is this 44 year old, CEO. He's a multimillionaire. He has founded different kinds of companies. And he has come out with this age reversal routine that he calls the blueprint. And we're gonna react to it and go through. Make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. Right. So this is the website that he has a blueprint.brianjohnson.co and, where he outlines the, main ideas of this blueprint. The project blueprint aims to measure all 70 plus 70 plus organs of my body and then maximally reverse the quantified biological age of each. So he has this basically biohacking routine. This is him right now in 2022. His chronological age is 43 and, when he started his biological age, which refers to, like, the age of his body or the health, that was 47 years old. So he was biologically older than he was chronologically in April 2021 when he started this routine. And now in November 2021, which is, now well, as I'm recording, that is January 2022. But in November 2021, he was 42.5, years old biologically and it's, you know, two years younger than his chronological age and this is what he looks right now. So it's like very skinny, very lean and probably has lost a bunch of weight and, you know, as you can see this is the person he was a few years ago, maybe like 42, 41 years old and yeah, he looks much older than 41 years old compared to now. Like in here he has a bit of extra weight, he has like grayer hair, yeah. Like, just, you know, looks older than, he was. Whereas now, he looks very young. You're getting too old for this shit. But I'll just get to the video, get more interesting stuff. I'll I'll speed it up in a bit faster Morning. So we can, get through it faster because it's a long video, like, thirty seven minutes. Yeah. I'll put you right now, and it's going. One sixty three point nine, down to twenty seven pounds, one hundred forty seven of muscle, seven pounds of bone, twenty two point two BMI, 6% body fat, sixty point seven water weight. Alright. So what do you mind? I do think that that those measurements are correct, that 6% body fat, etcetera. He's he's not, like, very heavy weight. Like, he's a hundred and sixty three pounds, which is quite low. Yeah. I think he has lost significant amount of weight over the last few months, which is part of the biggest reason why he has experienced these, benefits to his health. He just has lost a bunch of weight because calorie restriction is the, let's see, the only few known ways of extending lifespan or slowing down aging that we know, although it's not, you know, completely clear, it's yeah. Like, the color restriction is gonna be kinda the most biggest reason. I'll do everything I do. And then I have all my system ready to go because I have my this blood not showing low levels. It's every one I take, seventy five milligrams of iron plus, two hundred milligrams of vitamin c because it improves the torsion. So he's, you know, taking a ferritin or iron, supplements here. And, you know, obviously, that is, I think, biggest reason for that is the vegan diet. So, he doesn't get, like, that much of a heme iron, any, like, bioavailable iron from his food that much. And his ferritin levels were low, so he has to kinda supplement with iron, and vitamin c to increase his absorption. For regular people, if you're not eating a vegan diet, then your chances are you don't really need an iron almost ever, unless you're bleeding a lot or something, or you got injured, then you may need in the short term. But chronic iron supplementation or high levels of iron in a body are associated with atherosclerosis and heart disease and, just, you know, aging, accelerated aging, so you don't want to take iron if you don't need to. And, if you're eating some iron foods like, you know, there's a lot of iron in our food, especially fortified foods like cereals and grains. You get plenty of iron from that. If we're eating meat, then you don't need any iron supplement probably ever. And also one crucial thing about iron is that you actually need copper to basically absorb the iron better, convert it into hemoglobin, utilize it, release it from the iron stores. So copper is actually the biggest, let's say, leverage to, optimizing your iron status, not iron itself. And, you know, copper you get from organ meats, etcetera, but you also get copper from, you know, dark chocolate and beans and those kind of things. So copper is kind of the missing ingredient all a lot of times. You don't need iron, you chances may you need just increase the copper. His daily calorie intake is 2,150. He's vegan, sixteen hours daily fast, 70 pounds of veggies per month. His macros are 19% protein, 33% carbs, and 48% fat. No testosterone therapy, no anabolic steroids. So this is his kind of morning smoothie that he makes. First, a little bit of water. I'll drink a total of about 48 ounces a day. Two and a half grams of creatine. Two and a half grams of creatine for a vegan. That's a good idea. He may actually would benefit for more, like, three to five grams even because he doesn't any get he doesn't get creatine from his food. So, yeah, it will be good to get more. Drop the plantainese. Interesting to take manganese. Yeah. Manganese is important for the antioxidant defense systems like copper oxide, dismutase or manganese superoxide dismutase, and and those things require minerals. And manganese, you get a lot from, the seafood, which again, like, on a vegan diet, you may not get that much. Hundred and twenty five milligrams of the gliadin because they started two and fifty five twenty milligrams. So here is the, concoction. Water, liquid iodine, creatine, manganese, peptides, collagen peptides, spermidine, cocoa flavanols, and cinnamon. So I I looked at the document and it says that it's from chlorella spermidine. So spermidine is like an autophagy activator to autophagy, and autophagy is the process of clearing out cell particles and organelles, waste material, those kind of things. And spermidine is a autophagy booster. I haven't researched that much how significant it is. I think, you know, this is looks like, you know, it said it's chlorella. I'm not sure how much how much spermidine it is in chlorella. Like, spermidine, you can get from some foods like a wheat germ, some beans, and, mostly, like, yeah, like plant foods. Chlorella, it may have, like, some spermidine. I'm sure it maybe has a little bit, but even then, like, a little bit of, like, a supplement, spermidine supplement would probably be more effective and more you know, you you would you wouldn't get a significant amount of spermidine from just chlorella or whole foods. If you want to get some benefits of the spermidine, then you need to take a spermidine supplement. That's the only way. And even then, I'm not sure, like, how, important it it would be to get spermaden as a supplement. I'm I'm not completely convinced about that. Yes. Cocoa is good source of polyphenols and flavonols, and, it's good source of copper as well. Some magnesium tastes good as well, and post dopamine and such. So, yeah, why not it's a good superfood in my opinion. Seafood of cinnamon. And cinnamon is usually used for, like, like, insulin sensitivity, improving insulin sensitivity and blood sugar management. He's, like, in the morning fasted. He's not really eating sugar or carbs here. So maybe it's, you know, it's in here, it's mostly for the taste probably, but, and also in sensitivity. Yeah. But, he he wouldn't need to take this in, besides the taste. You look at this, you may wonder if it's disgusting. It's not. It's delicious. Maybe I'm trying to think though, but I love this drink. I will One thing I got, thought about was, like, you know, it looks like the American Psycho, morning routine. Like, oh, I take, this, three milligrams of spermidine or whatever and, do my stretching and I can do a 100 sit ups now. And he looks also like the Christian Bale from the American Psycho movie a little bit. Like, this very, lean and very, low body fat, person, which isn't like, I'm not saying it to offend him or something. It's just funny. Like, like, looks very similar. I believe in taking care of myself. A tablespoon of extra virgin olive oil. And, yeah, olive oil is also a good source of these polyphenols and helps helps things with cardiovascular health. And you do also need some, fat to absorb some of the supplements that he took or he's he's about to take. So, yeah, it's a good idea to take some, you know, olive oil or something. I think olive oil is one of one of the best fats, out there and, yeah, improves many aspects of health. That'll be one of, three, so fifty milliliters of olive oil each day. Okay. So he takes, fifty milliliters of olive oil every day. First one now. Three times a day, probably. It pills. I don't like the table I'm waiting lunch and bedtime. Always about the twenty five pills. I didn't put them in. This is the breakfast, twenty five pills. A small handful. When you're doing full of conviction, I think for me, every more full matters. I've found myself, but everything I've said. I'll just play on the calendar today I'll wake you up, unless I do, do really appreciate everything from. Which is true. Like, if if you ever done, like, bodybuilding or fitness, if you ever been on, like, a severe calorie restriction for a long time, then, yeah, you will start to, savor every bite almost and, it becomes very, you know, you become a lot of, like, hyper focused about, yeah, like, the food and thinking about it. And it's, yeah, you try to, like, savor every bite and to make sure that you get all the calories if if especially if you are eating only 2,000 calories, per day, which isn't like that low actually. Like, there's a lot of people who need to go below that, but if you're exercising a lot, then 2,000 calories can be quite moderate calorie restriction. But that's good. I do. He's not like that like, he's not that big. He's not, that tall. He's not that high amount of body weight. So for his daily caloric needs, he probably needs only, like, 2,400 or 2,500 at max, especially if he's working out. And that 2,100 that he's right now is just maybe, like, a 20%, 15% color restriction, which isn't, like, that substantial. So it's, like, some workout stuff. I'm not gonna talk about that. He just works out cardio, some weights. Enough. Because like any form of exercise, any form of resistance training is gonna be beneficial. It's gonna improve things like, autophagy and longevity markers and, help with weight loss and help with biomarkers. So I think any form of, yeah, is gonna be good enough. K. So this after the workout We'll put that this is a breakfast that he's gonna eat. I found and, I called it the you need disinfectant box every morning. My team and I make recipes, and we try to create the perfect diet. As I consume 2,005 2,100 different calories a day, and we try to make every single calorie perfectly suited for my body. We don't waste a single thing. And so this represents all of our scientific work, all Evan Space Medicine. We try to have zero guesswork. It's all based upon hundreds of medicines in my body that generate data. We look it up in the epic medicine domain, then formulate the recipes. I'll show you. So I think, you know, I'll comment a little bit about the that it's all, you know, evidence based, etcetera, etcetera, which I agree. I think that, that he will follow that he follows his evidence based. It does have health benefits, etcetera. It has micronutrients. It has all these different kind of superfoods, etcetera. But is it the only evidence based method of, losing weight or, helping to reverse, biomarkers of aging? Then I don't think so. Because, yeah, like, the biggest thing that matters is the calorie restriction and weight loss in in my opinion. Just, because, you know, first of all, the longest longest living people in history, who have lived the longest, they haven't eaten, like, a fully vegan diet. They haven't eaten any special superfoods, etcetera. They've just practiced moderate calorie intake and just all whole foods, both, plants and, meats and animal foods, they've just managed to stay physically active and maintain good health by doing that. I think also given from my own my own experience and my own experiments, I can tell that, yeah, like, I've seen or, like, at least my biomarkers of aging and, things like IGF one levels or, blood sugar levels, cholesterol levels, what is the the DNA methylation age, etcetera. Those are the things that have also been very good, very indicative of slowing aging, etcetera, and my like, my biological age was nine years younger than my chronological age. Although I'm I'm meaning a completely different diet than him. Like, I do a more extensive interval of fasting. I don't restrict my calories that much actually. I do more fasting and I eat a lot more protein. I eat a lot more animal foods, although I eat also plant foods. So I think that, you know, although this is one method of doing it, it's not the only one. And, there are other ways as well. And the most important thing is that you don't overeat. You don't ex experience high amounts of, like, this metabolic syndrome and metabolic disorders. You're physically active. You're moderate calorie intake. You do get your micronutrients, etcetera. You do get some maybe other super foods, polyphenols, olive oil, whatever, cocoa flavonols, those kind of things, they may have some best positive effect. But the biggest, like, 80% of the results will come just from the calorie restriction, weight loss, and, you know, sleeping good and exercising. Yeah. This is So this is the breakfast, super veggie. It's, like some black beans, broccoli, and, stuff. Around 50 pounds a month, vegetables. Let me see. Which looks like, yeah. You know what it looks like, but it's a very devil. Like a big mass soft fiber. It's like a puree, big mess of puree. One mill. But it's broccoli cauliflower. Which, you know, doesn't mean that it wouldn't taste good. Maybe it tastes good, Ginger garlic, mushrooms, and seeds. 300 grams of black lentils. Put on a a little simmer. This will take me about twenty minutes to shower and get all my ginger done. And the button to come down will be warm. And then we'll sit down and it'll be peace and joy as we eat super veggie and think about the day and specifically, you know, important things about how to accomplish and think about it. I really don't like listening to podcasts and mood ranking because in doing that, I really, I ignore the energy folks' table. I'm dead. Skin cream with all the other space that I use. And this is So this is the skin care routine. And this is where it looks like, yeah, the American Psycho where he puts on the skin care. I'm not gonna talk about the skin care because I don't really know that much about it. And, yeah, I don't think it matters that much. Then I apply an Erdmint facial mask. So this is the food again. The breakfast, the glorious bowl of pudding. Again, it's like, other people may leave things remaining, but remaining in the dish. I don't. It's like it's like a slippery slope that if you if you allow one second for any reason, it's kind of all fall apart. The next thing is gonna all the way up. This is, one of my favorite dishes. So this is, like, a lunch or something? Sorry. Pumpkin soup. If I remember correctly, it's If this is soup, then the morning, yeah, super veggie is also soup. I mean, like, it looks very similar consistency. 300 grams of pumpkin pomegranate, soup hittles. And then this is Yeah. I'm I'm not saying that it doesn't taste delicious. Yeah. I think it tastes good. It's just all the it's like he only heats, like, these purees, like, all these calorie intake for the day is like purees and pudding, basically. There's no, like, chewable things, which is, interesting. Like, I don't think that there is no inherent requirement or need to have everything as this puree. Maybe he likes it, it's fine. But I personally would like to, you know, chew something. Are you pudding? Is this for dinner? We'll have to probably around. It's more between two and 4PM. So dinner is also some sort of a pudding with pea protein. So the pea protein is good. Yeah. That is a good vegan source of, protein. It's one of the best, vegan proteins. I'll have to use the fringe. Brazil nut or the selenium? Are 15 calories? Yes. Brazil nuts are good source of selenium, and you can get your daily selenium from yeah. Just even a few, Brazil nuts. It's just that a half Brazil nut may not be enough, especially on a vegan diet. Like, you get selenium a lot from, meats as well, with the exception of Brazil nuts. So you I would eat maybe, like, two or three Brazil nuts if I were. That's what I do personally. Daily, I eat, two to three Brazil nuts every day. And then, basically, I make wine today. I did three ounces, but I stained my teeth. Now I'm afraid to send some point in the settlement that, is gonna be released in a week. So this may probably referring to resveratrol. So, yeah, like, drinking wine isn't a good source of, resveratrol. It's not significant. You're not gonna get any significant amount of resveratrol from red wine. You would have to drink here, like, liters. So taking a supplement is kind of although and even then, like, the avianthus about the resveratrol isn't that accurate or it's it doesn't actually have that big of an effect on, aging or longevity. With, like, maybe I'll do five hundred milligrams of cacao. Delicious. So the cacao, I mean, cacao is a good superfood in my opinion, especially if you're vegan. I think it's even good for, yeah, like, other, omnivores and such as well for the copper and all the other and such. It's a very high end. So trehalose is a sugar molecule, and, it also boosts autophagy. So that's a good thing. I'm not using trehalose myself, although I may want to try it out in some day. But, yes, it's not known about, autophagy booster. This is light. There's a treat. The light therapy is for every condition, 10 new equipment. And in this light, I do four about ten minutes a day, 10,000 for mood support and health. So he's doing a light therapy, the bright light, which is good for the circadian rhythm again. Although, I mean, there's sunlight outside. I can see from his window. He could go I mean, and he probably lives in California or something, so he can go outside and get a lot more natural sunlight with a full spectrum, which will also be very beneficial. He I saw that he used the sun a sunscreen, so he's probably afraid of the sun causing aging on the skin. This light therapy device would also cause some aspects of, you know, radiation on the skin. So, you know, obviously, you would I wouldn't use only this. I I I I would use it only, yeah, like, maybe five to ten minutes, this, bright face lamp or this big artificial light and, would still get some natural sunlight because the you get more than just the wavelengths from the sunlight solar spectrum. So it's the sunlight solar spectrum tends to be a lot better. And when it comes to aging, then the, the sunlight and the circadian rhythms, regulate also besides the circadian rhythms themselves. They regulate autobotube. They regulate, obviously, all the hormones, all the longevity pathways in the body as well as the NAD resynthesis. So, when it comes to NAD, then the recycling of NAD, is mediated through the sirtuins, and the sirtuins are linked to the circadian rhythm. So you need to be aligned, synchronized with the, day and night cycles, which means, you know, waking up in the morning, getting exposure to daylight and going to bed, you know, before midnight and such. And, that would help your body to maintain sirtuin activation, which will then regulate the NAD resynthesis through this enzyme called NAMPT. And if this, basically, your circadian rhythms are misaligned, then this sirtuins get off, NAMPT gets offline, and then you won't be able to recycle the NAD. And NAD is, you know, low NAD will accelerate the accumulation of all these hallmarks of aging, which will mean that you're start to experience mitochondrial dysfunction. You have low energy production. You have senescent cells. And, just, you know, this aging will be faster if your NAD is lower, and NAD will be low if you're not sleeping properly and if you're not aligned with the circadian rhythm. So this the light part is very crucial in my opinion, as well that very important for besides the mood and, you know, things of that that directly for, antiaging and directly for NAD and, longevity markers as well. And the red light is also good for the joints as well. You know? Also. That's a small thing. You know, I guess it's kid. So it also was no salt, which is a good, potassium chloride. So it's a low sodium and high potassium, salt. At this, I would have had a bowl of if there's hemp up Life or Coca Cola or Although, like, he's eating a vegan diet, he's in calorie restriction, he's doing some intermittent fasting, he's eating well, I don't think that he needs to worry about, like, his blood pressure, and his blood pressure was very low. And I mean, lower blood pressure isn't doesn't mean it's healthier. So I don't and he's getting probably plenty of potassium from, the veggies and such. I don't think that he would need to be in, like, a low salt diet completely zero salt to, it's probably not gonna have any longevity effect unless you have actual high blood pressure. So, yeah, interesting why he would use, this salt is besides, like, regular salt. Punch or, you know, any one of those, with skimmed milk, which I don't know. Because he does, you know, in this video, he already talks about a lot of the, negative side effects of calorie restriction, which is, you know, hyper focused about food, eating, and, you know, licking the plate and, being tired of it. He doesn't obviously, he's very, fit and healthy, but but the calorie restriction, does have this effect where you become this slightly low thyroid and, very kind of try to preserve your motion. He doesn't seem to have that. Like, he doesn't seem to be like this like a frozen stick. But, like, in in the axis of salt, for example, the salt would be actually something that would raise the blood pressure and help to prevent all this low energy that you may get from this calorie restriction. Here's the kind of, overview again in more detail. 5AM, wake up with meditation. 6AM, exercise. 07:30, breakfast. Nine, head to colonel. Eleven, lunch. Nadi Pudding, two to four dinner. So he eats a early dinner, and he fasts for sixteen hours, which is also evidence based that the early times we're eating, has been found to reverse many aspects of biological aging and improve health markers. So he starts eating at 07:30 and finishes dinner at, you know, two two to four, which is, you know, a lot of people, they find it, difficult and, unfeasible to stop eating at, you know, two to four is most people's lunch. Like, I like, if I have lunch, then I'll have it at two to four. Whereas he finishes eating at that time, you know, obviously, there is from a circadian rhythm side, there may be some benefit to being this early with the food and not eating before bed, but, that can also be problematic for other people who, can't go to bed with an empty stomach and, may, you know, just not be able to fall asleep. I think you have to find out which works for you. From a research side, there isn't that significant difference between, eating early and late as long as you're getting the same calories and as long as you're getting good sleep. So, yeah, I wouldn't like break my, you know, my head over, eating either early or late. I personally prefer to do the later timesheet eating that I skip breakfast and I'll eat later. But, obviously, you would have to find out which works for you. The circadian or the intermittent fasting side of longevity, obviously, it boosts pathology, but it also helps with this NAD recycling. So fasting activates AMPK, which is an enzyme that also turns on the NAEPT that then starts to, recycle NAD levels. And, that will help with energy and, basically all aspects of your body. The, but you also as I said earlier, you need the sirtuins and the circadian rhythm alignment to have the NAMPT activated in the first place. And if you're even if you have a NAMPT activated, but you don't have the circadian rhythms aligned, then you're not gonna be, turning the NAMPT on either. So, first comes the circadian rhythm and then comes the time restricted eating. So but if you're, let's say, messing up your, circadian rhythms by eating in the middle of the night or whatever, then it may not be that beneficial for the NAD side at least. Here are the supplements that it takes. B complex, folate folic acid and, premetabolism forms, zero point fifteen pills a day. Yeah. Like like, it's good for the vegan diet to get some b vitamins. Broco Max, which I'm not sure what it is, but I think it's like a sulforaphane supplement. Cocal flavonols, five hundred milligrams. D three two thousand IUs. Yeah. I think that he wouldn't probably need more. Garlic, two point five two point four grams. Ginger root, two point two grams. Glucosamine sulfate, fifteen hundred milligrams. Yeah. Glucosamine is also good longevity supplement, anti inflammatory effects and for the joints. But in, actually, higher amounts, amounts, it may be even better, like three, three milligrams or three, three thousand milligrams. Two to three thousand milligrams can be actually a bit better, in my opinion. Iodine as potassium iodide, one hundred and twenty five micrograms, which is yeah. You on a vegan diet, you'll probably need it. Lithium, one milligrams is actually for the for the mood and, like, yeah, like a brain side, micrograms in lithium is, good. Or you wouldn't want to be deficient in lithium, but you may not need need it either if you're getting from a diet. Lycopene, telomereganis, lysine, nicotinamide riboside three hundred seventy five milligrams. So, yeah, he takes NR. Obviously, there's others like NMN that probably work as good as nicotinamide riboside. I think there's not a huge difference in them in my opinion. Turmeric with piperine, one grams. Taurine, one grams. Ubiquinol, one hundred milligrams. Zinc, fifteen milligrams. That's the breakfast supplements. The lunch supplements, Procomaxacan, sulforaphane, vitamin c, two hundred fifty, cocofamol, five hundred milligrams, d three. Uh-huh. So he takes, the d three, two times a day. So four thousand IU's, every day. EPA, five hundred milligrams with vitamin e, five milligrams. Garlic, two point four grams. Again, ginger root, two point two grams. Also, glucosamine sulfate, again, fifteen hundred milligrams. So he takes three grams of glucosamine every day. Hyaluronic acid, three hundred milligrams. Lithium, one milligrams. Lycopene, ten milligrams. Lysine, one milligrams. Nicotemar riboside, again, three hundred seventy five milligrams. So, in total, seven hundred and fifty, milligrams of, NR a day. We use a good amount. Probiotic, 8,000,000,000 microorganisms. Turmeric, one gram. Taurine, one gram. Ubiconol, one hundred milligrams. So, yeah, you don't wanna be basically taking all the supplements in one go. It can be beneficial to spread out a little bit, especially things like some some fat soluble vitamins like Ubiquinol. Before bed, DHEA twenty five milligrams melatonin three three hundred micrograms. Yeah. I think that's good. Melatonin is a good antiaging and longevity supplement, but you don't wanna be taking large amounts. So three three hundred micrograms is kinda perfect. Other things that it takes three tablespoons of extra virgin olive oil daily, pea protein about twenty nine grams a day, and collagen twenty grams a day. So in total, he doesn't specifically outline how much protein does he eat, but he looks like but it looks like he gets a bit less than a 100 grams of protein. Like, on a vegan diet, you have much less to worry about high protein intake because the vegan diet and the plant based proteins are low in methionine, which is the crucial amino acid that appears to be associated with aging and, cancers and stuff. So on a vegan diet, you don't need even need to restrict the protein because, the, low methionine content. And a high protein intake can be, you know, just more beneficial for bones and joints and stuff. Obviously, too high protein intake is also not good. 1919% protein as is macros, which I personally want 25, especially on a vegan diet. It can be a better to have 25%, but 19% is already a bit higher than the standard American diet. So, yeah, it's a minimum amount. I think any less than that would be be not good, but 19% is, yeah, it's a good amount. Maybe 25% I would aim for. So in conclusion, as you can see, this is this, Brian Johnson's so in conclusion, this is Brian Johnson's longevity routine, antiaging routine that he does. He is measuring his biological age frequently every month, and it is declining. Obviously, I don't think it is finished. It will probably continue to decline. He may get below 40 with his biological age, because he started only in April. It's not even been a year. And, I don't know what he exactly looked like when he started. Probably he was exercising already before that and lost a little bit of weight compared to the older pictures. But, yeah, regardless, he's on the right track. And you as you can see, it's never too late to start to improve your health and, slow down the process of aging. I think it's very, good to see that, you know, if you see the before and after pictures, then, yeah, he looks a lot younger. He looks, yeah, definitely ten years younger than, he did a few years ago, and it's working. Obviously, it's working. Is his method, the blueprint, the only method of doing that, I don't think so. He has some, obviously, yeah, like, very interesting and very good points like just, you know, calorie restriction is very important, exercise is important resistance training. The polyphenols, I I I like. Creatine, some supplements. I'm not against any of the supplements evidence based. The diet, vegan diet, yeah, like, I think a vegan diet will ease, like, a very easy way to see some improvements in your health because it's very low in calories. Generally, it's hard to overeat just, you know, fiber and stuff. It can be filling. It can be satiating. It does have some other benefits or beneficial effects as well. Is it the only thing? You don't need to be fully vegan. I think, I I don't think that the fully carnivore diet is that beneficial, but you don't need to be like on a fully vegan diet to see those benefits. Like like I said, I did my biological age test as well. I was 16 with my biological age, which is nine years younger than my chronological age. Although I eat like, three times more protein than him and a bit more calories. I'm not overeating calories, but I'm definitely not vegan and I eat high amounts of protein as well. And my my biological age score was still very young and I was doing the right thing. My biomarkers were also optimal and good. So, yeah, obviously, there's many ways of doing that and one may not necessarily be better than the other. You just have to find out what what works for you. I personally do, yeah, like, one meal a day and indoor fasting and different kinds of methods. Resistance training, obviously, different kinds of supplements. And I do think that it's very, the kind of main principles are similar. You need to turn all on these different kinds of longevity pathways in the body. And, obviously, the most important thing for that is not overeating and calorie restriction. And, of course, interval fasting can mimic some aspects of calorie restriction, but, yeah, it's a very, you know, situation or nuance. You can structure it in many different ways. Alright. That's it for this video. Make sure to click like. Alright. That's it for this video. If you want to learn more about these kind of topics, and what I do, then check out my videos about it and my book, Mirabai Kathalaji. Other than than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seeb. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.