Alright. Welcome, everyone. It's, me, Sim, and, my wife, Inka. We are doing, like, podcast and, like, a talk show thing right now. We'll just, you know, try it out and see how it goes. We'll just cover different kinds of topics related to some scientific studies and some other findings that we've, discovered recently and, just talk about different topics. Do you want to look and feel younger? If you do, I'm looking for a few more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, message me on Instagram the word health and I'll send you the details or send me an email to sim@simlun.com. So let's start with, like, a few updates of, what we've been up to. So, like, what have you done over the last few weeks or so that you can share with people? Well, I've been up updating the Instagram, new content. We've been traveling. We we came back recently from the travels, so just settling to home and writing a a book. Have been done quite a lot of research on brain health Mhmm. Recently in the past few weeks. Yeah. It's, like, the common book where co authoring together is probably, like, comes out next year, something like that. Yeah. And, yeah. I also, started writing a new book, with doctor James, and it's gonna be about collagen and glycine, which has been very, interesting and exciting. So glycine is my favorite supplement. And, yeah, like Surely he eats it a lot. Yeah. I mean, it's, I mean, many benefits to it. Like, it can help with, glutathione. It can help with inflammation, collagen, skin health, antiaging sleep, and insulin sensitivity, so many things. So I think it's one of the best supplements. And one thing that I did discover so far already was that, glycine is actually one of the fur or essentially like the first amino acids on earth that, created life. And, in a, like, you know, three point eight billion years ago when Earth was like this big boiling soup, then, there wasn't, you know, like, any possibility for, life. But, the appearance of glycine on Earth enabled the first life forms to develop. So these like chlorella and these algae type life forms. And they use glycine to pretty much survive in like high salt environments, high temperature environments. So yeah, glycine is one of the like initial creators of life forms. And the funny thing about how glycine got to earth was that it came on earth on comets. So meteorites that were bombarding Earth, a lot. Then, the meteorite ice or asteroid ice on there, pretty much, like UV radiation from the sun on top of the ice inside comets created glycine as well as the impact on Earth. So if the the comets landed on Earth, then, that impact also created glycine. So that's how glycine got on Earth and created life which is like a very funny, Hollywood, Hollywood movie plot almost. But, yeah, the book itself is gonna talk a lot about all the benefits of glycine and collagen, which we've actually been eating a lot as well, collagen recently. Yeah. Collagen. And actually, I didn't eat much glycine before, you know, we got together and, you know, you started feeding it to me in the beginning. I was like, what? Yeah. What is this glycine? And, I noticed a lot of benefits, especially if I take it high doses, like three grams in the evening. It really helps with the sleep. But I think also with the skin benefits and just like joint benefits. Well, I've done a lot for my joints recently, because I had the knee injury last year. But I think the glycine really helps with that one. Yeah. Yeah. And And collagen as well. Yeah. Collagen. I've, like, looked into more of the studies about collagen as well and, it's actually pretty good for anti aging in terms of the wrinkles and the skin elasticity and things like that. But obviously, yeah, the bones and tendons and ligaments as well. Yeah. Yeah. Actually, also for the brain. Like, the brain health aspect was totally new for me in terms of collagen. And then I was talking with the guys from do not do not age, and, they told me that, you know, collagen is also for the brain. And I started looking into the studies. There are not that much. It's not like a huge literature. But there are it does contribute to the gray matter density in the brain. And there was some benefits of speeding up the recovery from brain injury. Interesting. Yeah. And of course the cardiovascular benefits of the blood vessels, the lining is made of collagen. Yeah. And one of the benefits for the brain was or they thought that it's mediated by, you know, improving the blood vessels. So Yeah. Microcirculation as well probably then. Yeah. Yeah. And one, important point about this, I guess, is that yeah. Like, your your body can make glycine as well as, collagen, but the amounts are quite small. So, like, for optimal health, you probably need a lot more. And, yeah. We take quite a lot. We take, like, maybe ten grams or more even. Plus we eat a lot of like glycine rich foods. Mhmm. But, I think they underestimated how much glycine you actually need because, yeah, glycine is for collagen turnover, but also for creatine and glutathione and heme production. And, if you're yeah, like so like you you produce three grams of glycine per day, endogenously, so your body makes it. And, to make glutathione and creatine and heme, that also takes maybe three grams. But for collagen turnover, daily collagen turnover is like 12 grams of glycine. So, you may need like, you know, 15 grams of glycine. And if your body only makes three and you're not really getting that much from diet, then, yeah, you definitely need like 10 grams at least. Yeah. Probably in the countries where they eat a lot of broth and joints, like Asian countries, they get a lot more collagen for the diet. Mhmm. And they tend to have very good skin as well. But Yeah. Mhmm. So, like, pork legs and Mhmm. Pork actually pork skin is very high in Yeah. The highest source of, glycine from foods. Yeah. When I was in China, the the women, really ate a lot of the pork skin and the pork legs and encouraged me to eat as well. They were, like, literally saying that you need to eat this for for beauty and health. And Yeah. But, we also like to do the Jell O. Yeah. Jello. It's just Jello, just jello gelatin powder and you make the jello with it. Yeah. That's also a very high source of glycine and collagen. Yeah. So, you actually also from the researching for the brain book Mhmm. You discovered a very interesting article about the Okinawans. So can you talk a little about it? Yeah. That was super interesting. So, basically, as a background, I've been doing or writing the chapter on on, like, insulin and diets and, yeah, the calorie restriction and ketogenic. I'm just looking into, like, what actually seems to me that brain longevity, what what evidence there are. And, of course, when you look into the centenarians in Okinawa as well and, like, blue zones and why they live long, what was in their diet. And there was this good article, from already 2009, actually, about, what can we learn from the Okinawans. And, I guess the main point there was they talked about the calorie restriction, but all the other things as well that Okinawans had in their diet, the traditional Okinawa per se. So, like, the modern Okinawa is not anymore the longevity diet, but it was the traditional pre World War two diet. So right now, they're not living as long? No. Two months? No. Yeah. It's, I think they even told that we we need to check it, but, like, they have now way higher rates of obesity. Even in childhood obesity, they have, like, more heart disease or diabetes than in Mainland Japan. So it was because during World War two, all the American influence came into the diet. Mhmm. Probably like one probably there were a lot of things that happened after the World War or, but, like, that was one of the things that really radically shifted from compared to pre war. What kind of changes then the major changes? There were, like, many changes, but one thing that in terms of, for example, the, calories, that was quite significant. So pre war, you know, as a background, calorie restriction has calorie restriction has been studied quite a lot in the past decades or at least a decade and shown longevity benefits. And that was one thing that the Okinawans had. Like, they were estimated to be about 200 calorie deficit compared to the average daily need, which was around 750. And they were getting 200 calories less. And after the war, they were getting 200 calories more, which was comparable to what Americans were eating at the time. So they were, like, at the time, 1970, they compared it to that time, they were about 200 calories surplus. So then they were in terms of calories, the Okinawans and Americans became similar. That's not actually a lot. That's a very small surplus, but it apparently has a huge impact. Yeah. Well, I mean, there was also other things, but, you know, deficit calorie deficit or calorie surplus. I mean, from calorie surplus, you would start gaining weight. Mhmm. Right. So Yeah. Yeah. And, yeah. Like, messes up the biomarkers a bit. Mhmm. So more diabetes, more, more, hypertension, other other like these diseases. And, yeah, like the calorie restriction is pretty, across all species generally associated with longevity and increased lifespan. But, there's no, like, human specific studies that look at it, but, obviously, this is an example of it that, excess calorie consumption is definitely not, the most optimal thing. And it goes like, you know, this, you know, during the war it was probably like they had food rationing or shortages of food, which created the calorie deficit. And, yeah, like this short term starvation periods or food shortages are actually beneficial. That's how calorie restriction works That your body is under the small energy stress and, turns on these longevity pathways and reduces inflammation and, yeah, loses weight, that kind of thing. And when you get out of that starvation state or you go go into, like, a more higher calorie consumption, you go into more, like, comfortable lifestyle and food abundance, which is the American lifestyle kind of represents, then, yeah, the opposite. You shorten the lifespan and get sicker faster. So it's kind of pretty I think it's pretty simple idea and pretty, many examples of that that represent it. Yeah. But then there was this study of the Minnesota Starvation Experiment, which showed that if it's too long or if the calorie restriction is very poorly designed, it doesn't have any benefits at all. Or at least well, they didn't look at the of course they couldn't do it for a long time. They couldn't see the longevity or whatever. And, they didn't have brain scans and stuff like that at the time. But, you know, the there there is this, big book about this whole experiment, and that was six months calorie restriction to young American healthy physically active men, which was only, like, about so they were eating in a normal conditions. They were eating or in the control period before the experiment about it was over 3,000 calories. And then they entered into the starvation, which was actually only 1,500 calories for six months. But their diet but their diet composition was like a representative of the average diet in Europe at the time. So it was very high in potatoes and bread and porridge and stuff like that. So high carb, no nutrients, no not much veggies or meat or salt or anything like that. And they actually got pretty poor outcomes, so the people lost 25% of their weight. Mhmm. The men, 20% of which was muscle mass. Mhmm. Then they felt fatigued, they had brain fog, chronic, like, or or gut issues. They had low mood, even suicidal thoughts. So it was pretty harsh Yeah. I remember. Right? Outcome. I remember some of them had, like, dreams of, like, eating the other subject in the study or something. Yeah. That's great. Maybe I'm making that but, yeah, like, you know, it's very I mean, it's not actually, like, a very severe calorie restriction, like, 1,500 calories, but they were also, like, just doing a lot of physical labor and they didn't get, like, protein, which I think was the biggest reason for their, like, d deterioration, or in such a rapid way. So that Well, at least the muscle. Yeah. But for example, in the Okinawan diet, so here we go into the, like, the diet composition, is that the Okinawans weren't getting protein either, but they had very good outcomes still. Mhmm. But they were eating a lot of, like, vegetables. It was a vegetable based diet, so a lot of vegetables, green beans, okra, bok choy. I don't know what were available at the time, but a lot of, fresh vegetables. They were eating miso. Sweet potato was their stable food. Mhmm. It's a stable food, whereas in Mainland Japan, it was rice. Mhmm. And many Asian countries eat rice. Mhmm. But it was sweet potato, which is, of course, high in vitamin a and vitamin c and, potassium and iron and those things. So, like, the vitamins and minerals were definitely present in the diet even though it lacked to protein. There was this, in the article, there is the table of the content of carbs, fats and proteins. Maybe we can I could shoot it? Look it up. So this is the article, the Okinawan diet, health implications of low calorie, nutrient dense, antioxidant anti oxidant rich dietary pattern, low in glycemic load. Mhmm. And where we can scroll to the food. Yeah. It's lower. Even lower. So this is the mortality rates from Yeah. Colon, heart disease, and cancers. So, Americans super high and, Okinawan's the lowest. This is the food pyramid. Right. So lots of vegetables, fruits, legumes, lo ghee, grains, fish and lean meats, oils, herbs, spices, sweets, and alcohol in moderation. What is physical activity in the food pyramid? Well, I mean, this is a supporter of the pyramid. Like, it's not a part of the pyramid, I guess. But, rich in omega three fats, high monounsaturated to saturated fat ratio, and emphasis on low glycemic index carbohydrates. And that's the staple food. Like, they had a big shift in this, glycemic load of the diet when they shifted from sweet potato to rice after the war. Because pre war, actually, sweet potato or, like, sweet potato has in those countries been, considered as sort of like the poor people food, and the rice was the royalty food. So they switched into the royalty food. Yeah. Interesting. I mean, sweet potatoes are definitely more nutrient dense than rice. So rice doesn't have any, like, micronutrients really. Yeah. But it's interesting. So this one was very interesting. So the traditional Okinawa in this table on the left side is the one that is associated with all the longevity and health benefits. So they had pretty high diet and carbohydrates, and that made them 85 is very high. Yeah. Yeah. And not that much protein. Mhmm. It's 9% of the protein. Fat was also very low, 6%. Unsaturated fat was very, very low. Mhmm. It has quite a lot of sodium though, but they they thought that that was like at a miso and Well, one thousand milligrams is, below the RDA for yes. Right now. So okay. So two thousand five hundred is usually the recommended amount. Oh, yeah. So it should be in higher. Yeah. Technically. Yeah. But they get so much potassium that, they probably don't need that much sodium. And they're eating so many carbs, so their sodium requirement kinda goes down. So, yeah, this this was interesting that they actually didn't get that much protein, but I don't think they were very muscular either at the time. And, you know, they weren't very big. So, for example, this caloric needs that they or the calories that they were getting, 700 1,750, is, like, probably a standard American at the time needs more. Mhmm. But it's estimated that it's over, 3,500 that they get. Yeah. So probably that's a bit too high. I mean, they probably don't need that much. Yeah. So in the modern diet, modern Okinawa diet, more fat than more protein, less carbs. Yeah. Like, four times more fat. Yeah, that's pretty high. A lot more sodium and a lot less potassium. Which probably just comes from the swapping to processed foods. So their protein intake is still very low, compared to standards, but they get a lot more fat which probably means that they're eating more processed packaged foods. So that more sodium as well and less potassium. Less whole food carbs, more processed carbs. Yeah. And, apparently, more dairy that they didn't have almost at all Mhmm. Yeah. Before the war, and then now they are also having dairy products there. Yeah. And they also suspected that, like, the low protein is not necessarily the key, but the fact that, you know, if the protein is very low quality, it's like very processed form or like this kind of inflammatory protein, meat. Yeah. Too high in, you know, BCAAs or something that are balanced. Too high in methionine. Yeah. Then then it wouldn't really be healthy to put in the diet. Yeah. So the methionine glycin balance is also one of the part of the reason why calorie restriction helps with the longevity. So essentially like too much methionine, which you get from muscle meats and, yeah, dairy is toxic to the body and can like raise homocysteine levels and it can shorten lifespan and promote cancer growth. Whereas if you get, like, protein restriction, less methionine, then and more glycine, then, it's better for longevity. Glycine does, like, reduces methionine toxicity and reduces homocysteine, reduces inflammation and and, yeah, it's better overall. So you need to eat more of these again. Less muscle meat and more, these tendons and, ligaments and those kind of things. Yeah. And And they have, like, fish. Mhmm. I mean, lean fish and lean meat is or even salmon. Mhmm. And lean meats are, like, good proteins. Yeah. I mean and, you know, when, people are so protein is also like an abundance food. Mhmm. So rich countries eat more protein because they have because protein is more expensive and they have access to it more, which makes them obtain more methionine and then ages them faster. Whereas poorer countries or like during war for example, you have less protein access and availability. And, yeah, you get less methionine and the protein restriction still helps you to live longer or reduces the disease risk that you get. So yeah, I guess the main takeaway from this, the protein side, is to eat more glycine and eat less methionine. Eat all the glycine. Yes. And yeah. I mean, I'm pretty sure the Okinawans eat pork, but they eat the pork legs. So they eat, like, the collagen and the glycine from there. Not not the not the steaks, not the tomahawks and, that kind of thing. Yeah. And also the the pork is sort of like in the side dishes and it's like a little pieces of pork in the veggies or something. It's not they don't eat big steaks. Yeah. That's kind of very rice or whatever. Yeah. And that's kind of a very new thing, the stakes. So, like, even even even me, like, I mean, I'm a nineties kid. Mhmm. And, like my family, they wasn't, like, super we weren't, like, wealthy. We were kind of, yeah, like a teacher and a policeman and parents. So, we didn't have, like, yeah, a lot of meat all the time. We did eat, like, plenty of meat, but, yeah, it was in the in the food mixed together, like in stews and, minced meat and, like, cheap meats, instead of steaks. So, like, we never ate steaks. Like, we we never ate, like, a beef, t bone or steak or anything of that. Whereas nowadays, you can get it anywhere and it's pretty cheap or I mean, it's not cheap, but it's much more easy and accessible, than even twenty years ago. So, that definitely can also contribute to people eating too much protein which accelerates their aging. Yeah. And specifically too much methionine. So they need more of these collagen and tenderness parts with glycine. And, like, in all the Mediterranean type diet, in a mind diet and dash diet that are the mostly linked to the longevity benefits, they don't eat a lot of red meat. So it's not necessarily not about even the the parts of the meat that you eat, but it's the type of the meat. Do you eat white meat or red meat? Mhmm. Or lean meat or fatty, you know, pork meat. So it's like, you know, fish is meat or fish is you know? They they just eat a lot of seafood. And then for example, in the mind diet, which is the anti Alzheimer's diet, so to speak, meat is only part of the diet, like, once a week or twice a week, as fish is three times a week. And the main source of protein is always the legumes, beans, lentils, the plant proteins. So Interesting. Yeah. Yeah. So I mean, I guess many people would think, you know, when they think about protein, they just think about meat. You know, is it, you know, pork or beef or grass fed or whatever, wild herb fed? I mean, maybe that's not the point. Maybe it's actually the what's the source of the protein in the first place. Yeah. And, there is a difference between plant based protein and animal based protein. So, yeah, animal based protein is very high in methionine. Plant based proteins are less in methionine, they have a bit more glycine and, the BCA difference as well. So animal protein has a lot of BCAs, leucine specifically that helps with protein synthesis. So, yeah, like animal protein is superior for muscle growth and and turning on protein synthesis and mTOR stimulation, but that's not always the best for longevity because of, yeah, excess methionine, excess mTOR stimulation. And also BCAA. Calories generally. So, Yeah. And BCAA is actually prevent, for example, tryptophan to access the brain. Because there's too much these competitive large neutral amino acids in the bloodstream, the tryptophan loses the access to the brain. So that would mean lesser serotonin production in the brain, maybe poorer sleep, maybe poorer mood, and actually less brain growth because serotonin is you know, the the hippocampus is very abundant in serotonergic receptors and serotonin production. So it's also that then it's the the balance of the neurotransmitter might switch a little bit. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. And I mean, the I guess the point isn't to, like, avoid all meat or something, but the point is to, yeah, increase your methionine to glycine ratio and, Glycine to methionine, you mean? Yeah. Either way. So you have more more glycine, less methionine, and, I mean, incorporating some so glycine is also actually the, anti catabolic. So glycine helps to preserve muscle. So even if you are eating a low BCA diet, you may not build as much muscle, but if you get enough protein even from glycine then you will still maintain it. And likewise with collagen. So collagen isn't gonna make you build muscle because it doesn't have leucine, but, it does help to preserve muscle. So from a longevity side, then you just need to make sure that you get, like, a certain threshold of protein, not necessarily super high protein. And for longevity protein, then it has to be lower in methionine and, higher in glycine, or at least you need to cycle them. So you need to have periods of higher methionine intake and periods of higher glycine and collagen intake. So, like, you know, there is no, like, I guess, golden rule, how much methionine or how much, like, glycine or how much animal versus how much plant based protein. But you need to, like, find some sort of a balance of cycling with them and incorporating either glycine as supplement, if you're eating a lot of muscle meat or swapping some of the muscle meat, which I think is a good idea with more of these collagen proteins. Plant proteins as well? Yeah. Yeah. And, adding glycine as a supplement. Mhmm. Yeah. For me, I've noticed it's, like, just personally works quite well that I eat like, I don't eat a lot of red meat. So I eat a lot of fish, white fish. I eat chicken every now and then and then very little red meat. Mhmm. And then I eat the organs, so, like, liver and tongue and yeah. And then then I eat a lot of beans as well and chickpeas and, new zest and plant protein powders and crump. Yeah. That's a good good alternatives. But let's talk about what is the kind of dash diet that they compare here. Mhmm. You know about it. Well, that's actually I don't know that much about dash. I know more about the Mediterranean and mine. So this is the, like for reducing blood pressure. This is the hypertension diet Mhmm. Which is linked to, yeah, better cardiovascular health And especially if you have chronically high blood pressure or something, then they recommend the DASH diet. But I haven't looked into it a lot. Mhmm. I mean, I I would imagine it's pretty similar as a Mediterranean diet. So, Yeah. They are pretty similar. But I don't know the specific foods in DASH. I guess the main point there is actually to restrict salt. Mhmm. That's the main point in the DASH diet. Mediterranean diet is more based similar to the Okinawan diet. So the Mediterranean diet, the main main proteins would come for from plant sources and fish. Mhmm. It's pretty, low in, like, wait. Let me look at the values. They're actually pretty high in fat. Mhmm. I mean, it's the olive oil and Yeah. I mean, olive oil is amazing. So also the quality of the fat, I would think, matter a lot. I think the modern Okinawa, for example, you can see that the ratio or, like, the saturated fat from the pre war Okinawa actually elevated three times. Mhmm. So that would indicate that the plant that the fat source is definitely not olive oil or plant oils like these healthy avocado oils or something like that that they increase. It's actually probably coming from these more fattier pieces of meat. Or trans fats. Or trans fats. Yeah. Yes. What else do they have here? So this does a sweet potato. Mhmm. So the staple food was you can see that the Indo pre war Okinawa, it was definitely sweet potato. Yeah. And then the consumption of rice increased. Mhmm. And bread as well, bread has been steadily increasing. Yeah. So that's the American influence, the white bread. And I guess it's also about the the cost is I don't know. Yeah. Maybe it's cheaper. Interesting that sweet potatoes were so large. I mean, maybe sweet sweet potatoes do have some good like, the main mac micronutrient is, like, just potassium. But it also has, like, resistant starch, which is, like, just more fibrous and to help with the blood sugar balance more. And it's also very high in vitamin a. Yes. And c. So also iron. Mhmm. Iron content. Oh, here is the I see. Sweet potato. Yeah. Yeah. A and c. Vitamin c. Actually, thinking about changing that amount of you get 50% of the vitamin c per is it the one hundred one hundred and eighty grams. Mhmm. So you get that much vitamin c, so that would be, what, one hundred milligram. Mhmm. And then you just erase that daily intake. And you, yeah, replace that with a rice. Mhmm. Probably not be the most optimal solution if you are on a calorie restricted. And I think this we need to take into consideration that, you know, these nutrients are very good if you are calorie restricted. Yeah. And, the glycemic index, sweet potatoes have also the lowest glycemic index compared to other types of potatoes. But I mean, I personally like still regular potatoes as well. So like regular white potatoes are still amazing, source of potassium. I mean, the highest source of potassium and high in resistant starch and, actually have like a high satiety index measured in studies that, the C. G. Did the most. Is there rice? Rice is probably one of the highest. Rice? White rice is also there, like 90 something, 95. I mean, rice is less fiber than white potatoes, so it's probably higher. Yeah. So eat potatoes in moderation. Oh, there was a I saw the seaweed word. So they also ate a lot of seaweed. Probably actually got the DHAA or the DHA from the seaweed as well. So they got a lot of omega three fatty acids. Probably a big big big source of the DHA is actually seaweed. That's where the fish get their DHA from. Yeah. And that's the brain healthy food. I mean, definitely, it's I think the number one brain food is omega three fatty acids for the brain. And this also shows the DHEA, the hormone differences between US and Okinawans. So, because the Okinawans eat like this low color intake, their natural DHEA levels, even in their youth, are lower than The US, but they maintain it for longer. So they catch up or even they pass The US, elderly people in their DHEA levels compared to US. So they probably eat more calories, they get plenty of nutrients, so their hormone levels are higher in their youth, but they also eat faster and, their drop off is faster. So they're gonna be lower in their hormone levels sooner than, Okinawans. Would be interesting to see this crap with the NAD levels. Yeah. I mean, their calorie restriction increases any of the levels, and obesity decreases it. So it's probably something similar. There was also the headline that the traditional Okinawan appears to be highly anti inflammatory. Mhmm. So because they ate so much of these bitter herbs and spices that are anti inflammatory Yeah. And got the, DHA from the seaweed and the fish. So that's also very anti inflammatory for the body. Mhmm. Yeah. So what are your takeaways? Like, what are you changing in your diet or if any based on this study? Well, mhmm. My first idea was to make a sweet potato pie today. But I noticed that that was a traditional Okinawan sweet. Really? Yeah. So actually, you know, the food pyramid still had sweets on the top. So it's not like they didn't eat sweets. Mhmm. But their desserts were not donuts and cakes. Like in America, their dessert was, for example, the sweet potato pie. So it has, like, a very thin layer of something. I don't know what it's made of. Probably some starch or what they tapioca starch or what they use at the time. Mhmm. And then a sweet potato layer. Nice. So I'm gonna do that. Yes. Yes. I'll I'll report. Yes. All good. Awesome. I hope I've never tried that before. But let's see. I'm gonna use probably some non traditional Okinawan ingredients for that, like lysine and trehalose stevia. Cinnamon and Yeah. Well, I guess they use cinnamon probably. But, yeah, I'm gonna do some stevia, you know, low carb version as well. Well, low sugar version as well. Mhmm. I guess here the key takeaways, if you do calorie restricted diet, you know, if we think about the Minnesota thing versus Okinawan thing, is that you need nutritional planning. It's not that just, like, stop eating. If you don't get your nutrients, you're just gonna go into starvation. You're gonna start losing muscle and tissue and, you know, neurotransmitters and everything. So calorie restriction, I think, is good, but it needs to be very well planned. Another thing that I noticed from the studies is that they haven't done well, the Okinawans, of course, they probably ate that for their whole lives. In humans, there are less studies on this prolonged calorie restriction, especially if it's high. So the, Okinawan calorie restriction was very moderate, like 10%. Mhmm. So maybe that there is no need to do take calorie restriction in excess unless you want to lose weight. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, calorie I guess moderation is still important. And, especially if you're in a calorie surplus and the quality of food matters more because I think if you're in a calorie deficit, from a, like the, yeah, like the health side, your health will improve no matter what, but to do it long term then you need, yeah, like the good good structure of it. Like, in calorie surplus then, I mean, you can still, you know, live longer without calorie restriction if you do a lot of other things right. So if you have like some good exercise and you get all the micronutrients and, balancing the methionine glycine ratio. So that's because glycine supplementation has been also seen to, extend lifespan even without protein restriction. So, yeah, like it's not even that the protein restriction is important. It's there like methionine. So make sure make sure that you don't get too much methionine is what apparently is more important, than protein restriction and calorie restriction usually is a way to achieve protein restriction and, yeah, but you know, it's also very hard to let's say build muscle with it. And so it's a quality of life is definitely reduced if you're under chronic calorie restriction. Like you're cold and tired and, sarcopenic and that kind of thing. So, obviously for optimal healthy aging then you still need to have some muscle and strength as well. And to maintain the like longevity or to not age faster when you are eating like maintenance calories or in a small surplus is to get more glycine and not that much methionine. So some methionine is still good. So you need methionine for like detoxification and methylation. And, I think I I even found that, like low methionine also like speeds up greying of hair. So your hair turn gray and lose color faster if you don't get enough methionine. But but you know you need the methionine but not too much and you need to counterbalance it with glycine. And I think I think I saw Chris Masterjohn's article about it and he said that for every gram of meth or like methionine depletes glycine. So every gram of methionine you need about 0.5 to one gram of glycine. How much does 100 gram steak, has methionine? I don't know exactly, but I mean it's very high. So like I would imagine it has a a 100 gram steak usually has maybe 30 grams or 25 grams of protein and probably like 10 grams of it is methionine. So you would need five grams of colitisine? At least, yeah. Wow. That's a lot. So, yeah, definitely if you're an intermediate there. Even even besides that, even for the collagen and, skin benefits and other, like, Kugathans benefits, you want at least 10 grams of glycine And probably more, like 15 probably or something like that. Yeah. So macrodose the glycine. Yeah or eat jello and skin. Yeah, beef gelatin. Jello and don't eat that much like muscle meat. Yeah. And I guess you don't eat need that much glycine if you don't eat that much red meat. But, Yeah. Like, you need less glycine on, like, a plant based diet. Mhmm. You need more on a muscle meat diet. And, I mean, first of all, you don't need that much like BCA's or methionine either. You need like a certain amount. Have you ever been on a low protein diet? No. Well, I've I've done it like a few days of, like, a fasting mimicking diet, and I do have days where I eat, like, a lot less protein. So I I have, like, some days where I eat only like a thousand calories and maybe 70 or 60 grams protein. And, that's like a fasting making diet for me. That, and the goal is to, yeah, like to, like, to keep the mTOR lower and, increase autophagy and AMPK and those things. So periodically, it's good, but you wanna do it, like, oh, it depends on the situation, and your goals. Like, I do it maybe a few times a month. So three times a month, maybe once a week of having like a low protein day and a very low calorie day is also good for antiaging. So I mean the alternative is to do like a strict fast, like a forty eight hour, thirty, seventy two hour fast or be on a low protein diet for a few days. Mhmm. And you pretty much get the same benefits like the water long goes fasting mimicking diet is based on that so that you don't do like an extended fast of zero calories. You eat like 500 to 800 calories of plant based foods that keep the mTOR and IGF-one lower and mimic the effects of fasting. So I think that's, that is like a real biohack in a sense that you trick your body into thinking that it's fasting. You know, while while still eating some food. Yeah. And I think that is definitely like a good longevity thing. And it's good for those people who just gets get stressed about not eating. Yes. Like, it's also there is also the mental mental component. Especially women might might get a little bit, distressed about it, and they just need to, you know, have the structure of eating. But also for women, I mean, these things get way more complicated than for men because we are very cyclical and we do definitely need more protein Or our body is better at protein oxidation and fat oxidation at the luteal phase. Mhmm. And in the follicular, the first two weeks of the cycle, we are more insulin sensitive. We do better with higher amounts of carbs. We need that for to boost the serotonin and everything like that. So for women, these kind of, like, heuristics don't really work that well. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I I agree. And the caloric knees, like, I wouldn't do strict calorie restriction at the first, two last two weeks Mhmm. Of the menstrual cycle. You're also going to lose iron and vitamins and water and everything, you know, in the beginning of the cycle. So that's why you kinda want to prepare for that. And then, you know, near the ovulation, maybe you don't want to do strict calorie restriction because your body starts to think that you're in starvation, especially if you're not getting the nutrients. And you may lose your ovulation. So it affects your fertility immediately Yeah. If you do it wrong. So, again, just like planning a little bit. I think women need to plan a bit more. Of course. Yeah. And I mean, like, chronic calorie restriction and low calorie intake eventually will down regulate for men as well, the hormones and testosterone levels. But I guess the threshold for that is a bit they can get away with more and they can stay in the colour restriction a bit longer and they can probably recover faster as well. But yeah, I think it goes back to like finding a balance of, you know, cycling your calories, cycling your carbs, cycling your protein, cycling your, yeah, the, like nutrient stress that you get from your diet. And not being on a, like, not being on a, like, modern, high calorie processed food diet. Yeah. I think that's the actually, the most important thing is just, like, avoiding the processed food. Like, all the traditional diets before and all of Mediterranean diet, mind diet, healthy diets are pretty much based on real whole foods. And The composition changes, but, you know, none of these healthy diets includes donuts or pizza or seed oils or Right. They don't include they like the yeah. The modern bread and modern pizzas are refined grains. Yeah. But they do have like, you know, breads. They do have some Yeah. Some like traditional pastas or pizzas under those things. So like Well that was the time when they used the whole like, the thing. Sheet. Yeah. They didn't just peel it off and Yeah. The refined refined grains are the ones, that cause the biggest insulin spike and, least nutrients. But, yeah, like a whole food bread, sourdough bread is probably still fine. It's very traditional. And, Yeah. They add sugar nowadays to bread as well. Mhmm. Oh, and that's another good point that you just said the insulin. Like, the Okinawan diet was very low. Low in glycemic index. It probably didn't include that much insulin spikes. Yeah. And there is a the brain insulin resistance and peripheral and central insulin resistance is whole another topic, which is like a huge impact on brain aging and the body aging, and they are very, like, linked. Yeah. Yeah. So Yeah. That's true. You want to you want to keep both the body and the brain insulin sensitive. Yeah. That's right. But, we can do another show about that another time, and we'll start wrapping up with very interesting paper. And, yeah. Looking forward to the full chapter and the full book about it. Is there anything else you want to mention before we, stop here? So, yeah, we've been talking so much about collagen in this episode that I just just thought to throw up a very good collagen because we have tested a lot of different types of collagen and everyone's you know, the the discussion is, is it supposed to be marine collagen or eggshell or bovine or grass fed or whatever? What type is the best if you want to do this or that? So I recently, stumbled upon this, Inca cow. Yeah. I don't like it because it has my name in it. It's just actually very good collagen because it does have it's a collagen complex that has bovine, marin, eggshell. Oh, damn. It's in in Germany, so I don't actually know how to Kraken. Kraken collagen. It has vitamin c, hyaluronic acid, elastin, but some sort of vanilla pieces and, the camember or come I don't know how to pronounce it. That's the sweetener here. So it has five different types of collagen, and it's molecular weight. Apparently, it's medical grade Mhmm. Compared to most of the collagens in the market, which are non medical grade, so they are less absorbed. So, yeah, I contacted them to ask to partner with them because I just yeah. I found this to be the best collagen that I've used. I also like their spreads, and they have nice products. Yes. They send me functional products. They actually just sent me for my birthdays, they sent me chocolates that had, like, my quotes inside, like, a card of my quotes. So they have these nice chocolates, different flavors, dark chocolates, very high in, and, Who's been eating? I wonder who. And they have, like, this quote cards inside of like my picture and like my Twitter quotes that I've said. This one says stress can either bring out the worst or the best in people. So that's my nice little interesting touch to it. Let's take another one for example, and it tastes pretty good. And as you can see, I've been eating them a bit. Yes. Totally. It has been seen. You can choose to be addicted to things that lift you up or addictions that drag you down. And, the chocolate addiction lifts you up. Right? It lifts my, it inhibits my myostatin and helps helps me to boost my antioxidant defense. So it lifts me up a lot. They also add, like, stuff like collagen and those kind of things to this chocolate. Yes. You have a code. Yeah. So I have a code. It's InkaCao with I n k ACAO. Is your code? InkaCao. Yeah. InkaCao. InkaCao. Okay. Yeah. Or we can put a link. Yes. Yeah. And you can find it on my Instagram as well. So if you want it a little bit cheaper, then use that code. And, another thing that I have an update is that I'm I've been recording podcast episodes for this year pretty much, but there has been a lot, that we've done, like, gotten married and things like that. So, yeah, I finally got back into that project, and I'm gonna launch it, probably next week. So it's gonna be very interesting. Like, I have had the privilege to interview pretty cool people in that. In mind and psychology, that's the topic. So if those topics are interesting to you, go to my Instagram or newsletter, and you can get the notification when I launch it. Yeah. It's Mind and Psychology podcast. Mhmm. Right. Okay. Well, I'm gonna be on it. So Yes. We will share it together. Alright. That was it for the episode and hope you enjoyed it. We definitely did. Stay tuned for the next one, next talk show. And, If there are any specific topics that, like, you would like us to talk about, then we're happy to do that. Put it in the comments, and, we'll look into those things. Where can people find your social media? I'm in Instagram at Inkaland with two i's, e e, I I n wait. I I n kaland. Yes. I'm not good at spelling in English. I I N K Land. Mhmm. Yes. And stay the next watching this episode. Stay tuned for the next one. Stay empowered.