Welcome back to the channel. My name is Seem Lund and in this video we're gonna talk about this new study that compared eating one meal a day with three meals a day. And it was a pretty good study. They actually had similar calorie intake and they controlled a lot of the variables. So we're gonna be going through this study published in January 2022. I'm gonna give you my own thoughts about it and some additional input. Make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. So here's the study 01/11/2022, differential effects of one meal per day in the evening on metabolic health and physical performance in lean individuals. So that's a good thing. It was in Norway, done in Norway, and they actually had people who are in good health, so to say, that they're not obese and they're not like in metabolic syndrome, those kind of things. So it would be like a pretty, you know, it would apply to, let's say, a person who's already taken care of their health and who is having same time. We do fucking 48% body fat. So the study, they put, they had a similar calorie intake. They didn't, like it wasn't like a metabolic ward study that they would be fed the exact same calories, but they did use food apps or food counting apps that looked at how many calories they're consuming. Obviously, people are bad at self reporting and they can underestimate or overestimate the calorie intake. But regardless, it was at at least they had similar calories, allocated calories. Eucaloric feeding provided by a single meal with a 22 fast and two hour reading window versus three meals per day in a randomized crossover study. And it took 13 participants, which 11 completed the study. Five males, six females, their age was 31 plus and minus 1.7 years. Their BMI was twenty four, so they weren't obese. They were lean. Participants consumed all the calories needed for stable weight in either three meals or one meal per day between 17 and 19 for eleven days per study period. So it's not like a super long study but eleven days is still pretty good to see some differences or results. They also use DexaScan to assess the, basically results and, the body compositions and these are the differences. So three meals a day lost 0.5 kilograms plus or minus 0.3. And one meal a day lost 1.4 kilograms plus or minus 0.3. So obviously, almost one kilo more lost in the one meal a day group. But the difference is that the one meal a day group also lost a bit more lean mass and fat free mass. So they did lose more weight in total but a lot of it or half of that even was basically lean mass and half of it was fat mass. Whereas the three meals a day group, they lost significantly less fat mass, only like 0.1 kilograms, but they also lost a bit less lean mass. So they lost half as little lean mass as the one meal that they group but they lost you know almost like six or seven times less fat mass as well. So yeah, the one meal that they group may make you lose more weight and it may make you lose more fat as well but it also has like a higher cost of lean mass reduction which has been found in other similar comparison studies as well. So that the intermittent fasting groups tend to lose more fat mass but they also make you lose a bit more lean mass. Obviously there's ways to mitigate that. You can like increase your protein intake, you have higher protein intake, if you have a higher calorie intake, if you are in a calorie surplus then you're probably not gonna lose any muscle either on any of these diets. Me who have been also doing one meal a day for five years plus now and even more, you can see that you know I've still gained muscle mass over the course of time. I haven't lost muscle mass. This left picture is when I'm in the military, 19 years old, six to eight kilos, doing a lot of like cardio, exercise and I was eating three meals a day because of being in the military. They'll say, you had to eat breakfast, lunch and dinner. So it was, you know, obviously I've still gained muscle regardless of eating one meal a day. I eat much less frequently now but I've still gained significant, almost like 15 kilograms of muscle over the course of seven years. So yeah, obviously that is not the only thing that matters. But it's something to remember that yeah, you can still lose muscle if you're eating one meal a day but you can prevent against that. Moving on, respiratory energy expenditure, basically, their metabolic rate and such, three meals a day, 1,900, one meal a day, seventeen seventy eight. So their metabolic rate was also a bit lower on the one meal a day, which is a kind of a beneficial adaptation to a facet state because if you have a super high metabolic rate in the fastest state then you're gonna just lose much muscle and, you know, that's not ideal. So a slightly suspended metabolic rate in that scenario is beneficial. Obviously, it can be, you know, hard if you have low thyroid in the long run but it didn't interfere with their weight loss. Even despite having a slightly lower resting energy expenditure, the one milliliter group still lost, you know, one kilo more of weight and double or seven times times more fat mass in the process. Some other blood work, triglycerides, three meals a day, 0.7, one meal a day, 0.6, which is a bit lower. And the reason for that is because you're burning more fat. Triglycerides, fatty acid lipid molecules, you burn them for energy in the fastest state. Cholesterol 4.2 versus 4.5. So the cholesterol in the one milliliter day group was a bit higher. And the reason for that is because of the slightly lower thyroid and lower energy expenditure that does prevent the conversion of cholesterol into the sex hormones and stuff. So the thyroid hormones that tend to decrease a little bit in the fasted state, those would naturally convert the cholesterol into testosterone and other things. But, because you're maybe, like, slightly lower on the metabolic rate and the thyroid output, then then your cholesterol levels may rise as a result of that, which is quite, common. Like, it's gonna happen in it's it's seen in other studies as well. HDL 1.6, 1.6 in both, which is good. LDL two point four and two point eight. So that's the, where it came from, this slightly elevated cholesterol level LDL. It also comes from the just increased fat oxidation so that the lipid molecules or vehicles, they transport both triglycerides and LDL in the same, let's say vehicles in the bloodstream. And the reason why the LDL may arise is also because you're burning more fat in the process plus the cholesterol, or that's thyroid association. Triglyceride HDL ratio 0.5 to 0.4. AST to 24 versus 29. So a bit more higher elevated liver enzymes 28 versus 33. So not huge difference but slightly elevated in the one meal a day. Alright. Alright. Alright. They also used a continuous glucose monitor to look at the person's like glucose levels daily all the time, 20 fourseven. And they found that, you know, follow the pretty similar diurnal glucose rhythm that the glucose levels was lower in the mornings etcetera. But as you can see then the one mill a day group had a a lower glucose level basically all day up until the point they ate. And before they ate, their glucose levels was much lower than the three meals a day. And the three meals a day had higher levels of glucose in the later part of the day because of this. Obviously your insulin sensitivity decreases during the daytime but also just eating meals, just compounds that affect to a certain extent. And, you know, whether or not it matters, not hard it's hard to tell. Like if you have maybe some insulin resistance or diabetes, then it may be better to kind of suppress the blood sugar levels for a bit longer. But I wouldn't say, like, you know, even if you do spike your blood sugar levels, let's say, three times a day or two times a day with a regular eating pattern, then it as long as you become you don't become obese or as long as you don't become diabetic, then it shouldn't have, like, any real long term consequences on your health. I personally do prefer, like, a more lower blood glucose state and more ketosis, at least the majority of the day that you would be in some ketosis for the other health benefits and anti inflammatory benefits, but, I don't think that it's the biggest, let's say, determinant of your overall health and longevity. Let's look at the physical activity or exercise. So how much time did it depend being sedentary? Three meals a day for four eighty minutes, one meal a day four eighty maybe six minutes. They basically did the same amount of exercise. Their VO two max in the three meals a day group was a little bit higher than the one meal a day group, 3,400 versus 3,359. I mean, it's a very small difference. It's not huge. But if you're a competitive athlete and obviously you need to eat more often and three meals a day is the better option for you, perceived exhaustion on the Borg scale, 19 versus 19. So that means that they didn't feel tired despite eating one meal a day and they felt the same level of exhaustion during exercise. Lactate, three meals a day, 10.3 versus 8.9 in a one meal a day. And lactate, lactic acid, that does impair physical performance. It's also not good for over longevity. You don't wanna have high levels of lactate all the time. Potentially one of the reasons why the lactate was higher could have been also because of their higher intensity of exercise. So that because they exercised harder higher rhea two max, they probably that could have risen the lactate but also maybe because of just eating more food. As you can see, the three means they group does have a little bit higher maximal isokinetic strength or isometric strength and the one meal a day does have a little bit less strength, although it's not a huge difference. I personally do think that, yeah, you probably won't be able to maximize your strength with one meal a day. You can maybe reach 90% of it, but there is gonna be this short drop off that you do experience. And if you want to fully maximize your performance, become an athlete, competition competitor, then you would need benefit from a higher food intake, more frequent food intake. And three meals a day is plenty for that. Of course, there are some ways to mitigate that. There's ways to prevent this drop off from happening. Like what I've done, I haven't eaten one meal a day per se. I've eaten one and a half meals as I've said in many of my videos which basically means that I eat one meal a day but doing my workout or immediately before that I have like a protein shake with essential amino acids, creatine, dextrose and some other things compounds in there that help to boost my performance during exercise. And I'm still fasting for like twenty hours every day but I consume my calories in a small window. And technically I am one meal a day but because of the small boost of protein and amino acids I'm still able to build muscle and get away with it. I've tried also eating one meal a day without the protein shake and yes, in that case I do lose more muscle mass or it becomes a bit smaller in frame because of not being able to exercise that much and because of not stimulating protein synthesis that often. Whereas with a protein shake, I'm able to overcome that and that's gonna be my secret over the past up to six, seven years I've been doing something like that already. In conclusion, I think that it was a pretty well done study. Obviously, they didn't have specifically exact calories or you we don't know what the exact calories were because they used like a food tracking app. They didn't actually be in a metabolic ward and weigh all the food, how much they ate, etcetera. But it's as close a good or as good as you can get in the real world scenario. If you want to know what I do and how I do it then check out my other videos about it and my book Metabolic Pathology. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.