Welcome back to the channel. My name is Seem Lund, and in this video, we're gonna talk about this new antiaging NMN molecule that is supposed to be like a super NAD booster, much more effective than regular NAD boosters. That's what it's claimed to be. And, we're gonna look at this new study actually that came out using this molecule and, showing that it does raise NAD levels in humans as well. Make sure to click the like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. So the study is actually pretty new, published nineteen February twenty twenty two. MIB six two six, an oral formulation of a microcrystalline unique polymorph of beta nicotinamide mononucleotide or NMN increases circulating nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide or NAD and its metabolism in middle aged and older older adults. So, this is a study done by actually the Metro Biotech that, David Sinclair is an advisor in. And, basically, this is one of the first users of this MIB six two six molecule in humans, that is, like, yeah, like a different form of NMN, and it's supposed to be like a called like a super NAD boosters. In this study, they took 32 overweight or obese adults between the ages of 55 to 80 years old, and they randomized them into groups. One group took one thousand milligrams of this m MIB six two six once a day. The other group did one thousand milligrams two times a day or two thousand milligrams a day, and the other one was placebo for fourteen days. And they found that, the group that took the MIB six two six saw an elevation in their NAD levels. And the group that did this, the one thousand milligrams once a day found 1.7 times increase, and the group that did two times a day or two times of two thousand milligrams a day saw 3.7 times increase above baseline of their NAD levels. And the group that was placebo, they didn't saw an increase in the NAD levels. And, the conclusion that, you know, they came for that is that MAB six to six, once or twice a day is associated with substantial dose rate increase in blood NAD levels and its metabolism. And we'll look at the, basically, the study as well, the graphs from there. So you can see NAD levels, placebo, no difference, once a day, one thousand milligrams, some elevation, 1.7 times or how much was it, 1.7. Yes. And, the one thousand milligrams twice a day, three point seven times the difference between, the beginning and end after fourteen days. Great success. So this MIB six two six, is, actually something that Davis and Clary is working on. It's the MetroBiotech company that he is working with. And, actually, we'll just play a clip from Joe Rogan podcast where he talks about it and what it, you know, essentially E is. The company is called Metro Biotech, and, it makes super NAD boosters. And the drug is called developmental drug is m I d dash six two six. Well, it it often comes as a shock, to people who don't work on this that we're already testing these molecules in clinical trials on elderly people. I've been doing that for a number of years now, with some positive results. We hope to be on the market in about, three years from now for for diseases, FDA approved. But we're also gonna be testing later, energy. We can measure actually the NAD levels that molecule I just mentioned. We can measure that in the muscles, and we'll test if that worked. And we'll we'll measure, of course, their endurance. Because the mice that we treated with NMN, they just ran and ran and ran. They actually broke the treadmill in my lab because they ran so far. So, yeah. Basically, Sinclair, obviously, he has more access access to a lot more knowledge about this m I v six two six and, how effective it is, let's say, in rodents or something. He mentioned that, you know, this m I v six two six make makes the mice run so fast that they break their treadmill, which is, you know, sounds interesting. I'm not sure, you know, what it means. But there's yeah. Like, there's no real, let's say, public this is kinda the first released human trial of this MRP six two six. There are previous ones as well that have been found for, like, you know, some aspects of heart health, but they haven't been concluded or they haven't finished or they haven't released yet either. But this study at least found that, you know, it's rather safe and it works in humans. Funny enough, a few months ago, maybe half a year ago, I also made a video about this, basically, US special operations commando using this, same NMN, the MIB six two six. And the Sinclair is also involved with that with the Metro Biotech. And, I did talk about, you know, it could have, like, some therapeutic potential for increasing the soldiers, like, stress resilience, recovery, sleep quality, energy levels, and those kind of things, and just postponing all these age related diseases that, special operations forces may be susceptible to more than, let's say, the average person. And I do think that it can be, of course, can be useful for those kinds of populations that are under accelerated, quote unquote, aging. But like I said, like, you know, we don't know anything else about this m I b six two six. What we do know is that it's just NMN. It's a different kind of NMN. And I think, you know, probably the main reason why, I mean, this Metrobotech is working on these different kinds of NAD boosters is that so so they can patent it. So they make a new NAD booster that is a form of NMN that they can patent, then they can, like, essentially, you know, get more money out of. Because currently, regular NMN has also been found to be already working. Like, there's many quite a few, human studies find that NMN regular NMN works in humans. Like, this study found that even, like, two hundred and fifty milligrams per day to aged men for six to twelve weeks, was able to basically raise NAD levels, in humans. And another one found that the similar dose, two hundred and fifty milligrams, improved already insulin sensitivity in pre diabetic women, elderly women. So we already have, like, NMN that is working. But this we don't, obviously, we don't have, like, any comparison between which one is more effective, the MIV six two six or NMN. What we do know at least from this study is that there is a dose dependent increase in the elevation of NAD when you take this MIV six two six that the more you take it up at least at least two grams is better than one grams in raising NAD levels. But even then, we don't know like how much NAD you need. We don't know that. And funny enough, this this particular study claimed that, in previous studies that they've used in MetroBiotech on m I v six two six, they found that doses like two hundred and fifty and five hundred and seven hundred and fifty wasn't enough to raise NAD levels. Whereas, like, one thousand was the minimal effective threshold for raising NAD levels with MIB six two six, which is funny because, you know, you can already use two hundred and fifty milligrams of NMN, which is a much smaller dose, and already see an increase in NAD levels. So I don't know, like, why would you want to be using this MIV six to six, one thousand milligrams when you can already see a minimal effective dose with two hundred and fifty milligrams of NMN that is already available that has already quite a few n like, clinical trials and etcetera. Like, of course, maybe I don't know the full answer. Maybe there is some unique, human like, animal studies that find that m I b six two six has, like, some unique effects that we don't know of yet. Maybe Sinclair knows something. He probably does know something. Wait a minute. That's it for this video. If you want to check out all the other supplements that I'm taking, then, you head over to cvlund.com/supplements and you can get my full PDF list of all the supplements I'm taking, when, and in, what doses. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.