Welcome back to the channel. My name is Sim Lund and in this video we're gonna talk about red light and testicles. Yes, man. A lot of people, myself included, use these red light therapy devices like this one, the blue box, on to shine red light onto their testicles. And in this video we're gonna talk about, you know, why is this so, what is the reasons for that, and how can you get those benefits. Make sure you click a like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. Even a few years ago, like 2017, there were a lot of people like Ben Greenfield, basically writing articles about how they use red light therapy devices on their balls to triple their testosterone levels. And yeah, like you know Ben Greenfield does all these different kinds of experiments, but there is also some scientific basically evidence to show that red light on the testicular region has a beneficial effect on testosterone levels and the sperm quality and those kind of things. For example in dogs, six fifty five nanometers of diode laser improves sperm motility. So red light is between six hundred and nine hundred nanometers, somewhere around there. And, yeah, it's been shown to improve dog sperm motility. Even in Japanese quails, red light improves testicular basically size even in inoculated birds and birds under the 2.8 lux intensity had greater testes weights than the controls. Greater testes weights were found in birds under higher light intensities. And in humans there is this very old 1939 study that found that ultraviolet irradiation basically increases testosterone by 200% and they use this kind of UV light bulbs or lamps to shine that light onto the testicles of men for a few days in a row. After five days five irradiations during six days, the endosteron endosterone excretion was raised from 70 to 205 IUs and which is about 200%. And they basically first did like three days of variations of then they stopped and then five days and they saw on the fifth day, the testosterone had increased by 200%. In rats, there's also evidence that, you know, male rats continuous life for seventy days showed an increased weight of testes and accessory sex organs, serum levels of FSH, LH, testosterone. So it does have a positive effect on all aspects of you know male reproductive system almost. Now what is the reason why does red light have positive effects on testosterone and let's say sperm quality? Well, I mean there's multiple reasons like, if you get exposed to the sunlight for example, then vitamin d levels are directly linked also to like testosterone levels and fertility and you know the UV radiation may also have some benefits on just overall health and moderation. When you shine it to the testicles then that's quite relevant because that's where a lot of your testosterone is produced. Like the vast majority of your testosterone gets produced by the testes and testes themselves like different organs, they also require you know adequate energy and ATP. They have mitochondria in them and the red light is beneficial for the mitochondria by basically causing this low level of stress and increasing this cytochrome c oxidase that improves ATP and energy production. So in this old 1939 study, they did find that direct exposure to the balls tripled testosterone levels compared to shining that same UV lamp onto the torso, for example. So there is, you know, some basically direct benefit to exposing your testicles to ultraviolet light, whether that be from the sunlight or such. The problem is that, you know, the sunlight spectrum consists of different wavelengths. Not all of them can be beneficial. Excess blue light does damage the mitochondria and this very, let's say, sharp, artificial light that you get that probably harms the skin. You know, that does harm the skin, causes skin wrinkles, damages the eyes, and it probably, you know, you want you don't want to have like LED blue light shining onto your balls. It may cause like damage to the mitochondria there and, yeah, it's not gonna be beneficial. Whereas the red light that has like more anti inflammatory effects, that has more of these ATP boosting effects as well. So on the testicles, you do wanna get like red light specifically. Obviously, the natural sunlight could work as well, but you know to get the therapeutic effects of that you probably need to expose yourself to the UV radiation for quite a long time. Whereas with the red light therapy devices, especially if you keep them close, this is handheld device is actually quite effective for that. You just you know keep it near in the region of your testicles and you can get it over with with like you know ten to fifteen minutes and you don't even need to spend any more than that outside. All in all, you know, the red light does have benefits on the testicles, energy production, sperm quality, testosterone levels potentially. And, yeah, I don't see a reason why you wouldn't want to be, you know, including that into your health routine if you're a guy. And, probably the same applies to women as well. They also need energy and the red light does other benefits that, you know, helps with reproductive health overall. You could use, you know, any kind of red light therapy device. Like I like the Blue Blocks. They have very handheld convenient therapy devices. You can also use these big panels. It doesn't really matter. The only difference is the intensity and, you know, how much time you need to spend in front of that particular panel to get to the benefits. And I think like more than, you know, ten minutes isn't necessary. You can get all the benefits by just, you know, exposing your testicular region to the red light, you know, for about ten minute minutes or something like that. And, yeah, you can do it, you know, in the morning even. It's a good way to kind of kick start ATP production and kind of ride the circadian peak in testosterone, which peaks at like 9AM. So doing some sort of red light therapy device exposure before 9AM is a good way to kind of also help to reach a big peak with the circadian rhythm of a testosterone production. If you want to get yourself some red therapy devices then head over to blueblocks.com/ciemlondon and use the code ciem15 for a 15% discount of their blue blocking glasses as well as the red light therapy devices. But other than that thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Ciem. Stay optimized, stay empowered.