We know that, autophagy is one of the biggest reasons why people like to do intermittent fasting and it's one of the also main benefits that you get from that. But what is the best intermittent fasting window for autophagy? Hey. My name is Sim Lund, and in this video, I'm going to tell you exactly that. Make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Probably one of the biggest misconceptions about autophagy is that you need to fast for like, you know, three to five days in order to activate some autophagy in the first place. There is truth to that that the longer you do fast then you do see an increase in autophagy in across different species in humans as well. But you don't necessarily have to fast for like you know this extended period of time to even activate it in the first place. It's not this on and off switch that you know just turns on at over 72 or something like that. Autophagy happens to a certain degree all the time. And we also have studies, human studies that show that even as fast as sixteen hours of fasting is enough to increase the levels of basal autology. And the biggest thing that determines whether or not you see an increase in autology or a decrease in it is your liver glycogen status essentially. So the liver glycogen regulates all these different pathways that also regulate autologies such as AMPK. If you fast around twelve hours or so then your liver glycogen stores begin to deplete and that already is good enough to start to see a rise in ketones and autologie related genes as well in a dose specific manner. But we also have to look at it from the aspect of circadian rhythms. Circadian rhythms are your body's diurnal rhythms linked to the day and night cycles of the environment and they control virtually all processes inside the body starting with the metabolism, cognition and ending with autophagy as well. We also know that autophagy has a strong diurnal rhythm and it functions or fluctuates with a circadian rhythm. Melatonin, the sleep hormone, is a strong regulator of autophagy and in order to have higher levels of autology then you need melatonin to do its work in sleep specifically. Natural melatonin levels start to rise in the evening around 9PM or so. They peak maybe 11PM and start to decline after 2AM in the morning. That is where many other beneficial processes for anti aging also occur such as the rising growth hormone around eleven p. M. As well as autophagy around eleven p. M. So what this means is that if you want to maximize the benefits of intermittent fasting and time machine eating for autophagy and let's say longevity, then you also want to coordinate, do or conduct these processes together when it's the most optimal time to do so. And that for humans apparently is around, You know, earlier the first part, first half of the night where you have increased melatonin, increased growth hormone and increased autophagy. In practice what this means is that early time receded eating where you eat breakfast, lunch, maybe like a lighter dinner or an early dinner that, you know, in theory is probably better for getting the benefits of autophagy because you're going into a semi fasted state already once you go to bed and you don't have this higher amount of liver glycogen to buffer the process of going into autophagy and, high amounts of, insulin and high blood sugar levels can also disrupt your sleep. So it all makes sense that, you know, you shouldn't eat immediately before bed and you would want to have at least a few hours before bed where you're not eating. Stop it. The 2019 study that they referred to earlier did also that they had the people eating earlier in the day and they saw improvements in these autologous genes and SIR2 in one and etcetera. So if I were to say which fasting window is the best for getting the benefits of Adalaji, then I would say an eating window of early time restricted eating. That means that, you know, you eat earlier in the day or at least it does mean that you shouldn't eat like a very late dinner. Like you want to have at least a few hours before bed where you stop eating. And, I mean, you don't even have to eat breakfast. There's not I don't think that it's very magical to eat the breakfast. I think the most of the magic comes from you stop eating earlier in the evening so that you maybe like a very early dinner around maybe 5PM at the latest. And optimally, I would say that if you want to fully maximize the benefits of otology and melatonin and growth hormone, then maybe like even like a 3PM dinner. Disappointed. Obviously, that's not, you know, very practical for a lot of people. People like to eat dinner. Dinner is the most sociable event of the day and I would say that you can still gain a lot of the benefits of autophagy and, these other processes if you have like the somewhat of a later times reading window where you skip breakfast, you eat lunch and dinner. But still like I wouldn't say that like a 10PM dinner is any good. Like you definitely want to have the latest meal at least like 7PM or something around there and wait around three, four, maybe at max like five hours before bed when you stop eating. And that that is what you, you want to have, form this circadian rhythm biology side and as well as the melatonin and autology production side. If you want to know what's the best way to do it over fasting and how to optimize it, then check out my four ks HD quality video course about it that has over five hours of content. But on that thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized, stay empowered.