You know, there are hundreds of different supplements out there that you could take. So this improves your cognition, this improves your longevity, this helps with fat loss. What? Truth is that most of them don't really have that many benefits or they're not worth it in terms of the cost or the benefits that you get. And, that's why I've made this video to talk about the the five supplements that are actually worthwhile to take for longevity. Doing. So number one is gonna be collagen peptides. I know many people think that collagen is a scam or it's hyped up much bigger than it actually is. But when, you actually look at the studies then there are dozens of human studies showing that collagen supplementation with collagen peptides improves skin health, improves skin elasticity, reduces wrinkles, moisturization and just helps with many aspects of skin aging. Besides that, there are also many benefits of collagen peptides on the joints, tendons, and ligaments. So it improves symptoms of osteoarthritis and just joint pain and those kind of things. Your body does make collagen but the amounts are quite small and you don't nearly get that many precursors for collagen synthesis that are needed for making collagen endogenously. And that's why getting like a good quality collagen peptide supplement is a great way to cover the basis of covering your daily requirements for collagen synthesis and getting the collagen precursors. Number two is gonna be my favorite supplement is glycine. And, glycine besides helping with, collagen synthesis and being a part of collagen, one third of collagen is glycine, Glycine alone also has independent effects, or, you know, it has a lot of benefits besides the collagen, turnover. So glycine is also helping with, glutathione production, heme synthesis, creatinine synthesis, and bile bile salts. Research about glycine shows that it helps to lower blood sugar. It lowers your body temperature, which is good for sleep and exercise performance. It helps sleep quality. It's an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain that mimics effects of GABA, so it calms down you. It helps with sleep and relaxes you. And on top of it, it has been also found to have life extension effects in, rodents by mimicking methionine restriction. Now you also may be wondering why take glycine if you're already getting some glycine from collagen. Well, like I said, only one third of collagen is glycine. And, if you take, let's say, ten to fifteen grams of collagen a day, then you're gonna get three grams of glycine which would only cover your bare essential requirements for gluethane and creatinine synthesis. But for optimal collagen turnover and the other benefits, then you need at least 10 of more glycine. And, yeah. Again, glycine is very cheap. It's very sweet. It's tasty. And, it has a lot of these health benefits that, don't seemingly have any like even like negative side effects. In studies where they've taken ninety grams of glycine a day, they haven't found any negative side effects even. So, yeah, it's perfectly safe. It has many health benefits, and I think pretty much everyone should take it, at least in some amounts. If you want to learn more about collagen and glycine and their role in optimal health and longevity, then check out my new book with doctor James DeNicolantonio called The Collagen Cure on Amazon. Number three is gonna be creatine. So this is the number one sports performance, supplement in the world, which has been also acknowledged by different sports associations, international sports associations. They say that, yes, creatine has all these benefits for muscle strength, muscle speed, muscle mass, and just overall sports performance. And, that's why it's considered like this pretty much the most effective sports supplement out there. It has a long history of research. It has, you know, by now probably like, you know, hundreds of studies showing that it, has these effects. And besides that, creatine also has longevity benefits because of, you know, it helps with your muscle strength and muscle mass, which are critical for pretty much slowing down aging in your elderly years. Creatine also has cognitive effects. It can be considered a nootropic. Your brain requires creatine and, creatine is also involved with methylation. Most people aren't getting enough creatine because to get the optimal amount of three to five grams of creatine per day, then you would need to eat, like, one kilogram of meat or or something like that. And, yeah, the creatine synthesis goes down with age and, you do lack a lot of the precursors, for that. Number four is NAC. So, NAC and acetylcysteine is also a glucotone precursor. And combined with glycine, it has been shown to extend the lifespan of, mice by twenty four percent. So this glycine NAC combo, glynaq, this is actually pretty powerful effect in terms of boosting the glucan and helping to bolster against pretty much the oxidative stress that you experience with aging. This is the reason I put NAC into this list. It's the combo of the glycine and NAC that has been found to have these, researched benefits for longevity and NAC also has other effects on the immune system. And last on this list is narsinamide or NAM. And this is a form of narsin that, is actually one of the best NAD boosters. It's the cheapest NAD booster because it feeds into the salvage pathway of, producing NAD. You always want to have the NAD salvage pathway working properly. It doesn't matter how much NAD boosters you take. It doesn't matter how much NMN you take or the NAD IV even if your NAD salvage pathway isn't working properly because all the NAD that you produce from either supplemental sources or from your body itself goes back into the salvage pathway. And in order to keep making the NAD to recycle it, you need to have the salvage pathway working properly. And niacinamide pretty much feeds the salvage pathway and helps you to boost NAD, levels. Niacin is it's somewhat different from a niacin which causes the flush. Niacinamide is the non flush version and it, the main reason I put this into this list is because it's, yeah, the cheapest and pretty much most fundamental, NAD booster that you want to take and it's, pretty cheap. Alright. That's it for this list. If you want to learn more about the different supplements that I take then check out my free list at semlion.com/supplements, and you can get a free PDF. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.