The roots of the stress are in the culture. It's just go go go go go and many of us get caught in that trap where we're sort of wanna out hustle or outperform. We have to be productive all all the time. Welcome to the Sibnland podcast. I'm your host, Sibnland. And our guest today is Anze Matsukevitz. Anze is a director and videographer with who I made a documentary movie called Stronger by Stress. Stronger by Stress is based on one of my books with the same name and talks about how to become more resilient and healthier through hormesis. This episode is brought to you by Blue Blocks, my favorite light and sleep optimization companies. Artificial light at night exposure is associated with diabetes, obesity, heart disease, cancer, and Alzheimer's. Blue Blocks provides the highest quality blue blocking glasses that filter out the specific wavelengths that have been shown to suppress melatonin in studies. Melatonin is more than the sleep hormone. It's also vital for longevity, antiaging, and immunity. Artificial light exposure suppresses melatonin up to 99% and makes your brain think that it's daytime before bed. That's why I love using Blue Blocks to guarantee my body is making high amounts of melatonin prior to sleep. They also have daytime lenses that you can use to reduce digital eye strain and retinal damage when working in front of a computer all day. You can get a sweet 15% discount of all the Blue Blocks glasses, red light light bulbs, red light devices, and sleep masks if you head over to blueblocks.com/seamlund and use the code seam 15. That's blublox.com/seamlund, and the code is seam 15, s I I m 15. Andy, welcome to the show. Hey, Same. How are you? I'm doing good. It's great to have you on the podcast. And, you know, you're the, let's say, mastermind behind, the new movie that we're releasing together and where I'm also being, casted. So, yeah, I mean, maybe before we start to talk about the movie, let's maybe, you know, let's start with, you know, why did you, you know, approach me in terms of wanting to create a movie together? And, yeah, let's start with that. Yeah. Well, I've been interested in health. I I I would even say it's like one of my hobbies. So, I would just, like, following all your podcasts and also other podcasts and stuff and reading books. And, I just realized that pretty much everyone everyone who is 30 or older usually is interested in health in some way or another, but not everyone has a time, to listen to, I don't know, four or five hours of podcast per day. But I had for some reason, or I just I was more interested into that. So there is a the information is out there. Like, even in this film, you won't learn anything new or exclusively new, you know. Like, you can get this information out there, but it just, like, takes a lot of time to find people who you can trust. And so I thought, like, I could save a lot of time for a lot of people by putting all all this wisdom into one and a half, hours. You know? So that was my main motivation to do this film. Yeah. Yeah. We actually, like, met first time maybe two years before starting the movie when you actually came one of one of my retreats. And, then we first met the first time, and then you, like, approached me again in 2020, to make this movie. So, and, yeah, now it's been, yeah, like, almost a year and a half in the making or almost two years. And, yeah, it's gonna be released, the first time, on iTunes on, March 8, and there's also gonna be coming out on other platforms across the world. So Europe and North America and, everywhere. That's correct. Yeah. Right. But, maybe I'll just show the trailer. The roots of the stress are in the culture. It's just go, go, go, go, go. And many of us get caught in that trap where we're sort of wanna out hustle or perform. We have to be productive all the time. Phonic stress, that's, that's kind of like a disease or a plague. My mind made me sick. I pushed myself over my own limits. Negative stress is something that breaks things down. While the beneficial stress that makes you grow challenges you enough so that you actually get your peak performance. You're not only seeking help when you get sick. You actually create your resilience to different kind of challenges that we are facing as a humanity, but also in your personal life. Technically speaking, everybody's a biohacker. Everyone's performing biohacks on a daily basis whether they know it or not. Drinking a coffee in the morning, that's kind of biohacking, caffeine to stimulate you, to wake you up, and get you in this more active state, and be alert, and show focus. Individually, it is the way of living. Collectively, it is the preventive health care system. All the available tools that we can use from nature, from science, from technology, from all kinds of possible ways that we can enhance our self consciousness. It's kinda sad that most people don't ever truly get to understand how amazing their bodies are and what they're capable of. We can live in the desert. We can live in the Arctic. We can live in the rainforest. So that's been, I think, one of the biggest reasons to our success as a species so far. Physiologically, we've been actually domesticating ourselves. We are basically We are basically looking at diversity and how that supports resilience and your health. Just to be able to feel good, you need to pay attention to several things at once. Eating better, sleeping better, moving constantly. Stressors and environmental disasters, they're constantly. Stressors and environmental disasters, they're not gonna go away. They're gonna keep happening, and we can't really avoid them. The only thing we can do is to keep ourselves more resilient, to keep ourselves more adaptable, and to prepare for those things in advance. Okay. Alright. So that was the trailer. And, yeah, the like I said, the full movie is gonna be, like, an hour and a half. We have actually a lot more material that, like, almost how how much was the total, let's say, content? Maybe, like, two and a half hours? Or Yeah. I think edited one is, like, same amount, so one and a half hours. But we recorded, obviously, like, I don't know, seventy hours in total or something. So a lot a lot of lot of good stuff out there. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. How long did it take you to, you know because I think this is only, like, us two working on it. Like, it's not like a it's a very small indie project, and, it's you are doing, like, most of the, let's say, you know, content creation, and I was doing, like, the script or, the ideas of what we talk about and, organizing the people and that kind of thing. So how long did, you know, usually it takes to, like, edit this kind of movie for you? Because you do it, like, as a professional thing as well for, like, other things. Yeah. I mean, this particular project was I think it was, like, eight months of editing. But but, you know, it's, like, eight months, twelve hours a day every day. So, like, usually usually, when people say, how long it takes, like, twenty, they they take into, like, the the weekends off and stuff. So but, you know, with the bike hiking, you don't really need to rest. You you can optimize yourself, and they can just work quite a lot and still, you know, recover, for the next day, and you don't really need weekends. So, yeah, it was like a I would say, like, eight eight months approximately. Probably doable in six, but then but yeah. Mhmm. Yeah. Did you do, like, any did you use any, like, supplements or any, hacks to improve your productivity? Yeah. I had, I've I've tried all kinds of stuff, but I I had this, quality mind next, next to my laptop. But, like, it's so powerful that I use it only when I really, really need it. So I I find, like, like, natural things, like, I don't know, going out for the walk or just lifting heavy stuff or just even, like, a short meditation works, like, really good for productivity. And, you know, editing is, like, it's quite quite special in a way that it's quite easy to be focused, you know, because you just go into this tunnel vision, you don't see anything, and you just you can just edit, like, forever without distractions, basically. So it's not not really hard to focus on focus on anything. You know? Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. Yeah. But, like, you know, the title is, like, stronger by stress of how not to be in chronic stress and how to use this process of stresses. But did you get ever, like, stressed out from making making the movie? Yeah. But today, like, a a healthy degree, I would say. I mean, it just, like, when you do something like this, you constantly doubt yourself and you don't really know. And for me, the hardest I think it's for most of the directors, the hardest thing is to just look at this, with the with the fresh eyes. You know? Like, for example, I thought, like, the film was done in three months. I was really I really thought, like, it's done. And then I just took, like, couple days off and watched it, and I realized it's so bad. I I need to work so hard on it. So these things are the hardest, you know, just to to look at it. Okay. This is what we have, and it's not perfect. You know? Let's let's, let's make it good. You know? Yeah. Well, maybe, I guess, different for the director who has, like, a more perfectionist outlook and a very, like, yeah, like, you're looking at it as a, like, of this more than a regular person would. Whereas, like, you know, the people that, I have talked to and all the other tests of the movie, they all they say that it's very great good, and I also agree that it's really great. It's very, like, engaging, and, it's definitely not boring, and teaches you information at the same time, but it's also, like, you know, visually very beautiful and appealing. And, yeah, the information is also, like, really good. Yeah. I think, eventually, we did a good job, and that's why we got actually such a wide distribution worldwide because, you know, if it was just like a home media, it it would be really like, it would probably end up on YouTube or something, but now it's gonna go everywhere. So so, yeah, it was worth the effort. Yeah. What was, like, the main things that you learned, or, did you learn anything new from from this? Yeah. I I actually learned a bunch of things. It just, like, like, general idea is that you don't really much you don't really need much, you know, to to feel happy and, I don't know, stay healthy. This all these things are, like, natural. I mean, most of the stuff you can do, you don't really need to buy anything. Right? I mean, supplements are nice, but you don't really need them if you, like, I don't know, eat liver and all other whole foods. So, yeah, it was for me, it was just like a constant reminder that, it's really easy to go to, I don't know, Amazon or somewhere and start buying stuff because, I don't know, somebody told you to buy, but, this is just 5%. Like, 95% you can do just for the, you know, natural stuff. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So the movie, I'll just, you know, maybe do a little synopsis of, the idea. So the title of Stronger by Stress comes from, one of my books, Stronger by Stress. And, the reason why we chose this topic was because of, you know, when, we started to think about making a win in 2020, then, the let's say the pandemic had just started. It was the first months of the pandemic, and, that was the reason why I started to write a book as well to just, you know, prepare people for these kinds of inevitable disasters or, events that are, like, you know, unpredictable and chaotic and have, like, huge event huge consequences on everyone. So you can't really avoid those kind of things that will have happened eventually. Like, humans have always suffered from different kinds of, you know, stressors in their environment, and, we can't even avoid them in the modern world either. And to to not become, like, this, you know, optimistic blindly optimistic or this very positive thinker that think there's nothing bad can happen. Instead of that, we want to, like, say, yeah, teach the idea of, you know, becoming stronger by the stressors and using your everyday habits and lifestyle to prepare your body and mind in advance for those things so that you when it do happen, you would be like this, you know, stronger and more resilient against them. And that involves different kinds of, you know, obviously, exercise and saunas and colds, but also just, you know, let's say, psychological traits of, being mentally flexible and being able to manage your stress and knowing, you know, what what is good stress, what is bad stress, and, you know, creating this lifestyle and creating this environment for yourself that, helps you to be healthier and, more adaptable. You know what I mean? Yeah. It's like if things like, not no one can, avoid the stress. I mean, we all experience it. So why why not, leverage it and learn about it? You know? Yeah. Yeah. I'll also talk about maybe the cast. I'll share the screen again just to give a introduction to the people in there. So, obviously, first, it's gonna be me. We'll talk in I'll talk, like, yeah, different types of mostly, like, you know, fasting and exercise and those kind of things. Then we have from Finland who's one of the authors of the biohacker's handbook and the curator of the Biohacker Summit who's also been been into this kind of things for many years. Doctor Rolly Sowjarvi, also author of the, Biohackers Handbook and a medical doctor in the past. He was, Lee Evan, who's a Wim Hof method expert in breath work instructor. He does ice swimming and those kinds of things. He talks a lot about the cold and how you can use that to your advantage. We have Inkay Monen, who is a master's in neuropsychology. She talks about just mental resilience and meditation and, yeah, just like the psychological aspect of stress. We have Yako Halmata, who is, the third author of the biomarker's handbook, nutrition expert, and, just, you know, very philosophical thinker. And, Kasparovs Vendelis, who's from Latvia, he, is also basically like a more, everyday biohacker and, talks a lot about different kinds of, yeah, ways to use stressors, these hormesis, and positive stressors for longevity. We have Eduardo Davilda who's, I don't know his age. Maybe he's, like, in his fifties or sixties. And, yeah, he talked about, yeah, like, the, let's say, work related stress and, business related stress of how you can just, you know, balance that, with your home and, lifestyle. So we have obviously many other a few additional people, about this is the, main cast of, who are gonna share their information. And, the reason why we chose them is obviously because we are friends with them, and, we're also, they're close by. Like, we we planned on, yeah, having a lot more different people across the world like The US or, but, you know, obviously, because of the pandemic, we weren't able to travel that easily. So but the Finland border was still open, and we, basically recorded all of this, in Finland, Estonia, and you also went to Latvia with, Casparos, for a moment. So, yeah, it's a very local it's a Nordic Nordic, Estonian, and Finland, type movie. Yes. Indeed. But, yeah, maybe let's, briefly also talk about you. So, yeah, like, what what got you into biohacking and, health? I don't know. I was just, like, always interested in in health, but I haven't been particularly healthy all the time. You know? I just like to make some experience, like, experience different things, you know. And, but the main reason why I just, like, started or started to like the bike, like, as you said, like, we met two years before before, the film. And Kaspers, who is also one of our heroes in the film, he actually mentioned, like, oh, there is one, like, really young, really smart dude in our country. You should get in touch and blah blah blah. So, I went to your, summit or or get together, and it's just amazing to see all these people who have different backgrounds, but think same things and want to achieve same things, you know. And, then you you take something, like, really, like, basic, like, fasting and stuff, and it's it has just such a great impact on your health and life that I don't know what why not everyone is doing it. But mostly, I think why they don't do it because they don't really have enough information, you know, because it's still considered as starving or something really extreme to do, you know. But we have this primal bodies, which are really used to do for this kind of stuff, you know, just our environment is not is not, suitable for for for this to naturally happen. So you need to, you know, force it into your life, but it has, like, it has, like, really positive effect. So yeah. Like, biohacking is amazing in that way. Yeah. For sure. Yeah. And, yeah, when we did record, then, obviously, you being learning from me or looking on information and, following some similar practices, then we did have, like, a pretty easy time with all the things. Like, sometimes well, at least when we recorded in, like, the late November or or October, was it, during one of the summits? It was, like, pretty cold outside, but we, like, neither of us was, like we we didn't care about about it either, and we were just, you know, doing it recorded. And in between the sets, we were doing, like, some, jumping jacks a little bit, but on the screen, maybe it doesn't show or even, like, the with all this audio as well. When we recorded with him, then, he was also doing, like, squats in between a little bit sometimes because it got the eventually too cold. But, obviously, like, if it were to be some sort of big big, non biohacker movie, then most of the, let's say, actors or heroes wouldn't have wanted to do something in the cold. But for us, we actually you know, if we're if we're talking about all the benefits of cold and, resilience and stress, then, obviously, we have to also, you know, embrace it or live up to it. So it's kind of fun. Like and the same with, like, fasting and, eating. Like, we didn't, yeah, usually eat that often, during daytime. And most of us, even if we were here in my home recording, then, yeah, we ate once they as well. And it was, like, really good, a good flow and a good, like, a good way to see that it, you know, has a positive effect on us at least. Yeah. To be honest, I wish, like, all the film crew out there was, like, full of biackers because you can't imagine how much energy, hustle, and, time goes into planning. You know? Like, if you have, like, a shooting day, like, usually, it's, like, ten hours kept, you know, and but it includes the breakfast, lunch, and then dinner, and, all kinds of, like there's so many different rules. Like, you have to have, like, I don't know, huge breaks in between the shooting days and stuff. So, basically, when we do movies and commercials, we always have to take into the account because people are used to, you know, having, like, three meals or even more, like, four or five meals a day. But if if they knew how their bodies actually work, we could produce so much more in shorter time, and everyone would be home earlier and have that more time for free time, you know. But yeah. But it's really hard to to, you know, to that's why I actually I think this movie might help quite quite a lot of people. So they just look at it, and hopefully, we'll learn something and try experimenting. Mhmm. Yeah. Is there is there something like some biohacks that don't work for you or, that you've tried, but, you know, you can't seem to make work? Yeah. Like, some gadgets, which, some people say, like, oh, it it's really good. But for me, I I I don't really see the difference. So with the technology, I'm now a bit skeptical, especially if they cost, like, a significant amount of money. I mean, it's nice. Sometimes it's nice, but the benefit you get is, like, just 2% or something. And Yeah. Also also some things, like, some things are are working. They're nice, but they're just not convenient or or just too much hassle to do, you know, and then I just relax in those places. You know? Like, for example, I have this, blue light blocking glasses. They're really nice. They block. I I feel the effect. But each time I wear them, I hit my head somewhere. And once I almost broke the nose, and I almost got under the car, you know. So it's like they're, like, they're too much. So I need to get the other version, which is which makes my you know? So I say more. So, yeah, like, those things. But mostly, all the basic stuff, it works, and and, yeah, I love it. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Still, like, the best, you know, best thing or most powerful thing you say, like exercise and maybe sauna and cold and, those fasting maybe. And sleep. Sleep is actually then the basis of everything. So, yeah, if you don't sleep, you like yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Alright. Well but, yeah, let's let's talk a little bit about, yeah, overview. Again, like, where can people get it? Where can they watch it from? And, yeah, some of you, like, the release dates that are in the near future. Yeah. So, on March 8, it will be released on iTunes. Right now, it's on a presale, so you already can book book it. But from March 8, it's gonna be on, iTunes, also on Gmail, and all kinds of other, video on demand platforms nationwide in US and Canada. In, Europe, it's gonna go countries by countries and the rest of the world as well. So we're looking for different partners because, you know, usually, you have to have a, like, a local partner to release movies. So, obviously, there are lots of countries in our world, so we haven't reached out to it everywhere. But I would say that from March, pretty much everyone who wants to watch it will will find it. Maybe not in the beginning, but from mid mid March, you can see it online for sure everywhere. Yeah. Gotcha. Yeah. And, film festivals? Yeah. We we submitted, to the film festivals. We actually got all already won award from the Brussels, film festival. Really? But, we'll see. Yeah. Yeah. I'll send you I'll send you the link later. But, yeah, the other festivals are happening towards the end of the year more. We we did actually different kind of approach. Usually, you know, when, people get done with the movie, they do a festival circuit. So they spend a year in the festivals, you know, sending to the festivals and hopefully getting getting invited and attending them, and only then they release the public. But I I thought, like, maybe this time, let's release the public first and then go for the festivals because, you know, the information is good, and, let's try to help as many people as we can as soon as possible and not keep it to ourself. You know? Yeah. Yeah. For sure. I I agree there. Yeah. That's awesome. Any other fields, like, in the future plan to making? Yeah. There are there are, like, bunch of different ideas. It's just like, it's so committing. You know? Like, for me, it's like one year basically of of, you know, life or something. So, before I commit to something, I just want to make sure that that it's gonna be worth it, you know, like Yeah. This this time, it was quite easy. I mean, there is a book there was a book. It was really good. Obviously, people want to read it, and let's translate this book into the, you know, film. So yeah. Sounds good. Yeah. That's good. Yeah. Obviously, it's also good to, like, you know, not always create, but also, you know, to spread it and, basically promote it to people Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So they can see it and not always get get stuck in, like, the creation cycle. Yeah. Yeah. But I wanted to ask you actually what what, how did you expect the I mean, what did you learn maybe from filmmaking? Because for you, it was probably the first time you you were part of, like, a bigger filmmaking project. What was different from your expectations? Well, I mean, it was pretty easy. Like, like, it there's gonna be, like, a huge maybe, like, yeah, the it's huge effect on things like color grading and, basically, editing the sound and all those things. It has a huge impact on the actual outcome or the, outlook of the scenes of what you're doing. So, initially, when you are recording in some sort of, like, a cold, lakeside in Finland, and the end result looks like completely different and feels also very different. So very feels very warm, the movie, and feels very, yeah, like, cozy in some sense. Whereas in your when you are actually recording, then it's may not be that. But, yeah, I think it, definitely you know, you had, like, you have, like, such a very, very good and unique way of editing of making it very, like, almost like an action movie or, because then they, the the field is looks it's not like some regular boring documentary. It's a very, like, very fast you know, it's not it's not, like, super crazy fast that you can't, keep up with, but it does have, like, a good way of, keeping the viewer engaged and, keeping the, basically, story entertaining while being interesting at the same time. So I think maybe that was a a tool that I learned more of, how can I incorporate that into yeah? From the information side, I basically knew almost everything. Yeah. Yeah. From that. But I think, like, yeah, like, even even let's see. There's gonna be, like, still some nuggets of information for even, like, a more, let's say, advanced, buyer hackers who already know think they know that they know everything, but, there's still gonna be some good information from there for everyone from all sides. It's not super difficult. It's not super beginner. It's kind of it kind of, you know, oscillates, like, between, like, advanced information and basic information quite easily so that you get everything. Yeah. Even now, like, when I watch I mean, I've watched this film from beginning till then, like, at least 70 times. So even now, if I watch it, for the technical reasons, it's not like I need to watch it, but I just need to make sure that it's all good. And even, still I learn every time at least something every time I will watch it. Not because, not because I didn't know it. It just kind of forget, you know, because there's, like, bike hiking covers. And we are we cover so many things in the film. Basically, all the basic things and it just, like, you may, like if you, like, exercise, you may know a lot about the exercising, but you may miss something else, you know. And if you watch this film, just a reminder. Yeah. Sure. I should be, I don't know, blocking my blue light more or something. You know? Mhmm. Yeah. Right. Well yeah. So, strongerstress.com is the website if you want to check out the trade trailer or the links to the platforms, as well as contact information. Where can people learn more about you and your work? Yeah. I have a website. It's called an anze.com, basically my first name. And, I also have Instagram, same, anze.director. And, yeah, that that those are two main channels. Awesome. We're gonna put all the links in the show notes. And, the last question that I'd ask everybody is that what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? Start early with your health or finances or whatever you want to achieve. You just, don't wait. Just start early. Nice. Yeah. Definitely good information. Good advice. Alright. It was, good talking with you. And, yeah, we'll definitely gonna be working again in the future as well. Yeah, man. It was good talking to you.