Exercising whenever you can is still better than not exercising at all in my opinion. But a recent, 2022 study actually looked at what is the difference between, you know, exercising later and, exercising earlier. How does it affect cardiovascular disease mortality? Okay. So the study is setting a clock association between timing of objective physical activity and cardiovascular disease risk in the general population published 11/14/2022. And, yeah, they actually had quite a lot of individuals about 86,000 participants, 58%, females. And the average age was 61 years old, average BMI twenty six. So it was actually pretty like normal weight to people. They followed up over the course of six years irrespective of total physical activity. Morning physical activity was associated with lower risks of incident cardiovascular diseases and ischemic stroke as well, which is actually pretty interesting that exercising in the morning appears to have a more protective effect in cardiovascular disease especially. So when you look at the graph then you can see that the lowest incidence for cardiovascular disease coronary artery disease is, yeah, exercising between 8AM until 11AM and 12PM somewhere between even like 1PM is still a pretty, low risk compared to, like, exercising in the middle of the night. So after midnight between 1AM or 1AM and, 6AM, that is associated with a higher hazard ratio and like a higher incidence of coronary artery disease. The rest of the days are pretty, like, normal. They're, even at, like, 3PM or 4PM until 5PM is also actually lower, like pattern of, these incidence of cardiovascular disease. And you can see that it applies to the same for stroke, same similar pattern. So that exercising in the morning 8AM to 1PM has lower risk. Again 3PM on the rear is also lower risk. And exercising in the middle of the night is associated with a greater risk of stroke. Ischemic stroke similar pattern. Exercising between 8AM and twelve is a lower risk while exercising in the middle of the night is associated with greater risk of ischemic stroke. So the conclusion of the study is that individuals with a self reported morning chronotype who were most active in the early morning had a fourteen percent decreased risk of coronary artery disease compared to the reference group. Additionally, individuals with a self reported morning chronotype who were most active in the late morning had a sixteen percent lower risk of coronary artery disease incident compared with the reference group. So here we go. This is the study. It's actually pretty interesting. It does make sense from a lot of, aspects. So first of all, there's the circadian rhythm alignment. Humans are supposed to be active at daytime and not exercise at night. So this kind of circadian disruption is also already associated with cancer and heart disease that's considered like a carcinogen. There's other reasons why this may be so. Like, there's also the reason that if you do exercise in the morning, you know, you get it out of the way for the rest of the day, then you add, like, a better biomarker. Your body is in more state of like this hormetic stress for the rest of the day as well. So you have like lower blood sugar levels for the rest of the day, you have lower blood pressure for the rest of the day if you exercise in the morning and you have just better biomarkers for the rest of the day, which over the course of many years just keeps you healthier. Whereas if you, let's say, exercise in the middle of the night and you go to sleep around that time and you don't have a lot of time to capitalize on that increased incidence sensitivity if you exercise in the middle of the night, for example, independent of the, circadian mismatch. This also reminded me another recent study in August 2022 that talked about, how these, NAD boosters in mice, work only in improving metabolic health if you take them at the beginning of the active phase. So in mice, that's at nighttime and the mice sleep at the daytime. So that's the rest phase. So if you give the mice NAD boosters in the beginning of their active phase, which is their night or like overnight but their daytime, then they do see improvements in their metabolic health by taking the energy boosters. But if you flip it, you give them the energy boosters at their their rest phase when they're sleeping, then it doesn't improve and actually has, pathological or, you know, negative consequences. And in some ways, that applies to exercise as well in my opinion because, yeah, energy already boosts energy levels, but it, helps to align the circadian rhythms and keeps the body the circadian clocks in sync. So you shouldn't, like, you know, exercise in the middle of the night. Of course, you know, there are people who do shift work. There are people who can't exercise at any other time other than 2AM or 4AM, then of course I still think that, like it shouldn't it shouldn't mean that don't exercise at all. It's probably the association of this cardiovascular disease and stroke is probably even greater if you don't exercise. So exercise is a way to counteract some aspects of, circadian disruption and shift work. But if you can, ideally, you should still do it, like, in the like, naturally, the active phase begins for humans, which is in the morning. And that helps to synchronize circadian clocks and keeps you healthier. Exercising in afternoon is probably still fine. Like, you shouldn't worry that that, you have to stop exercising at 4PM or 5PM because, obviously the exercise will still improve your health no matter the time of when you do it. It's just that exercising in the morning may provide like additional health benefits especially in like the general population. The normal people who don't take it like super seriously. They're not, you know, in particularly super, like, vigorous and super consistent with exercise. What you can definitely do is maintain the circadian rhythm alignment. Morning daylight exposure, block blue light at night. And the best thing for that besides, you know, making sure that you exercise at the right time and getting sunlight, is to also use blue blocking glasses and red light bulbs to make your body produce more melatonin before bed and make sure that you get the best night's sleep. The brand I'm using and that has the best lenses that filter out the specific wavelengths that inhibit melatonin production is Born Charge. They also have a 25% Black Friday sale. So you can head over to borncharge.com/clund, and you can get their blue blocking glasses and other steep tech for 25% off. But on that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Ciem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.