Now there is a lot of, like, exciting research about these longevity drugs like metformin and rapamycin in potential extending lifespan in humans and improving health span overall. But, obviously, you know, they're very hard to get. It's hard to get your hands on rapamycin and metformin unless you have actual diabetes or you get a prescription from a doctor. And they also have a lot of negative side effects. Fortunately, there is more, like, natural and more easily accessible supplements. So in this video, I'm gonna talk about one of the most exciting and most promising, longevity supplements out there right now. So the supplement I'm talking about is alpha ketoglutarate or AKG, and it has been found to have lifespan extending effects in multiple, animal models. And in humans, it's actually one of the only few supplements that has been shown to reverse biological age. Probably the biggest reason why I'm very, like, interested in alpha ketoglutarate is because of this study that was published in 2021. And they actually found that the seven months of using a supplement that had calcium alpha ketoglutarate was able to reverse the biological age of these humans by eight years, which is quite a large result. And the way alpha ketoglutarate works is through mTOR and there's many studies showing that, you know, suppressing mTOR has positive effects on aging and longevity and, immunosenescence. Your body has alpha ketoglutarate. It's, one of the key molecules in the Krebs cycle that's involved in energy production, but, you don't really get it from diet. There's no like dietary source of alpha ketoglutarate. You can make it with exercise, but with age your alpha ketoglutarate levels do decrease and the decrease is quite significant. So overall, I'm not saying that this is some sort of like a magic pill. There there is no magic pill. There is no magic supplements, when it comes to antiaging and longevity. There's, you know, compounding effects or stacking effects. If you stack certain supplements, then they will have a physiological effect on your body as well. And, it obviously requires the addition of a healthy lifestyle and the regular exercise and sleep and all those other things, but taking certain compounds may have first of all, it can mimic calorie restriction. It can help with energy metabolism, energy performance or exercise performance, and they can also have, like, an effect in suppressing different pathways in the body that are associated with aging like mTOR. Likewise, certain compounds can also increase the anti aging pathways like autobolgene and NAD metabolism. If you are interested in reversing your biological age, then I'm looking for a few more people who want to do just that. If you're interested, then send the word health to my Instagram or email info@SimLund.com. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Sim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.