Welcome back to the channel. My name is Seem Lund and today we do another Instagram q and a. If you want to ask me a question then make sure you follow me at Seem Lund on Instagram. Alright first question, would you recommend taking berberine before dinner if you train in the morning or noon? So no. So let's say you lift weights in the morning or noon then before dinner I wouldn't recommend taking berberine because the berberine is still going to inhibit some of the, you know, adaptations that you get from exercise. Because it's suppressor mTOR, although it, you know, it helps with blood sugar regulation and insulin levels, it's not yet the best to take after a resistance training. I would wait at least, you know, twelve hours, or I would wait for the next day before I ever take like a berberine after resistance training. You can take it before the training, that's gonna be fine, but after I wouldn't, do that. This episode is brought to you by Bone Charge, formerly known as Blue Blocks. My favorite light and c compensation companies, Blue Blocks, has rebranded themselves as Bond Charge. They're now involved with a huge range of evidence based products to improve your wellness and life in every way. Their extensive range of premium wellness products helps you to sleep better, perform better, have more energy, recover faster, balance your hormones, and reduce inflammation. My favorites are the red light light bulbs because they can be used to create a melatonin friendly environment in your bedroom by shining only red and not blue or green light waves that will reduce your sleep quality. After starting to use these red light light bulbs, I find it much easier to fall asleep and feel less awake before bed. If you want to try out these amazing products that are the cornerstones to my most optimal sleep, then head over to boncharge.com/seamlund and use the code seam 15 to save 15%. What supplements should a 21 year old take? So that's a very generic question. You know it's very hard to tell. Depends a lot on your situation, your biomarkers and goals and things like that. You know usually 21 year olds generally don't need like any actual like metabolic health supplements unless they are obese or metabolically unhealthy. They may, you know, benefit from a few things like creatine if you're exercising. Glycine I think is still very beneficial for everyone. They probably don't need collagen yet because they already have higher amounts of collagen because they're young, but I would still consider taking that because it helps with you know joints and ligaments and those kind of things and skin. But yeah it's a very generic supplement. You can check out my supplement list if you are interested. I think it's even land.co/supplements and that's gonna tell you what supplements I take and what you could also take for different reasons. How does your mornings look like? So my mornings are pretty yeah I'm I mean like I do wake up maybe like five or six. I take a cold shower. I do some red light therapy. I just move my body a little bit, drink some water and that's pretty much it. Then I start to work. So I think I don't have like any long special morning routine. I just get up and start doing stuff. That's generally what I do. What is your main habits? Well, I mean, my main habits mostly have to do with work again or or I, you know, like, I like to write. I like to research. I like to exercise. I like to spend time with my wife. I mean, yeah, those those kind of the things that I enjoy doing the most. What is the difference between waking up at seven or 5AM? So generally, there's no difference in terms of that. Yeah, like they're pretty close to each other. Some like morning people would maybe wake up at five or six and later people like night owl will generally wake up even later that they wake up like ten or 11AM. But yeah, like five or 7AM generally is no difference unless it's like maybe the summer versus winter. So at summertime, waking up at five is yeah. You're already gonna be waking up because the sun is rising. Whereas at wintertime, you're probably gonna be sleep sleeping because, it's dark outside. So the, you know, natural sunlight generally has a huge effect on whether or not you wake up or not. Do you use glycerin powder? Where can I add it to foods? Yes. I use glycerin powder. It's great. I use maybe about ten grams a day and I add it to coffee. Sometimes I just take it with a spoon and you can add it to like cottage cheese or something like that. It has like a small sweet taste which is yeah quite nice and it doesn't you know, have any like harmful effects. How important is the Randle cycle? So Randle cycle describes or usually it's referred to in the context of carbohydrates and fats and your body prioritizes different fuel sources at all times. It is burning a mixture of different fuel sources all the time. It's not burning only fat, it's not burning only carbs, it's burning different amounts and the Randell cycle determines which one is prioritized or which one burn, which one you burn the most. The, usually people use the Randle cycle when they tell you to not eat carbohydrates and fats together. So there is some, you know, physiological reason to think that or suggest that because, like fats, especially saturated fats, they can inhibit some or make you somewhat insulin resistant and, keep your blood sugar levels elevated for longer periods of time as well, which is, you know, not ideal. And I do think that it is a good idea to like, you know, avoid high amounts of fats and carbs together because it also increases the total calorie content of the meal. But yeah, like for the optimal blood sugar and insulin sensitivity, you do want to separate them slightly. This doesn't mean that you can't have any fat with your meal, but it would mean that don't eat like butter with potatoes or butter with bread or, yeah, like, you know, deep fried stuff, those kind of things. But let's say some beef that has a little bit of fat with potatoes is fine. And also the total calorie content matters. So the Randle cycle becomes more harmful to your metabolic health the more calories you eat. If you're in a calorie deficit, then the body's own antioxidant defense systems and the other pathways that you turn on with the calorie restriction overcome or let's say they compensate for that. And, likewise with likewise with exercise, the exercise is also able to overcome this Randle cycle because of activating APK and increasing the GLUT four receptor activity, which then helps you to clear the bloodstream regardless of the meal content, if that makes sense. So yeah if you do care about it then make sure you exercise before and don't combine high amounts of carbs and fats together. What I like to do is yeah like before exercise I eat low carb and restrict carbohydrates and after exercise I have the carbohydrates but I keep the fats somewhat lower. Time restricted eating for a person with subclinical hypothyroidism and thyroid nodule is their benefits. Well there is certain benefits for everyone of doing certain amounts of time restricted eating. So this means that just don't eat at night and don't eat immediately after waking up. Of course, you shouldn't do like a very long fasting window if you have hypothyroidism or other related issues. So what I would stick to is like a fourteen and ten window. Fourteen hours fasted and ten hours fed. Which you can achieve by just stopping to eat or you stop eating at least like you know three hours before bed which is good for sleep quality generally and melatonin production. And likewise, you in the morning you want to wait maybe like you know an hour, two hours, three hours, something like that before you start eating. And you already achieved the fourteen and ten window very nicely. What is your issue with eggplant? So, yeah, I have like some Instagram stories about eggplant, which aren't very positive. Generally it has to do with I like the taste. I don't like the taste. It's not very, you you know, tasty kind of vegetable. And when you look at also the micronutrient content then it's not worth it in my opinion. It doesn't have like any specific or special nutrients that you wouldn't get from other vegetables. And combine it with a bad taste then in my opinion it's kind of the shit tier vegetables in that sense. Why not to take glycine with protein rich foods? What can happen? I do actually recommend to take glycine with protein rich foods. I've never said anything against that or otherwise. And yeah, it's a good idea to take glycine with protein rich foods, especially foods that have a lot of methionine because the glycine helps to balance the methionine. Excess methionine can raise your homocysteine and we know from animal studies that excess methionine also accelerates aging and shortens lifespan. So yeah, I think it's a makes sense to take some glycine with the protein rich food whatever you're eating. But it also makes sense to take glycine with carbs because glycine helps to suppress blood sugar levels or lower the blood sugar levels. So it's a win win. You can take glycine with any food. Cold shower for better insulin sensitivity. Cold showers generally don't or like you know Yeah, cold showers can help with incident sensitivity by increasing your brown fat. And brown fat makes you more insulin sensitive. It helps to burn calories. It raises your metabolic rate. So yeah, like when I take cold showers then I do notice that it's very easy to lose weight and it's very, you know, almost effortless to, within reason of course, to not get extra extra fat. And I think that the cold showers work through by increasing your brown fat and increasing your metabolic rate by making you shiver. That's the way it improves. So like the brown fat improves your insulin sensitivity with white fat is just used for just calorie balance. Difference between strength training and hypertrophy training. So generally the main difference is that strength training just requires you to recruit the muscle fibers at a near maximum intensity. So usually you need like 80 to 90% of your one rep max to stimulate the muscle fibers to like to help with myofibrillar hypertrophy which is more like strength based. Hypertrophy is like sarcoplasmic hypertrophy, and that you can achieve with even, like, 60 to 70% of your one rep max, which means that, yeah, for strength, you can stick to somewhere between three to five reps and or even like one. I mean, one rep is just power. It's like speed, but, three to five reps is usually for strength. And, for hypertrophy, like eight to 12 is, generally like this. The hypertrophy ranges. You can also yeah. You know, time and attention affects that as well and the speed at which you do the movement. If you do exercise very slowly, like you do very slow bench press for example, but you do only five reps but one rep lasts thirty seconds or something, then that also stimulates hypertrophy. But yeah, like generally if you're just doing like regular one second kind of reps something or you know one one second eccentric, one second concentric, then generally that's strength is built with more like lower lower amounts of reps and longer rest periods. Whereas hypertrophy is, I mean you do get hypertrophy from strength training as well. Like if you lift any weight you will improve your aesthetics or body composition in terms of muscle growth. But directly hypertrophy you build with, somewhat like eight to 12 reps something like that. What is the best veggie in your opinion? So I like carrots and cauliflower. I think those are very good for the microbiome as well as, you know, they also have like some antioxidants in better amounts than like say eggplant, for example. How to increase bone density in elderly already two hips replaced. So bone density, the best thing for that is some weight bearing exercise and generally like yeah resistance training with weights, barbells on top is the number one way to do that. Gymnastics. So I mean, if you're elderly then you're probably not gonna do gymnastics, but gymnastics, or gymnasts have high amounts of bone density as well because the, you know, force when they spring off the board or whatever on the floor then that does Like your body just needs to experience this or the bones need to experience this high intensity stimulation or force and that like triggers this psychology synthesis and bone density increase as well. And yeah, like weight lifting. But obviously there's also you need to make sure that you have enough protein and collagen intake is also very important for that. And based on the studies then the best way to do that is to like one hour before a weight bearing exercise, you consume like ten to fifteen grams of collagen peptides with fifty milligrams of vitamin c because vitamin c initiates the collagen synthesis and is like essential for that. And one hour before, yeah, exercise you drink that. Then you do some weight bearing exercise. More of like a yeah, like a higher intensity. Like, something like 70 to 80% of of your one rep max. Or you could do plyometrics as well. So like jumps, sprints, they're like very similar in terms of the intensity. And, yeah, that's gonna trigger the collision synthesis and the bone density as well and joints. Is high LDL two sixty plus dangerous if your triglycerides are below a 100? So that's obviously a very controversial topic. I'm not gonna you know say if it is dangerous or not. I would but I would still gravitate more towards wanting to be the LDL to be lower. Like two sixty LDL is super high and especially I mean triglycerides are also pretty high, 100. Like if your triglycerides were to be 30 then maybe, but because their triglycerides are also a 100 then I would definitely consider that somewhat dangerous because, you know, the thing with LDL is that, yeah, LDL status or the LDL particle size matters, whether or not it's oxidized matters, lipoprotein e, that matters, yes. But LDL alone is also a risk factor because, you know, eventually your LDL is gonna get oxidized anyway. Like, you're you're a living breathing human or living breathing being and eventually the LDL, if you have higher amounts of LDL in the bloodstream, then eventually it will get oxidized. Even if you live like a very clean lifestyle, even if you avoid seed oils, even if you're metabolically healthy, you know, there is something that will oxidize the LDL. Like whether that be just some environmental factors or whatever it is. So ideally I would still want the LDL to be, you know, at least 120, 120 something, 150 at most. But for that you also need to have a low blood sugar and low inflammation and low triglycerides. So yeah, that's what I would feel comfortable with. I wouldn't feel comfortable with a two sixty LDL. There is of course genetic differences. Some people are hyper responders or they have like this familial hypercholesterolemia which you know I mean people with that gene variant probably have a high risk of heart disease as well because of that reason. So especially if you do have that genetic history of high cholesterol and heart disease, then I would be especially careful. How do we rebel and push back against the global social credit system? So that's, yeah, that's another somewhat interesting topic. I mean, it's will there will be some, for sure, like an app and stuff like that that will track your social status with the government and stuff like that. I'm not inherently like against it. I wouldn't want it to happen but it does obviously have its positives and its negatives. Like if you think it's all negative then you obviously then you're like I think I think you're wrong because there are some positives as well. Obviously the positives is that there's less crime, there's less trafficking, human trafficking or less drug trafficking or whatever. There's somewhat more security in the sense, but the negative is obviously that the government can track you, the government can, plug you off the grid and, take turn off your bank account and stuff like that. So it has like a huge negative, but it also has a few positives. So yeah, I personally think that we would want to obviously have a society where we don't need to have any social security system. And I'm not saying that we should have it. I think we shouldn't have it. But yeah, like in this world that we do live in, it's, yeah, I mean, there's positives and negatives. It's I think it's not worth it to create this dystopian social credit system for sure. With that being said, how do we rebel against it or push against it? Well, I mean, you know, the easiest answer for that is to just not download the app or whatever they're creating. Don't use software or don't use the system. Of course, you can't avoid it completely. You probably will have to use it at some point if it were to happen. Let's hope it not. But, yeah, the only way is to become more self reliant, self, you know, self self sustained in terms of your FUS, your finance and, yeah, to not rely on the government for a lot of things. So like many people are just living paycheck to paycheck and they're on kind of dependent of the system for everything. But you want to have like, you know, you want to be as off grid as possible in terms of self reliance. So like, you know, making sure you have your own food source, your own power source and those kind of things. Which again isn't possible for every people but, you know, the goal is to kind of move towards that as much as possible. Does that make sense? Eat potato or sweet potato with or without skin. So I mean I like the skin. It's nice if you cook it in the oven. It becomes a bit crunchy. So yeah I don't think there's a reason to avoid the skin unless you have like very sensitivities to them. Usually they're like the skin contains the lectins, but I don't think that lectins are a problem generally for most people. Especially if you cook it. Only maybe like raw raw skins. Maybe then it would be a problem. Hello. The best thing to reduce body inflammation, CRP. So CRP reduction generally has to involve like an entire lifestyle optimization. You know, one of Bazarid's diet, if you're eating a bunch of processed foods and seed oils and sugars and just overall calories, excess calories, then yeah, you just need to fix that. That's a big contributor to high inflammation. Another thing is just excess body fat. So if you have somewhat extra body fat, then, you know, the body fat or the body fat tissue will excrete pro inflammatory cytokines in your bloodstream all the time. And it will, like, aromatase your testosterone away as well. So there's no health benefit to being overweight and there's no like yeah benefit to your biomarkers to being even like somewhat chubby. So you want to have like a BMI of at least, you know, below thirty. And body fat percentage for men like 15% at most and women 25% something like that. Optimally men, yeah like ten to twelve percent is kind of the best most healthiest range I think in my opinion. And females maybe at 2022% but definitely not above 15% for men and 25% for females. Other ways to lower inflammation CRP is to exercise. So exercise in the short term does raise inflammation but in the long term it actually makes you more, you know, inflammation free in that sense. Cold showers, cold exposure, saunas do the same from a few supplements like molecular hydrogen, vitamin c, nac. Just a few that come to mind immediately. But the most important thing is the body fat, exercise and the diet and sleep as well. If you're not sleeping enough then your CRP will rise. Especially even like a few hours, like even like a single night of sleeping less than six hours raises your inflammation by a little bit. Almost like almost like a 100%. How to get enough calcium? I drink raw milk. So if you are drinking or consuming any dairy then you're probably getting enough calcium. The biggest sources of calcium are yeah dairy products, milk, cottage cheese, cheese, but also fish bones, sardines, salmon, and yeah like animal bones as well. Looks like tendons and ribs and those kind of things. Most likely, if you're not drinking or eating any dairy then, you probably aren't getting enough calcium unless you are literally eating like a lot of bones. So in that case, yeah, it's a bit problematic. So I think most people should consume some dairy preferably like cottage cheese if they're not allergic. Some plant based sources are you know spinach and like leafy greens but they're very small in that regard. And yeah, if you are eating and drinking dairy then you are getting generally enough. Is cold cryotherapy overrated? So I mean the cryotherapy chambers with the liquid nitrogen are definitely I think overrated or overpriced. Like one session I think costs like $50 and it lasts only like, you know, fifteen seconds. So it's not I think that kind of beneficial in terms of the cost to benefit ratio because from a benefit side then you'd get more benefits from an ice bath, which is generally free if you have an ice bath or if you go to like a lake or something, the river, something like that. The cryo chamber is suitable if you're in a city and yeah, you don't have access to cold water and yeah it's kind of safer as well because you're not literally going into like a abandoned river or lake and that can be dangerous. So yeah I think the cryotherapy is a bit overrated but it has some benefits in terms of convenience for sure. Which one is better? Cold baths are generally, like, more effective than cryotherapy. Optimal glycine to protein ratio for intake. Too much glycine bad. So, yeah. I mean too much glycine is hard to achieve. There's studies even like ninety grams and it has no negative side effects. And, what I think the optimal glycine ratio would be like a methionine increases your glycine demand. One gram of methionine increases your glycine demand by one gram of glycine. So, yeah. I think generally you wanna have like a balance. So that's 50% of your protein comes from methionine rich proteins that have higher methionine like muscle meat, eggs, fish, dairy. And, 50% of your protein comes from more glycine dominant proteins like tendons, chicken drumsticks, fish skin. I mean fish actually has a quite balanced with a glycine methionine ratio like especially if you read it with the skins, salmon with skin or sardines. Those are pretty balanced with that. But also plant based proteins, higher amounts of glycine, beans, legumes. I'm not sure about soy, but I do think the soy has glycine. So soybeans names like glycine max I think in Latin. So yeah, that's kind of funny. But you also want to take like, you know, glycine supplements, if you're eating like a lot of muscle meat. So I think like ten grams of glycine on top of eating like chicken or off sticks and fish skin is a good way to go about it or a good heuristic. Which websites do you read and use for research? Thank you. So, yeah. Most of my research is just done with PubMed and whatever the other science articles are. When I'm writing my books, then doctor James sends me also like a bunch of papers to go through. And I also do my own research, but most of them just scientific studies on PubMed and whatever other journal it is. I don't read like any blogs or like influencer articles in terms of the studies or the research. I just go through the research directly. How do you reverse or slow male pattern baldness that comes with aging? So, I think that depends a lot on your genetics. Yeah. If you have hair loss, bad hair loss genes in your family, then you're probably also gonna get it at some point. Men, yeah, will you know, it's not a matter of if but when they will get some aspects of male pattern boldness. Some get it more than others. I haven't noticed anything of that. I don't have bad hair loss genes in my family. None of my grandfathers and my father aren't bald. So that's good. But a a lot of things to slow down. You know, obviously you need to make sure you consume enough protein and collagen that helps with the hair growth. Spermidine helps with hair growth. But those things are only you know just bandaging this gushing wound. So you want to go through the source of putting out the wound itself. So that would include, you know, I'm not into like inhibiting DHT with finasteride or something like that. I don't think that it's kind of worth it. But there are like some shampoos I think that could help or at least alleviate the process a little bit like ketoconazole shampoo, minoxidil probably. So yeah something of that. But yeah I mean there's not a lot you can do. You can only gonna slow it down with those things. And making sure that your hormones are also optimized and insulin resistance I think can have like a negative effect as well. Radial therapy, micro needling those are also options. But again like they're not really inhibiting hair loss. They're They're just helping to grow the hair. Doing omad and not eat before six hours after their training. Is it too much and for a woman? I think six hours after training is too much. Like especially for a woman you want to do it let's say three hours as a female. So yeah that can answer the question. As a man you can probably get away with more. You can get away with eight or 10 but it's not still optimal for the hypertrophy and stuff. Yeah I would stick to four hours at max for either case. Thoughts on l carnitine supplement to use daily? So l carnitine is great. I think, you know, if you're eating animal protein and meat then you are probably getting enough. But supplementing carnitine can help with androgen receptor density, which helps the muscle growth. But there is the conversion of carnitine into tMAO in the gut, which is associated with increased heart disease risk. Some people say that you can take like garlic or allicin to counteract that. Yeah, maybe that can be so. So yeah, I do take carnitine before my exercise. So I don't take it daily. I only take it before resistance training to help with the androgen receptor density and, muscle growth from that. But, yeah, that's that's how we do it. Nicotine nicotine are really bad. So nicotine alone isn't. So nicotine gums and patches, they're not really, like, harmful. They actually have many cognitive and neuroprotective effects. So they're good nootropic for focus and productivity and as well, you know, help to prevent some aspects of neurodegeneration. But if you get the nicotine from smoke or smoking then obviously that's kind of bad. With nicotine it's obviously like addictive substance. If you start losing too much then it will have, you know, psychological and physiological negative side effects. One of the biggest things that you could get from getting too much nicotine is, like decrease in vasodilation and decreased blood flow. So it can, yeah, be problematic for heart disease as well as other aspects of, you know, blood flow. If you get it too much or if you take it too much, I think whatever. Like two milligrams a day is very safe, but more than that four milligrams, six milligrams is probably a bit too much. Best way to improve deep sleep. So for that, you know, deep sleep happens in the first half of the night which occurs, you know, in conjunction with the other repair hormones like melatonin, growth hormone and autophagy. So what you want to do is that before bed, like an hour or so, you wanna have already melatonin surging through your body. So for that block out blue light, use red light in your bedroom, wind down, maybe take a melatonin supplement like one milligram, and that's gonna boost your melatonin levels already naturally. And when you do fall asleep you're gonna have higher amounts of melatonin that helps with the repair and gets you more deep sleep. That's how you essentially do it. Do you need to protect eyes when using red light? So I wouldn't look into directly the red light. That's that will harm the eyes because it's too bright. But, yeah you can gaze around it and it won't have like any direct negative side effects. Last question and this is a weird one. Have you tried raw deer placenta? No. No I haven't. I don't I'm not very keen on doing that. I don't think I'll ever do it. But, yeah, I don't see any like real reason to do that. Maybe raw liver at, that could have like some benefits. But, yeah, no. Not interested in raw deer blood center. But that's it for this q and a. If you want to ask yourself a question, then make sure you follow me on Instagram at simlund. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is sim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.