Welcome back to the channel. My name is Sim Lund, and in this video, we're going to react to doctor David Sinclair's supplement stack. So we'll be looking at this video that is actually the newest one that I found in 2022 in January, And we'll be looking at what supplements does it take, and I'll just, you know, give you my comments about it. Make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. So here's the video. It's on the reverse aging revolution podcast, basically. And it's a clip short clip, from that. Well, I still use InsideTracker and, I just posted on Instagram that I think I broke the record at the company. I didn't realize I was, but but they saw my post and I said, holy crap. You know, we're a decade younger. We'll take it, actually. So that that was pretty cool. So what have I done to achieve this? Well, it is in the book, I think, once you've read it. But I have changed some some things since 2019. And I've added some things. I've taken some things away. What I've added are, a light acid. I'm taking, some spermidine, ramidade. Interesting. So, the first thing that I heard from here is, spermidine, which, there is some, you know, studies finding that dietary spermidine intake is linked to reduced mortality. And that one particular study where it was, eleven milligrams, if you consume more than that in your from your diet, then that is, linked to almost, like, thirty percent reduced all cause mortality, epidemiology study, but still a pretty long study as well. But he said he's taking one gram a day if I'm not mistaken. Let's hear it again. Spermidine. No. A gram a day. Okay. So it's yeah. One gram of spermidine is, you know, that's quite a lot compared to the eleven milligrams that you may need to take. I don't know if it's, if I heard it correct, but, I mean, one gram is a whole lot more than eleven milligrams. I'm not sure if that's correct because I don't think that you would need to take more than that. You would just want to get a lot above eleven milligrams. And, you know, it's hard. It's not that easy to get a 100% of that from just diet unless you're eating, like, wheat germ and, cheddar cheese and those kinds of things. But, yeah, I do think that the asperidin is a good supplement. It's a autologie booster and has, like, other anti inflammatory benefits benefits as well. I do take it myself for me. I do only take, like, four milligrams a day because I'm getting registered from from a diet. But, ideally, we just want to get eleven milligrams a day at least. I mean, there's no studies that, that are aware of that look at, you know, what happens if you take one gram a day, which is interesting. But, yeah. Maybe, like, one gram is probably like an overkill. I'm not sure how does you get it or what sources does it get from. Some senolytics. So physitin and quercetin, So fisetin and quercetin, yes. They're seniletics. They do kill off senescent cells, and they can also extend lifespans in other species. There's no human studies that I'm aware of that, that look at how they affect all cause mortality or longevity. But I do take quercetin and fisetin not every day, but, quite regularly. The funny the good thing about, quercetin is also that it inhibits CD 38, which is this glycoprotein that, is, like, increased when you're under inflammation, and it also, consumes NAD. It's one of the biggest consumers of NAD and, one of the biggest reasons why you see a decrease in your NAD levels as you get older because of c CD 38 goes up. And, yeah, quercetin is a good, let's say, counter measurement or counter, actor against CD 38. And, of course, the senescent cells, you get older, you increase oxygen stress that increases senescent cells. And senescent cells are just, you know, gonna they're like zombie cells that spread information to the neighboring cells, and it's kind of this, you know, swarm swarm effect of zombie cells. So, you know, at least, like, irregularly taking quercetin and quercetin can be good. But I wouldn't take, like, you know, quercetin and quercetin every day because, they do may have, like, some, you know, negative side effect as well by, like, you know, maybe causing some collateral damage or even, like, you know, they may also inhibit, like, mTOR and these other, let's say, growth pathways in excess. I personally think that you don't wanna be suppressing mTOR all the time. With Sinclair, like, he may be less, let's say, concerned with that. He is much more eagerly suppressing mTOR. But I personally think that, you know, if you want to maintain muscle mass, if you want to maintain more deponentially and, yeah, like just functional fitness for the later years, then you do want to have, like, some balance between mTOR and these, other longevity pathways, which I've made, like, many other videos as well. You can check them out that talk about how do I balance it and how do you do it. Perfectly balanced. So this video didn't cover all the things that, Sinclair takes. I actually found this, basically, blog post by Novos Labs as well that, October 2021 that, covers the ones that he takes that he talks about in lifespan, his book. So, Niketinov and Monrookutide NMN one gram a day per, per day in the morning. I do think that, yeah, I think NMN is great. It probably has some benefits on, let's say, health span at least, improving things like insulin sensitivity and, energy levels. This blog post says that one gram is, pretty high, and you need only two hundred fifty to five hundred milligrams to be sufficient. In, human studies, they found that two hundred fifty milligrams is basically enough to, like, elevate any of the levels. But maybe, like, you know, higher doses, maybe I don't know. Like, yeah, I don't think that higher dose is always necessary. But, obviously, Sinclair, who, you know, takes it more seriously, is gonna be safer on the safer side. I also actually take myself one gram of NMN, as well. Not always. I may take, like, a small dose sometimes, and I may skip it also sometimes. But, yeah, if I do take it, then I take, like, one gram. Usually, resveratrol one gram in the morning. So, yeah, I think that resveratrol doesn't have actually that much evidence that it is beneficial or that it works. Like, the animal studies are pretty limited, and, they they find that it doesn't even work all the time in increasing sirtuins. And even if you do, sirtuins aren't always, like, actually beneficial for longevity even in animals. And and there's no human studies either. And in fact, the resveratrol may actually be harmful to, like, exercise adaptations. There's a lot of studies that but even, like, two hundred and fifty milligrams of resveratrol a day was able to blunt, like, a VO two max from exercise in older humans. So, yeah, the human studies actually defined that resveratrol may not be good at all. And I'm not taking resveratrol, and I think that you probably don't need to take it if you're taking, like, all the other things, like maybe spermidine or whatever. Metformin prescription drug, one gram per day, Five hundred milligrams in morning and five hundred in in the evening. So that's quite a lot to one gram of metformin a day. Yeah. Metformin does have actually a lot of, human studies that it reduces mortality and is beneficial for longevity, especially if you have diabetes. If you do have metabolic syndrome and diabetes, then it's gonna be almost like a life saving drug. If you don't have diabetes but you're doing it for longevity purposes, then I'm not sure that it would be, you know, that good. Because, you know, Sinclair is already doing one meal a day, and, that fasting period will already suppress his blood sugar levels and insulin quite low during the fasted window. So he probably doesn't need to take metformin, at least, like, about every day. And, similar to, resorotidol, he can also, like, blunt some aspects of exercise adaptation so you are, like, just less fit and less muscle and, you know, it has some side effects. So I I don't take metformin. I don't think that healthy people don't probably need to take it if you're exercising, if you're, doing fasting and those kind of things. If you're not overeating, then you don't need to take metformin. Maybe, like, yeah, once a week, maybe five hundred milligrams. If you're, like, super into longevity, you could take it in with, like, no side effects. But taking every day, I don't think that is a good idea. But he, may yeah. Like, he's probably, like, just more into it, the antiaging longevity. Vitamin d three, he takes he doesn't take the dose. Yeah. I take that as well. I think that vitamin d is important for longevity. Vitamin k two, yes. I like vitamin k two as well. He probably takes it. Statin taken since his early twenties due to family history of cardiovascular disease. Not describing the dosage. I don't take statins. I think that, yeah, if you have high cholesterol and, let's say, lipid issues, then, yes, statins can also be, like, lifesaving. For regular people who don't have those issues, if you're not obese and your blood work is fine, then you probably don't need to take statins either, in my opinion. Low dose aspirin, eighty three milligrams per day. So, yeah, there is some epidemiologist study that finds that, aspirin is reducing some, you know, risk of mortality and cardiovascular disease by mostly being anti inflammatory. I guess it depends on, yeah, like, on your inflammation levels. If you have high inflammation or if you're overweight obese, then it could be beneficial in low doses. Like, eighty three milligrams is fine. Even in higher doses, if you have actual lactic metabolic syndrome, if you're not like, my inflammation levels were already, like, 0.1, which is, you know, literally on the the closest to zero as possible. When I did my test, most of it is because of just not being obese, exercising, and doing it overpassing. I do I'm I do may find beneficial to take some, low dose of aspirin if you have, like, sleep deprivation, if you are under some sort of, I don't know, inflammation or oxidative stress, that it can be beneficial. But aspirin in larger doses or more frequently taken can also be with some side effects and, like, causes bleeding or that kind of thing. So I don't think that at least, like, you wouldn't wanna take any more than eighty three. Maybe eighty three milligrams a day is kinda on the safe side. I'm not sure. But I do think, like, more than that, like, five hundred milligrams or a hundred milligrams every day may not be that good. Alpha lipoic acid, yes. Antioxidant, and not sure about the, let's say, longevity effects of alpha lipoic acid. Maybe there is some studies that it could benefit, like, some motor organisms, but I don't think that it actually is that impactful compared to the other things that he's taking. Like, he's probably one of the least impactful of the supplements. Coenzyme q ten, also good for the heart. Yes. I am a proponent of CoQ ten. I think even if you're healthy, you can benefit from CoQ ten because of improving mitochondrial function and just energy levels. Yeah. I don't think that it's probably not gonna be harmful to take. Various studies show that coenzyme q ten doesn't extend lifespan, and some studies actually find that coenzyme q ten can actually shorten lifespan. As the article says, which I'm not you know, I haven't fact checked, but I'm not sure I don't think that it's gonna be harmful. Smoke bomb. So, overall, I think that, you know, a few things I agree with him, like NMN is, you know, good. Quercetin is good. I don't think resveratrol is good. I don't think metformin is good. Vitamin d is good. Vitamin k two is good. What else do you took? Yeah. Fisetin is good. Some infrequently. So, yeah, those are some pretty okay supplements, but there's definitely a lot of other things that he probably didn't talk about or he may have missed or he's not aware of. I personally take, like, a few additional supplements like, like, Apigenin is also another CD thirty eight inhibitor. I'm not taking it all the time, but sometimes then, I mentioned spermidine. I'm taking that as well. You know, I mean, things like some easy wins even, like a creatine. I think he should take creatine, especially if he's on a plant based diet. It's gonna be, like, quite effect effective for him. And, yeah, maybe, like, calcium alpha ketoglutarate can sometimes be, good if he's interested in mTOR inhibition because calcium alpha ketoglutarate also inhibits mTOR, and you don't need to take, like, rapamycin or something like that. And, it has less less side effects than it. Apparently, it's also, like, life extension in animal studies and slows down biological aging in humans. But yeah, so if you want to, you know, check out all the other supplements that I'm taking then I have this free basically PDF with all the supplements that I'm taking, when I'm taking it, what doses, how many times a week. And so I basically outline, you know, from the morning to the evening all the sleep supplements or the exercise supplements or the morning supplements and all those things you can find in my, PDF free free free PDF. Just, you know, put your email in and, get it. You can get it from semlion.com forward slash, supplements. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell is well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.