My name is Sim Lund. I'm an Estonian author, speaker, content creator, and, I consider myself a biohacker or someone who is just wanting to optimize their health, longevity, performance, and just overall well-being. I've never had any like real health problems. I've never been sick. I've never suffered from like chronic disease, but I will always been somewhat curious about the human species and the human body especially. After like my high school years, I did enroll in, in the military, and there I got exposed to many of these different environmental stressors like, the cold, the heat, exercise, and just overall psychological stress as well. And I kind of wanted to leverage that ability and those experiences to just, become better as a human being, but at the same time also learn about these key insights. How can I implement them into our everyday lifestyle, and how can I find these ways to make these stressors actually benefit ourselves? I actually studied anthropology in the university and, you know, us as a human species, we're pretty adaptable. We've spread across the entire globe and we live in various environments like the desert, the Arctic, the rainforest, and we've been able to survive environmental stressors that include the cold, the heat, starvation, food shortages, predators, and Yeah. We've just become tougher as a human species in general. Despite our great success as a species, we shouldn't think that we made it and we shouldn't take our fortune for granted because we we're still going to be experiencing, the same natural, stressors from our environment, including all the modern and, man made stressors that are not natural, but we're still they're still a part of our everyday lives. The very nature of, life and the world is uncertain. Like, the only thing that we can be certain of is uncertainty. We know that, things are gonna be uncertain, and we can't really control many things in the world. We can't control the weather. We can't control outside events. We can only control our own actions and our own thoughts, the things that we ourselves do on a daily basis. Disasters, chaos, crises, accidents, they're all gonna happen anyway whether we like it or not, and the only thing we can do is be ready for them and prepare in advance. All the available tools that we can use from nature, from science, from technology, from all kinds of possible ways that we can enhance our self consciousness. It's kinda sad that most people don't ever truly get to understand how amazing their bodies are and what they're capable of. We can live in the desert. Desert. We can live in the Arctic. We can live in the rainforest. So that's been, I think, one of the biggest reasons to our success as a species so far. Physiologically, we've been actually domesticating ourselves. We are basically looking at diversity and how that supports resilience and your health. Just to be able to feel good, you need to pay attention to several things at once. Eating better, sleeping better, moving constantly. Stressors and environmental disasters, they're not gonna go away. They're gonna keep happening, and we can't really avoid them. The only thing we can do is to keep ourselves more resilient, to keep ourselves more adaptable, and to prepare for those things in advance.