We're seeing that people in their eighties, nineties, and hundreds are functionally, because of their muscle tone, strength, stamina, etcetera, are what they are in their forties, fifties, and sixties. And if you think about this anti aging goal, isn't that what we're trying to achieve? Welcome to the Seam Lund podcast. I'm your host Seam Lund. And today we have two guests from KAATSU Global, Steven Munnetones and John Doolittle. KAATSU is a form of blood flow moderation training that can mimic heavy weight lifting with lighter loads. You're basically tricking your body into thinking that it's lifting heavier weights that it actually ease. You can use it for treating injuries, recovery from exercise, and improving cardiovascular health. If you want to try out the KAATSU bands, then head over to katsu.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 10% discount. John, Steven, welcome back to the show. Hello. Nice to be back. Yeah. Hey, Sam. What a great honor to be back on your show. Thanks for inviting us. Yeah. Of course. Like, yeah, we did our first, like, show maybe, like, two years or something like that ago. And Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's, yeah, I'm glad to have you back because, you know, itself is, one of the best, I think, let's say, antiaging exercise routines for at least for the elderly folks, out there. And, yeah, I'm glad to still, you know, that it's, you know, spreading and that people are still, you know, getting access to it. And, yeah, maybe we can start by both of you, you know, going through, your journey of becoming involved with Katsu and, yeah, like, how did you discover it? What was your, like, you know, some sort of, activation point or, like, this, yeah, what got you hooked with, Katsu? Yeah. Well, I'll start off because I, I was introduced to doctor Sato, the inventor of Katsu, back in 2001, so about 2021, twenty two years ago. And he, I visited his laboratory in, Tokyo, just outside of Tokyo. And there was a long line of of, older people there, and, I observed what he did with them, and then he did Katsu and me. I was immediately hooked. I I was I thought this is the greatest thing that I have felt. But I was thinking about actually my parents at the time. When I asked them this question, I asked them, can I how can I learn about Katsu? Obviously, I live in California. He lives in Tokyo. And he said, well, I'll teach you. I've been waiting for someone like you to to meet. And I said, well, why isn't Katsu known outside Japan? And he said, well, two reasons. I don't speak Japanese, and I don't travel outside of Japan. And I said, okay. I'll do that. And then I asked him, when I return home, I wanna study KAATSU. And then he smiled, and he says, well, the information is all up in my head. And so at the time, early on, I visited Japan four to six times a year, for thirteen years. And some some people say, well, why does it take you thirteen years to, learn KAATSU? Well, at the time, we there was nothing written in English. Everything was in Japanese, and even the stuff in Japanese wasn't, what it is today. So it took many years. And as as you know, if you wanna become a very good sushi chef, you have to learn how to cook the rice and prepare the rice for many years before you get to actually, do the, be in the sushi bar, and same thing with with Katsu. And so during this thirteen year period, I learned all about Katsu. He he took me to the hospitals. He took me to see Olympic athletes. He showed, me how he works with older people, with people with sleep apalsy, people who are bedridden. And every time I visited, I would take lots of notes, ask him questions. And and in 2014, we launched the company. And then that's when soon after that, I met John, and the rest is history. John, do you wanna do you wanna explain your journey? Yeah. My, my journey is, much different than, than Steven's. I got I got pretty beat up during my career. I spent twenty five years in the in the SEAL teams. I retired out of the SEAL teams in 2017. Before I retired, I had an injury. It was a full thickness tear, supraspinatus. It's a rotator cuff. Exact same injury I had had when I was six years younger. And back then, it was an eleven month full recovery and rehab. So about that time, I'm working in the human performance program at, I was the director for that program at US Special Operations Command, otherwise known as US SOCOM. So I had a lot of trainers, and PTs, strength coaches, sports psychologists, working, under me. So I messed up my shoulder and, got the surgery done, and the guys told me you gotta go to Saksen. That's special operations command central command. So that's in, Tampa, Florida. It was right across the street from where we were stationed. They They said, you gotta go over to Saksen, meet with the PTs there, and try this thing called KAATSU. And at that point, I actually had heard a little bit about it, but I didn't know much about it. I met the PTs over there. They had a KAATSU machine. They had one. It was like the the size of a shoebox. And, I was like, what what the hell is that? And they told me. My only question was, is it gonna help me get back to the fight faster? Is it gonna help me, recover faster? And, they said, yeah. We have a lot of good outcomes with rapid rehabilitation. Just give it a shot. So it's they use the standard shoulder rehab on me, but they use KAATSU. Long story longer, five and a half months. I was at full or what they call 95% strength, agility, power, mobility. I was basically, in half the time, same surgery, similar rehab from six years earlier. So I was hooked. And that was in 2016. I was getting ready to retire, anyway, and, and and met Steven about that time. And we start talking, and and I said, hey. I'm I'm looking for something to do after the SEAL teams. And he said, well, we'd love to have you. And, oh, by the way, if you're traveling in The Pacific, why don't you take your family and go meet doctor Sato? So we did that. And, you know, Steven, you had me, but when I met doctor Sato, I was in. And it was a great experience, and I've never looked back. And I really enjoy working with, wounded, ill, and injured, veterans with GADSU helping with neuropathic pain and things like that, that we could talk about if you want. Mhmm. John, excuse me. I I wanna interrupt and remind you to tell Sim about your daughter. I think when you first met doctor Sato, it was very important and very telling to to tell them about your daughter, Megan. So, Sam, when I left the, when I left the US Navy, I I I'd spent twenty five years in the Navy. I did four years at the Air Force Academy. That's a whole another story. But one of the things I wanted to do is I had two months of dead time between ending my military and starting with KAATSU. And my kids had never been to Ground 0, and they had never done a true vacation where dad didn't have a lot of things on his mind and on his plate. So we went to, we we went to New York City, saw the the the ground 0, and, getting ready to do our first flight. They're called space available flights. We drove down to Dover after seeing Ground 0. And Meg, my daughter, who's now 15 at the time, she was, eight or nine. She was doing some back handsprings, on base in in some grass. So she did a back handspring handspring, and she snapped the the bone, the ulna bone right below the elbow right before going on this big vacation and traveling around and going to see doctor Sato. So, they put a soft cast on her. We flew to California. They put a hard cast on. We meet doctor Sato about seventy two hours after she broke her arm. And the first thing he says when he he sees us with Meg with a cast from her armpit all the way down to her wrist, getting ready to start an eight week incredible vacation, and she was so bummed. He looks right at Meg, and he says, ah, Katsu. We must do Katsu. And, so without prolonging it too much, we did Katsu just like he showed her, Katsu cycles. And during the cycles of pressure, he had Meg on just that one arm do isometric holds on her arm, three times a day. We did that morning, day, and evening. Nothing really hard, just isometric holds. Six weeks later, we're in Hawaii to get and, we went to the hospital to get the cast off. And the docs take the cast off. And, Sim, I'm not kidding you. When she had the broken arm out of the cast up next to the other arm, this arm that was in the cast was actually bigger and more defined than the arm that had not been in a cast. Now she didn't have range of motion. That took, you know, that took weeks to get her all range of motion back. Zero atrophy. Zero. As a matter of fact, that that arm was more defined and better developed than the arm that she had been using day in and day out. But she only had done Katsuo on the broken arm. So fascinating story, and I have hundreds like that. Yeah. Yeah. And I mean, like, yeah, it's a good comparison because I would imagine she didn't work out the other arm either. Like, she didn't do exercise with the other arm, like lifting. And, whereas with the calcha band, she experienced this resistance still by doing the contractions. So she, experienced the muscle growth through Exactly. Yeah. Like, you know, training it. Yeah. Well, that's amazing story. And, yeah. Well, I personally first got to try or I think, yeah, I might have heard about cuts before, but I tried it, in 2018 at the Toronto Biosphere Summit where, I met you, John, there as well and, for first time. And, I tried it, you know, and it was still, like, a super I didn't do any, like, you know, actual lifting. I just had the costume mats on, and I did, like, you know, invisible biceps curls and, those kind of things. And it felt like, you know, super heavy weights because of that, and the the pump was, like, crazy. And it felt like, you know, very hard workout. And I did, like, a few push ups maybe or something like that as well. And, yeah, like, because it was really tough. So that's kind of the magic of the blood flow restriction, training with KAUSTO is that, yeah, you, train your body or the body perceives that it's training, like, heavy loads, but it's actually, like, super lights, and you're not really putting any, like, heavy weights on your joints and stuff. Correct. Exactly. In fact, what you're doing and and one of the things that we were that you mentioned earlier was antiaging. What you're actually doing is you're actually increasing the elasticity of your capillary veins and arteries. That's really what you're doing. And when I mentioned that I, studied under doctor Sato for thirteen years, ten of those years were with cardiologists. So we would think that if you're gonna do, KAATSU or any kind of BFR, you probably would do your research with exercise physiologist or coaches, trainers, someone who is in the, physical training area. However, doctor Sato knew that the real key of KAATSU was this longevity aspect, the antiaging aspect, whether you're 20 years old, 60 years old, or 80 years old. And it was the fact that we were with the increased blood in your limbs, arms, or legs, that your capillaries and veins are actually becoming more elastic. That's why when he went on his very, very deep dive into research, he worked with cardiologist, people who knew the, blood sis the, vascular system and the heart, etcetera, because we were focused on the vascular tissue. Although the effect of the muscles is absolutely there, but more fundamentally is that elasticity of the capillaries and veins and arteries, which leads to the antiaging effects that we all know about. Yeah. Gotcha. How does the colcepans work then? Like, can you explain them as well? Like, how how do you use them? What's the, like, yeah, mechanism? And k. Okay. Well, John is gonna put them on right now. I actually have a b one set. You want me to put those on, Steven? Yeah. Either one. Either one. Okay. So, we we have, four bands, two for the arms and two for the legs. And as John is putting it on, he's putting it above his bicep, above his tricep, trying to maximize the amount of area where he can, where the blood can pool. And the whole object of these bands is the opposite of a tourniquet or blood pressure cuff. So when you take your blood pressure, you put the the nurse or the doctor puts the blood pressure on, and it gets very tight, and blood is occluded or prevented from coming into the arm. The way we structured the KA2 bands, which took years of development, was to do the opposite. Even if it's on and even if it's on tightly, blood arterial flow continues into the limb, but is slowed down coming back for thirty seconds at a time. So blood goes in normally, and it's slowed down, not stopped, just slightly slowed down coming back. When that happens, then the arm or the leg becomes engorged in blood. There's more blood in the arm or leg than normal. If you look at your hand or your or your foot, you'll see it become very pink, even a reddish color because all the very, very small capillaries are being filled with blood. And when that happens, that is the catalyst. That is exactly what the equipment is designed to do. Once you actually have your arm or your legs engorged in blood, then there's a number of different protocols that you would do either for training, building muscle, or rehabilitation if you break a bone like, John's daughter did, or recovery from a hard workout or maybe even a competition. So the first step is to make sure there's a lot of blood in the arms or legs momentarily for thirty seconds, and then the bands release. Thirty seconds on, bands release. Thirty seconds on, bands release. And act and it it acts so the vascular tissue becomes more and more elastic, and your hand or your foot becomes more and more pink or even a reddish color. Gotcha. How do you feel, John? So, Sam, I have I have two devices here. This one, I believe you're very familiar with. This is the the c three device. Remember I said they used to be the size of shoe boxes when I got introduced to them? This is a ruggedized, version and much smaller, very light, and it hook clips to your to your belt. I have it set up right now for one limb just to demonstrate that this is an armband, and this is the device. And then you can pick cycle mode. And once it's running, you'll see that we create pressure. And as soon as it comes to the pressure we're looking at, the countdown starts from thirties. You see it counting down? There's twenty more seconds. And each time it does a cycle, it will completely release the pressure after those thirty seconds, and the next pressure will be 10 millimeters mercury higher. So we we stair step. And then what we did differently with this device is you can do multiple sets of cycles. So you can set it to go, and it'll run for a half hour if that's what you wanna do. And I like that for I'll run it even when I'm not working out. If I'm just doing emails or, doing work around the kitchen, dishes, folding clothes, doing yard work, I'll run cycles while I do other things. That's personally, that's one of my favorite aspects is the efficiencies that you get here because you can trick the body like you're saying. Trick the body into thinking it's working much harder than it is. We're creating metabolic stress, yet at the same time, we're doing very light load simple movements like, sweeping leaves in the in the backyard. Mhmm. Now the I'll take advantage of this to show you. This is I'm wearing the Bluetooth version on my arm, and I have one right here. And I just wanna show you what we have going on here. So this is all this is all via a smartphone app. You can use a tablet. You can use Android. You can use, Apple, and you can see, same thing. I'm at pressure, and the countdown is going down from 30. But what's cool about this setup is you can totally customize it. So if you want, I don't know, forty seven seconds on and thirteen seconds off and you want one arm to be at a higher pressure because maybe you're, you're you're working on some atrophy issues with that arm and you want the other one at a lesser pressure or vice versa. You can totally customize this setup, and then you capture the data. So coaches, trainers, providers, even if you wanna share the the information with, like, friends and family and kinda have competitions all through a, online app. So this is very new for us, brand new. So kind of exciting. We got some, we got some new things going on. Nice. Yeah. I also like that part that, you can do. Like, you you can just walk even. Like, I I usually wear them while I'm walking on the treadmill in front of the computer and, like, yeah, checking emails or something like that. And, the pressure on, pressure off still gives you, like, a, you know, good metabolic stress and still gives you these, like, the small workout or you definite I I personally feel a lot faster recovery from the actual workouts or, like, weights. So I still do those as well. But on the rest days, I use the Kotoban, and that's, like, active recovery that speeds up the recovery much faster. And, Yeah. Like, it because usually, if you like, let's say, have two workout days in a row, you're gonna, you know, not be as strong and you're gonna not recover that fast either. But if you do, like, let's say, on one day, you do, like, a heavy workout, and then you're on the second day after that, you use the Kaustubhans, then you're just getting still, like, this like, the beneficial response, the training stimulus, but you're, you know, like, active recovery mode in terms of the, you know, low intensity and the increased blood flow and, those kind of things from the cost of vans. Yeah. Go ahead. Exactly. What you're doing is what we call double stacking. So you're you're trying to achieve something, putting cuts on top of that, and not impacting the your original goal. And, Sam, you you're a very active person. You work out, and KAATSU is very good for that. But imagine the convenience of KAATSU for people who are less motivated, who are older, who are injured, who are who don't wanna work out. And KAATSU allows these people who maybe they had a knee surgery or maybe they're just not motivated. Maybe maybe they are motivated, but maybe one day or a whole week, they're just so tired from work. They just wanna come home and watch TV or play on the computer. For that, what John was doing and what you do on your, quote, off days is simply use the bands as you do something very comfortable, very easy, and the effects are, out of this world. Yeah. What are some other, like, benefits that you've seen in research with, KASO besides the capillaries? Well so go ahead, John. I I was just gonna say, Sam, coming from the military world and the special operations world, I I'd say, easily 90% of my teammates that I stay in touch with are all, struggling in some sense with their sleep cycles and circadian rhythm and getting their body into that parasympathetic state. Something, we've been working closely with the International Olympic Committee researchers, specifically the guys out of, University of Brighton in UK. Something they found during their initial research with KATSU is when you do those cycles of pressure that we're talking about, especially on the upper arms, when you do those cycles and they are measuring, pan blood panels, hormonal markers, and they're putting sleep trackers on guys, They're seeing that parasympathetic states they're they're seeing the athletes slide into that parasympathetic state faster, which means stage three and stage four sleep or recovery sleep is happening sooner during their their their, during their sleep cycle, which is incredible, when we're talking about guys that are struggling with sleep. And I'm not just talking to PTSD, TBI, and whatnot. I'm talking about, like, flight dysrhythmia or, you know, another term for, jet lag, people that are traveling multiple time zones. Interestingly, they even came up with a protocol for athletes traveling across time zones to include when they use it on the aircraft, at what part of the flight, and when they use it in a hotel room before going to sleep. To me, that I had no idea when I came into this company that this could even touch on something like that, but we have high end, you know, evidence based researchers looking at this. That's, something new and different that I do not think we talked about two years ago last time we talked. Yeah. I don't remember that either, but, yeah, it's pretty cool. That's always, like, you know, not as sympathetic and as stressful as, like, a weight of sensation or, like, hit cardio or something like that. So it's more like a carasympathetic. Yeah. And and this come all the way back to doctor Sato's focus on the elasticity of the vascular tissue as opposed to a muscle building biohack. A muscle building biohack is easy replicable or repeatable if you simply lift weights or do push ups or walk in the you walk. You know, you could do isometric holes, etcetera. Where we are as a company right now, but where doctor Sato already saw this thirty years ago was if you increase the elasticity of the vascular tissue, then potentially cognitive issues, issues in the core. So you have the bands in the arms and legs, but what happens to the core between the neck and the groin? What happens when you have a, cracked rib, broken rib? What happens if you have cerebral palsy or multiple sclerosis or other, other kinds of ailments? So this is where doctor Sato saw 30 ago where the research and the practical applications would go, and that's exactly where we are now. We're in this era where we're going beyond muscle building and really looking at the fundamentals of what the human anatomy, human physiology is doing. And if you agree that the capillaries, veins, and arteries are becoming more elastic systemically from head to toe, then it makes sense that we, can develop and we are developing, we have developed protocols to help things between your neck and your groin and above your neck. Are there other, like, research, directly in humans? Like, yeah, like, what's the obviously, like, you know, findings that have been found in clinical studies that, using the KATZUBANS? Yes. There are. For example, we we simply put in one very fundamental study, as we were learning this, is we put the bands on the legs of elderly women. So we're only engorging the limb from the hip down to the toe. However, we were measuring blood flow in the head. Remember, these women are sitting down. They're older. They're not active young people. They're sitting down, and the bands are inflating and deflating, inflating and deflating. It makes sense, and we know that their capillary, veins and arteries in their of their legs are being positively impacted. But what we wanted to show in this research was actually the cerebral flow in the head, and that's what we measured and that's what we documented, which came out in in published research. And so the the areas where we are delving into, again, now are stemming from the fact that, okay, if we are improving the blood, circulation, what other things in the body can we impact? And we all know the human body was meant to move and not only physically move with your arms and legs pumping, but also more importantly, internally. And we all have, let's say grandparents who maybe their hands and feet get very cold. Again, this is, this is one issue with Sam, you're very well aware of. You know, their capillaries and the elasticity of their capillaries and veins is is is is decreasing. And so these are all areas where we are are delving into, but we're not doing specific research because now the research has documented this. Where we're focusing on is applications. How can my grandmother, how can my grandfather, or my parents, remain as active and as limber and as strong as possible. Something as simple as opening a jar of jam or lifting, you know, a liter of of milk and many other things, putting on makeup, combing their hair, washing their hair. These these are the applications that we are now, focused on because it it's real for these people. It's real for those 60, 70, 80, and 90 year olds. And and this is where we've taken the research, and now we're applying it in practical applications for people of all ages. Gotcha. So, like, you know, muscle loss and sarcopenia would be greatly or the main, like, benefit would be that probably and then, cardiovascular benefits and, yeah, stress management or stress reduction from that. Yes. And for example, John John was part of this research, was on amputees and paraplegics. And as we know, the as you age, you know, the the probability of you having a problem with your hands, arms, feet, or legs is increasing. So we wanted to show how beneficial KATSU is for people who don't have an arm or don't have a leg. And so that research was just, completed. It's gonna be published, this year, and that's where, the amputees without an arm or without a leg would put the bands on as John did up up high. Their phantom pain would either go away or be significantly reduced because they do have this what we call phantom pain. They they feel a pain, although their hand or their foot is not there. And also their their muscle tone improves. You know, when you don't have, the rest of your arm from your elbow down, it's hard to exercise your your bicep and tricep. But with KAATSU, you can do so. Same thing if you have a stroke, or you have diabetes and they've unfortunately, let's say, amputated a foot or even toes. They're become people become less mobile, less capable of walking both physically and emotionally. And so what we do is we put the bands on their arms or their legs, wherever the amputated body part is, and we allow the person to, a, increase their blood circulation in that limb, and, two, actually work the muscle that actually does remain. So that's an example of a recent, paper. It will be published soon, already submitted, already accepted. And John was a was a major part of that because of his teammates in the military who unfortunately did lose an arm or a leg. And if I could just tap in on top of that, Steven, the phantom limb pain, but also, peripheral neuropathy or or neuropathic pain. Some guys don't have the phantom limb pain, but at the stump, they have significant neuropathic pain that, does not let them go to sleep. And what we find what we're finding with, I'll say, eighty percent of the guys that try this are able to wean off their pain meds, you know, kind of their tranquilizers in order to get into some semblance of sleep. If we can eliminate that neuropathic pain, which is happening with eighty percent of the guys, That's incredible. Now why exactly that's, happening? I can't tell you. I don't know. But I have talked with, some neurosurgeons and brain neurosurgeons and, guys that specialize in, EEG reading of the brain and whatnot and pain pathways. Some of these guys have told me when you when you dilate tissue around an area that does not have the ability to exercise anymore, you're able to wake up a lot of tissue, improve circulation, and help eliminate some of those pain pathways that the brain is kinda stuck in, after the the trauma of having a limb removed. So same with the spinal cord injury, guys. There's one guy I'm thinking of in particular. He's, he was shot through the neck, so he's a complete quadriplegic. But every night until every night before KAATSU, he would go on it was a type of a sleep tranquilizing medicine so that his body could get to sleep because the neuropathic pain below his knees on both legs was incredible. Mhmm. We did KAATSU on him, and, you know, it didn't go away completely. But when when a guy like that, it's a complete quad says, hey. The pain's 80% gone, and we're not talking about a drug, and we're not talking about something that's invasive, I mean, nothing against our athlete population. I love them, and I and we absolutely can help the athletes. We could talk about the Olympics in Tokyo and all that. I see that as an incremental benefit. When you take a guy that can't sleep because of neuropathic pain and you make it 80% better, that's an exponential change. That is really why I'm excited about being part of this company and taking it to the next, the next level. Yeah. Yeah. That was super nice. Yeah. And and, I mean, you know, John touched upon it. And, as you know, John's a a very humble man, but he does have a lot of colleagues who have, traumatic brain injuries, PTSD, and other issues, in their brain. And one of the things, the research, it has just begun because researchers are understanding the implications of katsu is they put a skull cap on, the volunteers, the the people who have these, brain, issues, and they measure their they do EEG measurements. And, it's early on, but we have more and more researchers wanting to participate because they see the effects of of KA2. And I think, John, when you were you're talking with, doctor Eric Wong and others, you understand very well when, they do the KAATSU cycles and we measure do EEG measurements, maybe tell us some what what we're finding. Oh, it's it's incredible. This, this organization does what they call, magnetic EEG guided resonance therapy. So it's a, type of transcranial magnetic stimulation, TMS. But, Sim, as you know, TMS is set at a standard 10 hertz. These guys have the ability to change the alpha wave frequency based on the patient's intrinsic frequency, which I believe is usually between, seven and thirteen hertz. I might be a little off on that. But they find patients that are out of sync, and they can very subtly with magnetic pulse energy get their alpha waves in the parts of their brain that are out of sync, get them all moving, together, which is incredible. When they use KAATSU before the treatment and it we're at the very early stages of this, so I don't I don't wanna overstate it, but they are seeing very positive, initial data coming out of patients where they've done, MERT treatments without KA2 and when they've done MERT treatments just after doing KA2. And that's fascinating. It gets to that that systemic response that Steven was talking about, better blood flow across the blood brain barrier even though what you might be doing is KA2 cycles on your legs. So fascinating. We're working very closely with, Wave Neuroscience is the name of the organization out of California. And, so, yeah, we're we're we're we're doing a lot in the TBI, PTSD, and sleep world, which, again, didn't didn't ever see this coming when I, when I joined five years ago, Steven. Yeah. Yeah. And and, Sam, you know, something too, a lot of, people around the world have pets, and whether it's a dog, a cat, a a horse, etcetera. And, we're even doing, we're now in the second wave of tests with, animals starting off with dogs. Dogs are quite popular around the world, especially in The United States, especially after we came out of this pandemic, period where a lot of people bought pets. And when they get injured, we're actually even putting our bands around the four legs of the animals. So it's not only humans, it's mammals that we are actually, helping because we know that the love that the owner has toward that pet quite often is just as real and just as important as if it was a child or someone else, especially for those who are living alone or or other kind of things. So we we really are pushing forward, as as aggressive we we have because we see so many human needs. Yeah. Yeah. Of course. And, Yeah. I mean, like, you know, exercise and, you know, muscle stimulation in whatever form is kind of very critical for aging and longevity and just overall health. Like, a lot of times people you know, of course, there are, like, accidents and injuries, which I think, you know, the, culture bands are perfect for. But, yeah, like, even in the everyday life scenario, it's, like, a good hack to, get the person, moving and get them, faster results in terms of, your muscle muscle function and overall health. But, yeah, you mentioned that that athletes as well. So, yeah, besides the rehab, is there a way that the culture balance can enhance, like, performance? Yes. One of the biggest areas that, is actually well known, in the sporting world is recovery. Again, often, especially here in The United States, we're focused on getting the athlete to eat faster, better, stronger, and therefore, coaches were pushing the athletes very much. Overtraining is is a real problem. Where KAATSU can have a much bigger impact is actually on the recovery. So, yes, athletes, from from swimming to running, rowing to bobsled are using KA2 for the movements that they use in their sport, whether it's throwing a a shot put or throwing a javelin or riding a bicycle. But the area in sports medicine that is really taking off now is whether the athlete's doing before or after their practices and their workouts. And that's where KAATSU is really, really on the cutting edge. So, especially if you're in a competition, let's say, at the Olympics or even your local high school competition where you're gonna do an event, maybe multiple events in one day, and maybe you're doing a weekend of activity. It could be in the game of soccer, volleyball, etcetera. And that downtime in between the competition and the next race or competition, in that area, Katsu is really blowing the minds of coaches and athletes because as John put on, the pressure on, pressure off, pressure on, pressure off, actually really, tremendously enhances the metabolic flush from the working muscles. And so that recovery time is really used for recovery time on a muscular cellular level. And therefore, the athletes in workout, let's say they have let's say they do six workouts, in a week. Well, each workout can be enhanced when you make that recovery time best and optimum. So, yes, we are using it for athletes in in their actual sport, but where KAATSU is is really seen extraordinarily valuable now is in between the workouts or in between the competitions where we're helping the athlete recover. So, therefore, an athlete can come in on Monday, train at a 100%, Tuesday, a 100%, Wednesday at a 100%, etcetera. Instead of training at a 100%, getting tired, training up theoretically at 90%, 80%, 70% as they tire. So that recovery aspect of KAATSU has really been, something that athletes and coaches around the world have have really asked us. How do we do this? And, John, you you're meeting and talking to athletes whether they're tactical or competitive every day, and and and tell them a little bit more of your experiences. Well, I I think it's fascinating that the, you know, you have a sport. Some of these sports might have three all out efforts in one day because it'll be a quarter final, semifinal. And then at night, after a little rest, they'll go and they'll hit their big final. And, I know the Olympics doesn't work exactly like that. There's a little more time, but still, we have so many athletes that they use KAATSU, and, yes, they train with it, but the recovery piece is beautiful. So as soon as they finish the event, they slap the leg bands on. Let's say it's a track athlete. They slap the leg bands on. They get prone, and they love this because they they go right into their social media, you know, give all their buddies their stats and stuff. And in the meantime, during the cycle phase, we're dilating all that tissue. Curfusion is going up. Right? Your cardiac output your cardiac response to having the bands inflate, your heart has to pump harder because remember, Simna, the the blood's always moving past the bands. It's just that it's moving slower when and your heart has to work a lot harder. And then we get that rapid complete release, and now all that tissue is dilated open. The heart's pumping harder. We got a much higher perfusion, and we get that flushing that Steven's talking about. In the in the tactical athlete world in the military, we we we would never be able to tell the military human performance programs that we don't want the guys to go heavy. They they have to go heavy. They have to be able to carry weight. They have to be able to move weight, But they don't have to do it nearly as often as what I grew up with in the military. When I grew up, we would go let's just as an example, we would do a squat day in the gym. We'd go as heavy as we could to failure, max out, and then we wouldn't use our legs again in that in that sense for another at least three days. It's just the legs be destroyed. Yeah. What the guys are doing in the in the HP world now, in the human performance world, in the military, is they're still working the guys out with heavy weight, but they're doing much less of that maximum max weight effort, and they're folding KA2 in as a finisher. So they're going heavy, you know, 80%, one rep max, that typical thing. And then at the end of the workout, they slap the KA2 bands on, and they'll go in constant mode so they can do multiple people at once and untether them. So, we could talk about that more if you want. But, basically, they can easily have 10 guys with the leg bands on, and then they'll do a finisher, which is just body weight. And the guys love it because that body weight is harder than any it feels harder. Let me be clear. It feels harder than any of the, eighty percent one rep max they were doing during the workout. And what's what's really cool is now we have a especially in special operations, we have we have older operators. In general, the special ops guys are are are five to ten years, older depending which service you're talking about, but they've been around longer. They have more, chronic pain, arthritic issues, chronic pain from older injuries, and a lot of these guys are in some semblance of orthopedic rehab. So when they're at home station, they have all the tools they they need. They have trainers, coaches, PTs, and that. They have all the equipment. But what we're finding, a lot of commands are using this now. It's really cool. When they're going on a training trip or they're going on a deployment, they go to the physical therapist, and they check this they they check out this unit right here, the one you have. They check out the c three unit, with the leg bands and the arm bands, and they take it on deployment or they take it on the training trip where there is very little equipment or no equipment. And then, they can still get that metabolic stress on the road in hotel rooms or on the roads on on deployment without all the equipment. Couple couple TheraBands, maybe a TRX and KAATSU. So we have a lot of the military units building these. We call them flyaway kits. But, interesting stuff. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, they're perfect for travel and, like, pretty small as well. You can fit them in, like, a jewelry in there. In yeah. Like, that's how I imagine it's also best to use them that, you don't go like this. Because it kinda makes more sense actually to go to complete failure, like, as a finisher, like a pump it, complete the pump offset, with the cut two bands than with the regular weights. Because, you know, what what I've seen in studies is also that the, the the, blood flow restriction bands and, CAR2 bands, they actually cause less muscle damage. Like, you get more of these metabolic stress and accumulation of lactate and those kind of metabolize and blood into the muscle, but you cause less damage to it. So we actually recover faster from that. Yeah. So, you know, if you are, let's say, you know, the body builder routine where you're trying to Mhmm. Like, few last sets, maybe two last sets, you're doing a lot of, like, high reps and going to failure to get the maximum, growth stimulus, then it actually makes more sense to do that with the culture bands because, yeah, you're, you know, you're avoiding this massive, you know, muscle damage that would, come from that. But but you would get the same response. Exactly. That that inflammation response, we can almost eliminate that if we do very, very low or no weight for these multi joint movements. If you can eliminate the inflammation response and this is why doctor Sato is able to work out multiple times a day, same muscle group. He'll he'll put a bar this is great. I've seen him do it. He'll put a bar, empty bar, so 45 pounds, 20 kilos. He'll put an empty bar, and then he'll do he'll do reps. And instead of adding weight, he'll add pressure. It's it's incredible. And, by the end of it, you see him struggling just like a guy that puts two twenty five on the bar and goes to failure, but almost zero inflammation response. And he can he's not tearing down muscle fiber. He can do it again, you know, six hours later if he wants no problem. That's why he looks like, he does at 70, almost 75 years old now. Right, Steven? Yes. And what is what is even more remarkable about doctor Sato is if you look at his maximum, or his his his power, He started out in his teenage years and early twenties as a power lifter. Well, guess what? By the time he was 30, 40, 50, and 60, he was still lifting the same weight. You know, when when we think of bodybuilders or power lifters now, you know, you are you've maxed out basically between, you know, 20 and 35 years old. But doctor Sato has proven, we've done it him as a, as an individual, but also in the laboratory with people as as old as a 104 years old, that their power output does not have to decrease with age. Mhmm. And when you can take a 104 year old, increase her muscle mass, increase her strength, what this really means is that she's not gonna go in a competition, but she's gonna be able to walk upstairs easily. She's gonna be able to walk downstairs easily. She'll she'll be able to open up jars of of whatever she's doing. She'll she'll be able to lift things up and put them on a cupboard. So practical things, can be achieved by people in their eighties, nineties, and hundreds that were never considered possible. So the human potential as we get older is being dramatically shifted. It's a huge paradigm shift in in in doctor Sato as a practical matter. But also in the laboratory, we're seeing that people in their eighties, nineties, and hundreds are functionally, because of their muscle tone, strength, stamina, etcetera, are what they are in their forties and fifties and sixties. And if you think about this antiaging goal, isn't that what we're trying to achieve? If if you can freeze your human potential at the age of 40 and continue that 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, it it is what I believe in. It it is what doctor Sato saw many, many years ago, and it it's what you and and John were working for or towards every single day. Yeah. Yeah. That's awesome. I also, actually saw that, the cancer bands can also increase stem cells. Is is is that correct? Yeah. We have, In in in the stem cells, I'm leaving that in the hand in the hands of the stem cell experts, because, we can't I would rather have third parties just as just like we left it in the hands of the vascular elasticity in the hands of cardiologists. I was just at a at a convention in in San Diego, and the stem cell experts, came to me, and they were saying, oh, we'd love your product because of the effect that they measure and they see. And so, you know, these are all new areas that, we don't profess to be experts in everything. All we do is provide the tools and the know how how to use KAATSU, and then allow our stem cell experts, our cardiologists, our internists, our our Olympic coaches to take what we the fundamentals that we share, and they start to expand. I mean, when I was with doctor Sato the very first time in 2001, I did see a lot of older people, but I didn't see anybody who was 104 years old. And so what the the big issue is as I was continuing with doctor Sato, I did see people who are over 90, over 95, and over 100 years old. And so this this idea of human potential is really being expanded, through the integration of stem cell experts, of cardiologists, of cognitive, development experts, etcetera. Nice. Yeah. I guess there's more needs to be more, specific research done about that. But, yeah. I mean, even then, I think the, all the other benefits that you get from the muscle and, the cardiovascular benefits and, yeah, they've reduced, muscle damage and those things that are already super, like, amazing in terms of, yeah, like, what what you're actually doing. Like, you're not really needing to go to the gym. You're not, you know, tearing down your body that much, and, yeah, you're kind of avoiding this wear and tear that, may occur with, yeah, like, regular exercise as well. How how do you, let's say, use it? So, like, what kind of exercises can you do with, the bands? Like, because you can't I would imagine you can't do, like, all the traditional gym movements. So what can what can you do? Like, you can't train the back, for example, or you can't train the shoulders directly. Right? Absolutely. Well, there is go ahead, John. I I was just gonna, lean back into what we were talking about earlier with that systemic response. Just because you have the leg bands on, it does not mean because remember, they're not they're not tourniquets. We're still having blood moving in and out of the limb. So there's a lactate response if you're using let's just say you're really working your quads. Well, that lactate response is a systemic response. Granted, it's not gonna be as intense in your middle back. But if you build up the lactate in your legs and then you move immediately to back, you're still getting a very good, response. And and, actually, if you leave the leg bands on and work the back, it gets intense pretty pretty quick. It's, it's good, Sam. I know you work out all the time. It's good to experiment with it. Do do some things where you're taking your legs, pretty far along with KATU like you normally do, and then roll right back right into a back, extension or a core movement or planks or whatever you're working on, and you'll be surprised at how much harder it feels when the legs are at that state. Okay. I'm gonna try it then. Yeah. And another thing that's important to understand is when you have the bands on and you take the bands off, it's it's within a ten or fifteen minute period where HGH is maximized. So the maximum amount of HGH isn't actually produced as you're doing KAATSU. It act there's actually a slight delay. So how how is that actually practical in a in a athletic performance world or a a strength training world? So we always recommend if there is an athlete who is working on a specific move, maybe it's a runner or maybe it's a a swimmer who's working on their starts, Maybe it's a it's a hurdler who's who's working on jumping over the hurdles, or maybe it's actually a a a young man working on a bench press. What they can do is use KAATSU in their workout, then take off their bands. In that next ten to fifteen minutes, we believe that the KAATSU continuum, it continues. So in that ten to fifteen minute period, really work on whatever movement that you wanna do. At that moment in time, the HGH and the hormonal response is maximized. And so it makes sense if you're an athlete or you're you wanted to improve yourself in some way to actually do that movement as the HGH, beta endorphins, etcetera, are being maximized. So even though the bans are off, the effects of KAATSU continues for a period of time. And so, therefore, for let's say we have, athletes who are, let's say, trying to be getting a college scholarship or trying to, get on a national team or trying to get a a a new contract. What we recommend there is do KATSU in their warm up, Take off the bands, and then in front of the coach or whoever is making a decision about their future, do the exercise as their HGH, beta endorphins, etcetera, are being maximized. And so we don't simply believe that KAATSU is only when you have the bands on. It continues after the bands are off. That's interesting. Yeah. That's cool. So, yeah, like, you can take them off and still do, like, some, other movements and get, like, some responses from that. Right. Go for the one rep max, for example. Mhmm. You know, put the bands on, do the workout the cuts workout, take the bands off, hydrate a little bit, rest a little bit, and then go for your one rep max. Mhmm. We've seen that time and time again. And and they emotionally, psychologically, they say, how can that happen? I just maxed out with KATSU. Mhmm. But then they take the bands off, rest a little bit, drink a little water, you know, shake their muscles out, and then go for their one rep max. And all of a sudden, they said, well, ten minutes ago, I was exhausted. But Yeah. Because we've got a biochemical reaction in the body that's allowing your performance to actually get even higher. So my, my son's a basketball player or he was. He's now a freshman in college. But as a senior in high school, we brought, his basketball team over. We had them all, do their typical warm up and do, three vertical leaps. Basketball players, they knew they know their vertical leap within a millimeter, basically. So we have them warm up, three jumps as high as you can, measure their vertical leap, then we have them do KA2 cycles. They all do KA2 cycles and just mobility work, light stretching, maybe some air squats, whatever they want, basically. As long as they're doing the KA2 cycles on their legs, and we would do that for five to ten minutes depending which kid because it wasn't all exact it wasn't an exact science. But then we take all the bands off of them and have them all do three jumps again. So when we did this before they went to states, all of the kids had a higher average except one, and the one kid, like, had a problem with this year. So I can't say a 100, but they all jump higher. And it's and and and that's just one anecdotal. I think there were 10 kids over that day, but there's something there. There's something there. And so, yes, it's a recovery tool. Yes. It's a training tool. Yes. It's a neuropathic pain, but it's a warm up tool too, especially if you're getting ready to do and this gets to what you were saying, Steven. If you're going for a one rep max on, a deadlift or squat or if you're going for a max effort on pull ups, do Katsu cycles beforehand, and, you know, you'll be pleasantly surprised. Yeah. I mean, that actually makes sense because, you know, let's say without the KAATSU bands, you do you go for, let's say, not the one rep max or let's say, you lift, I don't know, 95% of your max, then the 90% will afterwards will feel lighter because you were at a 95% before and, it you are wearing the heavier load. So the lighter load feels that much, lighter psychologically as well as, physiologically also, like, more, you know, prepared to lift that. So with the Kaltzu bands, maybe, like, if you do, you know, get the get the metabolites going and you release the hormones so your body perceives that it actually lifts at, like, super heavy weight. Like, yeah, your body thinks that it lifts at a 100% or something, then, you take them off. You haven't, like, caused any, like, actual muscle damage or, you know, you still have plenty of glycogen and stuff as well, then, yeah, like, the one rep max that you're actually going with with, the actual weight, the barbell, then that could, yeah, feel, lighter just by doing that. So, I mean, yeah, we need to do, like, some more studies or but, yeah, like, that's maybe my explanation that it could be like that. Yeah. I alright. Well, maybe let's say, like, how how do you have people use it? So, is there, like, any, you know, workout routine that they should follow, or is do they, yeah, just maybe they do a few, cycles of that? Or how is there any, like, yeah, structure that people could follow? Yeah. It it depends, you know, because we work with professional athletes and Olympians all the way up to people in their eighties, nineties, and over a 100, it's it's impossible for us to say you should do this because we have a 20 year old who is very focused on competition, and we have an 80 year old who just wants to walk upstairs and down to the the park. So but what is common amongst everybody is to do the pressure on, pressure off, pressure on, pressure off. How they actually move their body depends on their lifestyle and their athletic goals. We recommend if if you're a competitive athlete, the best thing you can do is do the cut cycles as John suggested to warm up, then actually use your bands in the movement that you wanna do in your sport. So if that's a basketball player shooting or jumping up to grab a rebound, if that is a track athlete who's working on the sprint at the end of their 1,500 meter race or 5,000 meter race, then use the bands in the actual action that you're doing. It could be a golfer. It could be, someone doing archery. Whatever it is, use the bands in the actual movement that you're doing. Take off the bands, and then continue, repeat your activity, whatever that is, if if you're in the athletic, realm. So not necessarily. You don't have to use it in the gym. You can use it in gym. But if if I had ten minutes to use for a competitive athlete, I would be using my bands in the actual movement that they do in their sport. If it is someone who is older who simply wants to focus on antiaging, strength gains, weight loss, more, balance, then I would focus simply on the movements that they are weak in. So if it is a person with a a lower limb, some kind of leg, injury of some sort, I would put the bands on a little bit tighter on the leg that is injured or weaker and simply walk. If a person wanted to work on their core, either their stomach, their abdominals, or their lower back, they could put the bands on their legs and simply stand on one leg. They they will will they will have some sort of of difficulty. Rest. Stand on one leg again. Or very simple, instead of doing planks or crunches or sit ups, they can walk around, their house with a book on their head with bands on their their, legs. So we have many, many different protocols on how to do and what we often do. What I spend every day doing, what John does every day is people buy the bands for, let's say, one purpose. Maybe they were injured. Now they're they're healthy, And now they come back to us and say, well, I'm healthy now. I wanna gain muscle or I wanna run a marathon or I would like to be able to touch my toes. And in all these cases, we have thousands of different protocols that we share with people on a daily basis to match whatever goal that they have. All I would say is the older, the weaker that you are, the more benefit KAADSU will have for you. Of course, it's very good for the very elite athletes, but like John said, we can take a a Olympic gold medalist or a top professional athlete and increase their their benefit just a little bit. For them, that's that's very valuable. However, when we have someone who is weak or disabled or or, not motivated to do any exercise, for those people, the the increase is very great. So, you know, we like people who who don't like exercise. We like people who are, somehow, impacted physically because the benefit that COTS has for those people is very large. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. I agree. Like, even if you're, you know, completely sedentary or, let's say, mobilized or whatever the case is, even then just wearing the cup, the cuffs and, getting the cycles on and off, then all that already would have, like, a massive improvement for you. So, yeah, you don't even, like, need to lift anything to get benefit. Or even if you're like an athlete and you still wear them with just the on and off, cycles, then even then you would get some benefits for recovery side. So, yeah, you know, there's levels to this and degrees, but, yeah, like, even just using it on any case, you would see, yeah, great improvements in my opinion. Yeah. Yeah. And and then there's there's, and this might be a rabbit hole, but I I I think it's worth mentioning. The wound care, uses are are fabulous. I I've personally experienced that, and I've seen others, experience it. Just the especially especially if the wound is distal of the bands, somewhere on the arm or leg, during that, release phase, you have all this new oxygenated blood coming in. And then during the pressure phase, we're slowing that oxygenated blood around that acute injury, that wound, that cut, that suture, or even if we're talking about connective tissue. Right? Because now we're we're talking about all the way down to capillaries, and capillaries are everywhere in our body. Right? So if you can take oxygenated blood and slow it down and increase that partial partial pressure of o two around the wound, even just for thirty seconds, and then release the pressure, let new blood let new blood come in, and then slow it down again, and do that over and over and over without even having them move. So now think of a type two diabetic. Biggest issue with those guys is getting them to do anything. But if we can have them lay on their couch and watch their favorite TV show and do katsu cycles on their legs, if they're having a lower extremity wound care issue or something that's not healing, this is a way to improve circulation to that wound. It's, it's a great tool for that as well. Mhmm. Yeah. That's amazing. So, yeah, I'm a huge fan and a huge, user of the culture bans as well. And, yeah, definitely, I'll I see a use case for everyone, virtually everyone. No matter the level of fitness as well as age, everyone can use it. And, yeah. Well, it was great talking with you guys again. Where can people find more information about Katsu? Yeah. It's www.katsu.com. John has it on his T shirt or his shirt there. It's k a a t s u. Ka is a word in Japanese that means additional, and Atsu, a t s u, is a Japanese word that means pressure. So it's additional pressure. Mhmm. And that's exactly what the bands, do, and the effects are profound. So www.katsu, kaatsu,.com. And, thank you very much for this time and opportunity to share a little bit about Katsu with you. Of course. And, yeah, the, if people want to try it out, then they can get a 10% discount with, code SIIM, s I I m. And, yeah, we'll put the links in the show notes as well. And, yeah, it was my pleasure, and I'm glad to talk with you guys again. And, yeah, let's stay in touch. Thank you. Excellent. Thank you, Seem. Great seeing you again. Thank you. Likewise. Thanks for listening to this episode. If you want to support this podcast, then check out our sponsors and leave a review on iTunes or Spotify. My name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.