Microplastics. They're everywhere. They're in plastic bottles. They're in some of the foods. They're in the water supply. You're exposed to these kind of xenostriogenic microplastics everywhere and it is estimated that the humans will be consuming up to, like, a credit card size of microplastics per year. Suck. That can be quite harmful for your overall hormonal profile, fertility and just overall health and vitality. So in this video, I'm gonna talk about how can you detoxify these microplastics and and excrete different kinds of toxins and heavy metals plus plastics from your body. So the number one most effective way to excrete and detoxify your body from these different kinds of, toxins as well as plastics is to sweat. Sweating practices like the sauna have been used for thousands of years by different cultures, and they do have a therapeutic effect on your immune system as well as overall detoxification effects. Now you may think that this is bull. Detoxifying through sweat and excreting toxins through sweat is a myth. But in reality, there are actually quite a lot of studies finding that your body does excrete a lot of different kinds of, toxins, pollutants, plastics, pesticides, herbicides, heavy metals from your body through sweat. And, sweat is actually the largest concentration of these, compounds. Like you excrete more of these compounds through your sweat than you do through your blood or urine. And unfortunately, in these studies, most of the individuals that are studied, they do have things like BPA, Bisphenol A in their sweat. So pretty much everyone has exposure to these mycoplastics and different kinds of toxins. Phthalates are another one of those, compounds, xenoestrogenic compounds that have a negative effect on your hormone levels and infertility. And, fortunately, you can also excrete them through your sweat. Flame retardants, another one of these compounds, you're able to excrete them through sweat, urine and blood. But again, sweat is the number one pathway for this. Organochlorine pesticides, similar story. So blood, urine and sweat, but sweat the biggest one. Heavy metals like arsenic, cadmium, lead, and mercury in sweat, you, excrete them through sweat. During the Gulf War in the nineties, about thirty percent of The US veterans were experiencing something called Gulf War Illness. And, this was estimated to be caused by the exposure to large amounts of this pollution and different kinds of hay metals and toxins that, they got exposed to in that conflict. Fortunately, they were able to, like, improve the symptoms by the daily four to six week intervention that consisted of exercise, sauna induced sweating, crystalline nicotinic acid and other supplements. So basically, this is called the Hubbard protocol where you do sauna exercise and niacin. So niacin flush kind of enhances the, sweating aspect and makes you, like, flush and detoxify the toxins as well. The way sweat can help with excretion of different kinds of toxins is that, the glycoproteins in human sweat are able to bind to these kind of compounds in your system and, excrete them. Exercise has also been formed to contribute to this and the people who exercise, they, have higher concentrations of all these, metal and chemicals in their sweat as well. So exercise, sauna, niacin is, kind of the best, stack for excreting all kinds of different toxins. So the top three things for excreting different chemicals, pesticides, metals, plastics, microplastics from your system is number one, sauna induced sweating, exercise and niacin as a supplement. There are also some other additional supplements that you could take that bind to toxins like chlorella, liquid charcoal, taking glutathione to boost your own antioxidant defense systems etcetera. But I think that they're still the number one thing to do and to focus on is to do some sort of regular sweat exposure through sauna as well as exercise. Alright, that's it for this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.