When you look at the bacteria that promote virtually everything we would want health wise and you look at what feeds those bacteria, it's not on the protein side of the equation. It's on the roots and fiber side of the equation. That's what's feeding those bacteria. Welcome to the Cim Lond podcast. I'm your host Cim Lond. And our guest today is Joel Green. Joel is an author of the immunity code and a pioneer of many ideas in the nutrition space for decades. This episode is brought to you by Boncharge, formerly known as Blue Blocks. My favorite light and sea palme staging companies, Blue Blocks, has rebranded themselves as BoneCharge. They're now involved with a huge range of evidence based products to improve your wellness and life in every way. Their extensive range of premium wellness products helps you to sleep better, perform better, have more energy, recover faster, balance your hormones and reduce inflammation. My favorites are their red light light bulbs because they can be used to create a melatonin friendly environment in your bedroom by shining only red and not blue or green light waves that will reduce your sleep quality. After starting to use these red light light bulbs, I find it much easier to fall asleep and feel less awake before bed. If you want to try out these amazing products that are the cornerstones to my most optimal sleep, then head over to boncharge.com/seamlund and use the code seam 15 to save 15%. Joel, welcome back to the show. Thank you. Good to see you, Sam. Yeah, this is our third time doing a podcast together. And yeah, the first one was like twenty twenty second one twenty twenty one. And this is for this year, 2022. So, yeah, it's glad to have you back. Our yearly hangout. Yeah. Well, I mean, you have so much, amazing content. And, when I was, you know, browsing through Instagram, I was thinking about what we're gonna talk about this time, And there was, like, so many posts. Like, every post was, like, so interesting and very, like, you know, like, new or, like, many people don't even talk about those, things. So, yeah, it's very, like, hard to think about, okay, what we're actually, what's the topic of our today's podcast. But I guess, you know, what we decided on that is gonna be, like, you know, aging and longevity. So, yeah, that's some also something that you are very, like, interested in. Yeah, like, what maybe, like, is there anything that, you know, intrigued you the most about Dan Gaging, or what was the reason why you, like, you know, started to research it in the first place? Yeah. I I think the reason that, that I had both of my parents had very poor health. So, my mother died of cancer, like, when she was in her sixties, and then my dad got diabetes when he was in his early fifties. And he he spent most of his life kind of overweight, you know, saying that, you know, I gotta get in shape. I gotta do something, and he never did anything about it. And so I think for me that seeing both my parents, like, really not get what they could out of life, it had a profound impact on me, a profound impact. And I I, at an early age, decided that's never gonna be me. So I think that was, the impetus behind the whole thing for me. Yeah. Yeah. Like, the prevention thing That's for sure. Yeah. And, like, do you have, like, any I don't know. May people have, you know, different opinions about what causes aging and, the, like, monetary theories and things of that. Do you have, like, any, like, grand theory of, like, why we age and, what are, like, the keys to, increasing longevity? Gut. The grand unified theory. Right? Yeah. The grand unified theory of aging. Well, first thing to say is that, there isn't any single single cause. It's multifactorial. There's a lot of things that are driving the equation. And when we look at aging and what's driving it, there are sort of different ways to interpret which piece of the equation is dominating. I would begin with, probably insulin at the high level, highest level, just because if you break down the, the signal pathways of what's going on during so here's my grand unified theory. Energy, and growth and life are the exact same thing. They're all one thing. So the the taking in energy is essential for what we call growth. Growth can be defined in two ways. It could be defined as cell cycle progression, and then it can be defined also at the same time as, the protein synthesis, as the manufacturer and production of protein. So we can we can define growth that way. And what we find is that the production of energy and growth by that definition are one and the same. You you cannot have, you cannot have energy come into the body, in the form of glucose transporting across the cellular membrane and not get, cell division and not get protein synthesis. So, and then what we find with that is that when there are disorders or something gets broken anywhere anywhere in that chain. So for example, in the, in the in the transport process, bringing glucose into the cell, you have, a signal chain of molecules. And, you know, you have, IRS one, PIK three, AKT, a bunch of intermediates. We have these, transport, signal transport chains to bring sugar into the cell. And if so energy. And if anything goes wrong with any one of those, you're gonna see issues. You're gonna see pathologies. And so, ultimately, what we can say is that the production of energy and the equation of life are the exact same thing. They're one and the same. And when energy goes to zero, that's called death. That's called, by a number of different things. But that's that's death. So at the top of the food chain, I would say, is insulin. And it's because, in the in the signal pathway, insulin, the IGF one growth insulin IGF one receptor, it activates, it act it activates the growth pathways. So it activates what's called map k, mitogenic activated protein kinase, and that controls cell cycle, division. That controls progression through cell cycle. So that directly directly controls lifespan because, we only have so many cell divisions. And when we're taking in energy, we are triggering the cell cycle progression. When we stop taking in energy, I e fasting, I e autophagy, we stop cell cycle progression. And then on the other side of the equation, the metabolic side, when we take in energy, we trigger mTOR. So we trigger protein synthesis, and then mTOR is a throttle. It either slows down or accelerates energy transport into the cell, and that's all governed by insulin. So the ability of the body to respond efficiently to insulin, to not make too little, to not make too much, directly mediates, key signal pathways that directly drive, using up the body over a life span. So I would say the thing that people could probably get their hands on immediately and directly affect right now today that's gonna have the biggest effect long term is insulin and understanding how to, manipulate insulin to get the maximal, lifespan. That's what I would say. Mhmm. Wow. Yeah. That's very interesting. Yeah. Like, obviously, we know the insulin resistance and, diabetes and those, cut, yeah, many years of your life. And, like, in animal models, then one of the, like, one of the main, like, pathways of longevity is, like, the incident IGF signaling pathway. And, yeah, like, you know, if things grow too much through the incident and enter and IGF pathways, then, yeah, obviously, you will just, you know, you you of course, you can, like, experience this, you know, malignancies and cancer growth, but, yeah, like, you know, too much growth is still, you know, harmful for the, aging side. Yeah. Like like, if we're gonna talk about growth, you know, what we have to consider in the definition of growth is protein synthesis, cell cycle progression, okay, the the production of of proteins, the ability to make proteins. All those things are in the equation. And then what gets lost in the discussion is that that's directly directly controlled via insulin and its action on the insulin IGF one receptor. Directly controlled. So you have, let's take MAPK, that pathway. Mhmm. So when you stimulate when you when insulin stimulates the in insulin receptor, you get, basically, this dropping down of the beta subunit that sits below the cell surface, and then you have this tyrosine we have the scaffold of of kinases, tyrosine kinases that fire. And there's a sequence of kinases. It's nine seventy two ten six four ten six five that fire. And what that does is it is it activates, cell cycle progression. So that means that cells can be in a state where they're just kinda hanging out. They're not doing much. They're not dividing. They're just but they're not they're not they're in a quiescent state. And then when that pathway gets triggered by the IGF one receptor by insulin, now what happens is cells have to make decisions. Do we want to proceed to the next phase? Do we want to hang out? What are we gonna do? And so that that whole thing starts the clock on lifespan, you know, and that's that's directly tied to insulin. So if we have insulin resistance, for example, and we're we're making in other words, the insulin receptor has lost its ability to respond to insulin and move glucose into the cell. So now what happens is the body's making more insulin to get the same result. So the IGF one receptor is firing, firing more, but we're not transporting glucose. Okay? But what we are doing is activating all these pathways. We're activating the map k pathway. Yeah. Yeah. So that's aging. Yeah. Like in like, if you have a high blood sugar levels or hypoglycemia, then you actually are under this chronic impulse stimulation all the time. Like, you're always growing. Your body is detecting that it's growing. And at the same time, because you're not shuttling the glucose into the cells or there's too much of it, then, you're at the same time, like, damaging, you know, or causing glycation and damaging the blood vessels and, you know, like a double whammy from, both sides. Yeah. Well said. Very well said. Yeah. So, like, what do you say what do you say that, like, you know, is the answer to be, I don't know, like, a low carb carnivore diet or, suppressing insulin completely, or what's the, like, you know, solution in your opinion? Yeah. Absolutely not. So, here's what I think the answer is, and, I don't claim to have the answers. I'm just telling you this is what I've come to for me. And it's basically this. When we look at insulin and how to make insulin work optimally, it's like a it's like a lineup of the usual suspects. Okay? There's a few key players that we have to look at. One set of players are what I would call the family. You know, the the family of insulin hormones. So this is not insulin, but it's it's other things like, the incretin hormones. So that would be GLP one, GIP. That would be adiponectin, glucagon, and so other hormones. And what these hormones do is they make insulin work better. They sensitize insulin. Okay? And so we have to look at two classes of things. The first class is what I call direct stimulation of insulin, and the next is what I call indirect stimulation of insulin. And we need both. You need you need both. So insulin, what we find when we look at it is that it works, the analogy is that it works like a muscle. And the more that you work that muscle out you you have to work the muscles out in order to keep them toned. Now you don't wanna, like, work out too much per se, like, you know, if you're a competitive, let's say you're a competitive athlete and you're training around the clock, you know, you can overtrain. You can train too much. But, conversely, if you're a couch potato and you never get up and you never exercise, that's not good either. So, you know, we need some we need exercise in the picture to keep the muscles optimal. Insulin's the same way. Like, if so if you're on a low carb diet and you're never really triggering insulin, it's gonna get weak. It's gonna get dull over time. Okay? And so one of the, things that's not well known, as a result of low carb diets is that they have a short term effect, a long term effect. In the short term, they seem to improve insulin sensitivity, but in the long term, they make it worse. They actually drive insulin resistance. So when we look at these things like the carnivore diet, it it's very easy to say, oh, gosh. Well, I did it for six weeks. My insulin sensitivity improved. That's the solution. But but, actually, the window of observation, if we kept it up long enough, what we'd see is when we get into, you know, down the road much farther that that's reversing. And and and there's a number of factors that are driving that. One of them would be that you're overstimulating glucagon. So when you start overstimulating glucagon, which is a starvation hormone, then, eventually, what's gonna happen is you're going to, suppress insulin function. You're gonna you actually can get insulin resistance from that. So all this to say that we need to stimulate insulin directly, but not too much. Directly, but not too much. The other side of the equation is that we need to have periods of remission where we don't stimulate insulin, but we stimulate the helper hormones around insulin. Okay? So here's the the basic idea is that if we have, let's say, in a given week, three days where we were kinda low carb, we didn't stimulate insulin much, what we're not doing on those days is we're not triggering IGF one insulin receptor. We're not stimulating the map k pathway. We're not really triggering protein synthesis too much. You're aging slower on those days. That's like an autophagy day. Right? Then if you have another three days where you're stimulating insulin directly, that's like a gross day. Okay? And you need both. You need you need a balanced equation. Our ancestors, I like to actually watch survival shows, you know, like, naked and afraid and alone. I like Right. And when you watch these shows, you kinda see the same pattern. It's it's that it doesn't matter what you think you are coming into the show. Maybe you think you're a vegan. You get on the show, like, three weeks, and everybody's a carnivore. And conversely, you come on the show as a carnivore, I'm never gonna touch plants. Everybody's eating plant foods when there's no meat available. Okay? So what you see is scarcity. And in these scarcity periods, people forage and they eat roots and they eat berries. Okay? Because it's all there is. But it's but it doesn't satisfy them. Okay? Like, what they're ultimately looking for is is energy dense food, so game. But but game is hard to find. And so what you find is a balance. You find a balance between sort of, like, starvation, autophagy, and then growth. And and that's that's what we should have going on. And as a result, insulin's getting stimulated. So what I would suggest, is that you have, a minimum of about three days a week where you're directly stimulating insulin through insulotropic foods. These are foods that are high in resistant starch, polyphenols, key fibers, and that you introduce them on kind of a curve where you you you treat it like working out. Like, when I first started exercising, I didn't I didn't start at the Olympic level. I started at the couch potato level, and then I gradually increased my exercise. Okay? And so that when you when you begin to introduce these into the diet, your insulin sensitivity is not gonna particularly if you've been doing low carb carnivore, your insulin sensitivity is gonna suck coming off that. So you just slowly titrate these foods in, and then over time, you can handle greater amounts. And so that's how I would do that. And then I would have another three days a week where I'm more focused on fasting and autophagy and the other side of the equation, which is foods that stimulate the incretense. So, eggs will stimulate GLP one. Walnuts will stimulate adiponectin. You know? So I'm looking at more kind of a a low carb, higher, higher fat, higher protein profile on those days. And now I'm getting a balance. I'm getting both in the equation. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I I'm glad that you, you know, started with, like, you know, carbs and incident because, you know, the first thing that, most people talk about when this antiaging is like protein and, they, you know, that the protein is kind of the key, let's say, micronutrient for regulating lifespan. So, obviously, protein is also important, but, yeah, I agree that your insulin is still, you know, kind of the yeah. I mean, like, incident and carbs also turn on mTOR, which is, the reason why they think that protein is bad. So, yeah. But what do you think about protein then? Like, how does protein affect longevity and this cycling? Yeah. So, I I would first say that we're we're in a a phase public wise. The public's in a phase right now. And I'm only I'm not saying this because I've, you know, been doing this here going back a long, long time. And I remember when it was the no fat phase, I remember that, like, every food you could buy said no fat. Not an ounce of fat. No fat. You know? And then people were like, oh, it's got fat. Oh, it's got fat. And then we came then we came out of that, and then we came into the fats good phase and this had, you know, healthy fats and omega fats. And now we're kind of in the high protein phase, which is like, no. Protein's good. You need more protein. So, high level, what I would say is that I I put protein kind of in the same way that I put everything else, which is, sort of a balanced approach to it. And so pros and cons. The the pros of protein is that, you know, we need adequate amounts in the diet, and that's that's a point of discussion. What's the adequate amount? What's the right amount? So, let's start at the high level, which is, which is too much will kill you. Okay? So that would be rabbit starvation, salmon starvation, protein levels that are, you know, eighty, seventy, 80% of the diet, and, that's that's been proven. Like, just try that for a couple weeks and and you'll be dead. Okay. So that that's we can see that, if we're getting in just nothing but protein, no fats, you know, you can die from that. That was a there's an interesting paper that I read talking about the scaling of civilization. And very interesting. So I talked about basically the fact that the inflection point allowing civilization to occur took place when the primary constraint, which was death by salmon starvation, was eliminated. And we then we went to agriculture. And so the the the nutrient constraint was the thing keeping populations down. And then as soon as we had this sort of variety, boom, you know, we saw civilization emerge. But all that to say, it it there's an interesting thing that's not generally talked about or ever understood, which is that, like, if you just had one nutrient source, like, say, I'm gonna rabbit, you'd you'd die eating that. And that's that's so that's super high protein. And it would happen fast, take about two weeks to happen. That being said, most of the research out there talks about high protein being 35% of the diet, and very easy. Most most people that are, you know, end up being healthy these days will have protein intakes well north of that. I don't think there's anything wrong with that, for a period of time. I would I would I would say the extended, practice of that long term will present problems, that that you should be aware of. One one of them being insulin resistance. But on the pro side, you know, we need protein, at we need more at certain ages. So, there there's one school of thought that is, in the fifties, there's more of an incidence of colon cancer, you need less protein. But then in the sixties, you need much more protein because of sarcopenia. There's probably something to that. I I would say that if you have adequate fiber in the diet, colon cancer issues less of a thing. As a longevity mediator, insulin via carbohydrates, I think probably is a is a more powerful mediator for that because when you look at, like, protein's effect on, you know, insulin and mTOR, it's just generally not gonna be as much as carbohydrates. So, like, the big bullet in the gun is carbs, but then, you know, if you take protein into account too, protein can be very useful, calorically. Protein calories just don't seem to affect, body weight, body fat in the way that other types of calories do. So I think it's very useful, you know, in that sense as a as a like, if we're gonna increase one versus the other, what's the thing that we're gonna increase? Interestingly though, there's some really good research on this. The most important nutrient that's missing in the human diet today is not protein. It's resistant starch. And there's there's some new research coming out that's looked at, paleo, lithic populations. And it it it's the the conjecture seems to be that they were eating roughly 30 grams a day of resistant starch, and the average person nowadays gets in one to two grams of resistant starch. And and so, like, if you're gonna increase any one thing, it's the resistant starch. Yes. That's interesting. So resistant starch being this, let's say, a more fibrous form of, starch that, has, like, a better glycemic effect? Yeah. So so mainly just I think the easy way to think about it is, scarcity and availability. Like, digging up roots is kinda my last pick. Like, that's the last thing I'm gonna do. But if I'm starving, I'll do it. And so in terms of, like, human history or just go watch a survival show, it's not that we don't have refrigerators. It's not that easy to get game, typically. So what you do what what you make do with in the meanwhile is you just forage. Foraging on, you know, roots and and inedible things that plants and things. And those have tons of resistant starch in them because you're not cooking them. So that's the missing ingredient. We used to during the starvation phase, we would forage and we get a lot of resistant starch, and that doesn't happen anymore. Gotcha. What kind of foods would we naturally get the resistance starch from? Roots, primarily. So roots are, like, your best source of resistant starch. So potatoes, you know, tubers, things like that. Those are those are probably your best sources. And what affects, you know, what's the, like, health benefit from that that we get? Primary benefit is is is that's how you keep the gut fine tuned. So when you look at, the bacteria that promote virtually everything we would want health wise, and you look at what feeds those bacteria, it's not on the protein side of the equation. It's on the it's on the roots and fiber side of the equation. That's what's feeding those bacteria. So the the thing to understand there is, like, if you're on, like, say, a low carb carnivore high diet, what you're doing over time is you're depleting substrate for those bacteria. And that is not a, a match for what we saw historically. Historically, what we saw is that, during periods of scarcity, you'd forage, and then you'd be getting in resistant starch. So what the resistant starch did was it kept those populations high in between gain. And then when you had gain, you'd pig out and restore muscle. So that's the primary benefit, is is those bacteria that help you stay lean and and and promote longevity. Mhmm. Yeah. And it also has this blood sugar lowering effect. Or Mhmm. Yeah. Absolutely. Right. And, foods, you know, the green bananas are also a good source of that. Right? I've seen some pictures on your Instagram. Yeah. Like, the green banana craze. Yeah. You know, what's interesting about that also is, so I did a post on, green bananas. And so in my book, for those of you not familiar with the immunity code, I wrote about semi green bananas. And then recently, I did a post on, green bananas, and I had, like, a bunch of people from South America message me and and go, yeah. We've we've been eating these forever. You know? And, it's kinda funny because here here in here in The States, you can't get people eating green bananas. They'll they they'll just they'll bloat and they're they can't handle it. So you have to give them semi grain and and start with small amounts. But but people from different parts of the of the world, like South America, that that's regular part of the diet. They eat tons of this. It's no problem. But yeah. So, semi green banana is like a really good source of, prebiotic fiber and resistant starch, and, it's something I've been doing for a long, long time. I combine it with grapefruit. It's a nice little it's a fun little trick to to play with. You can take a day where you just eat a semi green banana and grapefruit. And not everybody, but most people will report by the end of the day, like, their energy is insane by doing that. And it's from combination of b vitamin production from bacteria and amp k activation from the grapefruit. Wow. That's interesting. So just how much how many bananas would you eat then? It it kinda self limiting in that. So typically, like, what I'll do is two two per meal, two to three per meal, and then I'll have four to five meals in a day. Yeah. Yeah. I've, yeah, I actually like the green bananas more than the, yellow ones kind of I don't know. They taste a little better. And, Really? You like them more? Well, I mean, yeah, like, you know, yellow bananas are sweeter, but, I like the starchiness or the kind of the, you know, toughness or a bit more dew. Yeah. It it it literally feels like paste on the tongue. Or maybe that maybe I've been eating the semirene. I don't know. Like, I haven't seen the color map. But, anyway, like, slightly more greener for sure. Like, you know, they're very, tough or starchy. Yeah. Yeah. You're an animal. Then, what I was gonna say, let me think. Then cook cooking and cooling the potatoes is another one. I think a common trick to get the reason search. Yeah. You can cook and cool and heat and reheat, and then a lot of it also depends on the potato cultivars. So there's different types. Some potatoes have more resistant starch than others. And there are there's something I can't talk about because it's, I'm coming out with it pretty soon, but it's a type of resistant starch that, will increase acromancy by 300%. And, it it's it's, I can't say anything other than that. But let's just say that, there's a there's a there's a lot of debate about resistant starch, and, you know, you'll find some people in the scientific community are like, that's a big red herring. There's nothing to it. And I I would just say that's debatable. And, it's easy to prove to yourself. You can just you can just do it. One of the best uses of resistant starch, is is, uncontrollable hunger. So a really good hack for hyperphagia, for uncontrollable hunger, and it works every time, is so if if you're let let's say that you have hyperphagia. You have, like you're eating just way too much at night. You're like, I can't stop eating. What you do is in the morning, in the AM, you literally reset the body's circadian clock, and you can do it in one meal. Basically, what you do is you have, like, a baked potato, really big one. Okay? Heat it, cool it, put some butter on it. Have a couple of eggs with that, maybe, like, six ounces of steak, and then 30,000, I use a vitamin d. Have that all at once. And then that fermentable fiber combined with the protein and the vitamin d just knocks the hunger right out, like, all at once. And it it's from the fermentable fiber, interacting with vitamin d in the gut. It just reroutes your hunger signaling immediately. And it's easy to prove, so I just say go try it. So that that was, 30 k, I use. 30,000? Yeah. Yeah. A lot. Wow. A lot. Yeah. And, the mechanism is the, like, kind of the fiber and, the protein or Yeah. So what you're doing is, well, protein by itself obviously is very, satiating, but, the bacteria in the gut have a very big influence over hunger and cravings and eating patterns. And so what you're doing is loading kind of like a gut bomb in there that's fermentable. So it's gonna ferment up more populations of bacteria that help with hunger. And at the same time, you're giving the vitamin d that the gut needs. So you're kinda giving everything all at once. And, it just it's you know, again, it's biohacking, so it's a hack. Don't take my word for it. Give it a try. If it works for you, great. Yeah. And then then eat it sitting in, run with the sunrise. So, get the vitamin D from there as well then. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We can keep playing with this and, you know, yeah, throw all that stuff in there. Actually, a cool way to do that actually would be, do an ice bath first, which you're gonna come out of that. It's gonna trigger a hunger response, then do that. You know? So, I mean, we can keep biohackers. Right? We we we go nuts with this stuff. Yeah. Yeah. But, yeah, the microbiome, you mentioned that. That's very important. So, and you we talked about the bristle starch. So what else? What kind of other, like, you know, acromensia, you mentioned that maybe, like, how does those are also probably, like, very important for longevity then. Yeah. So the interesting thing with that, that I would point out is there's a there's a few ways to feed acromensia. One is through certain polyphenols, but the other is through fasting. Fasting really feeds Akkermansia quite a bit. Akkermansia, prefers internally secreted proteins from protein in the diet. So this is one of the reasons why low carb, high protein over time, isn't that great for the gut because you're you're taking an external protein, external nitrogen source, suppressing, kinda what Akkermansia needs. But when you're in a starved state, when you're fasting, you're secreting nitrogen internally. Akkermansia feeds off that. So it feeds off the gut lining. So that's good and bad. There's there's pros and there's cons to that. So the pros to that is that Akkermansia turns on genes that help insulin resistance, help insulin sensitivity, helps with aging, all that. That's really good. The cons with that is that, forget the word fasting and just say let's use the word starvation for a minute. So easily verifiable that starvation destroys the gut lining. So when you're when you're when you go without food too long, you get too much acromancy. So and the reason is simple that, if acromancy feeds on fasting, keyword starvation, if you have too much of that too long, then it overwhelms the gut lining's response to acromancy, which is a little bit of acromancy, wears down the gut lining, the gut response, makes more acromancy. That's good. Too much, like like and I know I know people that do this. If they're just you know, they got into fasting and it's all they're ever doing. They're always fasting. Well, you begin to wear the gut lining down over time from doing that because you have too much acromancy. So the longevity sort of, like, approach to it is to regularly stimulate fasting, on a weekly basis, but don't do it too much. Make sure that it's balanced in there. And and so by doing that, you have optimal, production of Akkermansia, and you don't have the downside of that, which is that, you know, you're getting too much. You're trying to get the benefits of autophagy and fasting with too much of that kind of thing. So we need growth. Growth is an important side of the equation. So Mhmm. Yeah. What do you think what do you think about the, fasting side then for overall longevity? Like, you know, how much do you think is and, you know, like, maybe, like, what do you think about the extended fasting? Like, that's also, like, very, thought to be, like, a very antiaging thing to do, like, you know, five day or seven day fast. I think it's okay a couple times a year. Me, personally, I wouldn't do it more than that. But I think a couple times a year, it's probably essential. I would probably add in some senolysis with that, like, you know, very specific things like fisetin and, you know, other things. And and, again, what I do on that. So I might even throw in, like, some erythromycin on that with fisetin and, you know, an extended fast. That's really good for flushing stemless cells. But as a practice that you're doing all the time, what what is part so in my book, The Immunity Code, what I talked about is, basically increasing the benefits of fasting and reducing the time you have to fast. That's kind of the sweet spot. And the way you do that is through, mimicking foraging. So, if you go back and just think about it, you know, historically, there wasn't always food. Or or go watch a survival show and watch what people do. When there's no game available, they have to exercise, have to walk, to find food, and they have to forage. And then what they're eating isn't, like, the first pick. Nobody's nobody's first pick is roots. Nobody's first pick is, you know, foraging for berries. But they're eating those things, and then the net result of having those things is that you are in that autophagy state. You're stimulating the bifidobacteria. You're stimulating all the key bacteria. Well, what's interesting is when you look at what those bacteria do in respect to longevity, they exactly mimic fasting. So when you look at the pathways turned on by those bacteria, they turn on AMPK. They potentiate, you know, all this sort of, like, gene activity, certain all this stuff that essentially mimics fasting. So what I advocate is having your roots' fibers the day before fast, spinning those things up, going into a short fast, and then adding in small molecules at the start of the fast. So, you know, fisetin, things like that, berberine, and turning on all of those pathways through a little modern supplemental help, to really turning up the the jets on, you know, Autophagy and AMK and SIRT one and all that stuff. And so just as a maintenance tool, I'm not really fasting that much, but I'm maximizing signal pathway strength. Yeah. Yeah. So it's like, you know, the goal shouldn't be to fast as long as possible. The goal is to get, you know, the most benefits from the least amount of fasting. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. And then, you know, I mean, it so just, again, if we just look at survival shows or historically, what you quickly see is that there's always gonna be periods where, you know, you just you go a couple days, two, three days, and you couldn't really eat much. And that's but what's interesting in that is, like, if you watch a survival show, what you'll see is, they're still eating something. You know? They're just subcaloric during that period, but the and and and so as a result, they're just really hungry. So that's always gonna happen, and I think it's good to mimic that kind of thing a couple times a year. I'm not, like, I'm not a I'm not a proponent of, like, what we see a lot of nowadays, which is, you know, the five, seven day fast and doing that once a month. I'm not a proponent of that. I'm just because that's starvation. Starvation, is unhealthy. It's not a healthy thing. Starvation is not something that, builds optimal health over time. Some of this good, but too much is bad. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Like, you need to mimic starvation. Yeah. And, yeah, and in some sense, you know, you can do it with exercise as well. Like, you, you can eat up the benefits of fast or eat up benefits of pathology and things of that through or the activation of this AMPK and other pathways with exercise. So if you do, like, a very like, you know, long cardio session at the beginning of a fast, then you're pretty much, you know, halfway through it if you were to do nothing at all, like just, you know, drinking water and not exercising. Yeah. Again, well said. But exercise then. What's your, like, you know, exercise protocol for longevity? Well, the main thing is, that you're doing something every day, and it it really doesn't have to be much. But I think the two keys are, daily and then within each day's frequency. So, the the key thing I've noticed as I've gotten older is all of the things you would expect to happen start happening. So your hormones start dropping, circulation is not quite as good as it was, you know. And so what you have to do is you have to up the ante on certain things. And the most important things, have to do with circulation, because without the ability to get, oxygen and nutrients to the tissues, you fall off a cliff. Inflammation skyrockets and all that. So what I do a lot of during the day is, is very much like either circulation centric or mobility centric. It just and it's I I don't I don't, like, you know, go have some dedicated exercise session. I just I'll be working and I'll get up and I'll crab walk, you know, across a room or I'll just I'll, I'll I'll I'll go do a couple sprints or, you know, I'll I'll stretch. But I'm doing it every day, every single day. Because what you find as you get older is that, it's all or nothing. Like, if you do it every day, you can keep the body profiling fairly young. You know? It's like, I feel like I'm feel like I'm in my thirties. This is great. But if you let one week go, you age 90 years in one week. Yeah. So you have to do it every day is what I found. Mhmm. Yeah. And, what does your, like, routine look like? Well, number one thing is number one thing is sprints. This is the number one thing. So sprinting is the foundation of athleticism. The ability to run is the foundation of everything that that you call young. Like, if you look at old people and you go, what's the difference between this guy and and and this kid over here? It's this guy can't run. Okay? And the kid, you know, he hears a firecracker go off, and he's running a 100 miles an hour. So, it's the ability to run. And running is the foundation of everything. It's the foundation of athleticism. It's the foundation of mobility. It's foundation of, keeping the body young. Most importantly, what I found as you get older is it's the foundation of energy. Like, you take you take anybody who's having energy issues and you give them about ninety days to work up where they can run. And then your the cure for lack of energy at any given time is just go do a couple sprints, and and you get done. And and so the benefit of that is when you see people pick up running, what hindsight has taught me is don't take up distance running. That's I I I know people who've done that, and they have a great three, four years. And then ten years later, they don't run at all because they've blown their knees out. So you wanna maximize benefits, minimize wear and tear, and sprinting is the way to do that. So so, like, basically, if energy is low, go do a couple sprints. Bam. Immediate mitochondrial induction, immediate energy production. Immediate you go from, like, feeling like I have no energy. Like, I feel great. Wow. So sprinting, I would say, is the number one thing. It's it's the thing that you have to condition your body to do and then keep in fine tune. And you don't even have to be able to, like, sprint like like an Olympic sprinter. It's just more whatever your your optimal is for you that you could go roughly sixty sixty five, 70% of your max and and you can kinda do that on a daily basis. You're gonna keep your body your energy very high. You're gonna keep, you're you're gonna you're gonna keep your mobility high, your flexibility high, your energy high. All the things you lose with age, mobility, flexibility, energy, sprinting will keep that in place. So so keeping the body in a fine tune where it can sprint, to me, that's the number one thing. Yeah. And, you know, with age, you actually see that the fast twitch muscle fibers decrease, whereas the slow twitch don't. So, like, yeah, you don't lose the cardio, or you lose, like, a VO two maximum to the age, but you don't lose, like, the fast slow twitch muscle fibers whereas you do lose the power and the speed, from the fast twitch muscle fibers. Yes. Gosh. I'm glad you brought that up. That is such a critical point. That's, that's the thing that we're losing as we're getting older. We're losing the glycolytic fibers. We're losing the type two a muscle fibers. We're losing those. Now type two b are kind of in the middle. They they can do oxphos. They can do glycolytic energy, but really your your the muscles of you, the muscles that were sprint centric, you're losing those. So there's some really great, research that, is recent that's bubbled up on this that shows you can restore that kind of muscle. You can actually preserve and restore the type two a fibers just through just through sprint training or not even sprint training, just explosive movements. And, and you and they don't even have to be, like, the kind that are, you know, injure injury provoking. They they just just little things that you can do. So if you for your viewers who are watching this, if you go to my Instagram, real Joel Green, I have a platform and there's, actually fast twitch movements you can do. Just it's free. Just go in there and do it. But, yeah, that's that's so if we're talking about aging well, you know, historically, like, what you what you've seen in the biohacking spheres, it's all, like, well, AMK, NAD, but the thing that's been neglected is the type two muscle fibers. The because when you lose those with age, that kinda sinks the ship. You can make a really good argument. It sinks the entire ship because number one, you lose the ability, to, function in a young way. You know? Like like like, you you know, you get injured easily. All all these things happen. But also just from a, a muscle maintenance point of view, it's it's really the beginning of muscle decline. You start you start seeing the muscles wither and decline when you lose type two, so that's critical. And one way to do maintain it is to do the sprints. How how how like, you mentioned 60 or 70% is enough. You don't need to go, like, a 100% all out. Yeah. So the thing with sprinting is it's your, it's your biggest bang for the buck return because it's endemic to survival. Like, all mammals, for the most part, the ones that the ones that are here today are the ones that historically sprinted well. Okay? Like, either you sprinted well and caught something or you sprinted well and got away from being caught. One of the two. I mean, that's kinda it. So, it's it's endemic to survival. So it has the most return for the body for the least effort invested, but the biggest problem is, it's also the easiest way to get injured. And so that's the thing that, that's the thing you have to dance around a little bit as you're aging. I've had, literally thousands of people, reintroduce sprinting into the body, but what you have to understand is that it's gonna take you roughly three months and that we're we're not looking to replicate, you know, Usain Bolt. We're not looking to do that. What we're looking to do is, number one, how your body feels on any given day will dictate what you do. And then you never are looking to you're never looking to, I guess the best way to put it is you're always looking to stay relaxed. What you see a lot of people do in the sprint is take techno. Make it real techno. Like, trying a little hard. You're gonna get hurt. The most important thing is that your cheeks should be bouncing. You should see this bouncing in the cheeks. And the so what you see a lot of people do when they're sprinting is they lock they lock the elbows in place. They do this. Okay? So rig rigidity and injury go together. So what you see is when you can relax, and there's a fluidity to what you're doing. So, like, the elbow decouples from the upper arm, and it flows. Okay? Instead of instead of doing this, you're doing this, and the wrist is relaxed. When you keep the body relaxed, you're only looking to approach whatever your relaxational, sort of tension is. So as you're sprinting, as long as I can stay relaxed and I feel good, that's where I should be today. Okay? Now some days, the body's just on. Like, it's just on, and I can just really go. And other days, I am just tight as all get out, and I'm not gonna push myself. I'm just I'm staying relaxed. That's the most important thing because, you'll get hurt. And when you get hurt, you have time off. And so the key is is number one thing is relaxation. In fact, there's a there's a book, very old book that you could look up. It was written by a guy named Bud Winter, and he was, the head coach at a college, San Jose State. And he wrote a book called Relax and Win. And basically, long story show short, he looked at all the successful track and field athletes and found that all the best ones were just relaxed. They were they were relaxed, but under tension. And so that that's kind of a trick is learning to exert yourself, but in a relaxed state, not tighten up not, like, you know, lock your elbows, you know, and all that. So if you can stay relaxed and then take time, take about three months, work yourself into it, nothing nothing will drive your energy more than that. I say that from having done it for a long, long time. When my energy is down, I get up and I go for a sprint. I feel fantastic. And, it the mental the mental, thing is is is amazing. My friend, Mark Bell, you're familiar with Mark Bell Power Project? By the way, have you ever been on a show? Yeah. Yeah. It was, I think maybe two years ago. Okay. I think. Oh, we gotta get you back on that. I gotta talk to him. See if he can get you on there. Anyways, so so Mark kinda saw me doing some sprints, read my book, has taken up running, and now he can't stop. He's addicted to the mental high from it. You can get that same mental high by sprinting, and you can get it in thirty seconds versus having to go run for thirty minutes. The mental high from it, it it's astounding. You get addicted to it. So yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's just the runner's high is one of the, like, biggest reason, I guess, why people run-in the first place. Because I would imagine many people don't or most people wouldn't like this monotonous, you know, cardio thing. And the thing you mentioned about the rigidity then, you know, when you look at, like, cheetahs or lions or you know, they also are very supple and, super fast at the same time. So, yeah, there's a truth of that. Yeah. Aging is rigidity. That's what age is. Like, when like, if if we had to draw a picture of age, it's some dude bent over, walking like that. Okay? Youth is supple. So if you had to draw a picture of youth, it's some little five year old kid bouncing off the walls, and and he can't hurt him. He can't injure him. He's just supple. Yeah. But but what about, like, weightlifting? That also drains the fast twitch muscle fibers. Like, where do we put that? Yeah. So that's interesting. It does and it doesn't. So the the trick with, the trick with weight lifting is maximally centric movement, and we only have about six to seven seconds of energy in the type two, in in the type two b fibers. The problem is that the type two a fibers, can replete so quickly that what they're doing is in between sets, they're completely repleting. So we never really get to the type two b fibers, through for the most part. Most people never really touch on those. Now when you look at the literature, it's like, well, you know, like, heavy eccentric weight lifting is gonna stimulate those those muscles. But but in practice, for most people, they kinda do, but not totally. That being said, weightlifting is essential, I think. It's a question of how you're doing it. I I would I would offer that, quite by accident, I'm I'm through just as a course of my lifetime, I've I've I'm very much in line with Mike Menster's heavy duty, you know, system, which is, fewer sets, maximal intensity, fewer reps, and, and and complete complete focus on the, on the downward movement. So so that's kinda in terms of that, what that does is it's the intensity that that really is the bigger part of the equation. The intensity, it stimulates IGF one, stimulates a whole bunch of things. And so particularly as you get older, it becomes really, really important. You know, you you have to keep the muscles stimulated. So but but I also think that along with that, you need, explosive, fast twitch movements that you can work into what you do where you don't get hurt. Okay? And so nothing trains the muscles quite like moving them quickly. Moving the muscles fast trains them fast. And what I've seen, I've seen a lot of people that I knew from my track and field days that were sprinters, and they got into bodybuilding. And they they kind of, they kinda destroyed their ability to run really fast. That's just my observation. I'm open to being wrong in that. Maybe there's some science study that'll prove that wrong someday, but that's just what I've observed. So I I think that you always have to train the fast twitch muscles through fast twitch movements, through moving them quickly. One of the things I like to do that I think is something safe that anybody can do is to use, use, like, a bosu ball or reflex balls, and you can train the legs and the arms very fast by doing that, just by getting a recoil. So you add recoil into what you're doing just just by taking a fast switch movement, slamming it into a bosu ball, getting the recoil, slamming it. And by doing that, you can train, you know, fast switch, and it's and you're not gonna get hurt. So I like to do those as well. Interesting. Yeah. So, yeah, like, with, yeah, like, with with the weight lifting or bodybuilding types of training, then, yeah, you can, like, you know, wear down the muscles. Or you tend to, like, you know, start to grind the reps. Or if you if you are going for, like, you know, failure, from a hypertrophy side, then, you know, inevitably, you will slow down the, speed because it's you know, you're starting to fatigue, and that's where that's where you're not training the fast twitch muscles. So in, like, in some sense, like, the Olympic weight, I think would be probably the best if you want to train the fast of going for, like, just snatches and, clean and jerks and stuff. Yeah. Funny you say that. That's what I started doing. I when I first started weightlifting, it was, ninth grade. Eighth grade, ninth grade. Like, in a gym, not at home. And I just did clean and jerks. I I just did clean and jerks. Like, I'd go every night and just do clean and jerks for, like, two hours. And, I yeah. I found that was that type of movement is you also brought up something else, and I think that's really important. And that has to do with the accumulated wear and tear on the muscles from weight training. So, early on when I was in my twenties, you know, I was I was kinda into, you know, heavy sets and reps and all that stuff. And I I just kinda quickly noticed that, okay, I'm gonna wear the I'm gonna wear the muscles out if I keep this up. So I I in my approach, particularly as I got over 40, you know, I was I very much I I don't do a ton of sets. I might do three sets for a given body part, you know, but it and it lower reps. So the overall the overall volume of work, isn't that much. And I and I've probably lost a lot of size, you know, as well. I could be I could probably be, like, 20% bigger in terms of bodybuilding standards if I just added more volume. But it's not worth it to me because, the wear and tear, is, you know, you're you're gonna drive adhesions with the fascia. You're gonna get more of those. You're gonna drive all kinds of things over time that use the muscles up. And so I think it's I think if we're gonna talk about aging well, it's very, very important to consider the long term and wear and tear on the muscles. And so, like, I'm 57, and what I can tell you right now is that, that probably seems like to many people in your audience, that probably seems like way down the road. But I'll tell you, when you get here, if you take care of yourself, you're gonna feel incredibly young, and you're gonna wanna train. You're gonna wanna go to the gym, and you're gonna wanna get results. And if you've used the muscles up, you can't. It doesn't matter. It doesn't matter, like, if you take steroids. It doesn't matter. Ronnie Coleman is the world's best example of this. Like, Ronnie Coleman, no one's ever put muscle on like Ronnie. Right? But he used the body up. He used it up. He used his stem cells up, and now he's my age. We're exact same age. And his his body's used up. You know? And that's something that really think about. Nothing and I love Ronnie Coleman. I mean, I I you know? He's he's a hero of mine, but I but just in terms of, like, how I wanna use my body, you gotta play for the long term is what I would say. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's a good example for sure and unfortunate one in in many ways. And it's like, if you put more effort in terms of that, it doesn't mean that you're getting more results. So, like, my one of the mottos that I like to follow is that, like, stimulate, don't annihilate. So you can stimulate muscle growth, like, power and hypertrophy even with even, like, minimal effort or, you know, without completely annihilating the muscle. You need to just, you know, signal the body that it, you know, needs to create these adaptations, but you don't need to, yeah, drag yourself through the dirt or whatever, like puke or, spit blood or whatever, that kind of thing. That needs to be a T shirt. I I think okay. Like, I'm gonna geek out on on marketing here for a minute. I I think you should come out with a T shirt that's stim, s t I I m, you late, not annihilate. That would be a great gym tank top to wear. Yeah. Yeah. You should you should have a, or, simulate. Simulate. How did you mix your you gotta mix your name into stim. I think that would be, s t I I m, stimulate nautilus. That's a great saying. I like that. Yeah. But yeah. But from the bone density side, weight lifting Yeah. Are number one. So, how do you factor that? So, yeah, that's a bit well, like like I said, weightlifting needs to be in the picture. It it has to be in the picture. It's just a question of, how fast you're gonna use up your tires, so to speak. So, like, I like the license like, in the muscles to tires. Like, when you buy a set of tires on a car, you kind of know that they've got a a there's a life cycle to the tread. And if you're gonna, be doing, you know, you know, burnouts and, you know, hard cornering and drifting and go into the track. You're you're probably gonna go through a set of tires pretty quick. So versus if you're just, you know, kind of, driving a car, normally, every now and then, you jump on the engine. It's good. It's good for the car. It's good for the everything in the car. So it's just a question of, like, how much and when. That's that's the thing. Everybody's got their preference. Everybody's got, like, what they wanna do. Some people, you know, just they don't care. They wanna put on as much muscle as they can and look a certain way. Great. Good for you. Go ahead. Knock yourself out. Other people, like yourself, are more sort of thinking about the long term. And so the question everybody has to ask themselves is, how fast do I want to use the muscles up? That's the main question. And weightlifting is absolutely essential part of the picture. You just have to look at the, you know, like, a a lot of the extremes that are presented to us. Not everybody can handle those extremes. I think a good so, Michael Hearn would probably be a good example of, like, you know, someone who lives in the gym, lives in the gym, but not everybody could do that. Not everybody has the physical capability of training that much. You know? And so trying to emulate something like that, you're you're just like you said, you're you're annihilating. You're not stimulating. Yeah. That's true. Yeah. I mean, it's you know, depends on some part of, yeah, like, goals or, genetics and, lifestyle. But, yeah, obviously, in I think, yeah, everyone's, they should still do something, some weight bearing exercise for sure. 100%. Yeah. And deadlift's top of the list. You gotta every everybody's gotta do some kind of deadlift, like, on a you know, so the ultimate is, in a fasted state in the morning, do some deadlifts, do some sprints. That's kinda like top of the food chain and then everything else, you know, work in the beach muscles as you wanna go. Mhmm. Yeah. And, with that, you also activated more than fasting for, like, three days if you do it. Great point. Yeah. Great point. Awesome. Maybe do you have how much time do I have left, by the way? Whatever. Yeah. I've got, I have a I have a call in an hour, but I'm good for right now. An hour? Oh, no. Yeah. I've I've got a call at noon. My time, one hour from now. But, otherwise, if you wanna go a little bit longer, we're good. Yeah. Well, I'm not gonna go for an hour, but, yeah, maybe, like, you know, fifteen minutes. Yeah. Yeah. That sounds good. Yeah. What about supplements? So those are also know, quite hyped about the longevity. So what do we think are maybe some of them, let's say, basic and most, like, effective ones for longevity people can take and, well, some of the ones, like, more cutting edge? I I would say probably, in light of some new research, a foundational one is n a c and glycine. So, the combination of an acetylcysteine and glycine, I'm sure you're familiar, has been shown to affect, reverse aging, reverse a number of aging parameters. And the two are better together than either is alone, and they're very complimentary. So they're both rate limiters in glutathione synthesis, but above and beyond that, they seem to have this sort of plethora of effects on parameters of aging. And so there's really good research with humans that's shown, like, you know, you take small people, you put them on NAC and glycine, and and, like, literally within three months, you can measure all the markers of aging that are decreased. So, the way that I do it is the thing you have to remember about NAC is that it inhibits nitric oxide. That's the thing everybody's left out of the equation. So, NAC will inhibit inducible nitric oxide synthase. And as we get older, we need, most people need more nitric oxide because their circulation is winding down. So the trick with NAC, the way that, I do it, the way that I I have a actually, I have a I'll admit my bias here. I came out with a product called Young Body, which is NAC glycine. But, I did it because, I was doing it anyway for myself. I was taking, you know, NAC and glycine. I've been doing that for a long, long time. But the way to do it is as important as what it is. And the way to do it is really, I I advocate doing it three days a week during autophagy, doing it during a fast. And so that way, it's kinda optimal because you're repleting glutathione you're you're you're helping glutathione down that road during a fast, repleting it, and you're getting all these sort of antiaging benefits. And then the other three days a week, looking at, stimulating nitric oxide, looking at growth, and looking at the other side of the equation. So that way, you're not getting too much of either. Not talked about too much is reductive stress, and that's the excess of antioxidants. And so you have all these supplement companies talking about our product and our antioxidants, the best thing, a daily dose of this. You don't want antioxidants daily. That's you don't want that because you're gonna suppress the critical, nitric oxide signaling that that we need. So kind of balancing that out in terms of, like, when to take it, that's kind of a thing. So any sequencing in the morning, fasted three days a week, probably, like, that that's top of my list. And then the other three days a week, you know, maybe things that stimulate nitric oxide, beet root, things like that. Does glycine alone suppress nitric oxide? So, well, glycine by itself, you don't have to, worry so much about the nitric oxide piece of the equation. So glycine is a glutathione precursor, and it's it helps with a lot of different things. But it's really NAC, and it's inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase that becomes kinda like the the thing with it. That's not a bad thing per se. It's not a bad thing. It's just when are you gonna take it and how much you're gonna take and all that factors in. And and so if we're looking at aging optimally, do we wanna take it every day? Probably not. Probably not. But but but does it have a place? Yeah. For sure. Mhmm. Yeah. It's interesting. So my wife, she's, she has, like, migraines, like, genetic ones, and, nitric oxide is one of the, like, trigger might one of the biggest triggers, for getting that. And, yeah, just, you know, interesting. So, yeah, like you said, you know, I always want to, have, like, a bunch of nitric oxide and a bunch of, like, you know, these, let's say, blood flow or grow angiogenesis. You don't wanna have, like, a bunch of growth of new blood vessels all the time, and you don't wanna have, like, a bunch of, these nitric oxide all the time either. So it's, yeah, like, a very context dependent. Yeah. What you see a lot of, is so if so that pairs up with gut issues, typically. Like, what you'll see is if someone has a gut issue and they're getting lipopolysaccharide perfusing into the serum, so what night what what lipopolysaccharide will do is exponentially, increase nitric oxide to the point where you're getting conversion into peroxynitrate. And so it's really the peroxynitrate mediated by lead polysaccharide that, becomes a big deal. So, you know, what what what's what you can see a lot of is people who are super inflamed. And the reason they're inflamed is the gut is opened up, and they're getting, like, polysaccharide leakage, and they're getting too much nitric oxide. They're getting too much peroxynitrate. So you seal the gut first, you know, and then you start to look at other things that you can do. But, the, the gut and, issues with nitric oxide can go together very much. Gotcha. What are what are supplements besides these ones? I think that, NAD supplements, are, you know, in the picture. So I I take NMN. What I found with NAD supplements is that, they work very well if you're deficient in NAD. You'll feel it. Like, you'll take NMN, take it sublingually, for example, and you feel very energized. But that your NAD levels top off and when they're when they're sort of optimally topped off, you don't feel anything from it. So, you can make a case that, that those things have, like, kind of their have their place. And there's different ways to stimulate NAD, you know, like, you can you can have, you can stimulate, you can suppress CD 38 by apigenin, and you'll get as much increase in NAD as you would taking NAD supplements, you know, or just or just like, a supplement to help you sleep better. You'll you'll get just as much NAD as you would from taking NAD supplements. So yeah. But then NAD is definitely an important part of the equation. I, I I cycle a lot of things, so I'm never really on, you know, the same thing all the time. Other than other than glycine and AC, that's kind of in the picture on a regular basis. Things that I do cycle in a lot, though, I will, depending on the time of the year, I will really up my testosterone regimen. Oh, and also for me, full disclosure on that, I'm gonna be going on TRT later in the year. So I I made it to I decided this year I was gonna I was gonna go on TRT, and I made it this far, which is late fifties, which is great. But I'm finally making that transition here. I haven't done it yet, but I'm going to. Okay. Nice. Well, waited long time for that then. Yeah. Long time. Yeah. I think it's I well so just, for anybody who cares, what I would offer with that is that, the sex hormones are critical to aging well, and you really don't want that drop off in the sex hormones because, you're you're essentially telling the body that you're not useful to the herd anymore, and we need to get rid of you to make resources available for all of the reproductively viable, you know, people. So it's very important to keep the sex hormones flowing. The question is, when when do you pull the trigger? And what I found is that, where you're really gonna need it is right around my age, and right around early sixties. So what you'll see is there's the there's sub there's these dropping off periods where, like, the body wants to age quicker, and that's where you wanna counter it. And you have a life cycle of effectiveness of these things. So, like, they work best upfront the first time you do them and, you know, early on. And then over time, they don't work as well because the receptors attenuate and all this stuff, and then you need more and all that junk. So what I found is that, you you wanna save you wanna save it for, later on. That's what I found works for me. And so, my body is still sorry. My body is still pretty fresh pretty fresh right now. I've never taken those things. So, hopefully, what I'll get is a a really good response for a very long time at the time that I need it, which is right about this age. I see a lot of people that get on TRT very early, like, in, like, thirties, forties, and there's no need to. There's no need. Like, you should be able to stimulate testosterone. And then what you're doing is you're using up your your life cycle of of using that stuff. So Mhmm. Yeah. So, yeah, like, you know, when you when the that person would get into their sixties, then, it wouldn't work as well anymore, and they would still be like a normal 60 year old who doesn't take TRT even if they are taking TRT. Yeah. And you can see that. You can see that right now. Just go look go look at guys that were, you know, bodybuilders and huge dudes, like, in their twenties and thirties who used up, you know, everything. And you look at them now in their sixties, and they just look like an old dude in their sixties. Versus when you look at some dude who never did anything, never did anything, and then his late fifties, sixties went goes on TRT or starts taking Anabar or something. And and and it's like, my gosh. Wow. It look like freaking 25 year old. Wow. It's because the body's fresh and the receptors are fresh. Yeah. Yeah. That's a pretty interesting thing. Yeah. Yeah. What else? Is there something else that we haven't covered that you would would like to talk about that's, like, you know, very important people don't realize or need to know? Yeah. I don't know. I we covered a lot of ground. Yeah. We covered a ton of ground here, so I I think we're good. Yeah. Absolutely. And, yeah, I mean, we could talk about anything. Your Instagram is full of, ton of information like that. And, yeah, I mean, it's a good, like, place to wrap it up so that we can, you know, still have, like, another session as well in the near future. But, yeah, before I ask my last question, where can people find you and your work? Oh, yeah. Thank you. Instagram is real joel green. You can go there. And then, in my bio, I got all kinds of links and stuff for my stuff. You can go look at all that junk there. Nice. We're gonna put links in the show notes. And, my last question is, you know, what's this one piece of device or habit that you wish you'd loved sooner? Oh, gosh. Yeah. I I wish I had understood the short term versus the long term for anything, like, like, sooner. Because I did you know, I when I was young, I just thought that you apply a protocol and it always works the same. And what I've learned over time is that you apply a protocol, works really good in the beginning, kinda so so, and then later on, actually, has negatives. So, what a lot of people will find over time is you you you try some protocol. It worked amazing the first year or two. And now, you know, like, common thing I I get a lot of DMs on right now is is, people who were doing, like, fasting and keto and carnivore over the last three, five years, and now their guts are destroyed. Their guts are wrecked. You know? And it's because of that. It's because of the the long term effect of the thing that worked really well in the short term and doesn't work so well in the long term. Gotcha. Yeah. That's a good one. Alright. It was, really good to talk with you and, learned a lot of new things, and I'm sure people will also, you know, appreciate the information that we talked about. And, yeah, can't wait to talk on the next podcast. Cool. Yeah. This was fun. We'll we'll definitely, we'll pick it up again here soon. Yeah. Alright. I'll see you around. Alright, man. Take care. Bye bye. Thanks for listening to this episode. If you want to support this podcast, then check out our sponsors and leave our review on iTunes or Spotify. My name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.