There are many things that, make you age faster, but there is one specific thing that accelerates your aging much more than anything else. So in this video, I'm gonna tell you what it is and what to do about it. Do it. Alright. So the thing that accelerates your aging the most is obesity. So it may not be a surprise to you. I think, you know, we all know or, I mean, some people don't know, but, many people essentially, most people know that being overweight and being obese is not good for health and, it is, in my opinion, also one of the biggest things that does accelerate your aging. Obesity is linked to a higher risk of overall mortality. An obese person tends to live anywhere from five to twenty years less. Being obese increases the risk of diabetes, cardiovascular disease, neurodegeneration, cancer, and kidney disease, all of which are one of the top killers in the Western world. Diabetes. So, yeah. Surprise, surprise. It's not a big surprise. I think, that being overweight and obese does have a negative effect on your mortality. And of course, it's also going to make you age biologically faster. So, you know, you will look older if you are more overweight and you tend to look better and younger if you are leaner. So, you know, many people, they tend to have even, like, a few kilograms of, extra weight. Their face tends to be more chubby or you're puffed, and that does give them, like, the aesthetic look as well that they are at least a few years older than they actually are. And vice versa, if you are skinnier or your face is with less body fat than, you know, you have more defined face, then, that already makes you look a lot younger than you, you know, actually are. On the flip side, you can also see that losing weight or, fixing the obesity has a positive effect on mortality and longevity. Bariatric surgery has been found to reduce overall mortality by thirty point seven percent after a fifteen year follow-up compared to control subjects who who didn't get surgery. Now I'm not saying that you should get a bariatric surgery or something like that, but it does point out that, yeah, losing weight and fixing obesity is, what has a positive effect on your over mortality. So this not only applies to being super obese, overweight people who aren't categorized as obese, yet they can also have, let's say, increased risk of mortality. And this 2009 Lancet study, did find that, you know, the lowest mortality in people is around 22.25, BMI. So we can look at this chart that, yeah, people with the lowest the risk of mortality were between '22 and twenty five. Anything above, like, twenty seven or something, tends to have still I mean, it's still, not a significantly bigger risk, but above thirty, that's where you're considered overweight, or obese, 35, then, yeah, your risk of mortality tends to increase significantly. The, increased risk of mortality for people with a BMI under twenty, that's generally associated with, like, substance abuse or some sort of other disease that makes you lose a lot of weight rapidly. And, this is not caused by being underweight necessarily. Being underweight is the, like, the byproduct of some other disease, substance abuse or drug addiction or something like that. So still, the best, risk for your longevity mortality, or the lowest risk is the BMI between twenty two, twenty five, maybe twenty seven at max. And definitely, you want to have it under 30. Forty eight percent body fat. But the BMI is obviously very flawed, you know. I, who are very lean, I don't have any disease. Yeah, like low body fat. And my BMI is based on the calculations of the BMI, like 27, which, you know, puts me into like overweight category. But, my biological age is ten years younger. I don't have my blood work is perfect. And, the problem is that, you know, I have muscle. So that tends to misconstrue or change the results because of the increased mass that you have from the muscle mass. And we also know that muscle mass is protective against aging and it has a beneficial effect on longevity. So, just because your BMI is slightly higher because of having muscle mass, it's not, you know, necessarily meaning that, you're at a risk of, dying prematurely. A much more accurate tool is the waist to hip, ratio. And because this will actually tell you, you know, what's your body composition like. And with a high waist to hip ratio, it's going to, basically mean that you're, accumulating this visceral fat that is very harmful. It's much more harmful than this subcutaneous fat under the skin. Visceral fat around the organs is, you know, gonna lead to, like, organ failure and increases the risk of, other diseases much more so than the subcutaneous fat. So, having a high waist to hip ratio is, much worse for you, and that should be, like, the the thing that you actually measure. And there's also studies finding again that the high waist to hip ratio, increases or is associated with a greater mortality from heart failure and, yeah, diabetes. Based on the World Health Organization, statistics then, or recommendations then, if you're a woman, you, if you have a waist to hip ratio that, is measured, you first, measure your waist with a circumference, which is slightly below the belly button. And then you measure your hip circumference and you divide your waist circumference with the hip circumference. So for me, my waist is eighty three, maybe eighty five at max. And, my hips are a hundred. So I divide that, I get a zero point eighty three. And if you're a woman, then with a waist to hip ratio of 0.8, your risk health risk is very low. Man, 0.95. And, mine was 0.83, which is, you know, lower than, the lower risk. So, yeah, basically based on that, I don't have any, like, excess visceral fat. And, yeah, I'm pretty much very low risk, lowest of the lowest almost. If you're a woman, zero point eighty one to 0.85 is moderate risk. Man, 0.96 to one is moderate risk, which means that, you know, it's your your waist is, as wide as your hips. And, for women, 0.86 or higher means you're high risk, and men, one or higher. So naturally, you know, men generally have, narrower hips than women. And, women also tend to have narrower waist than men. Men, pear shape is a little natural for women and an apple shape. If you become more like an apple, not pear, then, that's gonna be indicative that you have like some visceral fat and both for men as well. Like if you have like this apple shape as a man, then you you need like this beer belly or pot belly, then that's a sign that, yeah, there's visceral fat there or just need to lose some weight. So in conclusion, being obese and being overweight is the biggest thing that accelerates your aging and is also the biggest contributor to your risk of mortality. So you want to achieve a BMI of, you know, at least twenty seven at most, maybe twenty eight and definitely below thirty. Above thirty is where you start to increase your risk of many diseases. And, yeah, that's you know, relatively easy to solve in a sense that we know how to lose weight. It's not rocket science. And, of course, it's subjectively hard or difficult, but the information of, you know, how to do it is, very simple. You just need to follow the right, guidelines and recommendations and then applies a lot of, you know, this consistency as well as some self control and discipline. If you want to learn about how to do this with a sustainable way, then check out my book with doctor James DeNicolantonio, The Obesity Fix. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.