If there's one thing that would make fitness people, sports enthusiasts, or bodybuilders go out to the streets and riot, then it will be the increase in the price of creatine. So that's what we were talking about in today's video, the, shortage of creatine and the rising price of creatine in 2022. Make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. So we have, many articles, that have come out in February and January and even as early as October 2021, talking about the coming shortage or the already present shortage of, creatine monohydrate, the supplement that is most commonly known as a sports supplement, enhances physical performance, but it also has, you know, many other longevity benefits. I think it's actually the one most underrated longevity and brain supplements. It's nootropic and, but there's a shortage of it. Like you traditionally, creatine has been also very one of the most, you know, researched supplement. It's I think it has the most actual studies backing up that it works and how effective it is, but it's also one of the cheapest. Like it's very cheap. Like in, I remember the first time I started buying creatine was maybe like or looking into creatine was in 2018 and then the price of creatine was like maybe $7.08, €10 at max per kilogram. But nowadays, in in March 2022, you can already see that the price of creatine, the regular creatine, the same creatine, is up to like $45 and $40 per kilogram and they also assess that the price is going to be keep keep rising. So, yeah, we'll just look into this article, on barband.com. That was one of the main ones that I found talking about this issue and what is the reason why this is so. So it, you know, talks about obviously, the biggest reason or the main reason has to do with, or the initiating cascading reason is the COVID nineteen pandemic that started to increase the price of all kind of different kinds of consumer goods, even regular supplements, whey protein, BCAs, toilet paper. All those things started to go, into some sort of, shortage because of obviously supply supply, reasons and things like that. But the article says that, in April 2022, the onset of the pandemic, sales were 44% higher than the same period in 2019. So people bought a whole lot of, you know, creatine. I don't know why. Like, you know, obviously, they maybe wanted to, use it as a safe, you know, haven in essence to have, like, a backup backup of creatine. But also, like, you know, that these people start to work out at home more, Maybe they need to get more, like, a quantity supplements to help with that process. But, yeah, regardless, there was a 44% increase in the, in the buying of, creatine between the from 2019 to 2020 already. And since that, I would imagine that the number is already quite higher. So maybe like 80% higher than in 2019, two years ago. As it stands, the shortage remains in full effect, and we anticipate creatine to be harder to purchase throughout 2022, says Clea Murphy, supply chain manager for Nutra Holdings LLC, a sports nutrition platform. Disappointed. According to Murphy, creatine maintained a steady average price of roughly $5 per kilogram in early twenty two 2021. Sorry. And, yeah, as you can see, even one year ago in in early twenty twenty one, the price of creatine has gone from $5 per kilogram up to $42 per kilogram, which is, you know, huge increase in just one year. Interesting also because the creatine monohydrate that is the most common, most effective, most researched form of creatine, that is mostly synthesized and exported by China. So a lot of the creatine actually is created in China, including many other supplements out there. And no surprise, the price of creatine is rising because, you know, obviously there's a pandemic. But right now in 2022 precisely there is like China is seeing another like rise in COVID cases and they, you know, probably will do some sort of a lockdown in the near future or they may do it. And that will drastically increase the shortage of creatine and thus the price of creatine in your, like, Western stores, in Amazon or whatever is also gonna be increasing quite a lot. So it's quite interesting, like a journey. So the baseline ingredient, which is Creapure, is this international patent owned by a German chemical manufacturer, Altchem Altchem Group. And, Altchem sells the patent to China and, based creating products like Creapure are manufactured in Germany and products like CreaPure are shipped to factories in China which are then produced into brand name products. And then brand name products are exported to The US. So it's like white labeling these Chinese companies are white labeling, this CreaPure that is patented by this German company. And in China, you have, like, all these different supplements. I don't know I don't know specific ones that would get their supply from China, maybe like bulk supplements, whatever it is, optimum nutrition, whatever. They probably get most of their ingredients from China and they, you know, put that product into there and then ship it across the world. And with the supply chain shortages, crop shortages in China, China is also hoarding, like, a lot of food, crops, and stuff. So that's all the reason why this, rise in the price of creatine is happening. Calm down. Get a hold of yourself. And, yeah, like if you look at Amazon creatine monohydrate, then, you can see that the price of, this just regular creatine powders is, actually quite, you know, high compared to like a few years ago. So this, I think this one, yeah, one pounds is $35 which is what? Quite high for the price of creatine and per kilogram that would be, you know, $70.70 dollars or something which is like astronomical price for regular creatine. And, yeah, other brands as well that kind of have a similar price. Two hundred grams of creatine monohydrate by VPA Nutrition, $15, which is again a lot quite a lot for regular creatine. And, yeah. There's apparently like still some stock in like this Amazon and things like that but the prices are quite high. When I looked at my own like Estonian companies' websites that sell supplements then, you know, there are a few creatines left. The price is a bit cheaper like this five hundred grams of creatine, €20, so €40 per kilo, which is a bit, yeah, much cheaper than the Amazon one. But as you can see, like, there's a lot of them out of stock already. Like, all these different kinds of creatine, products are out of stock and you can't get it. Like, there's only a few selection left. And other shops as well, this one has 500, again, €20. And, yeah, it means out of stock, out of stock, out of stock, out of stock, out of stock. Sucks. The concerning thing about it is also that, you know, obviously, you can get creatine from diet but the use of creatine as supplement is very easy and actually you can get it's hard to get your optimal intake of creatine from just food. You would have to eat like one to two kilograms of red meat to get the, let's say, recommended dose of creatine, which is like three to five grams if you're interested in like, physical performance. That's used for the, like sports and muscle building and strength. So, yeah. I mean, unless you're eating, yeah, like literally two kilograms of meat every day, then you're really not getting a whole lot of creatine. And, even then, like, adding some supplement is a very I mean, prior to this, I mean, the creatine was very cheap and there was no, like, real address effects to taking it. But being deficient or like consuming a diet that is low in creatine, less than one gram of creatine per day, that has been associated with an increased risk of heart and liver conditions. So, yeah, considerable shortage of dietary associated with increased risk of heart and liver conditions. If you don't get access to creatine like now or if the prices are too high, I I, like, I wouldn't go and buy, like, a creatine one pound for $35. Like, I wouldn't do it. I may do it to get, like, per, you know, €20, five hundred grams. It's not an issue for me, but, I wouldn't go out and buy $35 worth of, creatine for one pound, of creatine. Bullshit. Alright. Take it what you will. In conclusion, the prices of creatine are, skyrocketing and, there's gonna be some shortages as well in the future. If you have creatine stocked up, then, good luck or congratulations. I have. I have, you know, several years worth of creatine by now, even before this show that came about. So, yeah. Generally, like, I wouldn't be, like, super concerned. It's not like, you know, it's not gonna kill you if you don't get enough creatine. But, generally, the, creatine does benefit sports performance. It has a lot of anti aging benefits, brain benefits, and things like that. Ideally, you would want to eat foods that have creatine, but adding a supplement three to five grams is the most researched supplement there is, the most effective supplement there is in terms of sports performance. And, yeah. Just I think it's very great. Unfortunately, like current situations make it harder to get to the creatine, but I would predict that, you know, maybe like by next year, it will probably get, normal again. Alright. Thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click like, subscribe. Notification bell is well. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.