What kind of supplements are you taking? Or, yeah. And maybe, like, explain some of the reasons why. Yeah. So I take a first thing, when I when I wake up, on days that I haven't exercised, I take a molecule, to produce sulforaphane. So sulforaphane is a molecule that activates an enzyme called NRF two. So essentially, that that's like a master redox switch within the body. So if you switch that on, you activate a whole host of defense pathways against oxidants. Now when when activating NRF two was tested by the interventions testing program, there was a lifespan extension benefit. It was small, but it was there. So I I personally, take that in the morning. But there's also data showing that if you take molecules to activate your antioxidant defenses, that probably gets in the way of exercise benefits. So when you exercise, you're you're you are damaging your cells and you're releasing a lot of different oxidants. But it actually seems that when when you do have that burst of oxidants, it stimulates your cells to become more efficient to deal with those oxidants better. So if you if you remove those oxidants too quickly, you likely interfere with those with the stress response. So that's why I only take this molecule, on days that I don't exercise. I have, you know, moving on to other supplements, I take collagen. So when I first looked into collagen, I thought it was just complete hype. But when you when you have a look at the human data, there there is improvements that we can see. There's improvements in skin health, and there's probably improvements in blood vessel health as well. So I take hydrolyzed collagen about ten grams. And and with that, I also take hyaluronic acid. So hyaluronic acid is also a supplement that I thought was complete baloney when I first looked into it because I I wasn't convinced that the body could actually absorb it because it's a very long molecule. But again, the the human data is quite convincing that, you know, hyaluronic acid do supplements. When they're placebo controlled, it does improve skin health. So if it improves skin health, what other markers of health is it improving? So, you know, I I I also take that. We've also talked about how I take niacin. With niacin, there is, issues with, with boosting a molecule within the body called homocysteine. So to to reduce that, I take another supplement called TMG or trimethylglycine. Yeah. Yeah. And I also take omega three, vitamin d. Sorry. Take a bit of a list. No. No. Go ahead. Creatine as well. One of the other supplements that that I'm considering stopping is metformin. So I I do take metformin on days that I don't exercise. I'm not I'm not actually that I'm not that excited about the data on metformin as as what I once used to be. So, again, the interventions testing program trialed metformin. It didn't extend lifespan, which I think is is quite significant because a lot of the hype around metformin was in the my started. So so some of the studies were showing a lifespan extension benefit. Whereas when the intervention testing program trialed it, which is the creme de la creme of my starter, there was no there was no benefit. So I'm less excited about that. What I am excited about in terms of diabetic medications, though, so which is what metformin is, there's a class of diabetic medications called SGLT two inhibitors. Essentially, what it does, it it works on the kidneys to make you pee out sugar. And when the interventions testing program trialed that, I believe it was a fourteen percent improvement in lifespan. And how it seems to work is that it it blunts the peaks in blood sugar levels. So instead of your blood sugar level spiking after a meal, it it flattens that curve. And it and that's the most likely reason as to why these SGLT two inhibitors improve lifespan. So I'm I'm considering stopping metformin, and I'm just waiting on a bit more human data to come through about the SGLT two inhibitors because that's a medication that I prescribe in my clinical practice to my type two diabetic patients. And we're getting fantastic results in terms of, you know, weight loss, decreased heart disease, decreased kidney disease, and you can see it with the markers that that we're actually testing for. Nice. Yeah. That's cool. Is that all? What's it up for us? There's a there's a few more. Okay. Well, I do go ahead. Yeah. Yeah. I I do take, vitamin k two. There there's there's a suggestion in the data that, so so vitamin k two works on a group of proteins called GLA proteins, which seem to control where the calcium goes in the body. So either it's gonna get deposited in in other tissues in the body such as your blood vessels, or is it going to stay within your bones, which is where you want it? The the human data looking at, vitamin k two, it's not that exciting for reducing heart disease, but it is exciting for, reducing fracture or or bone breaks as we age. So that's primarily the reason why I take it is to make sure that I I am activating my GLA protein so that my calcium stays within my bones as as opposed to spreading elsewhere where I don't want it. Mhmm. I I do take a a very small dose of melatonin at night. I I, you know, there's I I take only three hundred micrograms. So so people with, who take melatonin, they're often mega, mega dosing melatonin. And and I I don't really understand why people do that because the the dosages that they take are far in excess from what the body will produce by itself. So I take a small dose of three hundred micrograms, and that's primarily to make sure that I'm falling asleep when I want to fall asleep. Melatonin levels, they decline as we age. So, that's one of the reasons why older people, they do struggle to fall asleep and stay asleep. It's simply they don't have enough melatonin. So, you know, taking melatonin in your older years, particularly a prolonged release version of melatonin, seems to make sense, particularly if you take it, you know, three or four hours before you want to fall asleep. But as of right now, again, since I'm 30, I'm not worried about my levels of melatonin. I just want to make sure that I fall asleep when I want to fall asleep.