As a health research organization, we wanna see more organizations start like ours. We'd love that. The more health research organizations there are, the faster we're gonna find out how we can really truly end aging. Welcome to the Seem Lund podcast. I'm your host Seem Lund, and today our guest is Alan Graves. Alan is the CEO of donotage.org. Do not age is my favorite longevity supplement company that provides research backed compounds that extend health span such as pyrimidine, NMN, TMG, calcium, alpha ketoglutarate, etcetera. For this month, you can get a free copy of my book metabolic pathology if you use the code SEAM for making an order at Do Not Age that includes NMN. What? All you need is either the NMN capsules or powder in your purchase with or without the other supplements. So head over to donotage.org and use my code, Siem, s I I m, to get 10% off all the Do Not Age products as well as the metabolic biology ebook. Hi, Sim. Thank you for having me back. Yeah. It's, great to talk with you again, and it's been almost like like a half year or something since the last time we talked. And since that, there has been a lot of, like, new research coming about, coming out about, the different compounds that, you provide. And, yeah, like, before we get into that, maybe, like, you know, what's been new with the United Age as a company as a whole, and, you know, what products have you been, releasing recently? So, yeah, there's there's a lot of new things going on at the moment. So I think last time we spoke about spermidine, we're we're looking at launching, a version that's gluten free because, obviously, at the moment, we're sourcing it from WheatGem, and there are still some people that don't like consuming wheat. There's some celiacs, etcetera. So, yeah, we are looking at trying to do that, and we hope that within just a few months, we'll be able to make that a reality. So that's one thing we've been working on. Obviously, there's a ton of research, which is what I work on most of the time now. I'm in The Middle East at the moment, having meetings about that. So that's really exciting. I've just finished a month in The USA as well doing, similar things. So there's lots of research in the pipeline. We can go into that during the during the podcast if you want. And what else? Oh, we do we do have a new product coming out as well. So, obviously, you know that the vast majority of research doesn't result in an ingredient that we launch, because we only choose the ones that have the highest highest health impact. And we decided on collagen peptides because the it's absolutely proven in humans the benefits that collagen peptides have. So that one will be coming up probably at the August 2022. Mhmm. That's, that's pretty interesting there. Like, a collagen is like a powder or a capsule zone. How do you think about it? Yeah. So, unfortunately, with with collagen, if you take it in in capsule form, it it doesn't get absorbed in the same way. So it does have to be a powder for that one, which I understand is tricky for some people because people like the ease of a capsule, which I completely understand. And if we could do it, we would, but, obviously, we have to look at the health outcome as as the main priority. Mhmm. Okay. Well, that's awesome. I do like collagen as well, and, I mean, the powder is, I guess it's, fine. You can mix it with stuff. Yeah. And the spermidine, like, does does it have, like, a CDR response, for people who are allergic to wheat even if you have, like, if you if it's, like, you know, just sourced from wheat germ, if you're taking us as a supplement, will it still have, like, any effects? Yeah. That's right. So, obviously, celiac is is an allergy. So, yeah, definitely don't go near anything that's come from wheat germ, for that. In terms of people with, like, a slight gluten intolerance, they tend to be okay with our current spermidine product, but, obviously, it's still something they have to be wary of. So we're just trying to create it so we can cover all bases. Gotcha. Gotcha. And where did where's the next one come from? Like, what's the other source that you choose? So we're we're working on that at the moment. But, again, anyone that's on the email list will get all the information on there. But, we we don't wanna say too much before we before we don't wanna run before we can walk. Okay. Right. Well, I don't know what it's gonna be like, but if I were to guess, then, like, or something like that. We shall see. Okay. We shall see. Alright. Yeah. Like, are there any, like, new studies that have, come out, let's say I mean, like, the biggest one probably that you, the biggest supplement that you probably have is, like, NMN, if I'm not mistaken. That depends if you're looking at all time or whether you're looking at the last few months. So the last few months, it would be cert six activator, but all time, it would be NMN definitely. Gotcha. Are there any, like, new studies that have come out about maybe, like, yeah, like NMN and NAD as a whole? Like, have what have you Yeah. So there's new studies coming out all the time. I think last time we we spoke, which was probably January of of this year, we we mentioned that there was a lot more human trials in NR than there was in a man. Well, that's now you know, the balance is starting to tip, which is fantastic. So we're seeing more and more in vivo results in humans. There's new studies coming all the time, and it's nice to see what we already knew being proven now in the clinical trials. I think the most recent one we've seen is the one that made me smile because it proved that NMN prevents senescence in retinal cells. So, you know, we see NMN boosted people's eyesight. And if you listen to our previous conversation, one of your questions was around, what what the benefits that people taking NMN might notice. And I said, well, one of the common themes for in terms of feedback for people taking do not age to work NMN was that our members were seeing an improvement in their eyesight. And then now we see the studies. I think David Sinclair tweeted about it recently. Yeah. Now we see the studies proving that out, which is fantastic. That's that's good to hear. Or, obviously, you know, I've seen like, the animal studies before as well that it helps with eyesight or reversing like this myopia and Yeah. Decline in eyesight with age. But, senescence so NMN, could it be then like a potential as analytic that, helps to clear senescence cells, or is it too early to think about that? Yeah. I think so. I think so. Again, we we ought to be we have to be careful what we say before the science has proven out, I think. And, obviously, some people use the term senescence and aging interchangeably as well. Mhmm. Right. That's true. Any, like, other studies about NMN or NAD or, like, you know, you what about the n negative on ribosites, NR? That's also, like, a common Yeah. So there's there's there there are regular studies coming out about NR, obviously, again, because of ChromaDex link. But, I mean, the ones that I tend to know more about in general are the ones, obviously, that we're responsible for. So, for example, the SIRT six activated trials that have been going unbelievably well. We have one trial being run by professor Barry Gorbanova, which showed a huge reduction in the frailty index in just a few months, and it got all of us very excited. Again, always nice when clinical trials prove what we already knew. And professor Gorbanova spoke to me. She rang me must be a month ago now. Just over a month ago. Where are we? Yeah. Maybe six weeks ago. And, you know, she doesn't get excited very easily, and she was super excited and said, look. Never seen results like this before. I think we should put this we should start another trial and put this into cancer patients. So people that have already gone through chemotherapy. And the what we believe, if we're correct, is that the recurrence of tumors in the group that are taking set six activator will be a lot less or hopefully nonexistent compared to the what the control group. So, obviously, if that proves out to be true, then it's gonna be huge, and that trial is just started recently, so very exciting. Okay. Well, that's awesome. Like, you know, the cert six activator, no one else has that. I mean, like, you're the only company that actually has a product like that that act that has compounds that activate the six in humans. And Yes. Exactly. And, like, that's, you know, very interesting in that sense that it's like a novel, let's say, a supplement or not a drug, but like a supplement. And but what is, like, besides, you know, activating SIRT six, like, what is, like, the mechanisms or why does it work or why does it what effects does it have in humans? Well, I mean, I can tell you about the feedback more than I can talk about the mechanisms because, obviously, we know about what Cert six does. But in terms of feedback, which I think is tends to be more important to most consumers anyway because they wanna know what result it's gonna have to them rather than rather than the features, they wanna know the benefits. Does that make sense? Right. And so yeah. I mean, the biggest one we get is energy. People say they feel much more energetic, less lethargic, particularly, obviously, in in slightly older population, sort of 40 and above. And yeah. The the main thing that we get is people say, I my wellness feels improved. So, obviously, we do a lot of phone calls. Right? So people have been taking the ingredient for six months. We'll give them a call, and we'll say, hey. How are you getting on? Just wanna check, make sure everything's okay. How much have you been taking? Ask them about their lifestyle and things like that as well and diet, etcetera. And then we're we're noting down all that feedback anonymously, obviously, but we're noting down all that feedback so that we can get an understanding of how people feel based on it. So that's something that the office in The UK deal with. So they'll be calling out from there, whereas what I deal with obviously is more the research side. But yeah. So an improved sense of well-being, which is basically an overall feeling of feeling better. And like I say, now the studies are gonna slowly but surely prove out what we already know that it's a hugely beneficial ingredient. Right. Well, SIRT six as a gene itself, belonging to the sirtuin family, it does have, like, a, I guess, the main, like, effect is, like, DNA repair, that it helps with DNA repair. And, Yeah. I think I think that's gonna be the the, most likely candidate for most of the benefits, in my opinion. So because of DNA damage is is the sort of upstream cause of a lot of downstream symptoms. Right? So the the DNA repair and also the fact that it's a huge anti inflammatory and inflammation obviously exacerbates most health issues, doesn't it? So between the DNA repair and the anti inflammatory, that's gonna I I believe that's gonna be the main mechanisms for SIRT six. Mhmm. How how does it, I mean, sirtuins are also affecting NAD metabolism and, like, overall energy production from that. So, is there any, like, link between this, Certix and NAD? Yeah. I mean, so sirtuins are NAD dependent. So if you don't have enough NAD, then the sirtuins can't run properly anyway, which is why as we see the increase in popularity in sirt six activator, we're also seeing an increase in people using NMN because they're boosting their NAD, and then they're activating the sirtuin as well. So, I think it was David Sinclair that said about the the fuel tank and the accelerated pedal. Right? Right. Yeah. Maybe let's, you know, before we carry on, let's maybe, like, explain, like, a brief for people who may not have heard about these things before. Like, maybe Okay. Simple overview about NAD and, yeah. Sure. So nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, now you can see why we call it NAD, is a coenzyme in every cell of your body. Without it, you would be dead very, very quickly within a matter of seconds. It's responsible for, I think, over 400 processors in the cell. So you can see it again, it's about that whole upstream looking at the upstream causes of issues. And as we age, it's been proven that NAD levels decline quite drastically, and this has then been linked to lots of different age related diseases as well. So the theory is if you boost the NAD back to youthful levels, then the rest of the body can function as it did in our youth. And with what we're seeing is that does prove out to be true with people that are taking NMN and or NR. Yeah. Yeah. I I think that, yeah, these, most of these, longevity supplements, like, they will have, like, this health span effect that, they will just improve they will improve your, functional health or, like, functionality, as you get older. Like, they will prevent or slow down some of that age rate decline that occurs. Like, with the surge six activator, it's gonna help with the brain side and neurodegeneration and protection against, maybe oxidative stress. And, with NMN, it's gonna be related to, like, energy metabolism and things related to that, like your metabolic health and incidence of the activity, which has been proven in humans to improve incidence of the activity as well. So, yeah. I think, obviously, there's not gonna be these, or it's it's not gonna be like this little supplements that kinda make you live, like, a 100 years old or a 150 years old or something like that. I don't think there's any, like, you any supplement out there that we know that could make humans humans live until a 150 years old or something like that. We don't have, like, any supplements yet. But then I'm I'm quite I'm quietly confident about the two that we've just been speaking about, NMN and Cert six Activator just because, obviously, I get to see the aggregated data from we've got, what, over a 100,000 members now all taking these and most of them take those ingredients. Right? So I am quietly confident that it will extend it, but we're not gonna know for, obviously, a very long time. Right? Because, you know, CertSix Activator is only a year and a half old. Has only been popular for three years. So the actual, full scope human trials aren't gonna we're not gonna know for many decades. Right. But I am I am quietly confident. Yeah. I guess you need to just have all the other, things also, done perfectly, like the exercise and the diet and the sleep and, the stress. Yeah. Those kind of things. So, yeah, I mean, they they can be for sure, like, they can be, additional boost in helping you to reach that optimal state, but, the foundation has to also be there, like, the proper Oh, yeah. Definitely. So I I think I'm assuming most of the people that watch your channel will already be looking after things like diet, sleep, and exercise. But it's interesting you mentioned stress because that's one that people tend to miss out, and it is it does have a really huge negative effect on pretty much all conditions, especially those linked to aging. So if people can try and find ways to control their stress, whether that's just through meditation or however they wanna do it individually, then I I would definitely recommend that because that's something that I'm still working on now. Yeah. And I think the vast majority of people could do with, less stress. Yeah. For sure. I agree. And, when when I think about it, you know, in my own head and, which is based on, like, you know, what I read and what I've researched and everything I've exposed to, then, yeah, I think that aging itself also goes down to a lot with, like, just stress and damage, like the higher amount of, like, physical as well as, you know, physiological, damage and stress your body experiences throughout your lifetime, then over the course of time, like, the body just slowly wears down and, and, the ability to Yeah. Recover from it is also also has to do with a lot just mitigating the damage as well as recovering from it. And, with you know, when you're young, your body can very easily recover from that, and you're gonna be fine because your body's own ability or energy levels are high and all these antioxidant defenses are also running properly. So it's very easy for you to bounce back fast. With age, you're just the ability to boost those, defenses goes also down, and that's where you start to, like there there's gonna be, like, they mentioned this kind of, tipping point where you reach that your body isn't able to recover and rebound from that damage and everything else you experience. And that's where you get all these age related diseases and go down, like, this, downward spiral. So it's a lot of kind of balancing the damage. All aging is really is damage, isn't it? So it's, and like you say, the the things that protect us from damage, for example, the seven sirtuins that we find in humans, they're extremely active when you're young, and then they get less and less active over time. So boosting them back to youthful levels is is what we aim to do. It's the same as things like CA AKG. Obviously, it's the the calcium version of AKG, which is, again, a very important molecule in the body. It gets it it reduces over time during aging, and so what we try and do is boost it back to youthful levels. So a lot of what we do is boosting things back to youthful levels or reducing them back to youthful levels if they get too high. So for example, CD 38. Yeah. Yeah. And, you know, funny enough, like exercise, for example, which is very beneficial for antiaging longevity, it kind of has a lot of those same effects as these, compounds. Or, like, I mean, it does raise NAD levels. But we we find we we do find it is in its it tends to be in a smaller way, though. So for example, exercise boosts your NAD levels. Obviously, it does a hell of a lot more than that. But just taking that one example, taking an NMED supplement is gonna boost your NAD levels a lot more than exercise ever could. So I think that's where we come in with our interventions is where we where we see we can add value and, like, you know, you might be able to exercise your way out of bad NAD levels until you're 30, say, for example. That's just a a figure booked out of the air, by the way. But over time, you're not gonna be able to do that. If you were, then we'd see people that were 90 years old that still had perfect NAD levels because there are older people that have done those kind of exercises all the time. Mhmm. Unfortunately, that's just not the reality, which is where we have to come in with interventions. Yeah. I I I totally agree. Like, supplementation has very good place, that it helps you to get back on track fast and, helps you to get out of the trench in that sense. Like, if you have low NAD, then it's very hard to get, you know, out of bed or to start to start exercise, whereas if you, you know, use something that kind of shortcuts shortcuts that a little bit to help you get back, then, obviously, it's gonna be a good way of going about it and, helps to you know? It's the same as, like, you know, like, treating a certain nutrient deficiency. Like, if you have a severe magnesium deficiency, then you're maybe not able to sleep properly and you're stressed out all the time anxious. But if you take a supplement, that fixes it in the short term, then, you're able to, you know, actually fall asleep and recover and make sure that you don't go into this, you know, vicious vicious spiral or feedback loop of, not not sleeping well and being stressed out about it and etcetera, not sleeping well about it either. Yeah. And I think I think magnesium is something that it's very important one, and it's a good example. But at the same time, it is possible to get enough magnesium from your diet. You would need to eat, you know, a lot of salads, but it is possible to do. However, things like NMN, for example, you know, there's no food. I mean, which food has the most NMN? Probably broccoli, I think, from memory. And you'd have to eat, you know, so many kilos of broccoli every day just to get that amount of NMN. Yeah. So, again, that's where that's where the the intervention comes in. Yeah. I agree. I think it's like, yeah, cabbage, tomatoes, and, broccoli or something. But yeah. Like Yeah. I've got I've got edamame beans in my head as well. I think that was one of the ones that was high in NMN. Yeah. So, like, but it's very small, like, literally, like Yeah. Like, 0.2. High high compared to other fruits, not high as in high enough to make a big difference. Yes. Yeah. So, yeah, I I think, yeah, like, the it's especially great for, taking whenever you're like, I personally take it mostly when, let's say, under a higher amount of stress or inflammation coming from the environment. Like, whether that be the sleep side that I didn't sleep well enough or I changed time zones or I need to have, like, better angiocin status and, just defenses against any kind of oxygen stress. That's where I find I think the best so best fit for NMN and these energy boosters, comes from. So let's briefly mention, like, the NMN, quality as well because I think that's still worth mentioning. Once again, we did talk about it in our last podcast, but, like, most of the that you you can buy, like like Amazon or something, they don't even have, like, any at all. So, whereas your do not age, has actually the in high quantities in their product. So can you, like, briefly talk about it? Yeah. Sure. So it was we we started it off when we, back in 2019. Obviously, part of being in this market is knowing what's already available and part of our mission to only provide either things that we can increase the quality of or reduce the price if the quality is already at the best it can be. Then, I think we spoke last time about with the MN, the reason why we became known for it is because we did both. So we reduced the price and increased the quality when we first, launched. And, obviously, as part of that, we have to go and see what's already out there and test it and see what and I was shocked. I was really shocked. I knew the supplement world was murky, but it was you know, there wasn't a single one that had what it contained. There was a couple that had some, you know, 60%, 80%, but they were claiming 99%. And then there was the vast majority, which didn't have any NMMM whatsoever. So, obviously, I reported it to Amazon, spoke to them about it, and they couldn't they couldn't give it monkeys. They were not interested at all because they were just selling someone was selling a product on their marketplace, which means they get cut, so they don't really care about the quality of that product. So, you know, I'm not saying that we will never go on Amazon. Maybe in the future, donotage.org will have a an Amazon shop. I don't know. But I think people should just be wary. From it for myself, for me, I would never buy anything from Amazon I was gonna put into my body just because I know how Amazon works, and I know exactly how it works as a marketplace. And I think most consumers don't. They think because it's a large bit company, it's one of the largest companies in the entire world. They they they assume there's gonna be, safety nets there. They're just on there. So Gotcha. And then from our perspective, that's why we just test at every stage. And it's why we introduced the do not age quality guarantee. So the purity is guaranteed to your door wherever you live in the world, because we don't just wanna there there are some other companies that will make the product, test it as soon as they've made it, and it's 99% pure, but then it sits on a shelf for six months and then gets shipped to a consumer. And then by the time the consumer gets it, it's not 99% anymore. Whereas, obviously, that's why we guarantee that purity to the door. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's really unfortunate. Obviously, you know, most of the supplements, I think they're all, you know, probably gets shipped from, like, some China or something like that. And, yeah, there that you didn't even know, like, if how quality they will send you that product. So you as, like, whoever, like, like, manufacturers or white labels, any kind of supplements, then it's kind of, yeah, up to them to test it first, obviously. But I think, like, many people may not have the ethics or, the principles Yeah. To actually, you know, change anything about so even if they see that their product doesn't have any NMN, then they will still sell it, because it's wanting to make it, like, a quick buck or, yeah, just Exactly. And I and I think that's why as a health research organization, we wanna see more organizations start like ours. We'd love we'd love that, because, you know, what are we now? Over three years old, and we don't we still don't have any competition, which is not a good thing. It's not a good thing at all because the more health research organizations there are, the faster we're gonna find out how we can really truly end aging, and stop all these horrendous age related diseases. So I think the old style supplement company just out to try and make a profit, not putting anything back into the research, which is, you know, that these companies need to realize that without the research, they wouldn't be able to sell the supplements they're selling. Do you see what I mean? So for for me, it's it's a bit of a it's a duty to pay back into the research. Yeah. And how many, like, researcher, like or how many studies do you actively have going on right now? Oh, we have we we have a lot all the time. So, there's multiple, and they're all around the world as well. So I think there's there's one in Singapore at the moment looking using our CA AKG, looking at the effect on the microbiome. Obviously, we already know about the anti frailty, and I think last time we spoke about the reduction in biological age on that, on that study. And so now we look at the effect on the microbiome. We've just invested in a we funded a rapamycin trial. So hope you know, that's gonna take a few years to find out the results, but that's obviously exciting because that's something that people talk about in the industry. And, again, that was something that we're trying to encourage others to do as well because, you know, if if if it turns out that rapamycin is beneficial I don't take rapamycin myself because of the immunosuppressant, concerns, because it is an immunosuppressant. But that's that's not to say that we haven't seen some good results so far in some of the animal models. So we funded that rapamycin trial knowing full well that if it comes to fruition and it shows huge benefits in rapamycin, we're never gonna be able to provide that ingredient because it's a pharmaceutical. Right. See what I mean? And, again, so that's why I was trying to set an example of trying to do the right thing rather than the profitable thing, if that makes sense. Yeah. I think, like, a lot of people would be excited if there was, like, a commercial rapamycin that you could sell performing. But, yeah, obviously, obviously, yeah, like, it's a more dangerous not a danger, but, like, you need to be more careful with that kind of, which is an actual drug. Like, rapamycin is an actual drug, compared to, like, supplements. Yeah. But, yeah, what do you think about itself overall? Like, you you're not taking it. Would you ever take it? Or Oh, yeah. I mean, if if if the science proved me wrong, then 100%, I would I would take it. You know? There's I didn't used to take collagen, for example. Now I told you about these these, you know, the collagen peptides because sometimes when you look into something enough or enough new studies come out, you can kinda say, okay. I got that one wrong. And, you know, having not being able to change your mind is a very, very dangerous position to be in because especially with science because, you know, things are always evolving. You know? Yeah. Yeah. I agree. So, yeah, I I would I would take it if but like I said, I think I think dosage is gonna be the key with rapamycin. That's what it looks like. Yeah. Because, you know, suppressing your immune system straight away sets off alarm bells. Right? But When you're doing I can say, some some of the results in the animal models have been impressive, so we shall see if that carries over to humans. Mhmm. Yeah. I think, yeah, like, you know, periodically, every once in a while using it can be good probably, like, in certain situations, but not chronically because, I mean, if you chronically suppress mTOR with rapamycin, then, that's gonna, like, slowly, waste away your muscle mass and strength as well. So, yeah, you do need you can you need those things as well for aging and aging. Yeah. Definitely. Kind of balance of how how much mTOR you want to suppress and when you do it. Is there a I you know, if I I'm not taking it either. I'm, you know, I'm not planning to take it in the future, but if I were to be, like, super be geeking out on, constructing the best anti aging routine or strategy, then I would probably include rapamycin in there in some doses every once in a while. So, but, yeah, I haven't thought about it that much. Yeah. Like, the newest product, that was released the last time was a sulfur boost, which is a sulf Yeah. Sulfurophane booster, basically. Like, what's can you talk about that? Like, what's the research behind that? Yeah. So I think we've we've already seen a few people in your, from your audience taking Sulfuraboos, which is great. Obviously, I know lots of them are taking SIRT six activator. I don't know if they're doing it because of the last podcast we had or whether it's because you're taking them as well. I don't know. But either way, they're starting to see the benefits already, which is great. It's another popular one, so for a boost. So we know it activates n r two, protects cells from oxidation, activates glutathione, helps with, liver detoxification, and it can help prevent DNA damage, which, again, as we spoke about earlier, is quite important. And there is some evidence that it deactivates carcinogens like benzene and stuff like that. So, that's I think they're where the main benefits come in from, Sulphora Boost. Gotcha. Yeah. And the glutathione, right, as well from that. Yeah. Like I say, increases the glutathione, which is super important and in the brain as well. So I don't if anybody's got any spare time, go and watch Rhonda Patrick talking about that. She's she's very clued up, and I think she's a big fan of, sulforaphane boosting products. Is she taking it or, do you know? I don't know. But like I say, there's a lot of high profile people taking out products. I think the one she talks about is called pros prostate prostate. I think she she's probably taking that one. But, yeah, we've had a lot of celebrities taking our stuff, and they'll always use a, you know, pseudonym. Or if they don't, they make it clear over email that they don't want anyone to know they're taking the ingredients, not not because they're worried about us using it from a marketing perspective, but because they don't want people know knowing that they're taking things to try and stay young because of how that's just how celebrity works, I guess. Gotcha. Gotcha. Have you changed any of your supplementation recently? Or well, in the very recent weeks, I've been mega dosing on MN because of I I mentioned about my I'm in The Middle East at the moment. I've just gone across America, so it was I flew from where I live in the South Of Europe to London. And then from London, I went to Florida, from Florida to Texas, Texas to Montana, you know, Alaska, and then back to Washington Washington state. And then from there to here in The Middle East, and then I'm gonna go across another time zone tomorrow, and to Dubai. So yeah. Because I've got all these meetings all over the world, it's it's great. And I love talking about the research, and and this is I I'm doing the things I love, but at the same time, the body isn't wasn't designed when airplanes were a thing. So, yeah, I've been megadosed on NMN. And what I'll do is I'll look ahead to where I'm the the time zone I'm going to, and I'll take the NMN as if it was, like, 8AM or 7AM in that time zone to try and get because because, obviously, it's so intrinsically linked with the circadian rhythm. So Yeah. That's why. And it's working. It's been it's been working very well. And, obviously, I've added collagen relatively recently as well. So I'm, I'm fortunate I get to get my hands on it before the public. That's that's awesome. Yeah. Yeah. It's kind of, don't know, ironic or funny that, you know, you, travel all over the world while preaching or, you know, researching about, longevity and antiaging, etcetera, while damaging your body. It's quite surreal. Yeah. I I think that quite a lot. You know, especially when I'm struggling for sleep because I'm a big proponent of quality of sleep. And I also just find that after you've had a good night's sleep, you feel so much better as well. And, obviously, it's very important from a gym perspective in in terms of the rest and repair. But yeah. So I I do sometimes chuckle to myself about that as well. It's, you know, I'm telling everybody to do one thing and doing another one. So it's not it's it's not it's not very fair, but, you know, sometimes you have to do things for the greater good. So Right. Gotcha. With that NMN, you're probably also stacking it with, trimethoplastin, DMG. Right? Yeah. That's right. So when whatever I take in NMN, I'll take that one on one ratio with TMG. That's, again, just to provide those methyl donors. Mhmm. You're taking TMG as well. That's right? Yes. Yeah. I'm taking that. I would take it even if I weren't taking the NMN, but Yeah. Because it has a ton of benefits. Yeah. We're seeing that a lot as well. Not just with the people from from your audience, but all pretty much all of our members. We see some people will will even take higher dosage of TMG compared to the NMN just because of the other benefits that TMG can have. So that's always it's always good. Yeah. Well yeah. Yeah. Especially if we're eating a high protein diet, I think that it's beneficial to take the TMG to help to lower the homocysteine, from the high methionine intake. Yeah. Kind of, worsted for that reasons as well. I agree. And, any CD thirty eight inhibitors that, you have made? So for for a while, I was actually taking a thousand milligrams of apigenin, and I've reduced that just to to five hundred milligrams, recently. But, yeah, I'm I'm taking five hundred milligrams, so that's two capsules of the, pure apigenin product. I take that every day. So it's, it's definitely a good one. I tend to take that later in the day as well just because of the kind of relaxing effects that apigenin can have. Gotcha. And the reason for that is, to, inhibit CD thirty eight, which is this consumer of NAD. Yeah. I mean, I would probably say control rather than inhibit because CD thirty eight is necessary, but it's like I was mentioning earlier, you know, things like NAD, AKG, they decrease as we age, and CD thirty eight increases. And it's an NADase, which means it feeds on NAD. So the the more it increases, the less NAD you have, which is obviously an issue as we know. Yeah. And, high amounts of c d thirty eight is considered or thought to be, you know, one of the biggest reasons why this NAD levels decrease with age. So Yeah. Precisely. So it's it yeah. When it comes to NAD, it's always best to take that two pronged approach. So control the CD 38 and boost the levels of of NAD itself. ApoGenin is one Quercetin is also, if I'm not mistaken. It is, but similar to Quercetin being a senolytic, it it's it's it's, relatively. So if if Vicetin is this good at being a senolytic, Quercetin's this good. And it is the same way as, you know, if ApoGen is this good at controlling the CD 38, Quercetin's this good. Quercetin's a fantastic supplement, but it tends to have a small effect on many different pathways rather than one large effect. Right. Gotcha. One supplement, I mean, that you do provide is resveratrol, but, personally, I'm not taking it. And, I think that I can explain, like, why or you know, one of the biggest reasons is probably that I haven't seen, like, enough evidence human in humans, especially, that it would help with, you know, having, like, antiaging effect. And when it comes to, like, you know, exercise performance, then that actually has been also seen in humans to have, like, a negative effect on VO two max. And, I think it's also gonna have, like, a negative effect on, like, muscle hypertrophy and muscle strength side if you're taking it around the training. So that's the reason why I'm not taking it. Any thoughts on that? Yeah. I think the the thing with that is, like, when I spoke to David about it, obviously, David is probably the the biggest and most famous proponent of, resveratrol. He was he was adamant. And, you know, I've looked at the studies, and it has been proven that it does activate sirtuin once. So if you believe in activating sirtuins, then I believe you should believe in resveratrol. But I also understand that everything's not gonna be for everybody. You know, there are other people that have said they don't wanna take that product. Some people we have take it every other day because there was some of the some of the rodent data showed that every other day was more even more beneficial. So, you know, everyone's gonna be different, aren't they? But I I still take my resveratrol every day. Gotcha. Yeah. Maybe, like, I think yeah. It it's the same with rapamycin. Like, it obviously has, like, some benefits, for cases, and I would you know, I'm not, like, so like, I don't think it's gonna be harmful if you take it every once in a while. I think it has, like, a net positive effect if you take it, like, maybe, like, I don't know, once a month or something, for an average person. And the same with, like, reseroes as well probably. Like, I'm not I don't think it it should be, like, a daily supplement, personally for me at least. And, but I think, yeah, like, maybe a few times a week or a month probably has its benefits. Like, there are, the way I look at it is there are, like, days where I'm, like, being, quote, unquote, anabolic and, you know, like, pro muscle growth and pro hypertrophy and recovery and strength and those things, which, you know, in excess can be problematic for aging, but in moderation are also, you know, very good for aging. Like, you want to have muscle and strength for aging as well. And on the other hand, there are days where I'm, like, more catabolic, more like these longevity pathways that are not necessarily gonna help you build muscle, but they do have, like, these benefits on ontology and DNA repair and Yeah. So I I I think I do a similar thing, but I do it daily. Uh-huh. So I'll have a period in the day where it's about building. You know, I'm eating something probably high protein. That's usually in the morning for me, and then I'll be taking the the relevant supplements for that. And then maybe I'll have a period of twelve hours where I'm not eating, and I'm just I might I might take x y zed. So I think we're doing similar things just maybe on a different time scale. Yeah. I do well, I do do it on a daily basis as well. Like, you know, there's the fasting window, and there's the eating window. But on a, like, a macro scale, I do it also, like, an like, a few, like, longer periods, like, it'll be, like, a week or something like where I'm deliberately more parabolic or deliberately more anabolic. And, like, I I think that's, you know, I think that's a key to this seeing progress in all the things that you do, especially, like, in training as well as, like, the maybe antiaging side. If you're trying to, like, you know, do everything at once, you're trying to build muscle at once and strengthen, trying to improve your biomarkers and and, you know, have, like, do or do all these different kinds of antiaging interventions, then, you know, you may, like, end up spinning your wheels a bit. But if you, like, cycle them, then that's I think that's a key of, I think. Yeah. Definitely. The body either wants to be building or repairing. So Yeah. You have to you have to choose one rather than being one foot in both camps. Yeah. I can I can I'll I'll maybe, like, briefly give my supplement and this routine, which actually people can also check out from my, like, supplement list at cmount.com/supplements where I just list up all the supplements and when I take them as well? So, like, in the morning, you know, after waking up, I'm in this, you know, fasted state, and I'm already, yeah, having gone through a lot of the liver glycogen and my body is in this state of semi ketosis and, I mean, all these longevity pathways also turn on, you know, like, dose dependent manner after that fast or the long go fast, so, like, you know, twelve hour, fourteen hour fast, then, kind of wanting to push the gas on the longevity pathways like this. Things that put, like, this small amount of stress to the body and actually turn on these anti antioxidant defense systems and, cell recycling. So all the NMN and, sulfur boost, calcium, alpha beta, butyrate, and, fisetine, all those supplements will be that I consume in the morning usually to kind of help to drive those pathways or support them. And, around, like, midday where I'm starting to work out soon, then I'll, like, switch it a little bit. Like, I'll incorporate some aminos and even, like, HMB and those, supplements that help to, like, slow down that process a little bit to slow down the catabolism and switch switch more towards this, you know, muscle repair and, recovery and maintenance. And then in the evening after a workout, then I'll, you know, I have, like, a protein shake as well before the workout, but, yeah, like Yeah. Workout and then afterwards, in the meal, I'll have, like, you know, food that has protein. Depending on the day, like, I may have, like, more plant based, more animal based, higher carb, lower carb. That depends on the day. Like, yeah, like, after, that is where I'll like, switching over from this complete catabolic side to, like, this anabolic mode. Does that make sense? Yeah. No. It does make sense. What what's your, routine like on that sense? At the minute, it's all over the place. But, yeah, usually, it's, things like NMN in the morning, and then, obviously, you've got the, the morning workout. So if I'm gonna if I ever miss a work if I don't get my workout in the morning, then I usually don't end up doing the workout, just because of how my diary and how my schedule is. So and and even nowadays, because I'm always in hotels, the workout has to change anyway depending on how good the gym is in the hotel. And then, obviously, you you start taking your supplements. So I'll take the resveratrol then. I'll take the Fisetin. I'll take the quercetin. There's a few floaters as well that you can kinda take at any time, so things like the hyaluronic acid. I don't think that matters too much. It doesn't seem to make too much of a difference to me when I take it. So So I'll take that a couple of hours after. After that first meal as well, there will also be, so just before it, there'll be spermidine, and then just after it, there'll be Cert six activator. And then I'll usually eat a few hours later, and then my eating window will is at the minute, it's been a bit stretched, but it's usually four four to five hours. So have that big protein meal straight after the workout, and then few hours later, have another meal, make sure there's plenty of veggies and things like that in there, also some protein as well. And that's when I'll take my next lot of Citrix activated because, again, I take quite high dosage of that. K. And then that'll be when I take my vitamin d, vitamin k, and magnesium blended product as well. And then later on in the evening, then I've got a couple of other things I take, and a few other products from other brands as well. So, and I I at the minute, I'm still trying to work out where my collagen fits. So I'm taking it at different times. Or some days, I'll miss it because I've got, you know, ten minute window until my next meeting or until I've gotta go somewhere. And because it's not as easy as just putting a caption in your mouth and swallowing it, I'll be like, I gotta get stuff out, you know, pour it in and all that kind of stuff. So I definitely need to get into a routine with that, but that's something that do not age to all preaches anyway. It's a massive having a routine is huge because it means that you won't forget to do it. You know? The amount of people that I've spoken to that have said, oh, I've I've stopped feeling x y z benefit. Can you help me out? And then one of the team or myself will will speak to them individually. And they'll say, oh, yeah. But, know, I've been struggling with it. I missed it for three days, and then I missed it for another four days, then I forgot. And then it once you're out of the habit, it's very difficult. And so, yeah, I'm not in a habit with collagen yet because it's so new and because I've had this crazy schedule. So, hopefully, within a few weeks, I'll be more settled down and be able to get into a routine. Right. Yeah. I think collagen is great. Like, when I've looked at the research, then I think that if it took it before a workout and then did resistance training, then it did improve, bone density. But Okay. But general like, it kind of, you know, goes specifically to those, target joints. And, but if you take it, like, overall and, you know, whenever, then it still has, like, a positive effect on, the ligaments and tendon recovery as well. So, yeah, I think, you know, whenever you can is probably best. It's just not gonna be it's just not gonna be, like, you know, quote, unquote, anabolic. Like like, collagen doesn't, like, doesn't have leucine and doesn't have other essential aminos that you need to trigger a proteasynthesis. So it's not gonna be, useful for that, but, obviously, it's useful for, the joints and ligaments and tendons. So, yeah, whenever you, you know, call it if you call it in post workout, then you would want to make sure that you have, like, the other amino present as well, whether from a meal or, like, a other, shake, like, a whey or Yeah. Protein. Yeah. I mean, hope I'm hope hopefully, most people that are working out, particularly with a strength workout or with a very intense workout, are gonna be consuming some calories after that anyway. I would I would hope so. Yeah. Of course. I think so. Yeah. Any any other, like, new trials, something that you're working on? Well, there's like I said, there's always lots in the pipeline. We're we're testing out something called Urolithin a at the moment. But, again, that's, you know, watch this space kind of stuff. And then there's also something called astaxanthin as well that we're looking at. So Yeah. That's We we think they're gonna be we think that we're we're confident about both of them, but you never know until you get the results. So, you know, I'm hope hopeful that before the end of the year, we can have another ingredient that's gonna help people. I'm actually taking astaxanthin at the moment. That's one of the things I mentioned I'm I'm taking, from from another brand. And I was I have seen some research, but I've also heard lots of people tell me that their sunburn is reduced when they take astaxanthin. And, obviously, I'm in a lot of hot countries at the moment, so I'm taking it. And I'm not sunburned yet, so not sure not sure how clinical that trial is, but it's, it seems to be it seems to be working fine. Yeah. Well, funny enough, like, like, your NMN levels also determine whether or not you get sunburn or UV damage. So there is like, last year, I saw a study in mice that that NMN was, like, the determining by factor whether or not they got skin damage from the sun. So, like, with high level basically, like, you know, when sun causes UAE radiation or causes oxidative stress and that damage to the skin. And, in order to basically counteract that, your body needs, again, like these defense systems and NMN and NAD are, you know, the ones or NAD, but specifically would be, like, the one that is, like, used for contracting that oxidative stress that you get from the sun as well. So Yeah. And I think that's like I say about a lot of things, that's what happens when you fix the upstream causes of agent. The downstream symptoms that are fixed is gonna be numerous. You know? So so, like, for example, the eyesight thing. You know? When you take NMN, you're not you're not going near your eyes. You're putting something into your body. But because of that upstream, then we see the downstream, benefit. And it it sounds like it's gonna be the same for UV damage as well. Yeah. I think, you know, many people know about Azaxanthin, so it's this, like, lipid or fat and, that is used. Yeah. It does have, like, a basically protects against the oxidative stress in the skin. Many people have, reported that as well. But what about the other one that you mentioned, the urethane a? Yeah. So urethane a is it looks like it may benefit the mitochondria. But, again, I don't wanna say too much until we know more because the last thing you want is to get people's hopes up. And then, obviously, the the the trial ends, and it and it doesn't work out that way. So, yeah, that's something that people can watch this space. Anyone that's on our email list, just go to 2.ai.org. Scroll to the bottom. There's a little box where you can put your email in. The results of all these kind of trials are emailed out regularly. So, if anybody's interested and wants to know more, that's the best way to do it. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. Well, where can people maybe learn about these, trials, or where can they read them? Is there, like does do does your website have, like, a list of all the studies and, things that you've done? Donotage.org, the the website is the kind of in the consumer face inside of it. So we do have a science page where you can look at some studies, based on mostly based on the ingredients plus things like fasting and exercise and stuff like that. But we are looking at the end of this year probably to update the website and start having, like, a research page. Just a just the page to do with the research that we've directly involved with. Because when like I said, that that was set up as the consumer facing page. So we're letting the public purchase the ingredients that we're working on. And then now I think now we're building up this body of work. We should we're about ready to have a page that's dedicated just to the things that we've done ourselves. So for example, there'd be a lot of search Xactimate stuff on there. Mhmm. That's to give one example. Yeah. The the page is very, you know, comprehensive in a sense, or you have the references all listed out there. So it's a Yeah. .Org/science. So you can check Yeah. Yeah. That's right. Size, ontology, NAD, CT three, GMG, resorotrol, and, yeah, like, all everything is kind of listed out there with the references to studies. So if you already Plus Yeah. If anyone's got any specific questions, then they can just email hello@donotage.org, and then, obviously, one of the team will be able to get back to them. A lot of people do email in and say, I have x y zed, disease or condition. What should I take? You know, please still email us if you if you want some advice, but, you know, we can't give medical advice. So the the result the response to those kind of emails is always speak to your doctor, you know, because we we're not allowed to sort of treat or diagnose. But the science page should answer a lot of things for a lot of people. And if anyone's got any specific questions, hello@donotage.org. And, Do Not Age, where you deliver, worldwide. Right? Yeah. That's right. So we we the mission for the organization is to extend healthy lifespan for as many people as possible. So in order to achieve that, we need to make sure we deliver to every country. And recently, we've introduced hubs as well around the world so to help people, reduce their taxes and fees. So, for example, you know, where are the most common areas? USA, European Union, Australia. Anybody that purchases from us in those areas doesn't have to pay any taxes and fees, and that's the case for the majority of the world. There's a few countries where there's nothing you can do about it. So, like, India, for example. If you import stuff to India, there is a a small charge. But the vast majority of people don't have any taxes and fees to pay. So we're always trying to remove as much friction as we can and make it as easy as possible for people to get their hands on these beneficial ingredients. Yeah. I'm also, like, very, excited about, your company and the products that you provide. And it's very, like, you know, good to have, like, a transparent company that actually, you know, or make sure that the ingredients are what they say they are as well as, base base their, the products themselves on, the science themselves. Like, you have a huge research team behind you and, yeah, make sure you actually test your products basically in studies, which is, you know, very new for a supplement company, but it should be, like, somewhat, like, mandatory or Yeah. And I think, like I say, what what what I'm trying to do on a personal level is be the example. Like, I wanted to be 10 dogs in in a few years' time. You know what I mean? And, like, so that we actually have some genuine competition and I mean, we would just collaborate with them. You know what I mean? We would collaborate with them and say, right. You share the results of your research. We'll share ours. Let's all because we're all working towards the same thing. Right? We all want to solve the complex aging problem. So the more resources are going into that pool, the faster we're gonna get there. So yeah. Yeah. That's awesome. And, yeah, people can check it out at donotage.org, but, where can people learn more about you and your work? Yeah. I mean, I don't really do social media or anything like that. But, maybe in another six months, we can have another podcast, and I'll have some news because I've just started working on a project. I can't reveal too much, but, there's lots of exciting things in the pipeline. It's something I'm doing from a personal perspective rather than a do not age to all perspective. So, yeah, we can we'll be able to talk about that next time. That means people have to stay subscribed to your YouTube channel. That sounds good. Well, it was great talking with you, and, yeah, I'm looking forward to having, like, another update maybe, like, in six months or so. Yeah. Perfect. Thanks very much, Seem. Keep up the good work. Alright. That's it for this episode. As a reminder, you can get the free copy of my Metabolic Autophagy ebook if you use the code SEAM and buy NMN from donothage.org. So head over to donothage.org and use the code seam to also get a 10% discount. Other than that, thanks for listening to this episode. Stay tuned for the next one. Stay empowered.