Welcome back to the channel. My name is Siim Lund, and today we have another Instagram q and a. If you want to ask me another question in the future or be featured in this, video, then, yeah, head over to my Instagram at c nonde, and I do these q and a's quite regularly there. This episode is brought to you by Bond Charge, formerly known as Blue Blocks. My favorite light and sea palmeistering companies, Blue Blocks, has rebranded themselves as Bond Charge. They're now involved with a huge range of evidence based products to improve your wellness and life in every way. Their extensive range of premium wellness products helps you to sleep better, perform better, have more energy, recover faster, balance your hormones, and reduce inflammation. My favorites are their red light light bulbs because they can be used to create a melatonin friendly environment in your bedroom by shining only red and not blue or green light waves that will reduce your sleep quality. After starting to use these red light light bulbs, I find it much easier to fall asleep and feel less awake before bed. If you want to try out these amazing products that are the cornerstones to my most optimal sleep, then head over to boncharge.com/seamland and use the code cine 15 to save 15%. Alright. Question number one, is Wagyu cattle diabetic? So, yeah, if you haven't seen before, then, Wagyu beef is this very, like, super fatty beef that has this intramuscular fat accumulation, essentially, like this, you know, a lot of fat in there, not a lot of protein actually, so most of it will be, you know, actually fat calories. And, you know, the reason why this wagyu beef, you know, bill or, you know, it becomes as such isn't, you know, because of that they are somehow, like, obese necessarily, but because of it, like, this insulin resistance that accumulates this, intravascular fat eventually. And, yeah. I mean, it's not diabetic, essentially. I mean, the problem they have, like, some diabetes, it's not, going to have, like, any, like, real harm on your health directly. You know, eating a diabetic cow isn't gonna make you diabetic, but it may, you know, it may, like, you make over consume calories because like I said, it's super fatty. There's a ton of calories there. It has a lot more calories than, let's say, lean beef and much less protein. So in that sense, yeah, you know, you just get a lot of calories. Whether or not you should eat it, you know, depends on your, you know, calorie macros and whether or not how many calories you have to consume. But, inherently, it's not going to make you diabetic unless you become obese and diabetic in the process. Next question, creatine in capsule or powder? So creatine, yeah, very good supplement. I think that or, yeah, like, you would want to consume creatine as a powder and mix it with water, that's where you get the most of the absorption and, that's where you also get the hydration benefits of creatine. So that, you know, the creatine helps to store water inside the muscles and consuming it with water will have, like a more direct effect on that compared to capsules for sure. The quickest way to recover after food poisoning, well, I mean, depends on the degree or the severity or the type of that as well. If you have like a bacterial infection, which usually food poisoning is, then, then in that sense, like, fasting is one of the best ways to help with that. Fasting helps with bacterial infections quite easily. When you get sick, animals get sick, they stop eating and, yeah. Usually, like, eating food on top of a food poisoning, will just, you know, flare up that symptom again. You're gonna get, you know, more nausea and more of these symptoms of food poisoning by doing that. So fasting is the best way to do that. You just have to kind of wait it out a little bit. Things that can help to speed it up would be, you know, activated charcoal to bind to that, basically, endodoxemia that, gets created from this bacteria. Things like n a c, things like vitamin c, then because of antioxidants can also help, with that. Thoughts on lemon water in the mornings? So, yeah, I mean it's very popular, a lot of people do it. I think it's great, like in some sense, it's, I mean it's gonna help a lot better blood sugar levels as well, helps to, like, lower the cortisol a little bit, and, yeah, kind of wakes up some of the digestive enzymes. It's not, yeah, like super inherently needed. I think, like, salted water is also very good for the gut and, the cortisol levels, but lemon water is kind of one option. Why not sauna before sleep? So, yeah, it may, like, elevate your body temperature and the heart rate, which can keep you up and, prevent you from falling asleep. So ideally, like, same with the exercise, you wanna wait at least, you know, a few hours, four hours, five hours at least, before bed. Supplements for healthy brain function. So, you know, obviously, good quality nutrition is the foundation to that foods that have a positive effect on the brain. I think the most important one is choline, and get that from egg yolks and liver, the big two biggest sources of choline. Then different kinds of dark cruciferous vegetables for the polyphenols as well as the methyl donors you get from that, they have protective effects on the brain. Obviously, your brain is made out of, a lot of, fat and cholesterol. So again, egg yolks, but specifically these, you know, omega three fatty acids, DHA, EPA, you get from fatty fish. Those are also kind of the main building blocks of the brain and, I think olive oil is a good one. It has polyphenols, antioxidants, and, the oleic acid has also been found to have a lot of benefits for brain and protecting its neurodegeneration. Right. Why are glycine good to take? So why is glycine good to take? I think, yeah, glycine is one of my favorite supplements. It's, has multiple benefits. One of the main benefits is that it's part of collagen, so it helps with skin, tendons, ligaments, those kind of things, but it also, has antioxidant properties, it helps to lower blood sugar levels, it helps to lower blood body temperature, it lowers inflammation and it's part of glutathione or helps to boost glutathione. So yeah, I mean it's one of the safest, one of the most like, you know, effective, very easy to take, and it tastes sweet. So you can add it to, like, you know, coffee or just take it before bed to help with sleep and relaxation. Have you ever played a team sport? Not really. I've never, you know, played in professional sports or anything like that. And the only, like, sport thing I've done, I did, like, a few bodybuilding shows, fitness shows. But, yeah, like in a childhood, I used to play more, like, you know, I don't know, soccer or basketball. But, not that much nowadays. Mostly, yeah, different kinds of fitness related activities. Best five things to prioritize to lose 35 pounds as quickly as possible and sustain it. So best five things would be to, you know, obviously, you need to be in a calorie deficit, and, the way to achieve that would be to eat satiating and filling foods that have low calorie content, like lean proteins and vegetables. That's kind of the best food for rapid and sustainable weight loss. Then secondly, you will do, you know, resistance training to build lean muscle tissue and make you very insulin negative. That's gonna just improve your metabolism to the extent that losing weight becomes very easy and you have a high resting metabolic rate, so you don't even have to, like, exercise all the time to keep keep the weight off. Third would be to, you know, manage your stress and sleep well because then by default you will, you know, make better decisions and you will have less stress that would make you want to overeat. Essentially, number four would be to kind of have some sort of, like another purpose but yeah, like some things to do other than eating because all the times people eat because they're bored. And things to do include like work related things, some some things you're passionate about, hobbies other than food and obviously relationships can be important part of that as well. Food is, you know, a social activity but I mean a lot of people eat out of loneliness or they eat just because they're bored, like I said. And lastly, I would say maybe, I don't know, like cardio or walking. I think that's also very underrated in an, just actually many people just don't do do don't do cardio. So if you incorporate it into your weekly routine, then yeah, it's just gonna make it, much easier to keep the weight off. How many days of the week do you not do keto? So, I think I may do keto or I mean, I'm never actually, like, on a very strict or an actual ketogenic diet. Like, I have days where I eat low carb and days where I just eat specifically like higher fat foods but, the vast majority of the days I'm still, you know, eating too many carbs to be in ketosis. I mean, it's fine for me and, I still, I think, produce substantial amounts of ketones, in my fasted window. Like right now, I haven't eaten anything, for today. I've fasted for maybe, sixteen or seventeen hours. And, yeah, because of the extended fasting window or databases, I do get adequate amounts of ketone production as well. How many days of the week do I not do keto then? I mean, I mean, ketosis almost every day, but, yeah, like in the evenings, I still eat carbs on most of the days. So maybe I have two low carb days per week, usually on, like, rest days. Alkaline water, is it good? So alkaline water, I don't think that it's good for as a default. I don't think that it's something that you just want to drink as a default because, you know, alkaline you want to have like an acidic stomach and if you drink a lot of alkali water then that can go as like you know indigestion and digestion issues. So as a default you still want to consume you know preferably mineral water but you know regular water regular water is fine unless you have like some metabolic acidosis or some super, you know, muscle soreness, whatever inflammatory conditions, then maybe like a little bit of alcohol and water can be beneficial, but as a default, I I don't think that it's inherently good. Does adding a little bit of glycine to my coffee in the morning break my fast? So, you know, glycine, it doesn't have calories, it lowers blood sugar, but it does raise insulin, which is the mechanism by which it lowers blood sugar. So I don't think that it, you know, matters. I don't think it matters that much. But if you were to be super kind of OCD about it then yeah, you may want to not add it to your morning coffee but I personally don't think that it matters at that point. Because coffee can also balance, you know, coffee activates the AMPK which is like the opposite of insulin and helps you to boost the benefits of fasting. So you know it's a you know, balancing act I don't think that it a small amount of glycine actually has any substantial effect on the fasting state. Adding 35% cream to my coffee in the morning is breaking my fast. So 35% cream depends on the amount. If it's only like a 100 calories, like a tablespoon, then I don't think so. It's, not enough and it's mostly fat. The milk protein I mean, cream also has a little bit of sugar. The milk protein may, like, also spike insulin, but, again, I don't think that it matters in that quantities. If you have, like, a thousand calories of cream, then, yeah, probably. It's gonna do that. To to do, what do you think about in kind bed therapy? So the in kind bed therapy is where you have your head, like, or you basically have the head of your bed is elevated by, like, 10 or 15 centimeters. And theoretically, it's supposed to help with circulation, while you're sleeping. So I think it I mean, I haven't tried it myself. I like I have a I I like to have, like, a big pillow anyway. I think it could be beneficial. Yeah. For sure. If even if you're, like, maybe, snoring, that can be a useful trick to, you know, prevent your neck from collapsing. So, yeah, you can definitely try it. Many people say that it works great. I haven't seen any, like, substantial studies or anything to show that it has, like, some, superior advantage over regular sleeping. Any tips for nerve pain damage and regeneration? So for that, infrared light is beneficial there. You know, obviously, actually, one recent study found that intermittent fasting help with axon nerve regeneration through modulating the gut microbiome. So I think that can be actually a good thing for that. From the food side, then, yeah, you just want to promote, consume foods that promote growth. Obviously, protein and collagen can be added there. From a supplemental side, I think, yeah, one of the only supplements that comes to mind is like BPC one hundred and fifty seven, which isn't like a supplement, it's a peptide. And that has a lot of like at least animal studies showing that it helps with many aspects of regeneration, many aspects of recovery like, yeah, nerve cells and, yeah, things like that pain, joint pain, those kind of things. The brand, you know, you should have to, like, inject it with a needle, but, the there's only one brand that has, like, an oral BPC one fifty seven, which is by BioPrime supplements. And, yeah, just, you know, a tincture, you put it into your mouth and consume it that way. The they also have, regeneration serum that, is like a ointment or something, you know, that you're putting on your skin. But, yeah, like the PPC one fifty seven is the only one orally that I think could as a supplement, you know, or let's say, like a peptide, heating peptide to help with neuro pain and regeneration. And, yeah, the website, if I'm not mistaken, is bioprime supplements, and the code for that is c 10, for a 10% discount if you're interested. I've tried it. I think that it has some, benefits for sure. Iron deficient despite eating meat. So, yeah, iron deficiency is very one of the most common nutrient deficiencies in the world, primarily affecting females because of their menstrual cycle. But, yeah, even if you are eating other meat and, I mean, iron is everywhere in our food supply. It's in cereals, grains, meat, and, many other foods have iron already, but iron deficiency is still one of the most common deficiencies. The main reason for that, in my opinion, is because of, the, lack of copper. So copper helps with iron absorption, copper helps with, hemoglobin production and converting iron into hemoglobin. So you need copper to basically do what iron needs to do and you get copper from, you know, liver and dark chocolate and beans, things like that. So look into that. Probably That's the reason why. You may also have like some genetic, let's say genetic factors that reduce your iron absorption or hemoglobin production. So yeah, you need to maybe do a DNA test to assess that, but regardless like just eat red meat plus plus, the, liver as well as oysters, seafood, maybe like dark chocolate as well. Is salt necessary? Well, sodium as as well as chloride, I mean, they are, you know, essential nutrients. Your body needs salt to do many things, pretty much everything, energy production, digestion, and, yeah, like salt, you know, I don't think that you need to have, let's say, or you would survive without ever consuming salt as a, you know, from a shaker or whatever. But let's say if you don't get enough salt from your food either then that can cause problems. So you know ancestrally you would get salt from water from like some springs or mineral waters, some rivers, whatever you get salt from there. And you also get salt from a lot of foods. Obviously seafood is very salty by default. Sea vegetables, fish, oysters, clams, but also like you know if you kill an animal, you drink the blood, you eat the bones, those have you know salt in it as well. And a lot of the studies that looked at the altogether salt consumption, they didn't, you know, take that into account. So, how to get it even if they're not like necessarily didn't have salt shakers, they still consumed quite a lot of salt from the animals they ate. And, yeah, salt is no. Depends on the diet, you know, if you have like a high carb diet, a lot of fruit, etcetera, then chances are your salt performance are much lower because of the kind of increased potassium intake as well as the, aspect of insulin making you hold on to water better. But let's say on a low carb diet, you definitely, you know, if you're not directly eating a lot of seafood or you're not directly eating a lot of fermented foods, for example, or, you know, drinking blood that has salt in it, then, yeah, you may just need to add like a little bit of salt to your diet. If you're eating the standard western diet, processed food diet that has added salt in everything, then I don't think that you need extra salt for sure. Depends on the diet that you follow. But, as a mineral, let's say, salt is essential for sure. Do I lose a lot of benefits of sixteen and eight if I do it only five five days a week? Well, I mean, depends on, yeah, like, what kind of benefits, and I mean, if you do even do it once, once a week, you're still getting some benefits in that day of doing that. And obviously depends on the overall calorie consumption of the rest of the week. So, yeah, I don't think that, it matters how often you do it, you still get benefits while doing it for sure. Which weightlifting targets the whole body the most? So the main compound lifts like your barbell squats, deadlifts, barbell rows, bench press, overhead press, standing overhead press, those will be the main exercises that targets pretty much the entire body on all those lifts. So even if you are, like, you know, bench pressing with proper form, you actually don't have to, like, embrace your core and legs a little bit as well. With the deadlift, you're using your entire body. With the squat, I mean, you're, you know, using your legs primarily, but, you know, you have to also have, like, a, tight back and core muscles. So, yeah, those are the main barbell compound lifts that target the body. And the benefit of these, full body compound lifts is that studies do find that they trigger a bigger hormonal response like more IGF-one, more testosterone, and things like that and actually free weights generally outperform like machines as well in muscle growth and muscle strength. Alright. Next question. What's the best time to sleep? So, best time to sleep from a circadian rhythm standpoint is generally, like, before midnight for humans. I mean, yeah, that's people who have, more nocturnal habits, but, these, habits of being, like a morning owl morning lark or a night owl, they're primarily caused by lifestyle. So naturally, humans are supposed to be diurnal that we generally sleep at night and we stay awake at daytime. And yes, some people are more like they exhibit more morningness or more eveningness which means that yeah they may go to bed a bit a few hours later or a few hours earlier, but yeah generally around like before midnight I think you should be definitely in bed and that also kind of coincides with the natural production of hormones that the human body goes through. So, the human body starts to produce naturally melatonin around like 9PM slowly and reaches peak at 11PM when you start to produce growth hormone as well. That's the most growth hormone you produce during the daytime and, yeah, like in the morning your cortisol starts to rise around 6AM, peaks at 9AM, so that's the human natural circadian rhythm. So I think that going to bed around like nine to 11PM is, good for most people and waking up around, you know, six to 8AM, somewhere between there. Of course, there are, you know, shift work and literal night owls who do the opposite, but, yeah, I mean they still get some of these surges and growth hormones because the human body can adapt, but I think if you also want to link yourself to the day and night cycles then, yeah, that's the optimal window to aim for because, you know, there's no point in being awake in nature if you're human. If there if the if it's dark outside because you can't hunt, you can't do anything. You can only sit at a bonfire. So yeah. Whereas in the morning, you can go hunt, etcetera. So human body is geared and, kind of evolved to be this diurnal, which means that wake up in the morning with the sunrise, technically, and go to bed when it's dark, pretty much, which doesn't mean that you can't stay up if it's dark, of course, but, you have to kind of still respect the natural human, diurnal cycles and kind of, you know, block out blue light and, use whatever technologies you can to still mimic that natural cycle as much as possible. Glutathione supplementation for reversing grays after massive stressors. So, glutathione is more of like a, you know, antioxidant, and it's more of like a protective antioxidant. It's it's better as a, like, a preventive thing. I don't think that it can directly, like, reverse gray hair, but for for that, you know, you can still promote growth of hair with, you know, collagen. I think, you know, protein intake and collagen, those are the biggest determinants of, you know, hair growth and hair regeneration. So I think that's kind of the main focus that should be. Again, like the BPC one hundred and fifty seven could help with that. Astaxanthin, vitamin c, vitamin e, maybe glycine. You can add a whole lot of other supplements that you could take for other reasons besides the hair. But, yeah, the collagen and protein intake probably is the main main focus. So, like, double your collagen intake, maybe. And red light therapy actually can also help, directly with that. Next question. Important to take creatine with water for best absorbent. I can take a scoop on the tongue. Yeah. So, yeah, you need to take or the best absorbent you get from, creatine if you take it with water, so you hydrate better. Things that can help to heal injured ligaments, for that, the, you know, slow controlled and the full range of motion, is the best kind of medicine for the joints. So you still need to move the joints a little bit. Like if you have a broken arm, you put it into a cast, you're not moving the arm and when you remove the cast, you and you can see that people's muscles have withered away and their arm is like half as size as it was before and the reason for that is because of like immobility. Not necessarily because of the brokenness of the bone but immobility is what is you know causing the withering of the muscles and movement helps with the recovery a lot. So you need to still, you know, if you have like an injury, obviously you don't want to exacerbate the injury, you don't want to make it painful, but you do want to like move it to a certain extent. And I I made a video about doing, like, this slow I had some pain in my, elbows, like, many years ago, five, six years ago. And the reason I overcame it with was doing these very slow push ups to like basically direct more blood flow into this elbow region. And because these tendons, they don't have many blood vessels, they recover very slowly so you need to go out of your own way to extra work for those regions directly to direct blood flow into there. And yeah, different kinds of push ups to target those regions very slowly, controlled and full range of motion. You don't wanna, you know, exhaust the muscles, you just want to promote blood flow into there. And you can also have planks. One, you know, actual biohack for, the injuries is to use the KATSU bands. So KATSU blood flow restriction bands have been used in many studies actually to, help with, joint recovery and even like helps to maintain muscle if you have broken an arm. So yeah, like if you have a, your arm is in a cast, you put the katsu bands on and the katsu bands work even without you doing anything. Like they have this setting where they start to, like increase the pressure in the cuffs. So it increases the pressure, releases it. So it creates this pumping effect like pressure on, pressure off, and this by itself will, help to, you know, move blood in the limb. And, even without lifting anything you have people have seen accelerated recovery and more muscle maintenance, muscle preservation after an injury by using that. So the KASO bands are amazing for, yeah, like just lifting lighter weights and getting a lot more blood flow into those regions without causing additional injuries. So definitely look at look, suggest looking into that. Proper supplement aside, again, BPC one hundred and fifty seven is great for that collagen and, you know, probably like yeah. Red light, infrared light will also help with that. Those are the kind of main ones that come to mind. But, yeah, exercise and blood flow is the best medicine for that. How How many workouts per week do you do? Well, I work out pretty much every day to in some degree, so it's not always, like, some intense stuff. It's some days I'm just, you know, mobility. That's I also consider, like, movement, but it's not gonna, like, elevate my heart rate significantly. On average, I work out, like, three to four times with, resistance training, which includes either weights or calisthenics, so the kind of strength based movements. On usually two days, I'll do cardio, which is just zone two type cycling or jogging. And, maybe one day is a quote unquote rest day where I go for a longer walk or do like some mobility yoga, that kind of thing. How to build strength and endurance quickly, not necessarily muscles? Well, for strength, it's very easy. You oh, it's not easy. Sorry. For the endurance, it's quite easy. Like, you have to do a a lot of zone two cardio. And, the way or the biggest mistake people do with endurance training is that, they train endurance as if they're going for, like, a hit cardio or sprint. So if you're doing the hit and sprinting, then you're getting better at hitting and sprinting sprinting, not necessarily the zone two cardio. If you wanna get better at zone two cardio, which is the kind of, aerobic capacity, then, you have to do the zone two cardio and, do the cardio while maintaining this aerobic engine and for that you have to be for most people it's below the 65% of your vr2 max threshold. If you're fat adapted then that can be higher, you can even be like 85 if you're super keto, but generally, yeah, like you want to stay in the fat burning state, which means being yeah, usually maintaining nasal breathing is a good indicator of that. So you want to just get better at that and go as fast as you can while still breathing through your nose. That's how you build endurance over time. And, yeah, as you get better, then you can run faster while still retaining this, aerobic state and burn fat in it. For strength, strength, is actually kind of a similar approach. You don't wanna, you know, go to failure when you're training for strength and power. For strength and power, you want to, yeah, go for the highest intensity, while still being able to recover from it. And and, yeah, like going for, like, somewhere between three reps, maybe three to three reps, three to five reps is the kind of the, I think, sweet spot for strength. And, yeah, the intensities for that are usually like you know 80 to 90% of your one repetition maximum. So it has to be super intense or near your one repetition maximum to build strength. But the kind of volume tends to be lower. So you don't need to do a lot of volume and you don't need to go to failure to build strength. For strength, you need to kind of reach the, near maximum, but you don't wanna, you know, completely burn yourself out by doing that. Are there ways to decrease SHBG? SHBG sex hormone binding globulin. So sex hormone binding globulin can like decrease your testosterone levels or free testosterone levels you combine to it. So things for that, I think best for that is boron. Many people don't use it. So boron three milligrams a day is very good to reduce that, which helps to increase testosterone, as well as estrogen for females. Then you want to also make sure that you're not in a calorie deficit. So calorie deficit on a being in a like a starvation state, low thyroid will raise SHP levels. High protein intake helps to lower SHPg and, you know, carbs as well actually help to lower that because carbs are very like energy stimulating or they signal high energy like raising insulin and eating carbs tells your body that, okay, you're not starving. And, that's one way to also decrease SHBG levels. Best ways to remove heavy metals from the body. Only one heavy metal in my playlist. Yes. Only have your heavy metals in your playlist, not your body. So best ways to do that would be saunas, exercise, I mean, calorie restriction, fasting because you're, you know, burning fat that can do that. But it's problematic if you mobilize the toxins and the metals into your bloodstream. So you need binders for that, like, actually, charcoal, spirulina. But, you had to excrete them then, sweat. So saunas are the best one. Infrared saunas actually have been used. So combining ganaiosin plus infrared saunas is a good way to, do that on a regular basis. You also excrete, like, these, plastics and pesticides. If we're going to be sedentary doing work, is it better to do PSMF or a protein sparing modified fast or OMAD or one meal a day? Yeah. It depends on again your individual preference. I think they're both very equal in terms of the metabolic outcome. PSMF is probably more suitable if you're like trying to build muscle or if you're super frail and you need to maintain muscle because you get to consume protein. But OMAD, maybe some people prefer OMAD if, they don't like to eat at work. So I think they're both kinda equal in terms of the metabolic output. Both will increase your insulin sensitivity and both will, you know, prevent these blood sugar ups and downs that you may get if you're eating like a standard diet at work. What's your thoughts about cannabis and using it to stress relief? Well, I'm not using cannabis. I don't think that it's I don't think that's a good way to relieve stress. I think there's much better ways to do it and, yeah. I don't think that's kind of necessary in my opinion. I mean, maybe someone else may disagree, but, yeah, in my personal opinion, yeah, I've never kind of used it and, don't plan to use it either. Just got York intolerance test back. Only egg yolk came back order line. I eat eggs most day. So that's the thing with the most of these food intolerance tests is that, you know, if you get a red flag on a test, okay, milk or egg whatever, then it can be because of you're actually consuming them. So your body you know has antibodies or produces antibodies in response to consuming those foods and that's the reason why it flares up. You know, you have to look at the actual symptoms. Do you get like, you know, some skin inflammation or gut issues from eating those foods or not? If you don't get any symptoms, then you really don't have anything to worry about. So I don't think that it's, you know, it's not needed to, let's say, avoid eggs if you don't get any symptoms from them even if your test says that you're intolerant. So yeah, look at the symptoms first, I think. What can help with muscle cramps on a carnivore diet? So salt, probably probably and most importantly, magnesium and potassium. So, you know, on a carnivore diet, you don't get that much potassium. So that's probably the biggest reason why it may occur. So I would suggest that looking into maybe adding some fruit or things like that into your diet, mineral waters for all the electrolytes and maybe like a magnesium supplement. Does supplementing melatonin suppress or disrupt dopamine? Not that I know of, like, high melatonin levels have been associated with depression and, like, mood disorders because maybe you're so, like, tired and drowsy from the melatonin levels. I don't think that the melatonin supplement would, help with that and, I don't think that, melatonin has, like, any effect on dopamine per se. Do you use SPF on your face most days? No. Well, I'm I don't need to because I'm not I don't get that much sun here in Estonia especially now that the fall and winter is coming. In the summer I didn't use it either because I mean it wasn't that like intense I think here in Estonia. I did use a little bit of SPF when I was in Sicily for my honeymoon and especially when we, like, climbed Mount Etna, which is, you know, 2,000 meters above sea level. So there, it makes sense to actually use some sun protection, I think, especially if you're not local and you're not used to it. So in in those kind of situations I think it's worth it but not on a daily basis if you're not really getting that much sunlight exposure. Funny thing enough, you know, I was in Sicily and the locals themselves, you know, who don't I don't think that they use SPF or any sunscreen, They did have, like, a lot of these, you know, pigments, sunspots, and those kind of things. So I think that, you know, even if you're, like, a local living in a very warmer country with a lot of more sunlight, then it's still worthwhile and smart to use some sunscreen or SPF, because yeah. It it just, you know, goes to show that, yeah, like, those locals even who, live there, they did have a lot more, like, skin damage or, wrinkles from the sun exposure, I think. To to do a best supplement for best skin, collagen, probably, protein, whey protein, unless you're allergic, glycine, those kind of things. Do electrolytes or EAs break up fast than calories per scoop? I don't think so. It's a very small amount. How to reverse macular degeneration. So, the biggest reason for that usually has to do with, like, screen time if you're a lot of, you know, artificial blue light is going to damage the retinas and damage the eyes. So if you are working in front of a computer, then definitely use some sort of filters or these, glasses, see through lenses, blue blocking glasses like the one in the board in charge, for example, that, you know, they don't filter out the colors. You can see everything, but they filter out the blue intense spike that's and they protect your eyes. Obviously, you also need to do like eye yoga exercises, you know, massage your eyeballs, look into a distance. A lot of like myopia that you get from this screen time can also be reversed by just looking out of the window, looking at long distances. Like most of our lives is just 10 centimeters away nowadays. We look at only things ten ten centimeters away. We don't look at things a 100 meters away that much, which is a problem for the eye health, I think. Supplements, vitamin e, azaxanthin, maybe maybe like glutathione, but, yeah, avoiding oxy distress. And that red light is probably another one that can be used. Question. Next question. What can I do to function on six to seven hours of sleep instead of eight? So, I mean, you need to make sure that the sleep is quality and, get enough deep sleep and REM sleep. So, you know, blocking blue light before enables you to fall asleep faster and enables you to go through the sleep stages better as well. So you get more of the quality sleep stages. In a cool environment, people sleep better so lowering the temperature of your room and bed is good. Taking glycine will lower your blood temperature and relaxes you. So it's very beneficial as a sleep supplement even. Magnesium can be done for that. Meditation has been found to reduce the demand for sleep and meditators function better or less sleep. So some sort of mindfulness practice. Exercise increases your sleep demand so you just, you know, fall asleep faster and I think that although like exercise increases your sleep demand, you can get away with less sleep if exercise because your body's kind of getting this small hermetic stress from the exercise that increases your stress resilience. And I think that's pretty much it. You can also try like a siesta, take a siesta, like a nap in the afternoon. Now that is, I think, you know, if you sleep six hours in your core sleep, at night and then you have like a thirty minute nap in the afternoon, then that kind of catches up, on that sleep deprivation short one. So, yeah, like a nap is a good way to kind of, cycle or dissect your daily sleep, time into, like, a smaller chunk a little bit. Alright. That's it for this q and a. If you want to ask me another question in the future, then, yeah, make sure you follow me on Instagram, and I do those q and a's, quite regularly there at simlund. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is sim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.