The US FDA has banned NMN from being sold as a dietary supplement in The United States. And in this video, we're gonna take a look at what does it mean and whether or not this, like, a ban and is it actually, like, a real ban and if it's legitimate or not. Execute order 66. So a lot of this, has been taking place over the past few months even. And since, like, 2020 already, it has been raised the question whether or not NMN is, like, a pharmaceutical drug or is it a dietary supplement. And based on, like, these different investigations the FDA has done over the past few years, they have, like, come to the conclusion that, NMN is not, like, a dietary supplement because it's not found in, like, the food source or food supply. And that's why the reason they concluded that, NMN is excluded from the dietary supplement definition. And, that's why it's not may not be marketed or sold as a dietary supplement. So bullshit. When the FDA initially reviewed NDA notifications relating to NMN, NMN was not clearly identified as an article that was authorized for investigation, I. E. MIB six twenty six, which is a form of crystalized NMN that, this company, Metro Biotech, is working on. David Sinclair is part of that company as well. And once the FDA has been made aware of the connection between NMN and MIB six to six, we concluded that NMN is in fact excluded from the definition of a dietary supplement under section two zero one of the FD and C Act. So it looks like, you know, that, the FDA wasn't clear whether or not NMN is a dietary supplement or a pharmaceutical drug up until the point of, the MetroBiotech company has started to do some trials with the MIB MIB six two six. MIB six two six is a normal formulation of a microcrystalline unique polymer of beta nicotinamide mononucleotide. So it's a form of NMN, like a more patented form of NMN and, a different form of it. And that has been shown in humans to increase NAD levels in older adults. One thousand milligram once or twice a day has been found to be safe and associated with a substantial dose rate that increases in blood NAD levels and its metabolome. MIB six two six has also been actually used by the US special forces as well to test, like, what is the effect of NMN supplementation or this MIB six two six supplementation on their performance and NAD levels. These trials are still in the works. They haven't been released yet, but there are, like, some of, like, these initial findings that it does, like, pretty much work in improving intensity and, like, combat fatigue and those kind of things. So, yeah, in my personal experience, I would say that NMN and boosting NAD levels can be very beneficial for this high combat or high stress, situations where you're, like, sleep deprived and under chronic stress such as soldiers in combat. But, yeah, obviously, there's also, like, just medical benefits in terms of improving the insensitivity in older adults. So what does this all mean? Yeah. Like, the FDA has stated that NMN cannot be sold as a dietary supplement, and, it's quote unquote called like a ban. But, when I've talked with some of the companies that sell NMN, like Do Not Age in The United States as well, Ben, they haven't heard anything that, you know, they can't sold it, that they can't sell it anymore, which, you know, may take some time before it actually goes into effect. But in my opinion, actually more just this statement applies more to the MIB six to six, in my opinion. So the MIB six to six is the patented new crystallized form of NMN that, is probably, like, said to be more potent like a super NMN as David Sinclair says it. Whether or not it is some sort of a superior form of regular NMN, we don't know, because like regular NMN has been seen to work in raising NAD levels and improving insulin sensitivity as well as the MIB six to six has done the same. So, I don't know, like, what's the real difference based on the current studies. But the FDA ban, you know, I think it probably applies more to MIB six to six because, I mean, the say that it doesn't exist in the food supply is not accurate because there are foods, natural foods that contain NMN. There are also people being like somewhat conspiratorial or, like, Doctor Brad Stanfill, who also made a video about this announcement. And he thinks that, this is essentially the, MIB six, the metro biotech company lobbying for the FDA to ban NMN so that they could sell their own, the MIB six two six, as a pharmaceutical drug, not as a dietary supplement. So, you know, who knows? But NMN itself, you know, you can find it at food and, it has safety data behind in humans. So I don't think that there is justified to ban it outright as a dietary supplement. Pissed off. What does it mean? Does it mean that you can't get NMN anymore in the future? Maybe it will. Like in a worst case scenario, yeah, it literally means that you can't get NMN as a supplement anymore and you need to only get the pharma version, with some sort of a prescription or something like that. But I think the best case scenario is that it just applies to the MRV six two six. Only only time will tell. We'll see what next year brings. I definitely take NMN, and I'll plan on taking it in the future as well. So I think it's worthwhile. And also let me know, do you think that this is lobbying or is it just the FDA not knowing anything about NMN and just, you know, banning it based on the, connection to MIB six two six? Thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is C. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.