Hey. Welcome back to the channel. My name is Seeb Lund. And in this video, we're gonna talk about how can you get more deep sleep. So, basically, I'm gonna be giving you almost like a mini podcast, about, like, a full guide to getting more deep sleep so we can sleep better, get more recovery, and just be healthier. This episode is brought to you by the world's most recognized probiotic supplement, Seed. Seed's daily Synbiotic is a pre and probiotic two in one capsule that supports your gut health, skin, digestion, and so much more. Seed isn't a cocktail of random strains of bacteria that do nothing. It contains 24 clinically and scientifically studied strains, which makes seed the first of its kind. Seed's daily symbiotic is the only probiotic supplement I'm taking regularly because of how much is backed by research. I noticed the benefits it has on my digestion and overall energy. You can get a 15% discount off Seed's daily Synbiotic by using the code SIEM 15 at siem.com/siemfifteen. That's siim15@seed.comforwardslashscenefifteen. So to actually know how much deep sleep you're getting, you know, you would need some sort of a tracker, you know, and, I use Dioring using that for many years. And I do get a good good consistent amount of high deep sleep all the time on a regular basis. So these are kind of my average nights. I get usually, like, two hours of deep sleep. I may not get that much REM all the time, but, I do get adequate deep sleep on a regular basis. And some, you know, my records are three hours even, like, up to 50% of my sleep totally may have been some deep sleep sometimes. But I think that's gonna be a bit of, like, a misreading from the OR itself that actually a part of that is gonna be REM sleep. But, you know, regardless, I get plenty of deep sleep and I get high amounts of deep sleep as well. And, you know, what is deep sleep? Deep sleep is, quite a crucial part of the entire healthy sleep cycle, and you need deep sleep for many things, mostly for physical repair. You need to to be in deep sleep to conduct all these different kinds of repair processes, especially related to, like, muscle repair, you know, just overall health in related relation to your body. The REM sleep, rapid eye movement sleep, is a time where your brain is, you know, doing a lot of most of the processing, and that's where we also see dreams. So one sleep cycle lasts about an hour and a half and starts from, you know, wakefulness, go into n n one NRAM one stage, NRAM two, and NRAM three is, considered the deep sleep stage, after which you go into rapidly to near wakefulness where you go into REM sleep and you see dreams. And during time, during the entire night, you get about, four or five total sleep cycles in total if you sleep somewhere between sort of, like, seven hours. And, yeah, the majority of deep sleep occurs in the first half of, the night, like, between 11PM until two to three, AM is where you get mostly deep sleep. And then in the dawn, basically, in the later part of the night or early morning dawn, that is where you get more, REM sleep and more dreams. So, that's why the body kinda prioritizes a physical repair first and then it starts to repair the brain and the neurological processes. So, yeah, deep sleep is quite crucial in many aspects. How much deep sleep should you get? This, you know, this depends a lot on your overall health, some genetics, and, when do you go to sleep, how much you sleep in total, etcetera. On average, it's okay or it's healthy to be awake for about two to 5% of the night. Light sleep contributes the vast majority of your sleep. The NRAM two and NRAM one stages, you get, like, 40 to 50% of it can be up to, light sleep. Although, like, ideally, you would want to have, like, a little less of that or you can compress it. Deep sleep, 13 to 23%, I would, much rather have, 25 or 30% as deep sleep because it's still quite, crucial. You don't wanna be having too much light sleep or, you know, you wanna be deficient in light sleep, but compared to deep sleep then, or compared to, yeah, like, light sleep, deep sleep is much more important. And REM sleep somewhere between 20 to 25% is a healthy amount. Too much REM can make you, like, schizophrenic or something like that. It can cause, like, some it can also reflect some other, problems, with the brain, if you get too much REM sleep. But, yeah, deep sleep, I would much rather have, like, a 30% deep sleep. So let's begin with how do you actually get more deep sleep. Many people do struggle with that. They struggle with, energy levels. They struggle with motivation. They struggle with staying asleep. They struggle with, you know, body aches and pains. They get memory loss, etcetera. And that can all be tied to it back to, like, just the poor quiet sleep. And, deep sleep especially will will relate to things like, yeah, like physical side, like, injuries and physical soreness and those kind of things. So what is the number one thing that I think is the most important thing for overall sleep architecture architecture? That's gonna be, the circadian rhythms. So the circadian rhythms, if you don't know, then they are these day and night cycles, diurnal rhythms inside the body that control basically everything that's going on including sleep hormones and include including all the sleep stages. And the main circadian rhythm, but probably related to just wakefulness and sleep is the melatonin and cortisol circadian rhythm. And, they follow this, inverse pattern almost, or reflecting they reflect each other or, they're not, you know, similar. So cortisol tends to be the stress hormone, the wakefulness boosting hormone. It rises in the morning, peaks at 9AM, and drops low, for the rest of the day, and it stays low for the throughout the night as well. Whereas melatonin, melatonin is low in the morning and low during daytime, but it starts to rise at 9PM and peaks at, like, the middle of the night and then also starts to gradually decrease, but it's still very elevated and it drops down after the cortisol begins to rise. So this is the, you know, melatonin is the sleep hormone or the hormone of darkness that, basically starts the repair processes. Melatonin is linked to all these, different kinds of antioxidant defense systems in the body, autophagy, growth hormone, cholesterol synthesis, gluconeogenesis, detoxifying the brain, bone health. Yeah. Like, I mean, the melatonin is not only like a sleep hormone. It's a longevity hormone. You don't wanna be low in melatonin by any means, and, that can be quite damaging to your overall health, especially when it comes to sleep quality. And, yeah, with a optimal functioning circadian rhythm that your body should have, like, these cycles mapped out quite easily that you should produce high cortisol in the morning. It's healthy to have high muscle cortisol after you wake up and peak at 9AM, etcetera, and then drop down. And it's healthy for your body to have a lot of melatonin when you go to bed and when you fall asleep because it needs the melatonin to conduct the repair processes. And the circadian rhythms are regulated by many things. The biggest trigger is gonna be light light and darkness cues, that are mediated through the eyes. So, wavelengths from any kind of source, light wavelengths will enter the eyes through the retina that will enter the brain and stimulate the suprachiasmatic nucleus, which is the master circadian clock inside the brain. And that master circadian clock regulates all the peripheral clocks like in the heart, liver, muscle, kidney, pancreas, fat cells, even the gut. They all have their circadian clocks, and that is regulated by the master clock inside the brain. And the master clock is like the maj vast majority of it is regulated by the day and night cycles and the, light cues that you get through the eyes. So the eyes are the most, biggest, let's say, channel for the circadian rhythms. Other things that also affected are, like, eating, feeding times, and physical activity. There's also temperature that, contributes to that, but they target mostly, like, the peripheral clocks. So, food will mostly target, like, the gut and, the microbiome and the fat cells and those kind of things. But those, peripheral clocks will then send signals back to the master clock as well that will then regulate the sleep cycle, your cognitive performance or physical performance and, hormone production. So, yeah, the clocks are always the clocks are always running as I like to say. And your whether or not your body is in sync with the clocks depends on the cues that you get. And if you are in sync with the cues and with the clocks, then your your body will be also healthier and it will produce the right hormones at the right time that will allow you to fall asleep, etcetera. If there is some sort of a mismatch, you're getting the light sight light signals at the wrong times, you're getting the feeding signals at the wrong times, whatever it may be, you're jet lagged, then, or shift work, then the clocks will be out of sync, and then they actually begin to be get become damaged. They become to work disorderly and out of sync, which will then cause, like, sleeping problems and, bad, let's say, health overall. Light itself, you know, shouldn't be thought of as just, you know, light. It's actually yeah. You can think of it as a nutrition or a very important aspect of overall health, because the light, the circadian rhythms through the supraseiomatic nucleus, they regulate, yeah, DNA repair, methylation, NAD plus recycling, autophagy, detox pathways, digestion, insensitivity, fat burning, growth hormone, all those things are linked to the circadian signals. And especially when it comes to deep sleep and sleep, then, yeah, obviously, melatonin melatonin production is linked to the light signals. Your body doesn't produce melatonin at morning and daytime, but it does or it's supposed to produce it, before you go to bed. And, that's where it that's where you need it the most. So on a natural setting, in a natural environment, the daily circadian rhythm would look like this. In the noontime or morning, you get, like, this full spectrum sunlight that consists of all the solar spectrum, all the violet colors or the rainbow colors, and, it comes almost in, like, a very balanced way. So you get blue light, you get green light, but you also get red light, etcetera, from the daytime sunlight. And that's very healthy. It keeps the circadian clocks running. It helps your body prepares your body to produce melatonin at night, etcetera. And in the evening, it shifts more towards, like, this, amber lights more red, more orangish, and much less of the blue violet and green lights, because the sun is setting and the wavelengths become, you know, more tilted towards its higher frequencies or nanometers. In the evening or at night completely when the sun has set, then, that way you should get mostly only, like, you know, red light naturally. There were no smartphones. There weren't no, like, lamps in the hunter gatherer times. So, even, you know, like a few hundred years ago, there was no artificial light. So people were able to get to this high amount of red light at night as well as their only source of light, which is, you know, relatively healthy. It doesn't disrupt circadian rhythms, and it's, devoid of this artificial light that would be damaging to your health because the blue light, the artificial light, it inhibits melatonin production. So the blue light, green light, turquoise, violet, they tend to inhibit melatonin production, which will then lower your melatonin levels, makes you fall asleep worse or decreases the time that it takes to fall asleep, reduces our overall sleep quality, and, makes it harder to kinda stay asleep. You definitely produce less melatonin, which is, you know, unhealthy, whereas the red lights, sunsets, campfire, candlelight, as well as, like, red light bulbs, red light therapeutic ices, they don't inhibit melatonin because they have these, wavelengths between 700 to 600, 650, or 550 nanometers. Those yellow amber red lights don't inhibit melatonin. So this is the light that you want to get exposed to, prior before going to bed as opposed to this blue light. And obviously, in the modern world, we're surrounded by these blue lights all the time. And, the smartphone, the computer screen, even like the blinking light on the smoke detector, that can also have this green or blue light interfering with your melatonin production. Even just a small amount can be enough to suppress the melatonin. And it takes at least like thirty minutes to forty five minutes for your body to resume the melatonin production because what it essentially signals the brain is that, you know, it's daytime. It's not time to go to sleep, and you should, you know, just go hunt or stay active to gather resources instead of sleeping. Whereas in reality, you may actually need to get recovery and sleep, which would require the red lights and absence of, blue light. You would still want to sleep in complete darkness like in zero light. But, before bed, you would want to get exposed to some sort of, like, red lights as opposed to blue lights. And, the LED lights also, that you can expose that you get exposed during the daytime, those are also problematic because, they come in as, like, an imbalanced frequencies or the wavelength that you get from them is, like, slightly imbalanced compared to the solar spectrum. The solar spectrum has all the, wavelengths that are kinda relatively balanced. But with, the LED lights, artificial lights, you get this high amount of blue light and high amount of green light and not enough of the red light that has these anti inflammatory properties. So you get, you know, more oxygen distress. You damage your eyes with the artificial light, much more compared to the sunlight, and you don't get to the proper circadian signaling as well from the, LED lights. And that's why using some sort of blue blocking glasses, I think, is one of the best sleep hacks. I think number one sleep hack probably is better than it's better than, taking lontolin. It's better than, you know, using any of those fancy gadgets. It's better than using even a sleep tracker. So, yeah, the blue blocking glasses are, I think, one of the best things you can do to just protect your sleep, especially if you tend to have, like, some lights in your, room, bedroom, or you tend to, stay up too too late watching at your smartphone. So the blue blocking glasses will filter out the specific blue and green light that will inhibit melatonin, but they will let through only the red and amber wavelengths. So this company that I'm working with is Blue Blocks, and, they have very stylish gases. The red lenses, they have been tested. So, these spectrogram on on the blue box, as you can see, it filters out all the blue and green, and it leaves only the, amber or red lights, which are the ones that don't inhibit melatonin. So this is what you want. To know whether or not your blue blocking glasses work, you have to you know, obviously, if if the company has their spectrogram analysis test results on their website, then that's the best thing because you can see, hey. It's actually legit. Most like many that's even like some reputable brands that you get from Amazon or whatever, they say that it's, you know, blue blocking glasses, but they don't even, you know, filter out the blue light or they leave some of the green light in, which is not ideal. You want to block out all the blue and green light. And to know whether or not your glasses work, you can just, you know, put them on and look at this RGB circles. So if you can see the blue light, then obviously or if you can see the green light, then, it means they're not working. You should see only the red circle. The blue circle should be completely black, and the green light may green circle may be, like, slightly grayish or slightly darker, but it shouldn't be gray. It shouldn't be green. You you shouldn't see green or blue colors when you're using your blue glasses. You should only see slightly, like, this yellow, maybe amber, and red colors. Moving on with, melatonin more, like, how do you make melatonin? Your body can make it from different precursors. The biggest trip precursor is tryptophan, which is an amino acid that you get from protein primarily. Tryptophan gets converted into five HTP that requires folate and vitamin c. For example, it also requires iron for that. Five HTP gets converted into serotonin. This conversion requires vitamin b six and zinc, and serotonin then can converted into melatonin, the end product. And this conversion also requires vitamin b six and zinc. So you you don't basically wanna be eating protein, to help your body to produce melatonin as well as many other neurotransmitters. And you need basically a good, whole foods diet for this to happen. Some some problem can also sometimes for a lot of people be that although they're eating tryptophan, then they're still not able to fall asleep or they're slightly anxious. That has to do with the tryptophan not really reaching the brain because there's, like, many other amino acids in the in the bloodstream. Let's say if you eat a piece of chicken that generally has high amounts of tryptophan, if you eat that, then a lot of that all all those amino acids that you get from the chicken may not reach the brain, because there's, like, competing amino acids. If there's a lot of competing amino acids, then tryptophan won't get there. And, that's where, like, eating some carbs actually can help by raising insulin. You eat carbs. The insulin shuttles the other competing amino acids into the cells away from tryptophan, basically, and that there's then there's more tryptophan that will be able to enter the brain and get converted into serotonin and then into melatonin. So, yeah, only eating tryptophan, only eating protein may not always work. And this is where carbs actually are good, foods, for the evening, because you're gonna experience this serotonin crash, basically, that helps you to produce melatonin and, kind of fall asleep a bit easier. Some specific foods also have melatonin directly, and, those foods tend to be the ones that are exposed to a lot of, like, sunlight. And, they accumulate this melatonin in in their, like, skins primarily. And, all these dark fruit that are in the sun, like dark cherries are the highest melatonin foods, like dark cherry, tart juice is a good source of melatonin. Leafy vegetables, berries, and tart cherry juice, and milk is also the milk how much melatonin milk has depends on, how much sunlight the the, animal was exposed to and also when you milk it. So if you milk the cow during daytime, then they produce much less melatonin and the milk also has less melatonin. Whereas if you milk the cows in the evening, then that milk also has a bit more melatonin because, you know, that's where the cow will also naturally produce some melatonin. Food. Let's continue on with food and the circadian rhythms. You know, I said light and darkness are the main regulators of the master clock, which is true, but food and calories will primarily affect the peripheral clocks in the intestines and the gut, which will then send the signal to the master clock. And based upon that information, the master clock will control all the sleep wake cycles and, things of that digestion and the hormone production. And there are some studies that even suggest that the, food intake may be, like a bigger controller of the master clock in some cases. Like, if you eat in the middle of the night, then obviously, the food intake will shift the peripheral clocks or misalign them, and that will also misalign the master clock in some way. So you don't wanna be eating, like, at night, basically. You wanna be eating during the activity period for humans, which is, you know, during daytime. This is where the eating, concept comes into play. It's also linked to the circadian rhythms. It's quite well researched, by now that it does have some positive effects on sleep quality and oral health. The average person tends to eat, like, within a sixteen hour window and fasts only eight hours, so they eat from the moment they wake up until the moment they go to bed. So they never experience this fasted state, and they are misaligning the circadian rhythms to a certain extent by just being in this failed state constantly and suppressing, or miss causing, misalignments with the master clock. Then there is the concept of intermittent fasting or time restricted eating is the more scientific term. And this is slightly different that you actually fast for sixteen hours and you eat within eight hours. There's different ways of doing it. Like, you know, you can eat early in the day. You can eat later in the day. It doesn't matter. I think, as long as you don't eat immediately before bed, it shouldn't be a problem for your sleep quality. You should want to have at least a few hours, where you stop eating before going to bed to allow the body to digest and do not, like, eat a massive meal before. There are the circadian clocks of, food intake or, you know, the based upon what the circadian clocks do to your metabolism. Ideally, you should want to eat, you know, when your body is the most insulin sensitive and metabolically fixable, which tends to be in the AM part or, the earlier day, somewhere between 10AM until twelve is where you have the highest intensity sensitivity. But, also your physical performance tend to be better in the afternoon, like two to 5PM. And if you eat then then you're still very insulin sensitive after a workout. That's that's, you know, because of the physical exercise, activates all these gut four receptors, makes you very insulin sensitive. And even then if your natural insulin sensitivity will be lower because of the circadian rhythms, you would still be very insulin sensitive in the afternoon or evening if you worked out before. So it's a very safe kinda window to eat anywhere between, like, you know, 10AM until 6PM, somewhere there, 7PM. I wouldn't eat, like, immediately after waking up because the cortisol is rising. You don't want to blunt it. You don't want to overexpress it. I would let the cortisol do its job first thing in the morning, and it peaks at, like, 9AM. And after that, it begins to decrease. Melatonin production naturally will begin, like, around 9PM, 10PM, somewhere around there. And what melatonin does is actually to make your body a bit more insulin resistant. So it binds to pancreatic cells and prevents the insulin production. And, that's where you don't want to be eating, especially at carbs because your body wouldn't have enough insulin to clear the bloodstream from the glucose and that that can cause, like, high high blood sugar levels. So, ideally, you would want to stop eating before 9PM. That's when the melatonin production should begin. And growth hormone, this is the kind of mostly repair hormone, not like a muscle building hormone, but that starts to rise 11PM and stays elevated until 2PM. So you will want to be in a semi, like, you know, not with a full stomach when this process happens. The microbiome, the microbiome also has some effects on the, mastococcasin circadian rhythms. So, actually, the 70% of the serotonin production of your body comes from the gut and, serotonin then gets converted into melatonin. So, yeah, your circadian rhythms can shift your microbiome. They can cause, like, bad strains of bacteria to overpopulate, and they can kill off the beneficial ones. And at the same time, like, just a poor working microbiome can or let's say food intake at the wrong time can also dysregulate dislocate the massive clock. So it's quite, let's say, important to, have some sort of time machine in eating at least to a certain extent. Like, I wouldn't say that you need to do, like, a sixteen hour fast or one meal a day. I would say, like, at least twelve hours and twelve hours of fasting, twelve hours of eating. That should be, like, a gold standard for everyone. And, ideally, you should want to confine it a little bit more, like fourteen hours fasted or something like that. What are some supplements for deep sleep especially here are ones that I tend to take? Melatonin melatonin, you know, it's it's still some somewhat beneficial to take some melatonin every once in a while as well because of the longevity boosting benefits that you get. In small doses, it doesn't have any negative side effects. It's not going to suppress your natural melatonin production. In larger doses like seventy five milligrams, it can be a contraceptive. But if you only take zero point three or one milligram, then, it's not gonna have those effects and, it's not gonna also disrupt circadian rhythm. It has immunity boosting benefits like melatonin supplementation, has also been used to treat, you know, the pandemic or the cases of the pandemic, the virus to a certain extent. And, yeah, like a small dose, three zero point three milligrams up to one milligram, that can actually give, like, a small boost in just the melatonin production. And, essentially, it's very beneficial if you have, like, had bad sleep or if you have short sleep or have jet lag, then you can use the melatonin supplement to reset your circadian rhythm or, align it much beneficially. Magnesium, you know, very important mineral. A lot of people are deficient. Five hundred milligrams tends to be like a good RDA for most people. And, you know, if you take five hundred milligrams of magnesium before bed, then you just feel very relaxed and, calm and helps you to fall asleep. Reishi mushroom is something that I use quite frequently. It's, actually helps also with sleep architecture, lengthens overall sleep, makes you have crazy dreams or you get a lot more dreams with Reishi, which, I do get myself as well. I take usually, like, four hundred milligrams, and, I don't take it all the time, but yet quite frequently, I take it, and I do get very vivid and very, like, memorable dreams if I, implement that. Glycine, two grams, two to three, even five grams is fine. Glycine is a inhibitory amino acid. It lowers your body temperature, relaxes you, boosts glucagon and antioxidants. Yeah. It's a longevity supplement, but it also helps with sleep. I like it. It makes you relax and calm. Taurine is also an inhibitory amino acids. Two grams can be beneficial. Theanine, generally, like a relaxing amino acids, two hundred milligrams. You can take it even during daytime with coffee to kind of ease out of the jitters of coffee or something. Or if you're stressed out, then l theanine can be a great one. Essential amino acids, you know, for getting these amino acids that are required for producing all these neurotransmitters, you don't need to take it, before bed, but even during daytime, some essential amino acids, ten to fifteen grams can be beneficial. And lastly, like a seed daily synthetic is what I take. It's, also, you know, obviously, with the link to the gut microbiome. If your gut microbiome is messed up or it has an overgrowth of too many bad bacteria and not enough good ones, then it's gonna be a negative effect on the circadian clock system. So some sort of a probiotic supplement is general improves motility and just well-being and they do that as well. Let's talk about caffeine. You know, caffeine stays in your system for quite a long time. The half life of caffeine is, like, five to six hours. So, you know, 50% of it is still gonna be in your system after six hours of drinking. So, yeah, like, even within twenty four hours of drinking a full cup of coffee, there's gonna be some amounts of caffeine in your system. So that's why, you know, you obviously don't wanna be overdoing the caffeine. I generally drink, like, one to two cups of coffee a day, maybe three at max, and, I don't have any negative side effects from that. I get still plenty of good sleep. The problem is that you when you take it matters. I try to cut off caffeine, at noon so that I would have, like, a long period of time, at least, you know, 50% more, and that will be out of my system, before the evening. Let's talk about the aspect of aging, the problem with aging with the circadian rhythms. When you do get older, then your, circadian rhythm system becomes more damaged because of, you know, aging. Aging causes oxygen stress. Aging, reduces the, let's say, effectiveness of the retina to transmit the signals to the to the circadian clock system. Your brain gets, you know, slightly damaged, with age, and that's when you're produce less of these hormones. You produce less melatonin. You produce less cortisol. You produce less growth hormone. All these hormones get damaged partly because of the aging damaging the circadian clock system. And this will has been shown to, like, older people get significantly less total sleep and their sleep quality is worse. Their deep sleep is worse. So that's because of the circadian rhythms become more flat. You want to have, like, these big swings. It's healthy to have high amount of cortisol and high amount of melatonin and low amount of cortisol at night. And, but with age, it becomes a reflect. You don't produce that much cortisol, so you wake up with less energy. You don't kick start the circadian system that easily, and you produce less melatonin as well, which will make you not sleep that well. Unfortunately, it has been found that this process of, let's say, damaging of the circadian clock system has been found to be able to be reversed with things like calorie restriction. So calorie restriction improves NAD metabolism. NAD is involved with a circadian clock system. It repairs. It it, has DNA repair effects and epigenetic effects of antiaging, longevity effects. So it repairs the circadian clock system back into a more youthful state, basically, so that you would be still able to produce more melatonin and produce those hormones as required. And there are many things that, you know, have this effect with NAD, like calorie restriction is one of them. Intermittent fasting, does it or time restricted eating, does it time restricted eating actually directly activates one of the, recycling pathways of NAD that, increases your NAD levels. NAD supplements or NAD boosters can be an effective way to raise your NAD levels, especially if we take it in the morning. Exercise does it, and just being aligned with the circadian rhythms also keeps your energy pathways aligned and synchronized, which means they are just getting daylight and sunlight exposure and sleeping at the right time. Things that derail the circadian clock system or damage them, make them break apart are shift work, circadian disruption, chronic inflammation, jet lag, and everything related to the, yeah, misalignment of the circadian rhythms. Next up, let's talk about EMF. You know, the blue light that you get from a smartphone is bad for the melatonin production, but the EMF, can has also been found to have a negative effect on sleep quality. And, there is a positive association with, EMF exposure and sleep quality. So what you can do for that is, you know, obviously, turn off the Wi Fi if you can, turn off all the electronics in your house, put your phone on airplane mode, and you can also do some grounding, which has been shown to in studies lower inflammation, improve sleep quality, reduce pain, reduce blood pressure, improve mood, reduce blood viscosity, reduce oxygen stress, etcetera. So it's a very, quick and free way of doing that of, just lowering your body's EMF, let's say, buildup, that can improve your sleep, especially if you do it in the evening before bed. Next, we'll talk about temperature. So temperature is also with a circadian rhythm. Your body's temperature while you're sleeping is the lowest. So the lowest dump for the, throw, what you call it, is, around, like, four AM, 5AM is where your body has the lowest temperature. At a highest temperature is, like, 6PM, and the highest blood pressure is also around that time. So lower temperatures will signal also melatonin production. So cooling down your body and, like, glycine does it, some cold shower can lower your body temperature. Sleeping in a cool bedroom will help with melatonin production from a circadian side because where your body should have lower body temperature at night. And there are studies that high body temperature and high bedroom temperature decreases sleep quality. Of course, there are some individuals who have a different threshold for that, but generally, you don't wanna be sleeping, you know, super sweaty and, in a super hot bedroom. A slightly cooler environment tends to be more optimal for melatonin and, deep sleep especially. Yeah. Studies finding that, the most people if if the temperatures are lower, then people get more sleep, total sleep time, and they wake up around the same time. But, you know, the the total sleep time, total sleep length is generally a bit higher if you sleep in a cooler environment compared to, like, 38 degrees Celsius or 40 degrees Celsius. What is the best temperature for sleep? According to the National Sleep Foundation, it's somewhere between 60 to 67 degrees Fahrenheit or 15 to 19 degrees Celsius, which is quite cold, but for a lot of people. But I would say that, yeah, you have to find out what, what's the sweet spot for you. Maybe 22, 25, is the the room temperature. This describes the room temperature, 15 to 19 degrees Celsius, not your body temperature. And that this describes the body temperature, so to say. If you want to cool down your bed, then you can use you know, obviously, you can just open your window, which is easy. You can turn off the central heating, but there's also like these chili pads which I use only during the summer. When it's super hot, then you can't like turn off the sun. You can only use something that cools you down and the chili pad is a good easy use for that. Let's talk about exercise. How does exercise affect your sleep quality? When you are, let's say, during the daytime you're awake, then what happens is that your sleep pressure increases. And sleep pressure describes, yeah, just the desire to fall asleep and the demand for sleep. The longer you stay awake, you stay awake for thirty hours, then your sleep pressure is super high. Whereas if you've been awake for only four hours, then your sleep pressure is low. So the longer you stay awake, the higher the sleep pressure is. And things that increase the sleep pressure are things like exercise, just, you know, physical activity, mental thinking. Those can just increase the sleep pressure. The more you exercise, the more you want to sleep and the more you need sleep as well. If you stay awake, you don't go to bed, then, yeah, obviously, the sleep pressure continues climbing, and that's gonna be bad for your overall health and you get injured or something. But if you go to sleep and, fall asleep, then the steep pressure drops back to baseline. After you've woken up, it begins to rise again. So we want to accumulate some amount of sleep pressure during the daytime, and you build a sleep pressure with exercise and you build it with also daylight exposure. Sunlight exposure increases the sleep pressure because of the circadian rhythm, clock system. And there is studies finding that, exercise increases sleep quality almost in a linear fashion. So people who are vigorous exercises, they report, much higher sleep quality compared to those who are moderate or light exercises. And, yeah, obviously, there can be, like, you know, overtraining will probably eventually reduce your sleep quality and may cause, like, insomnia or something, restlessness, restlessness. But still, most people aren't exercising that hard, and vigorous exercise is still associated with the best sleep quality because of the sleep, pressure and, other things as well that with circadian rhythm side help to, fall asleep. And no exercises where people actually report some somewhat, worse sleep quality, because, yeah, obviously, they don't have that much sleep pressure. And, their sleep their let's say, maybe their melatonin production is lower because of the circadian clock system is damaged. They don't have that much NAD. Exercise also boosts NAD. So, yeah, you just want to exercise to, increase your sleep pressure and improve sleep quality. When is the best time to exercise? Cortisol, why is it six to 7AM, peaks 9AM? I personally don't like to exercise first thing in the morning. Although it's fine to do it. It can also be a good way to kick start the circadian rhythm or if a jet lag during a new time zone, exercising in the morning can be a great way to start the circadian system at that point. Ideally, the best time to exercise is some, you know, would be between two to four to 5PM because that's where you have best coordination and the greatest the muscle strength and the power. But obviously, any time is better than nothing. So I personally like to work out four to 5PM, but anytime during the daytime is gonna be, generally good. The high blood pressure comes at six to 7PM, so that's where I wouldn't necessarily work out. And melatonin production also begins at nine to 10PM, so I wouldn't exercise. If you exercise too close to bedtime, then that can keep you up and that can disrupt the circadian system. So I would stop exercising, like, at least three to four, five hours before bed. Now I'll just, you know, cover a few small things that can also affect sleep in a positive way. Infrared light, infrared saunas, as well as the regular red light, those have been found to improve sleep quality and, melatonin production as well because the red light mimics the sunset to a certain extent that is the wavelengths. Other studies find that it improves sleep quality. There's also PMF or, like, impulse magnetic field therapy, those kind of things. They have also been used to, treat insomnia and help with, sleep. What they do mostly is just reduce inflammation and reduce pain that can be beneficial for the sleep cycle. There's also things like meditation and mindfulness. Those have been found to improve sleep quality, maybe like stress management, I would imagine, is the mechanism there. White noise, so some kind of background noise is good for just creating this buffer against the environmental noise. So if you have a lot of outside noise, then that can prevent you from falling asleep, whereas some sort of white noise machine will block it. So you hear only, like, this very monotonous white noise that kinda shields you from the outside noise that will always keep you up. And, lastly, I think, yeah, like, just sleeping in darkness is probably the most crucial thing that you wouldn't have some sort of artificial lights. Somewhere you don't have, lamps. You wouldn't have the, like, window open with the street lamps or passing cars suppressing a metal tone. You you don't want that. You wanna sleep in this semi complete darkness, with that much, you know, darkness as possible. If you want to know more about how do you fully optimize your sleep, then, yeah, you can check out my total sleep optimization video course. Talks more about overall sleep, science as well as how we can optimize it, not only just deep sleep, etcetera, but this video just, you know, gives a good, basically, overview and, good tips for just improving your sleep, quality, especially deep sleep. Alright. That's it for this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification button as well. My name is Steve. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.