That stress can benefit you up to a certain point, benefit you by triggering mechanism in your body and system which are extremely powerful to preserve your body, to keep you great. Welcome to the Seamal podcast. I'm your host Seam Land and today our guest is Ori Hofmekler. Ori is the author of the Warrior Diet which is the first intermittent fasting book online made over twenty two years ago. Basically, the Warrior Diet is one meal a day but you're allowed to snack on some berries and nuts during the day. Ori is a pioneer in everything related to hormesis, stress adaptation and longevity. He's written multiple books including the Warrior Diet, the seven principles of stress, maximum muscle, minimum fat and the anti estrogenic diet. Now although Ori has been a huge influence on my own journey as an author and, an intermittent fasting practitioner, I do and I do agree with the main ideas. I there are still some things that we obviously disagree with, and, it's also important to note that, you know, Ori isn't like an active researcher anymore. He doesn't write any more book books. He hasn't done so in the past several years. And, yeah, there are some things that, you know, new research and new studies have you know, talked about hormesis and intermittent fasting that aren't necessarily, you know, the same as, yeah, his ideas. Although the main general principle of stress adaptation and hormesis, that is still, like, fundamentally rooted in, our human biology. That's why I've compiled my own ideas about honesis and intermittent fasting in my own books metabolic cathology and stronger by stress that are based on the latest research. But nevertheless, it was still an honor to have him as one of the godfathers of intermittent fasting on my podcast and talk with him, which, the first time we did was five years ago. But, now we have another conversation. Ori, welcome back to the show. My pleasure. Yeah. We just, talked, that, the first time I had you on my podcast, which was actually one of the first episodes of the podcast was five years ago, and it's been a very long time. You know, you look actually I think even better than before or, you know, still very young and youthful. Mind if I ask, like, how old are you right now? I'm over 70. Okay. So, yeah, you you look excellent for your age, and I think that's Thank you. You're very, like, you know, still fit and, healthy in that sense. So, yeah, like, you as an author have been, like, a pretty huge influence and inspiration in terms of my interest in intermittent fasting and, how it relates to, you know, stress adaptation and, resilience in general. So, yeah, I'm a huge fan of your books and read all of them. And, we'll basically yes. For people who might have not heard about, you before, then we'll, you know, delve into all of them. And, you know, funny enough, I think that you are one of the, I don't know, the first people online to even start to talk about inward fasting or popularize it at least and one of the first books the first books that I definitely read about it. And that was definitely, like, over, like, twenty years ago if I'm not mistaken. Twenty two years ago. Yeah. That's and, how long have you knew doing innovative investing yourself? Like, when did you start? You know what? I don't even remember most of my life for sure. And it has through I went through phases and still am. It's evolving. As you move to the future, you constantly need to adapt to your situation And your needs as a young person changes as you reach the age of 30 or 40 or 50 or 60 or 70 or 80 or 90 or one twenty. It will still evolve, but the principle do not change. So in my mind, it was always the Warrior Diet was created on the concept of intermittent fasting, which I early on realized it's kind of stress or hardship that we biologically evolve to thrive upon and benefit from that. So the whole idea is to trigger mechanism within you that keep you in shape, not in shape muscle wise, in shape to better survive, less age, keep your brain always young until the end. There's no reason, in my opinion, to suffer from dementia. People should not die from dementia. I put the serious research about it and explanation in my last book, the seven principle of stress. Yeah. I think it's very true in the sense that, in the modern world, especially, like, we are very, like, you know, easy to kill or, like, you know, most people won't be able to survive in nature for a long time and they're very, like, you know, fragile in that sense. So they're, you know, evolutionary or in our past, we did evolve under different kinds of physiological environmental stressors like, you know, high amounts of exercise was included there or, you know, like, you know, still movement and, you know, lifting stuff for climbing and periods of famine and fasting and, you know, cold heat, all those things were part of our everyday lives in the past. And, like, in that modern world, we're, like, lacking in that. And you can see that, you know, most people are somewhat, you know, not resilient at all, and they're, you know, fragile. And a lot of the kind of diseases also come, even from, like, lack of this positive stress. I I agree with you. It is very clear to see that this approach is very anti industrial because our society is really fed by all these nonstop new product. Many of them are made with sugar. Many of them shorten your life, but they look so friendly and cozy. Who don't want you who don't want it? Who doesn't want cakes and cookies and ice cream and all this stuff and even the so called health products generally loaded with sugar? It is so easy to fall into denial because taste is addictive. Sugar, pleasure, hit the same receptors, crack cocaine in your brain, opioid receptors, make you addicted. So in life, it's really a matter of choice. Choose who you wanna be. Are you ready to trade off your life for a cookie, or are you ready to trade off your life for living long and beat the aging process? Mhmm. Yeah. In the past, people do not live that long, but they just, yeah, die young that they died because of injury, war, famine, accidents. Didn't even have a chance to live long, and many wild animals, the same thing. So the whole idea of us aging for so long isn't new. But what is becoming clear for many years already, that hardship blocked the aging process, that lack of energy, not excess energy, trigger mechanism to keep you young. And while all this industry, pharmaceutical industry, trying to find the miracle molecule that will keep you young, and it's so attractive to people. Oh, there is one molecule. It used to be a resveratrol, then it's in, nicotinamide riboside and other molecules, so called, that keep you young. There's no shortcut. There's no one molecule that can do it. It's the principle. It's the way you behave. This is the way God created us. We are under test. We are constantly tested, not just tested to survive hardship, which is constantly constantly coming upon us. If if somebody told you that life's supposed to be easy, they are lying. There's always problem. There's always a challenge to face, but you can find a way to understand the principle. If you have a faith in nature, if you have a faith in God, you should be humble enough to understand and try to learn who you are and what kind of lifestyle will benefit you, not just physically, also spiritually, make you a better person, be in control, less addicted to substance, more in control. Yeah. That's, yeah, very powerful. And, I think that, you know, these kinds of, let's say, the voluntary stressors and hardships, like, whatever they can be, they do teach you a lot of, you know, about being disciplined and having more self control and, which in turn can have, like, a huge, impact on your other areas of life as well. Like, you know, you're maybe more disciplined in your work or, whatever your purpose, that you're chasing. And, yeah, it's like a, yeah, like a man because if you, like, give in to the temptations, then, you know, you're teaching your brain to be less, you know, disciplined and, more eager to give in. Yeah. Everything's about training. Everything is about training. They say, you know, when, there's a good and bad side was created in this world, meaning in opposite things. But we can't be so agreeable with this because some bad is so bad that it must be fought. You can't just accept things as good and bad. Let's move. Let's just do nothing. We do have instinct. We do have instinct to forgive, and we do have instinct to fight back and push back. Very important. So when you see things that are wrong, and if you cannot change it to the society, change it about yourself. Become your own model. Make your priorities. And it's coming the details are very important. I believe today that your diet and lifestyle should be as simple as possible. Things are gonna be complicated anyway. Keep it frugal. Keep it simple. If you eat one main meal per day, that's already a way to simplify things. But even every day, ask yourself, what make me feel and look and perform best? Not just physically, mentally. So you have carbohydrates fuel, you have fat fuel, and you cannot mix them. They don't mix well together. You also have food that God created that work to cleanse you, remove toxin. They are very, very important, have been used by humans and animals for so many years. Yeah. Animals. Yes. I don't know. Do you have a dog or maybe? Like a cat? Yeah. I have a dog. Yeah. You have a dog. What kind of? It's a it's a Belgium, Shepherd. Oh, that I had a dog. A black one? Or no. Sorry. It's the, what's it called? Manino maninoise. That's the one. What's the color? It's also like it's it's this, beige beige. Beige? Okay. It looks like a shepherd? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Beautiful animal. So if you take him outside, you can see that he's gonna eat grass. Now why would a predator like him that live on meat, no grain, no why would he eat grass? Why are they attracted to it? Because there are nutrients in grass and plants, not animals, that are unmatched with the ability to keep you in shape, to keep you young, to protect you. Yeah. And a lot of the and all of those, also have these, I don't know, like stress molecules as you could call them that, also cause, like, this small positive stress, on the body, which is like the scientific term is called the xenohormesis that, Yes. Correct. They mimic the impact of hormesis on your body. Many of them are deterrent. They are bitter. They were meant to actually reject insects or other animals to protect the plant, but this toxics actually work for us. And if we develop a taste for that, even better. Most people don't like so much bitter and herb y. You can develop a taste for that. They are critical. Rosemary, thyme, oregano, many seeds. Yeah. I'd like I'd like to move a bit, a a few steps back to also cover, like, you know, we talked about the stress and importance of this hardship on health, but, like, maybe they'll also explain people shortly, like, you know, why is that so? Why is this hormesis as, like, this small positive stress on the body? Like, why is it beneficial, and why kind of we need it to be healthy? Other question to why, only god knows why. He created this world, but it does exist, the phenomena of hormesis. That means that stress can benefit you up to a certain point, benefit you by triggering mechanism in your body and system that's extremely powerful to preserve your body, to keep you great. We are talking about cellular effect or like AMPK. We are talking about, heat shock protein system, which is incredibly powerful to search and destroy anything bad in your body, including cancer. And you don't need to go to take medicine or to do it, like, every only time that when you have a crisis. You should do it every single day. You should activate home bases via exercise and nutrition to make sure that your body is challenged properly the way designed to. We don't know why we were created this way. This is way too much. We just know that it's a fact. That's the way it is, and it's very anti industrial. I really believe that if you do follow a diet that is very low in carbohydrate, it should still be intermittent fasting. And fasting alone, I don't know if people understand fasting alone create more ketogenic effect than all these diets and product that they are buying. So no need for the extra fact and no need to starve yourself out of your favorite food. Avoid fruits which are critical for your survival, and avoid nutrients that God provided you, and just reject it because somebody creates some theory about the ketogenic diet. And the guy who really created, one of the founder of the ketogenic approach, professor Cahill. If you read his early writing, he's worried that people will turn into a diet. That diet was created to prevent dementia or epilepsy. Epileptic attack among children. That's correct. Yeah. So that's why he create and he was very concerned about the side effect. In my opinion, he was one of the greatest scholars that existed. But today, everything is commercialized. I came with the first concept of intermittent fasting about twenty two years ago. In my first book, I show the ration rationale behind one meal per day to stay with the cycle of the twenty four hours. It is true that this junk food is everywhere and people are more, like, you know yes. Like, hardwired into them to want it. And, it's also, like, you know, the environment that we live in is very so simple, and you can just get it everywhere, this junk food, and you don't have to, like, exert any, like, effort or any calories. You don't have to burn calories to get calories in that sense. Correct. There's no more struggle. There's no more gathering, let alone hunting. I no longer eat animals. I mean, mammals or birds. I love animals who stopped eating them many years ago. You know, I'm still convinced that this is a good thing. Not just be richly humane, it's also healthy. There's, yeah, like, excess consumption of, everything that aren't really needed. And, when we look at, you know, basic physiology, then, you know, like, obesity is bad and, like, excess anything is pretty bad for the body. And, Yeah. Like, just moderation, obviously, probably is the key when it comes to food that, you know, you're not overeating, and that's where you're, you know, maintaining your health for the longest and slowing down the aging process as well. And, you know, when your body is forced to when your body is under this, you know, small stress, whether that be eating one meal a day or risk restricting certain, food groups or reducing calorie consumption overall, then, yeah, you you your body still wants to survive. And, given that your body has plenty of, like, let's say, resources and means to survive, like, you know, you have fat stores, you have different ketogenic pathways, etcetera, that, increase this hardness of the body or hardening and, yeah, clear out dysfunctional cell parts that are just, you know, dragging down the body during this stress, then, yeah, it makes sense why these positive stresses are so beneficial that, your body is, like, forced to survive and remove all the excess, whether that be excess body fat or excess, you know, dysfunctional cell parts and mitochondria and everything that is, you know, kind of not needed in So how is your personal diet? What do you do you eat meat? Yeah. I do eat it. I also hunt myself. So You hunt? What kind of animal do you hunt? I hunt, I mean, in here where I live, there's mostly deer and, moose and, wild boars. I also pretty much grow vegetables in my own garden, and, I have chickens where where I get, eggs. I say, like, a cyclical, ketogenic diet. So, like, I cycle carbs based on my, like, exercise and those kind of things. But I do well, from the intermittent fasting side, I do, intermittent fasting with, like, one meal a day, predominantly, but I also have during the daytime when I'm, like, exercising, I have, like, some, protein, like a whey protein shake or something to help with the, basically, strength training. That that's the main reason that I do it, and that helps me to, like, progress at the gym and, still eat, like, one meal a day. So I I I, like, focus a lot on, the goals of, you know, if I'm trying to, like, maximize from a exercise standpoint, then I'm consuming more anabolic fluids, quote, unquote, that have more leucine and, more more protein that would stimulate more mTOR, which is the growth pathway in the body. I can see the size of your muscle. You got big muscle of you on you, my friend. Yeah. More than you had last time that he he talked. Sure. That was, like, you know, five years ago. Maybe why I couldn't recognize you. Yeah. That's, I think, part of the reason for sure. And on the other days where I'm not exercising, then I'm choosing more, yeah, like, catabolic foods or foods that have less leucine and less I mean, I see it's more more plant based actually, like, more, like, beans and stuff so that I would, keep the mTOR lower and insulin lower and kinda dig or dig deeper into more the e EMPK pathway as a cycle between EMPK and mTOR modes, basically. If I'm trying to build or recover from exercise, then I use mTOR with more, protein and carbohydrates. And if I'm, like, resting and, going in more, like, antiaging mode, then I'm, yeah, like, restricting carbs and eating more plant based. So you cycle everything, basically? Yes. I have, like, actually helped to cofound a plant based protein, which is made of hemp seeds and pea protein, which is, like, this kind of granule that is actually twice the the amount of protein than beef. And, yeah, it's like a stone inmate that'll be cofounded. And, And how do you eat it exactly? In a shake? No. It's, like this granola, like a granola thing. It's it's like Oh, I got you. You can chew it? Yeah. Yeah. It's like a crunchy thing. You you moisturize it in water. It absorbs the liquid, and it becomes like minced meat almost. So, yeah, I'm actually cofounding that, and we're scaling that up. We're in actually in a few of the restaurants in Estonia here, and we're expanding to Finland and the other Baltics. So yeah. I got you. Hemp is also very good for the environment from the, you know, environmental impact size. I got you. I'm not so much familiar with Bosnia. Right? Estonia. Estonia. Sorry. The kind of, plantation or vegetation that you have there, But I'm sure it is good. You probably have some good berries there. Yeah. We have blueberries and cranberries mostly and blackberries. And, obviously, we can grow our own, like, currants and cherries and raspberries and strawberries and those things. Do you grow your own? Yeah. We have, strawberries and raspberries, cherries, currants. I know. Yeah. I eat those, quite a lot and freeze them for the winter. Really? Wow. That's interesting. Yeah. That's it. How long is your summer or springtime? How many months do you have? Well, I mean, the summer, it's let's say the warm months of the year can be, like, from May until September. So, you know, five months. The actual super warm months, like, you know, summer months are really three, June, July, and August, but, August and September are still pretty warm. After that week, it becomes, you know, like, you still have to wear a jacket, if you go outside. So when you freeze your summer yield, you collect enough for the whole winter? Yeah. I mean, actually, well, depends on how much I would eat. Like, I could eat, you know, I don't know, three cups of berries in one sitting if I want to, or, but, I do kinda ration it out a little bit. So, I don't know. At least every summer, we usually stock stock up on maybe, like, I don't know, 10 liters of berries in the fridge or something. I got you. Yeah. So you've got a big freezer there? Yeah. I have, like, you know, four four freezers. Nice. Nice. And, do you exercise every day? I do something every day. Yeah. Like, I I do, like, resistance training, strength focused. Like, my main focus is training yeast, strength, and power. So, like, fast twitch muscle fibers, and I do that maybe three times a week and or four four times at max. And, three times a week, I do, like, cardio or something. And, yeah, one day, maybe I have for rest. But, on that day, I also, like, you know, I don't know, maybe go for a longer walk or cycle, maybe something like that. And how long is each session? Well, they're usually actually, like, maybe forty five minutes max. Forty five minutes to an hour at most. Yeah. What time of the day you usually exercise? In the afternoon, like, three three to 5PM, somewhere between there. I got you. Yeah. And I During the day, you have another what kind of walk do you do during the day? Well, I walk just regular walk in, nature. Maybe, like, thirty minutes an hour. So something like that. Usually around noon. In the mornings, I work, you know, on the computer. I have, like, you know, treadmill desk because we wonder which I can walk while working. So I walk like that, and, I do go outside as well for a walk and, yeah, work out in the afternoon and eat around 6PM. So your podcast is part of your kind of job? It's like a routine Yeah. Every day? The work I I, you know, the work I do is conigration. I, research. I write. I, yeah, make videos. Yeah. Everything related to that. I have, like, clients and those kind of things. I got you. Have you have been doing it for how long? Maybe, you know, six years. Six years I've been, you know, starting with online presence, but, the last maybe four years has it become more like a full time thing. I got you. And you tell the world about your experience? Yeah. I my experience, what I learn, what I and, yeah, what kind of things I do, everything related to that. But what about you? Yeah. What about you? Like, what does your what what's the you know, let's maybe start with, like, what's the archetypal warrior diet routine? What what does it look like? And, maybe how do you do it to yourself? The past, several years, I was off the grid, basically, because I was working to innovate some solutions, product that could present solution, and I told you, that's already in the process. Yeah. I'm not such a good person as you are. Definitely not that social. And, yes, I I keep reevaluating everything I wrote or done before. I see things today very different than twenty two or thirty or forty years ago. And I said it before, and I'll say it again. It's not just carbohydrates, fats, or whatever you put nutrient in your body. It's your mind. How do you nourish it? It's your capacity to generate mercy. Yes. Push back and fight back, but also give, share, be generous. And after that and with all this coming, the lifestyle and the diet and everything else. So you need to take into consideration, in my opinion. And, you know, it's it's it's funny when I think about it because in the past religious people, those very dedicated, the pious, you know, they deliberately used to deprive themselves. Fasting and hardship self inflicted was deliberately done. So it's deep rooted in our genes to be aware of this. Sim, when when you exercise and beat yourself, okay, you feel after the exercise the compensation. Yes. You feel the release of stress, the release of junk and excess that coming out of you, spiritually, not just physically. Don't you? Yeah. I mean, it's a good way to, you know, I mean, yeah, like, you do exert yourself, but you actually feel more energized and more you know? Obviously, there's, you know, many brain benefits and mood boosting benefits you get from exercise. And, I mean, it's kinda yeah. It is funny that exercise is considered like a uncomfortable thing, but, you know, our body is is, you know, still hardwired to be, you know, let's say, addicted to it or get some positive associations from it. Like, if you exercise and you feel great afterwards, then it does, you know, hardwire you to keep on doing it. Although it is causing your body some stress and uncomfortable, things in the short term. It's very stressful many time and very uncomfortable, but it release you from part from junk, spiritual junk. You feel different after that. You feel cleansing on the mind too, not just the body. The body actually help. You break it. Sometime you need it's almost like an injury. You need to recover, but the mind, it's the best thing you can do. So imagine all this that you do on a day be best in a magnitude of thousands can happen. The kind of experience and clearness and elevation that you can have on the spiritual side, not just the body side. The body will follow. Everything start here, the body follow, not in a boat. We believe and thought by the industry that if we pop a pill, it's affected by of course, it affect the brain. But it's a brain that make you pop the pill. It's all start there. Yes. Coffee is great, in my opinion for the brain, but it's your brain that has to choose it and how to do it. So how how do you how does the yeah. How does a day of, let's say, a warrior diet, if someone is interested in trying it out, like, how does it work? Like, how long do you need to fast? When do you exercise? What kind of foods would you eat and, that kind of thing? Don't take me as an example because I shifted into the extreme of water fasting. My I I feel like I need nothing else. Okay? I even exercise on empty. I feel it big time, but the benefit is outstandingly better. And, no, I'm not suffering. I I would suffer if you force me to eat during the day now. It just this is how deep the switch is. It's very difficult for me once in a while. We go to, you know, vacation, Hawaii or whatever. I I start to eat even some stuff during the day, like fruits or something that I didn't eat before. I feel the difference. So adaptation, in my opinion, is real true total. But in my book, I say you don't have to follow it this way. There are things that you allow that can even benefit you during the day, especially fruits or veggies. It's unlimited, the amount of veggies that you can eat. There is nothing wrong with green, but don't drink it. Chew food. Don't drink food. Period. Right. Activate your saliva. Make sure the nitric oxide alternative cycle hit your system, get the beneficial anti inflammatory effect. So between this and fasting, it's a trade off again. Both have its benefit. For me, I try to make things simple. Look. I'm not trying to be big anymore, but I keep try to keep my muscle in a good shape so my exercise is still intense, but I shorten it. I build my home gym. I have my boxing gym, and I do it every single day. Nice. Sometime more or less, but usually no more than thirty minutes a day. Again, on empty, you really feel it. But for me, it works. Yeah. I mean, it's you know, exercise is kind of vital for, yeah, slowing down aging. Like, you if you stop exercising and stop moving, then your body just begins to deteriorate. So, yeah, you given you're over 70 and you're still exercising every day, then, yeah, that's you know, goes to show, like, why you have. Well, it's really a matter of adaptation. Refusal to accept that aging is an inevitable disease and trial and error, honestly. Mhmm. Yeah. So so to recap then, the warrior diet would be you eat one meal a day, but during the daytime, you can, like, snack on, like, a few of these, let's say, stress molecule foods, like, coffee and, berries and some vegetables and, fruit. Correct. You don't wanna over the one thing you don't wanna do, you don't wanna text the digestion with slow digesting food. You don't want it. You wanna be as clean as possible and maximize the detox effect that your body has during the day. Your body is very good in slowing away toxin elimination. You don't wanna go to the opposite direction. It's the night that is the time to load. And if you keep the cycle properly, you're gonna do very well. It's emptying and replenishment. Removal, emptying of energy, activating all the mechanism that keep you in shape and young. Mhmm. They're compensating at night. And when your glycogen is empty, you can virtually do anything. This antiaging compound, the AMPK, is so strongly affecting you at this point. Your insulin is in a peak sensitivity. Mhmm. So even if you screw around and cheat and this, somehow your body will survive. If, however, you add big meals before that, every excess anything else you do Yeah. Even a healthy protein bar will be detrimental to you. So here it is. You can see people who eat not ideal food, cakes once in a while, cookies, and this and the pass, whatever, and they still look well and do well. And there are people who are constantly on a diet, constantly checking, constantly checking, and nothing working for them. Mhmm. Yeah. So Because they are missing the cycle. See? Yeah. Yeah. So they're like, you know, their their metabolism is slightly broken because of, you know, overeating and being on the history of a bad diet. And, you know, and they're going on a diet that doesn't fix their broken metabolism directly. So they need to fix the metabolism, then they need to basically shut do, like, a re system reboot, which involves activating They don't do the reboot. You're right. You put it very cruel. Yes. There's no reboot. Yeah. Maybe then you need to kinda reboot your metabolism. Crisis management from the morning. So the morning is a diet breakfast. Mhmm. Then come diet this, a diet snack, a diet lunch. And if they wanna be more sophisticated, they say, okay. It's intermittent fasting, two meals a day. They forget the principle of the eye and denial. They don't wanna understand. So they are thrown into this vicious cycle hell of dieting. I honestly don't think we should diet. I think we should live instinctually. Eat what we like. Train yourself. Build taste to things that fit you. Yeah. When I eat nuts or pistachios, I enjoy it. I honestly do. Yeah. And sometime calorie intake per day can easily exceed the 2,000, 2,500, and still the body is lean. Mhmm. Yeah. People don't understand it. You can have a diet of 800 or 1,200 calories a day and still be soft. Or to all over 2,000, 2,500 and still be lean. Keep the cycle. Understand the principle. To recap again then, first, basically, exert your body, put your body under this positive stress, which involves, you know, fasting every day and, maybe consuming coffee and, these other stress foods, clean aromatic foods, exercising. And then when you eat, when you break the fast, then you're, like, recovering and restore you know, rejuvenating the body from that. Yes. Yes. You can be perfect, and you could be less perfect. You're still gonna do so much better than otherwise. Yes. Yeah. You know? It's very, very important to understand it. And I cannot emphasize it more that we need to enjoy our life. We cannot just beat ourselves nonstop. Yeah. When it comes when it comes to hormesis and, you know, stress in general, there's there's obviously, you can overdo it. So, you can over exercise. You can over fast. You can over That's very true. Very true. So how do you differentiate? Like, how much is too much, and where do you gonna find the sweet spot? Well, that's part of the phenomenal for Mercedes. Everything is predesigned, and it's very individual. But I do believe that we need to keep remembering that God created this world with day and night. Sun during the day, moon during the night with cycles of themselves. We can't ignore the twenty four hour cycle and how it affect us and animals. So our diet must be tightly connected to the twenty four hours. So there's circadian rhythms? So I believe that if you exceed fasting to this, forty eight hours, you basically betray the whole principle of hormesis. Yeah. It may work. You may get some result as research show, but the result and the statistics show that people on every other day fasting or exceeding long fasting find it very difficult. They get very agitated, extremely stressed. It's chronic stress, basically. They they cannot sleep. So as a matter of life, I would think, it's absolutely no no. Because as much as stress is positive and can cause you to be better and younger and better shape, it can also kill you. When it become chronic, it shutter everything good in your body. It shutter it make you insensitive. Your response to stress itself is being diminished. It shutter and destroy the endocritical system. Too much cortisol wipe your brain. Yeah. We need to understand it. The cycle of life is a cycle. Every day, we need to sleep every day because if we don't repay the consequences. Don't overbeat yourself. Forgive yourself. Have mercy for yourself too, not just for others. And you're gonna do very well. So don't overdo it. Don't overdo the Don't overdo nothing. No. What's the point? If once in a while, you need to fight for your life and starve yourself for three days, most likely with your background scene, you're gonna do it better than others, but not as a routine. This is wrong. Don't listen to people who put you in weird routine of chronic that has anything chronic in sight. We don't do nothing well on anything chronic. Only intermittent. Yeah. Instinct. Listen to your instinct. Yeah. Maybe in some days, it feels intuitive to go for a forty eight hour fast or longer. But if it doesn't feel or if you're, like, you know, have to push yourself super hard to do that, then obviously, you may be going against your, body's needs in a given moment. So, yeah, you need to kinda Once in a while, it happened to anyone. It happened to me. I was stuck in a situation. I had to go for more than forty eight hours. It's very difficult though. I don't know about you if you tried. I felt agitated. There's no need, but there's no need. There's no serious benefit to this. And don't fall trap to the study about the mice that they did on mice. This every other day fasting that they fasted for twenty four hours, and don't fall to this trap. Mice are not humans. You don't have a brain of a mouse. Your to stress is different. Your range of choices, your predetermined design to make choices that mice don't. So comparing constantly human to mice is a horrible mistake. We are not rotten. We don't eat like them, and we don't live like them. But if we choose to, yes, we can be animal that you choose. Human can be rotten. You can can even behave like cockroaches. But when your spirit and your mind and your faith is priority, you will never allow yourself to be reduced to this level. I mean, our bodies haven't changed a lot. So our physiology hasn't changed a lot, for thousands of years. So, yeah, I guess we have to still follow the same principles for sure. Yeah. Listen. Evolution. Yes. They talk about evolution. It's very, very important how we evolved. But we can also evolve to be homochemicals. Sim, I don't know if you're aware, but I had clients in the past. And they used to eat junk, and they were obese, and they were happy. They seem happy. They accepted themselves, but were they really happy? You can adapt to anything. Even, like, even if you are, like, you know, eating out of, some sort of emotional stress or depression or whatever, you're overeating because of that. That's also like an adaptation. Yeah. It's kind of, yes, compensation whatever you call it. The thing is this. We have a mind, and we have a spirit, and we have a soul, and it always need to be the leader. So it's not just explanation and words like evolution, adaptation of that. To words what direction? What is your choice? Who do you wanna be? I think I said it all. Yeah. Yeah. That's a great way a place to end as well. And, yeah, I think we gave a pretty good overview about, you know, to summarize then, yeah, your body benefits from small stress, and you need to have it to stay healthy. And it does like stow down aging or turns on these antiaging pathways in the body. And, yeah, different ways to achieve that primarily through, you know, exercise and some of aspects of, you know, fasting and, yeah, being moderate in your calorie consumption, essentially, also as well to not to not overeat. I agree. And listen, I wish you good luck with the post cuts and spreading your message, and keep me posted on your own personal evolution too, how you evolve with this. Of course. Yeah. Definitely do that. Well, yeah, it was a great, talking with you. If not sooner, then maybe, like, in five years again, we can do another post podcast, but, hopefully, sooner. Good luck with everything, and thank you for inviting me. And we'll be in touch. Yeah. Likewise. Thank you very much, Singh. Good luck. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure to click a like and subscribe. Leave us a review on iTunes. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.