Welcome back to the channel. My name is Sim Lund. And in today's video, we're gonna talk about how glycine and n acetylcysteine supplementation can extend the lifespan of mice by up to twenty four percent. Make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. So we have this relatively new study in March 2022. GLINAC, glycine and n acetylcysteine supplementation in mice increases length of life by correcting glutathione deficiency, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, abnormalities in mitology, and the nutrient sensing and genomic damage. Basically, discovered that, giving mice glyNAc supplementation or glycine and n acetylcysteine, these those mice live 24% longer than the control mice. And they also saw improvements in glutathione synthesis, glutathione deficiency, ocular stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, mitophagy, nutrient sensing, and, genomic damage. So, glyac glyac supplementation is, already known to have some positive benefits in humans as well. For example, let's take HIV patients. Glyac supplementation improves oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, inflammation, endothelial dysfunction, insulin resistance, genotoxicity, strength, and cognition. Macaya supplementation in older adults improves gliothione deficiency, ocular stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, inflammation, insulin resistance. So it's almost like identical, improvements and results. And, there there's also things like the, you know, the glutathione deficiency, which is quite relevant to overall, aging and, immunity, and those kind of things can be also corrected or improved with NEC and glycine supplementation. Wow. Winning. So let's look at some of the methods of this study. They basically had, mice who are fed and add libitum diet, regular diet protein consisted twenty five point six percent and three kilocalories per gram of body weight. And at the age of 65, one group of the 16 mice, eight males and eight females, were switched to a diet supplemented with glycine and n acetylcysteine. They still got protein 23.5%, three calories per gram, and they got one point six milligrams of NAC and one point six milligrams of glycine. The glynac supplemented diet was isocaloric and isonitrogenous to the regular diet consumed by the control group of 16 mice. So which means that the same amount of calories and the same amount of protein, roughly speaking, and everything else was to, you know, kind of the same in terms of diet. The only difference was that the one group got the glycine and the NSE together. And these doses of a glycine supplement and NSE were chosen to approximate dose of glyin glyinac used in clinical trials in humans. So they got approximately the same amount of a glycine and NAC as humans would, in, in in these trials that have been proven to be beneficial improving the mitochondrial function and those kind of things. And I did kind of, like, calculations as well. So if, like, a mouse weigh weighs somewhere between, like, 20 grams, then they would get, like, forty milligrams of, a bit less, like thirty five to forty milligrams of glycine and NSC per day. No. That's a lot of damage. So as you can see, the mice who were fed the regular diet lived about, like, 24% short term than the mice who got to the glynaic diet. And you can see just these graphs compare, that, after this threshold, the, mice who were started to get glycine and NAC just live longer. They also found that the control mice who didn't get glycine and NAC, they had 69%, 65%, and 72% less glutathione in the heart, liver, and kidneys. And, the concentrations of reduced glutathione concentrations were 75%, 64%, and 81% lower in the same organs respectively. So they basically had much lower levels of glutathione, and glutathione is considered to be the most important antioxidant in the body produced by the liver that regulates the immune system and, antioxidant defense against oxidative stress. And a lot of the, you know, reasons why you age and develop these different kinds of, age related diseases is because of excessive oxidative stress and, DNA damage and all those things that come from that. And gulothan is one of the, like, shields against that. With low gulothan, with low antioxidant status, your ability to cope with the world or to resist the oxidation and oxidative stress of the world will be greatly lower. Where and if you do boost, your glutathione levels with glycine and NAC, then it's gonna be, you know, very beneficial for that. And, you know, the reason why glycine and NAC specifically have this positive effect on gluathon is that they're one of the main, components of gluathon and precursors. Glycine supplementation has also been found to extend lifespan in male and female mice by four to six percent and, by up to twenty to forty percent in other rats by mimicking methionine restriction. So, glycine is one of the let's say, helps to detoxify methionine toxicity and helps counteract the, you know, harmful effects of excess methionine intake on aging. And, it's one of the few amino acids that many people aren't getting enough of. They do get the whole lot of methionine from, like, muscle meat and those kind of things, but they don't really get, glycine that much, which is why I think, like, almost like anyone could benefit from, taking some glycine, especially if we're eating, like, a high methionine diet. And I'm personally taking glycine on a daily basis. It's one of it is probably, like, one of my top favorite supplements. It's very cheap. It's very easy to find. It's, yeah, safe. There's no, like, real harmful effects to that. You can get up to doses of, you know, ten, twenty grams even with no side effects. You you can get it from Jell O. You can get it from these tendon meats and those kind of things. And, yeah, I personally aim for, like, a five to ten grams. I usually stick around, like, five, and on some other days, I'll go up to, like, ten grams. And it's good for sleep, good for, glutathione, good for immunity, good for methionine, good for inflammation levels, helps to lower blood sugar levels, protects against oxidative stress. So, yeah, I don't I don't see a reason why you wouldn't want to take a glycine almost. Woah. Woah. Woah. Woah. Woah. Woah. What's that? Alright. That's it for this video. If you want to check out all the other supplements that I'm taking, what amounts, when, and how often, then check out my free supplement list. You can head over to simlan.com/supplements and you can get it for free. On that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Sim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.