You know, your skin is your largest organ. You have to treat it like a metal mouth. There are thousands of ingredients United States allows. Europe doesn't. If you wouldn't put it onto your skin or any of your mouth for the most part, don't put it on your skin. Welcome to the Simlond podcast. I'm your host Simlond, and our guest today is Andy Nilo. Andy is the founder and CEO of Alitura Naturals, which is a 100% natural skin care company. In this episode, we talk about the dark side of the commercial skin care industry and how to take care of your skin with natural food grade products. This episode is brought to you by Blue Blocks, my favorite light and sleep optimization companies. Artificial light at night exposure is associated with diabetes, obesity, heart disease, cancer, and Alzheimer's. Blue Blocks provides the highest quality blue blocking glasses that filter out the specific wavelengths that have been shown to suppress melatonin in studies. Melatonin is more than the sleep hormone. It's also vital for longevity, antiaging, and immunity. Artificial light exposure suppresses melatonin up to 99% and makes your brain think that it's daytime before bed. That's why I love using blue blocks to guarantee my body is making high amounts of melatonin prior to sleep. They also have daytime lenses that you can use to reduce digital eye strain and retinal damage when working in front of a computer all day. You can get a sweet 15% discount off all the Blue Blocks glasses, red light light bulbs, red light devices, and sleep masks if you head over to blueblocks.com/seamlund and use the code seam 15. That's blublox.com/seamlund, and the code is Seam15SIIM15. Andy, welcome to the show. How's it going? Thanks for having me. Yeah. I'm, excited to have you on the show, and we've actually been having trying to organize a podcast for, like, maybe, like, a year. But, yeah, eventually, we've managed to do it. Hey. Here we are. Here we are. I've like, I get a lot of questions often about, like, skin care and skin health and, like, kind of thing, but I've never been, like, any I have never had, like, much knowledge about it. So I figured I'll get, like, the expert on the podcast to talk about, all kind of things related to skin health and, skin care. So, yeah, here we are. But what how you, you know, maybe how'd you get into how'd you found your company and how'd you get into, like, you know, skin skin care products? Oh, man. It's a it's a much different story than, I don't know. I mean, a lot of other businesses are many other companies are planned. People write business plans, they have partners, they have, you know, staff, usually a business background. Not me. I was, in the entertainment industry for, let's see, at that point well, yeah. I was modeling when I was 18, but I've got into acting about 2005. But so that was my career. And, one Saturday night, 03/20/2011, I was just walking crossing the street after dinner, looking down on my phone, just kinda lost focus for a little bit. I got hit by a westbound heading vehicle, lost consciousness, hit into the eastbound lane. Clothes cut off me in the middle of the street, my first responders, and yeah. I mean, I I was coming in and out of consciousness at that point on the short drive over to Cedars Sinai Hospital, but I quickly found out, about the severity of the situation. I mean, I was on a morphine drip in an ICU bed looking at my well, yeah. I mean, I kinda see it out of the bottom left corner of my eye, my chin, and one of the worst compound fractures that the resident, maxillofacial surgeon, doctor Rosenberg, had ever seen. So we had to hire a private guy to, come in and get me repaired. I had a titanium plate inserted up top, one on the bottom, put the particles back together, waited, what, eight right around eight weeks for the bone to grow back. You know, just a zombie from antibiotics, seven broken ribs, collapsed lung. And I, my jaw was out to, you know, it was I was very banged up. Unrecognizable, but, I also, you know, I'm not gonna I'm pretty, pretty resilient. So I mean, I I just I was alive. Right? I had that perspective. And I mean, absolutely nothing to complain about. People don't survive actions like that. In a weird way, I was excited. I mean, I I don't know if it was because I I mean, I wouldn't say excited, but, like, giddy, like, just on edge. I don't it may may have been something, like, from my my body's natural response to going through physical trauma or something like that, like the, I don't know if it's cortisol response or I'm not sure. But I I also had my family around me, and I was which rarely happens, you know, all of us, my sisters have their families too. And even during holidays, we have very rarely ever all of us get together. But so we had that, and I had a lot of love in my little small 660 square foot apartment in North Hollywood, California. But I needed that love right there during that, that that time of recovery. I mean, just coming down just like, what? You know, job wired shut, no teeth, and just really banged up. But I I needed you know, that kinda started off my recovery on a somewhat positive note. And I'm a pretty, you know, I I had perspective before that accident. Mhmm. And it obviously heightened afterwards. But, yeah, that I had a preexisting clay mask that I was using, kind of hiding, from roommates and stuff like that, definitely to my male friends. But, I mean, just I mean, I I didn't hide it from them, but I it's not like I was just going around, you know, telling everybody about my clay mask, but in my, you know, passion in skin care. But, after that because every Sunday night before a week of auditions as an actor, you know, I mean, I wanted to look, you know, as much like my pictures and, you know, really aside from the, you know, the the, you know, the, aesthetic side of things, it really, the product, the clay mask just really helps. Well, not even clay mask, but clays in general create a, you know, influx of blood flow and microcirculation to the surface of the skin. So it just, you know, leaves it's, you know, mix your you know, the the pores very tight. I mean, I'm talking about soloplay, kaolin, betonite, parafilite, iolite, French green I mean, yeah. They're they're very not only mineral rich, but they create so much constriction in blood vessel, vasodilation just, to the surface of the skin. So you get a lot of stagnant capillaries moving. You wake up that t zone and that that nasal area and just I I love it. And so I had that in my back pocket. So I knew I was gonna use that to but it was only four ingredients. And so when I was making my little morning tonic, I would meet George Lamoreux, Ron Teegarden from Dragon Herbs, Crosby Ware, Truth Kalkin, Sage Dammers, just my jaw large, like, trying to, you know, pick their brain with, like, you know, morning. They basically putting my my morning tonic together. Right? Mhmm. And so I had a lot of, medicinal mushrooms. I mean, chaga, reishi, lion's mane. I don't think I had turkey tail at that point. Spirulina, deer placenta, pearl powder, Hoxhu Wu, Shizandra. I mean, I I just but it it I kept adding to it over time in an effort to build my blood, you know, get that blood that good blood circulated from head to toe and help rid my body, hopefully, toxins and impurities and inflammation. And so that that actually ended up, we actually ended up encapsulating that small formula without the de placenta, egg yolks, and bison liver, obviously, but, and that's revitalized. I don't know if I mentioned that to you or if you tried that, but, yeah, I was really banged up. But I I mean, this took a very long time just I, you know, it's I would say about a year, year and a half. I was never formulating a product. I was just trying to heal myself, period. Right. I made it I made it a big goal to, just get back, in better shape than I was before. And I I mean, you know, it's just a goal, but you goals, you know, I mean, are important. So but it was definitely a lofty goal at that point. But, I mean, I started to feel so good very quickly. Like, my my, obviously, the scarring is not just gonna go away, but the abrasions were gone within two to three weeks. Mhmm. Wow. That that's not like record time, but seriously, I was really, really banged up. And so I had a lot of gashes and things that were sped up through the the clay mask that I was using, and then also using really good nutrient dense ingredients so I could afford, like, a cow butter, you know, olive oil, and then certain essential oils. But then that started to build as I was getting more momentum personally in, my recovery. I mean, it feels good, you know, when you wake up, you're not seeing but it takes a lot of time though too. I mean, I went through a real dark period. I mean, imagine try you know, someone making a joke and then, you know, hiding your smile because you don't wanna show the fact that you don't have your front teeth. You know what I mean? Like, that that was there for about a year, year and a half. It's a very, I wouldn't say dark time, but it was I was, you know, I was very self conscious. I my soul my zest took a hit, you know? And so, but, that's why I wanted to get back so quickly. And I'm and that, you know, the love, the support that I had from friends and family was, oh, man, unbelievable. And then on top of that, I was just extremely grateful to be alive. And Yeah. You know, everything after that, it was a bonus, seriously. I mean, I that was very, very intense. That was Yeah. Yeah. It's like, you know, hard to imagine, what it feels like to go through something like that and, especially like the accident part. And, you know, most people, yeah, they don't maybe, have that kind of a mindset about these things and, may actually, you know, gonna spiral out of, you know, some towards more negativity and that kind of thing. But, yeah, you obviously had the opposite, perspective and, you know, to made the best of it and actually you actually, you know, came on on top. You you were, know, in a better position after afterwards, when it happened. So, yeah, it's a kind of very admirable, you know, perspective to have. Thank you, brother. I appreciate that. And I wanna I wanna I mean, that's a big outside goal of mine, and, hopefully, I'll do it. I mean, I wanna be there for the people that are going through something right now. You know what I mean? Like, recovery is a I mean and they just need I've been there. I I and I'd know I I mean, it's not the exact mindset, but, yeah, it's a very similar mindset. They're down and out. I mean, I really wanna help those people whether it's aesthetics and just I don't know. But maybe if I start my podcast or something, I'll touch on that. But, yeah, thanks, man. I appreciate it. I'm so happy to be alive. Yeah. That's awesome. But, yeah, maybe let's talk about, you know, I do know, like, one thing that, you know, most of the skin care products are pretty bad or that they're full of, like, this, you know, bad ingredient or, you know, let's say, kinda toxic ingredients or, that actually aren't that good for your skin. So what have you learned maybe, as a researcher of this industry and, as a, like, you know, entrepreneur in it? Like, what is maybe the biggest as a shortcomings of the, let's say, conventional skin care industry and the the products? It's there are thousands of ingredients that United States allows that Europe doesn't. Why is that? You know what I mean? It is unbelievable to me. It's, yeah. It it comes down to, you know, integrity of your your ingredient decks. How how do you wanna be known? And then also, it's deceiving to the customer. So that says so much about, it says a lot about the company too. I mean, I I just you know, in searching the store shelves and, in my recovery, trying to find something that I could afford to use to heal my, you know, my my scarring after the mask. I want to have something to heal and hydrate that area. So, like, same thing. I just ordered the raw ingredients. So there was always some type of hole in the product at that time, you know, right around 02/2011, 2012. There wasn't that much, like, there weren't that many brands, in the in the cosmetic industry. You know, there was Eminence. I think there was I think Osea was was in back then. Maybe Udacity. I'm not sure, but there wasn't a big, you know, a large amount of green beauty brands out, and there wasn't a big attention, attention put on the emphasis of clean ingredient decks. You know, your skin is your largest organ. You have to treat it like another mouth. I mean, if you wouldn't put it, excuse me, if you wouldn't put it onto your skin or into your mouth, I I just I feel like that's, for the most part, don't put it onto your skin. I mean, we have certain actives, certain, you know, lactic acid, fulvic acid. Actually, fulvic acid, I just took this morning. So that's not hyaluronic acid. I mean, no. I would I would eat that too. So, I mean, plant derived stem cells, I'm not sure if I would. But, I mean, pretty much, we we wanna do everything that we can to make as, as food grade and close to nature as possible with our products. And I think, you know, like I mentioned, Amorigiani, OSEA, Maylyn's in terms of another really good brand. I'm missing a big one. But yeah. I mean, it's so it's starting to, you know, become more popular. Brands are becoming, you know, more aware. Just I mean, don't mislead the customer. I mean, treat and treat everyone like a reflection of yourself. I mean, is money that important? You wanna get that profit up and get another sale, get another customer, or do you wanna help someone? Seriously. I mean, that's how I'm wired. And I, yeah. And it's it's you know, let the customer, you know, tell their friends. Let let them share. You know, you put more into your products. You market it that way, and you let the customers be your biggest form of marketing. That's how we do it. Yeah. Yeah. That reminded me of, like, the like, I've seen, like, some sort of video where they, like, some Monsanto CEO was on the some sort of, interview, and he they said, like, hey. You would you drink this glyphosate in a glass? And he said, of course not. But then he said that glyphosate is safe or something that is completely not carcinogenic, but, you know, most people wouldn't eat or wouldn't be able to eat their own, skincare product or but, obviously, your yours has, you know, actually quite yeah. Like I said, very close to nature and, food grade. So it's actually somewhat different. Yeah. Yeah. It's, it's fun for me. I mean, it's a blank canvas. I love bee products, so I usually start with that as my base. And I have an unbelievable manufacturer in Hawaii that holistically raises bees. And I just I'm so fascinated with, just bees in general. They're so important for the world, by the way. I mean, just a third of our food source, comes from, you know, just obviously pollinating flowers and just getting I mean, it's they're unbelievable. But they're also they're also scientists are finding out more and more about how molecularly complex the just the enzymes and the the richest antibacterial, antifungal properties of, bee products, you know, propolis, beeswax, honey, royal jelly, pollen. Mhmm. Oh, man. Yeah. So I just I I love how healing they are and how nutrient dense and how just mysterious and powerful those little guys are. I I just I love them. Yeah. So yeah. I I just I it's not that hard. You have to really, love it though. And also, you know, fiercely wanna disrupt in it, you know, something that is so wrong in an industry. I I mean, come on. Yeah. There's a study. On average, women leave the house with over 200 government recognized carcinogens daily between hairspray, lipstick, makeup. You know, that's I mean, over time, that is, aside from being, you know, disrupting endocrine receptors and, at a at a hormonal level, which is seriously very important to everything, it's just, over time, inflammation is the root of all disease. I mean, that's definitely going to spike inflammation markers, and, I mean, it's just one of those things that we can control. I mean, this right here, Giovanni hairspray, I wanted I mean, that's relatively nontoxic. I think yeah. I mean, I don't I can't name any really good makeup brands or organic makeup brands right now. And I know there are a couple really good ones that a friend you know, girlfriends of mine say are very effective, but just look into everything. Look into your ingredient decks. Scan the UPC code with Think Dirty. They do a zero to 10 rating. Well, that's mostly skin care products, but, I mean, you just research your ingredients. And especially if it's something that you're doing daily, You know, over time, that's going to build up and then, you know, just disrupting everything that, is not intended. I mean, it it does not serve your skin. And, I mean, between fragrance and I mean, that's another culprit as well. I just you can get unbelievable results from natural products, and then, I mean, it's just I've experienced that. It's up, you know, it's up to all of us in the, you know, holistic wellness and biohacking industry to just just spread the word just on, how important our products our personal care products are. Yeah. It's like, you know, you do already get exposed to these kinds of chemicals and, yes, the toxins, on a regular basis in your, yeah, like you said, household items even. And, I mean, soap or something can also be having these kind of different chemicals and disrupt your endocrine system. So, yeah, like, why would you, you know, want to overburden your system even more by putting it on your skin especially? And, yeah, I mean absorbed in your yeah. I mean, that it's absorbed into your bloodstream very quickly. Mhmm. And it just, you know, and then also, you know, between shower filters, shampoo, conditioners. I mean, it just sometimes it's it's two or three step. They have leave in conditioners now. I mean, that close to your brain, your scalp your scalp, your hair follicles, and, I mean, I just I've yep. It's it's just up to us to go to work and inform and do our best to educate and just, you know, show different alternative healthier alternatives that serve us for long to end and effort for Yeah. Are there are there any specific ones, like, a few examples of the names of the chemicals that are, let's say, the worst or that are known to be like arginine or propylene glycol, BHTPEG, 100, I believe it is. Any artificial colors, like the blue I think it blue lake blue 25. It was interesting. I was on Boss Babe's podcast yesterday and she brought out a oh my gosh. I she brought out a scrub, a very popular scrub. Top right, it says made with a 100% natural exfoliants in, like, a little badge. It is so misleading because the consumer sees a 100% natural and then, like, the NTS in in in exfoliants. You know what I mean? And so they probably think that it's a 100% natural ingredients. Like, you know what I mean? Like, they don't even need to see the bag. It's a very they are very clever with their marketing. People are. But it's so dishonest. Yeah. It is what and they have one little spec. I mean, sure. They're they're, yeah, their their exfoliant is probably a g m well, it's a corn kernel, corn grain. Guarantee, it's probably GMO laced, and I can't I don't know. But, I mean, it probably is. And but that's yeah. Sure. They can use their that is their, their claim is a 100% natural exfoliant, but that I still I I don't even know if that's true. I mean, they went, Danielle went through and scanned the UPC code of a couple other items that were claiming to be made with a 100% natural ingredients, and then there was propanediol, government recognized carcinogen. I mean, there's a I I forget the the, the name of the I I should find it, but there's a list of the top 25, butylene glycol, propylene glycol, stearates or, magnesium stearate, I would stay away from. It's, oh, wait. That's that's more on the supplement side of things. Aluminum based deodorants, stay absolutely stay away from that. You know, you just you between the Think Dirty app scanning UPC codes and them identifying which ingredients are, you know, just to stay away from. And then, obviously, some of them aren't even listed on the ingredient decks from the brands themselves for whatever reason. And that's just I mean, that's where we're at in The United States right now. And that's that's oh, man. It's interesting. It'd be in this, smaller, you know, all natural green beauty brand. I we're we're completely, opposite of that integrity, you know, integrity wise, but also just everything about it. And so, you know, in fighting against that and wanting to disrupt, but seriously, just awake, you know, awaken people to what's going on. It why are there thousands of ingredients that, you know, overseas, they are just flat out do not allow in their products and then The United States, they do. And why are things different? Why do people switch up their formulas for for Europe to make them cleaner? But in The United States, we we it just doesn't matter. It's like they're they wanna make it it's yeah. It's, disappointing. But, you know, that's why we're we're here to do our best to, you know, just inform, educate, and to show different alternatives, examples, but better effects too in my opinion. Yeah. Yeah. I've seen I've seen some of the transformations on the website and social media that's, pretty crazy. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you. I mean, it's, just over time, it's it has very good long term results without the unpredictable downtime of something like a chemical peel, microdermabrasion, laser, Botox, you know. I mean, it's just there's, yeah. I just I have very sensitive skin. I know what I'm getting every single time with with my products. So it's just, yeah. It's fun. Mhmm. Yeah. It's Yeah. And especially with an industry that, you know, it's it's you're basically assisting and building confidence. You know, I really wanna help people feel better about what they see in the mirror. For so long, I was just man, it was so frustrating. Yeah. So I get it. I I just yeah. It's, there's an emotional aspect to it as well. Yeah. Absolutely. But maybe let's talk a little bit about, you know, what you can tell us about, like, your overall skin, I don't know, aging or skin health. It's sort of like, why why why does skin go bad, or what makes it become, as in, less aesthetic appealing over time? Or Well, I would say it comes down to not taking care of, you know, things like exfoliating, generating that circulation to the surface of the skin, depending on how your diet is, your the climate, where you live, how interested you are, I love it. And a lot of people when they when they experience good skin care I mean, it does. I mean, when you look a little more brightened and your skin's a little bit more tightened, a little bit the eye area is a little bit more, you know, awake, it feels good. I mean, imagine having that every day. You know? I mean, it's going I just obviously, I'm a little bit different in that aspect, but not really. I mean, a lot of people are very excited, to to do their routines because it sets a tone, you know, for your day. It also sets a tone energetically for everybody you meet personally and professionally, you know, if you feel good about yourself. Now you can do that without skin care. I have no doubt about it. I know. And it's just one of those things where, you know, you stay consistent with a good cleansing routine to rid your body of impurities, dirt, oil buildup. And like you mentioned, environmental pollution is big, and we absorb that. We're so porous. Like, you know, mentioned, it's a large organ. So we're constantly absorbing impurities throughout the day, so you we wanna remove those. Our skin is our largest detox organ as well. So something like a clay mask is is something I whether it's once a week, I do it, well, I would recommend one to three times a week. But, I mean, I'm I'm finding myself preparing for things almost daily now. So, I mean, I'm doing it a lot I mean, a very, probably, like, five times a week, maybe more. I mean, but it's it's gentle enough, is and especially with the pearl powder and the and the, like, the just the ultra ventilated silk like, particle size of the of the formula in general. It, it's yeah. And it's not overly drying. Obviously, I do my best to hydrate. So it works out for me, and my skin's kind of, been built for that, and, like, kinda calloused over time. So that's that's something whether it's a once a week clay mask or just I mean, there are a lot of just one ingredient. I mean, Aztec Healing Clay, whether it's our product, our brands, or someone else's. I mean, I would really recommend doing it. It's a pretty unique experience. Have you I don't know if you've tried our clay mask. Have you ever done a clay mask? No. Well, maybe Yeah. Yeah. I I don't think so. Yeah. Yeah. No problem. We'll send you. It's it's a unique feeling. It it's yeah. It's invigorating. I mean, I I used a little derma roller before to open up and create these little tiny micro tears that signal to your body repair itself effectively creating a thicker collagen layer. But then also on top of that, in rolling over your skin, you create these tiny pathways for optimal absorption of the ingredients you put on top of it. Well, the products the ingredients of the products you put on top of it afterwards, you know, maximizing the benefits. So that's something I'll do, before I mask as well. But, I mean, it's and then, you know, keeping your skin hydrated, repairing with a good healing night cream, and the most important time to do so when you're in one position for hours, I think, is clutch. Mhmm. You know, a good night cream. Yeah. I mean, but you can also just keep it it's exfoliate, hydrate, repair. You know what I mean? Cleanse, exfoliate, hydrate, repair. That you stay consistent with that a few times a week and then, you know, coming you know, depending on diet and how you're eating with, you know, good shower filter, good laundry detergent, you know, keep your pillow pillowcases clean, you know, and then just taking care of all the impurities that are just all around us, especially in The United States. It's, it's almost a full time job with, with everything. But, yeah. It's it over I mean, it's for it's just an effort for longevity. I I I don't understand why it's, I mean, it's our life. You know? It's we wanna stay as vibrant and, you know, those the the personal care products, I mean, as we mentioned, just over time, it just accelerates, aging. Mhmm. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. But what about collagen? Like, that's also, like, a pretty touted to be, like, a skin health promoter. Collagen. I mean, it's about I mean, what's that? It's proline, lysine, and glycine. Right? Those are the so, I mean, I I supplement with those. I do my best to get it through food as well, beef, I think, and obviously, collagen powder. But, as far as I mean, I like to I like to build up, I like to put the building blocks into the formation and and, like, let our body let our body create it on its own for long like, longer term benefit long term benefits rather than doing, you know it's such a hot word. Right? Collagen. You know, it's just like but what I mean, you I we we have it in our cleanser, because it's more of a leave on treatment too when combined with the pearl powder. It just it just it's a different feeling. It's very healing. We we get our, our marine collagen from Red Snapper. But as far as supplementing with it and then also supplementing with it on the from the building block amino acid standpoint and then eating well, I think that's how your body can, you know, produce the most collagen. Good, you know, fat rich diet, in my opinion, has been, very helpful for that. And then, you know, because you want that subcutaneous fat layer, you know, just to kinda thicken and and fill in those fine lines and crow's feet and wrinkles that could develop down the road. But I really I really feel like just getting that circulation, getting the stagnant capillaries, whether it's for twenty four hours naturally, rather than some quick fix band aid, you know, a lot that so many med spas have with the chemical peels, the retinols, the I mean, where's the downtime is, I mean, the sun sensitivity, the, you know, unpredictable results from that, and also the toxic ingredients. I mean, why I just don't get it. So, I mean, just something more natural, a more natural exfoliating, exfoliant to your routine would would be, you know, very helpful for that. And then, obviously, the the little devices with the derma roller that, the collagen synthesis is accelerated with that. Rolling it into the skin, rolling you know, I like peptides. Right? So we have a a copper peptide in our gold serum formulas. So what I'll do is I'll roll a cleanse and then do a derma roller treatment all over my face, neck, and behind the ear for, you know, to keep that neck tight. And then, and then I'll apply the gold serum and then roll again once a week. Roll it into the skin. So you're filling up those those hole or the, the holes that were just, you know, open with the with the first roll and then you'd roll it into again the second time. And then, and then I'll apply the clay mask after that. Just once a week. I mean, that's a it's just it was kind of an experiment. Sometimes I'll mix in some, methylene blue, like, a couple of pumps and then a couple drops of methylene blue and roll that into it. And that there's a definite noticeable difference. Like, it it like, how do you explain methylene blue? I I mean, I was trying to explain it to someone the the other day. It energizes the mitochondria of the cell, but it's so much more than that. Right? Yeah. Yeah. Well, I mean, it also has, like, well, I do think that it's like an AMPK activator, so, which is like which is like the ketotic pathway of the body. So it's maybe preserve it's like, you know, improves glucose tolerance and those kind of things. So it's like it is like a longevity, let's say, marker that increases when you're exercising and things. So I do think that, you know, maybe, like, you know, this high sugar intake and, you know, advanced medication end products and hyperglycemia, those things will just not damage the collagen or scaffolding of the skin and eventually we can do, like, sag, if you're, like, diabetic, which is why you may, you know, age faster as well if you have, let's say, a metabolic syndrome or those things. And I do think, like, methanol blue would, you know, contract that to a certain extent. I mean, obviously, it's not gonna prevent diabetes or anything, but it does, like, work similar in a similar pathways as, like like, ketosis, by inhibiting, the, glucose as a pathways of the metabolism. Wow. So it's an ATP accelerator. Is it Yeah. I mean, it may help with that, I think, similar to, like I don't think it, like, increases ATP production or anything, but, it Oh, it does improve. I'll apply it I'll apply it but it improves, like, much cognitive function, but, you know, indirectly will help with energy production, for sure. Nice. Yeah. I mean, I I think I first heard about methylene blue from, either it was either Dave Asprey or or Luke's story. But, yeah. I mean, it's a messiest thing in the world. You get that on a hotel counter. You got yourself a big bill. So definitely watch out for for that in your hands. I mean, I just did it this morning. There I mean, it's just it is what it is. But Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I I it's a noticeably effective feeling. That's for sure. Gotcha. What what is, like, you know, special about Clay? Obviously, a lot of people I think clay has been, like, used even for, like, yeah, I mean, centuries. Probably thousands of thousands of years. So, what's what's, like, more what's the most, beneficial effects of, like, clay? Oh, they're so it's they're so mineral rich. I mean, between pyrophilite, it's loaded in silica. So that one combined with things like vitamin c and different, in antioxidants like our organic kelp powder and freshwater pearl powder. I mean, it's just a nice blend of of all the ingredients. But clay is particularly you know, as we age, we we lose vital minerals, not only for our skin, but for our overall health that can, you know, slow down the, you know, the inflammation markers and and also just help with, like we mentioned earlier, just a very, very potent, detox ingredient. I mean, the it's it's like a detoxing ingredient. I mean, as far as, like, removing impurities and heavy metals, it's a I I think Dave told me it was it's like a I mean, Bentonite's using military protocol, you know, just as far as for, you know, just arsenic, heavy metals. I mentioned environmental pollutants and also reintroducing minerals that we're that we lose as we age. It's one of those things. Bentonite, particularly, in French green I mean, they're all rust. So it's amazing as well. It just, it's very pulling. It pulls up. Animals get sick. They roll around. I mean, elephants, I mean, they roll in the mud and lay out in the sun. I mean, that's I do that three or four times a week. You know? I mean, I don't roll around in it, but I mean I thought about it actually. But, I mean, it's, yeah. I mean, it it's there's there's it's almost like the the the b the b product side of things. I mean, there's just so much. And it it's so much I mean, just, like, getting the capillaries, I've I've I throw I throw it in my hair. Obviously, it it just helps with the texture as well. It's a base of my texturizing hair clay that I'm gonna be making. I there's so much more that, that it's capable of. I mean, I spot treat bug bites. It's just it's so pulling. It'll it'll it'll literally pull out, let's just say you have, an infect usually, it would like, spot treating is there an infection. I mean, you let that come to a, you know, a drying point. You're able to remove it like I've never seen. I mean, it between spot treating, pulling out impurities, detoxing, and then just creating an unbelievable amount of blood and blood vessel constriction and, staying those capillaries moving especially around the eye area. I think that's it's just it's a secret weapon in the in the antiaging industry just for looking not even but aside from the, aesthetic side of things, I mean, just just helping your overall longevity with pulling out, you know, impurities and and toxins with our our our biggest our largest detox organ, our skin. So Yeah. Yeah. You're you're still right about the mineral parts. Even, like, you know, the, spa waters or mineral spa waters have also been used for, like, many many centuries as, I mean, you usually use so, like, you know, body aches or those kind of things. But they yeah. Like, you do absorb a lot of the minerals through the skin. That's why, like, you know, magnesium baths or whatever they do, you absorb actually a lot more magnesium through the skin than you would, let's say, from, like, a supplement or and, yeah, all the other minerals as well that you mentioned, like, silica silicon and, yeah, copper. That's a really good point. Thank you for mentioning that. Because it's yeah. I mean, a lot of the, you know, the the absorption is just disrupted in the in the gut biome. I mean, so, I mean, that's why I mean, it's just that's the biggest pathway, especially, you know, with with and another thing we touched on with lipstick, you know, with that right there, the lips are, like, one of the most porous pathways. And, yeah, so just your skin is just going to absorb whatever you put on top of it. I mean, it's just and we have to look at your ingredients. What about, like, you know yeah. Let let's say, like, what is the order of operations? Like, should you first put the, you know, clay mask on and clean the surface of the skin before you apply? Let's say some sort of a moisturizer or, like, whatever tincture or whatever it is. Like, should you first clean the face even if it's, like, with the regular water or, what's the order? Sure. The routine? Yeah. Cleanse with the pearl cleanser. If you want a derma roll, I highly recommend it. If you don't, that's fine too. And then I mix up a clay mask. You can use it in a non metallic bowl. You can use apple cider vinegar or, some people use rose water, aloe vera juice, Gerolsteiner, Pellegrino, filtered water. Tap water is, you know, that's the last, last dish effort right there. But, I would mix it up, in a non metallic bowl. You can add your favorite essential oils. I like sweet orange oil, pink grapefruit, ylang ylang, lemongrass is great, chamomile, myrrh, frankincense, sandalwood. I have a lot. Clary sage is is great too. But you can customize the formula to your your liking based on the essential oils that you'd like to use to get a little aromatherapy effect as well. And also to take out some of the bite, because it's a little earthy. Apple cider vinegar and kelp powder are, you know, it's a little, smells like an ocean, but, it it it's an earthy aroma, so you can add, sweet orange oil, like I said, or pink grapefruit to eat up some of that acidity and add a really good aroma, therapy and skin benefits as well. Carrot seed, calendula, primrose. Yeah. I mean, there are a lot of good essential oils out there that, that I add to the mix and a lot of people love as well. So I and and I mix it up, and, so it's smooth like tooth toothpaste, and then apply it in upwards direction, let that dry, hop in the shower, rinse it off, apply a gold serum or moisturizer, and then at night, follow-up with the night cream all around the face, neck, under eye area, and that's it. I mean, four step process, Five if you want it. If you're wanna go if you really love this stuff, it can get even, you know, it can increase to to a little bit more of it. But, I just I love it. It just makes me feel good. I know what I'm getting every single time. It helps with the energy that and the ripple effect that I'm gonna meet, you know, with with everybody that I meet. You know? Sets tone for my day. Yeah. That's awesome. But what about, let's say, let's talk a little bit about, like, you know, let's say, skin problems, things thing because of, like, blisters or pimples or acne, those kind of things. What do you think is the main, let's say, cause for that, and how do you, let's say, remedy those? Gut. I would say gut, diet, maybe the products you're using already. You know what I mean? I think gut health, the gut biome really determines a lot, on our skin. And that's becoming I I just, I I I believed in that, but then I I was just at Microbiome Labs media week two weeks ago in Arizona, and there were about 20 natural paths explaining the importance of gut health in, in its correlation to healthy skin. So, I use Microbiome Labs' products. I also like Just Thrive as well. But just taking care of your gut, getting really good nutrient dense vegetables, preferably fermented. I I I do a lot of sauerkraut, a lot of, beet krauts in general just to build up that gut biome. Mhmm. So, with that right there, and then, you know, I, you know, I would recommend intermittent fasting for if you want to for women, it it's it's still up in the air if it if it's, if it's if it's good for for women to do, but it just stay you know, diet is very, very important. I think you'd agree for, just overall health and well-being, but skin and you know, staying away from dairy, staying away from, you know, a a sugar laced diet, wheat, gluten. I don't really like nuts. I you know, I'll I'll I'll supplement with some Brazil nuts, but then again, the mycotoxins that commonly are located on a lot of, dried nuts and, just things that are on store shelves just accumulating, you know, just a lot of, you know, outside elements are are not yeah. They they don't it's not it's not ideal. I mean, diet is very important. I would, I would say, you know, some of it is passed down. You know, you know, genetics do play a part. I and that's my biggest thing to count you know, like, the biggest culprit to I wanna counteract through just a a solution. You know? I mean, we're using I I I strongly believe that, you know, the, the colloidal silver eating up bacteria, I mean, with the cystic acne cases that have, come our way, the rosacea. I mean, the the just the potted skin, I mean, it's something that we, yeah, it's it's becoming more and more common. And I think it's a lot of it is because of nutrition and, in in the products that people are using just kinda as a band aid to dry out the skin, kill everything on the outside of the skin. Antibiotics, Accutane, absolutely awful. I mean, just the side effects are, crippling and heartbreaking. I mean, I had a a friend of mine that he's like, dude, I was depressed with it, with acne, or do you wanna be depressed with Accutane? And so I guess, yeah, it's a that's a heartbreaking, you know, situation I have to be in. So I would, yeah. I mean, diet plays a big part. Overall, you know, activity, getting good amounts of sunlight, the and then I really I love the sauna. I I swear by the sauna as well. Getting on a good getting your blood work done, finding your inflammation markers. I would, I would definitely recommend that. See what you're, deficient in and then supplement, you know, get a good natural path, behind you. I I swear. I mean, there there's there are solutions to I mean, I feel like every situation, almost every situation. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. I I agree that the diet is huge when it comes to that. And, yeah, information and things like dairy or food allergens are generally, like, one of the biggest triggers for people. And, yeah, like, combining that with, like, some sort of elimination diet or, things of that, I I think, is the most effective, solution. Yeah. That's a good idea. Yeah. Elimination diet. Mhmm. Just to identify where you're at. But that's I mean, we we want we want those people. We want we want them to I mean, we just wanna help those people particularly. I I just had a conversation. I mean, no. Not I mean, not just them, but everyone. But, yeah, I mean, I really wanna please reach out. We got you. Yeah. Awesome. What about, like, you know, scraping the skin or, you mentioned the derma roller. So what are the, like, different kind of coffee scrubs? Or what are what do you think about those things? Yeah. So, I mean, I've tried them all, obviously, because I just wanna know how they work, if they work. It's yeah. It's funny. We were watching video yesterday too, like, the avocado mask, the egg white mask, the egg yolk mask, the, the I've tried all of those and made the honey mask, coffee scrubs, particles too. It's and they're all angled too, so you just get more you just look more irritated than you do before, usually. Coffee, I yeah. I've I've seen that. It's popular for whatever reason. I guess, the caffeine content kinda they can market that to kinda be in a diuretic to keep your skin tighter. I don't know. To reduce puffiness. I'm not sure. But, I I like, we yeah. Just a nice, a gentle scrub on the off days in between. A clay mask would be good. But, yeah, I mean, just staying consistent with cleansing, exfoliating, and then conditioning and hydrating throughout the day. That and then just with with with clean products and then staying active, I I just I feel like just depending on lifestyle, that that's the recipe right there. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. And then, I mean, the little devices with, you know, opening up, you know, pathways with with the derma roller, that that's, probably my favorite tool right now. I would say microblading, I've never done. I I think that's what you mean with, like, the the scraping. Yeah. Yeah. Never done that. I'm curious, but but I've also seen people break out big time with that and have, you know, like, a week or two. Just can't do anything. And I I just I want something consistent, you know. But, let's see what else. I mean, that I just I haven't seen it. You know, you see the red light mask. We're actually thinking about making a device. I'm working with Jube scientist right now. And, almost like a little there are a couple different thing. Oh, man. I wish I could talk about it. Yeah. There's there's a couple different things I'm working on right now. We're, just we're trying to work with the the scientist that has the patent on certain a couple different things, but just effective, devices with, you know, I mean, so something with with something like a a topical, almost like a BIC rays rolling onto and into the skin with with the lubricant before, you know, something like maybe a gold serum or maybe we make a skin activating serum to just roll into the skin. Direct red light, possibly some other, yeah, photobiomodulation, like, like, maybe a green and maybe a blue as well for antibacterial properties. Yeah. But, I I I haven't seen that one yet. I just there it is. But that I saw another another one as well. But that's that that may be down the road. But, yeah, there are some very good devices. Just make sure they're they come from a reputable brand. Joovv Yeah. Doesn't get any better. I would say yeah. But I don't know if you've done the Juve or if you use the red light therapy. Yeah. I use it regularly. Yeah. Everyday. Yeah. Me too. Yeah. So it's effective. Wipes you up. I the mitochondrial benefits too, for the for the skin as well. I just I I just it really I feel the activity, especially after doing a derma roller treatment because you you just accelerates that repairing process. Yeah. Yeah. That's good. That's really good. I'm I'm glad you mentioned the blue light as well, and that's actually been used for, acne as well, as well as the red light, so quite successfully. Yeah. Yeah. That's, I mean, that's a big thing. I mean, that it's I don't know if you've ever had, if if I had a I've I've done it once. I think I had a blue light device from what was it? NewWave way back? I don't think it was NewWave. But yeah. I mean, you feel it just literally zapping that bacteria and just infection. Mhmm. And it's gone within a couple days. I mean, so it's undeniably effective, and it's just sort of something that's Yeah. Electricity. Yeah. Vibration frequency. Yeah. You know, given that you're a a skincare brand, what what what is your opinion on, like, the sun, like, sunlight? You know? Oh, I Yeah. How does what does you know, do you think that it's, etcetera, skin aging or, what what are your thoughts? Oh, man. That's so tough because we are making a a sunscreen just because nobody's nailed it yet. And I I love the sun. I mean, if I'm gonna be out there for extended period periods of time, I mean, I I can't wait to to, I mean, try mine and start using that and going back and forth and and going through that process. But I just love my body lotion. I love I mean, I I get at least twenty minutes of sun every single day. Have to. I I mean, personally, that's just me. Now I understand if you have underlying, you know, you know, underlying skin issues and you have, you know, I mean, if you have, history with skin, skin cancer, I just, yeah, absolutely not. I mean, I I completely respect that. But I and I don't wanna put light on, how you know, I I just for for me, I I I mean, we're finding out more and more about how benefit beneficial the sunlight is to our overall health. And I just circadian rhythm. I mean, I I just yeah. I don't miss too many sunsets. I don't miss well, I mean, I'm starting to miss sunrises, so, you know, it's getting busier. But yeah. Yeah. It's so important just for our overall health. So I'm you know, just I mean, as far as for skin benefits, if you get to the point, like, ten, fifteen minutes, you're not gonna reach that burning point, that singeing point to the exterior. But at the same time, if you moisturize correctly and you have something to kinda illuminate and gently hydrate that area, I don't think you're gonna burn as quickly. Obviously, it's theoretical, but if you're using theoretic, but if you, if you're using conditioning ingredients, like like I usually am with, you know, aloe, cacao butter, and different essential oils, and, you know, the ingredients and butters that we have in our our products. It doesn't it just works with me. I don't know if my skin or I don't know if I built they say that, you know, in, like, the Himalayas, like, it it just calluses your skin. You know, they they're used to the sun, and it builds up like a a it builds the skin, the outer layer. I don't know if that happened with Meeks. And so I'm out in the sun daily, and I'm talking I live in Nevada. And I I have, like, this little glass table, and it just shines right up. Yeah. I mean, I'm every single day, I I love how I feel after about twenty minutes. So Yeah. I think it, you know, goes down to also, like, your the diet. So, like, you know, your diet and minerals are gonna fuel your body's, like, antioxidant defense systems. And, I mean, the sun causes a lot of distress to the skin. And if you have proper and, sufficient of these antioxidant defenses, then it's not going to, you know, damage the skin either. Obviously, if you stay there for, like, maybe five hours or something, six hours, then, eventually it will. But, yeah, even, like, things like NMN is actually being used or your body uses NMN to counteract the, UV radiation, and repair, yeah, repair against it. So, yeah. So the the diet is important. Yeah. I think we're we're putting niacinamide. In our, in our meteorite scrub and is it I think arginine too. Nice. You know? So, that's interesting, though. I'm gonna I'm gonna look into that. I've I've I've seen NAD using skincare. I just wanna I don't wanna do things that are just hot that other people already I want you know what I mean? I wanna find out my my things, on my own. But yeah. I mean, it's it's fun. I mean, there's so much out there that is not I don't think that yeah. I mean, just with you know, we we get a few ingredients from the Amazon, particularly. I was just in Belize. I found these little, like mini coconuts. They call them coquitos or co cajuns as well. I mean, it's just there's so much beauty in nature, and I feel like there's so much medicine that lies within that that that, you know. And Yeah. There we can you know, I'm gonna yeah. I just I love sourcing. I love finding the the diamonds in the rough. Yeah. That's that's awesome. You mentioned solars and red lights, and you're doing it to your diet. I don't know, like, any supplements that you use that are that you think are good for the skin. Oh, yeah. I would I would say because, man, I take so many supplements. I would say a good nutrient dense like blue green algae. Spirulina, I would say, is probably my number one. Spirulina, schizandra, Ho Shu Wu, big on Chinese medicine. Mhmm. Big on Chinese, Chinese medicine for sure. Sheila Gi, big fan. Let's see here. Obviously, vitamin c, but I I I use the vitamin c peptide just subcutaneously. That's, you know, a huge building block and, you know, just probably the most important nutrient, for skin, I would say. I I also, yeah, like you mentioned with trace minerals getting you know, just throwing some of that into your, water in the morning, a little bit of, yeah, salt's great too. I mean, just keeping keeping your diet is is mineral dense as possible without overdoing it. You don't wanna but, yeah, I would say, yeah, that's that's pretty a good amount of amino acids. I like citrulline, but that's more agmatine sulfate too. That's more of a vasodilator, good for circulation, but, obviously, that can you know, our face is included or our overall skin is included. Yeah. That's turmeric, berberine. There's stuff going back and forth right now on whether or not salmon oil versus krill oils are better. So now I'm kinda, you know, trying to figure that part out. But, Sam, I I love yeah. Love fish oil, astaxanthin, wobe enzymes are great, and then I have a, you know, a lot of different probiotics that I take from Mycobion Labs and Just Thrive. I know that sounds like a lot. I'm trying to figure out if I could just name one, like, a couple. Yeah. And I would say spirulina spirulina supplement with collagen protein. It's so it because it the amino acid profile and collagen protein, unbelievable. Have you read that? It's like a full on I mean, I don't understand why anybody would ever take, an amino a branch chain amino acid. Like, it's just I mean, that is a full pretty much a full spectrum, amino acid profile, and that's the bulletproof collagen protein I take. So So I would definitely recommend that. It's pretty affordable. Gelatin's amazing. Oh, there it is. I forgot. Gelatin. Yeah. Great Lakes gelatin. Yeah. Yeah. It it doesn't taste that good, What's so important, though, down it before, it kinda gelatinizes, and that means just your ligaments connect the tissue and tendons are gonna yeah. Definitely. I also love that. Yeah. Consume gelatin pretty regularly. Yeah. Yeah. Good for elastin. Yeah. For sure. That's awesome. Yeah. I mean, is it you really are, like, inspiring to see and, also good to know that there is, like, some, you know, quality products out there actually that, especially there. And and you're, like, actually, I think, one of the only ones that I've come across that is, let's say, this high quality and, like, green ingredients and transparent ingredients. So, yeah, definitely, I definitely recommend people to check it out. And, Yeah. Before I ask my last question, what can people learn about you and your work? Yeah. So I wanna offer a coupon code to to you and your following. We can just call it SIIM, s I I m. Yeah. Sure. And then our website's alitura.com, alitura.com. I don't know if I mentioned this, but alitura is Latin for feeding and nourishing. So that that's, what the name means. And That's my baby. Yeah. If you if you have any questions, I'm I'm on, Instagram, Andy, h n I l o. And our Instagram handle is alitera naturals, a l I a l I t u r a n a t u r a l s. And, yeah, I love what I do. Love this, and I appreciate you having me on. Yeah. For sure. And my last question is, we'll put all the links in the show notes. And, my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you'd have sooner? What's oh, to myself? Yeah. Yeah. Yourself. Pay attention to the pay attention to the things that excite you because it may end up being what you end up doing for the rest of your life. Nice. Yeah. That's pretty nice. Yeah. And and you can. You know? Why why not make it? You know? Just do your best to make yeah. Pay attention to things that excite you. Awesome. Thank you. Yeah. Yeah. I can keep going and going. That's a great question, man. Great question. Awesome. Yeah. Well, thanks for coming to the show, and, yeah. Really love your work, and looking forward to the future products at Drake. Hey. Likewise. Man, I love your work, and you're helping a lot of people. Big respect to you. Alright. Thank you.