I've tried virtually all different kinds of fasting that there is. Three day fast, five day fast, seven day fast, alternative fasting, and, I do have to say that I don't see, like, a real reason or benefit of going for, like, super long fasts. That's why in this video, I'm gonna talk about why I'm no longer doing extended fasts. Make sure you click the like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. Hey. Welcome back to the channel. My name is Sim Lund, and I've done intermittent fasting for over eight years by now. And, during that time, I've also implemented many types of extended fasting. The human body is incredibly resilient in that sense. Like, we can go for many days without eating at all, and, it doesn't really have, like, any huge negative effect on your performance as well as your, you know, well-being. However, after so many years of, doing this, I have to say that, you know, I won't recommend going for, like, very long extended fasts in my opinion. I think that any long, like, you know, ten day or fourteen day fast, etcetera, they're kind of, you know, silly. They're definitely not needed when you're looking for some sort of health, benefits. Like, many times people who are doing extended fasts, then the rationale for doing that is that trying to go into, like, a deeper state of pathology or they try to activate different kinds of longevity pathways inside the body. Now there are animal studies showing that extended fasting does increase autologous proteins, and it does have, like, some other beneficial biomarkers activated as well, such such as phosphoproteins, sirtuins, etcetera, that are considered to be, you know, beneficial for longevity. Wait a minute. Obviously, the most visible and clearest effect that happens would be just severe weight loss. Like, you would lose a lot of weight if you fast for, let's say, seven or ten days. And, it does have, let's say, a positive health effect on your body if you, do that. But, you know, it's not necessarily caused by the fasting. In that scenario, it can also be just caused by the severe calorie restriction and the weight loss that you experience. Like, if you lose even a little bit of weight, if you consider yourself healthy, then, that calorie restriction and that weight loss will inevitably have a positive effect on almost all of your biomarkers, like your you will see a reduction in your lipids, your cholesterol levels, your blood sugar levels, insulin, and all those things will improve just by virtue of weight loss and calorie restriction. You don't necessarily need to go, like, a very long fast to see those effects. Of course, if you go for a fast for seven days, then you're gonna get those effects faster. Like, you will see the weight loss and you will see the improvements in your biomarkers, much faster if you fast for seven days as opposed to being under calorie restriction for, two weeks. And I guess that's the one of the reasons why people may like to do this extended fast as well. And I'm just I I can empathize and I can agree with that in that sense. Like, I personally would also, prefer five day fast as opposed to being gone to calorie restriction for your months upon end. However, it still doesn't mean that there is, like, some sort of necessity for going for, like, an extended fast even for these biomarkers when it comes to. It's a trap. This entire topic about the topology and this longevity pathway is not very clear. We don't have any real human data and no human studies showing that, first of all, that these biomarkers are beneficial for longevity, although they are associated with aspects of health span and the lifespan. In other species, we don't know it depends on price to humans. And second of all, we don't know that whether or not the fasting is the most effective way of doing that and whether or not they actually, will, you know, carry over those effects in actual your longevity. Disappointed. There's also gonna be a lot of negative side effects that you may experience from extended fasts. Your thyroid function will, decrease significantly. Your metabolic rate, your leptin levels will, go down quite severely at least during the fast. Of course, you you can, like, reverse those things, once you start eating again. Like, it's very normal for your metabolic rate and thyroid function to drop down under energy restriction. Even calorie restriction will do that. But the problem is that if you are doing a very long fast, three, seven, ten days, then, that drop in metabolic rate and leptin levels and tighter function, it can stick around for definitely many months after even you've stopped the fast. So in my opinion, it's not really worth it, especially if you're, you know, relatively healthy and lean already. Then going for this, severe long fasting and calorie restriction is just not worth it, in my opinion. You're going to lose your a little bit of muscle mass. You're going to lose fat and weight, obviously, but that's not necessarily, like, worth it if you take into account all the other things that may come come with that, like your drop in metabolic rate and, viral function, etcetera. This is not just something that, I would do to my body if it's already healthy and, functioning optimally. Like, you don't need necessarily yet to go for these own fasts to activate autologer in the first place, and you can activate all these different longevity pathways with exercise, for example, and you can mimic extended fasting with just, you know, severe exercise. Like, I think overtraining is probably much healthier for you than extended fasting. Like, if you go for, let's say, a few days where you're just, you know, grinding yourself with exercise, I think that's even healthier, than this extended fasting for a week because, because, you know, you're gonna get all the other adaptations that you get from exercise as well, and you're gonna get this positive aspect of increased fitness, cardiovascular fitness, muscle mass, and bonus, you know, all those things that you don't see for fasting. With fasting, extended fasting, you do see, like, this increased, biomarkers of longevity, etcetera, and the weight loss and those things, but you don't see this increased fitness aspect. And muscle mass itself is also quite important for health and longevity. I think muscle mass and muscle strength itself will be one of the best predictors of, overall vitality and health span. Like, if you have just muscle, everything else will improve as well as a result of that, and it takes less effort to stay healthy. If you're kinda skinny fat or obese or you don't have muscle at all, then it's relatively hard to kind of maintain your biomarkers. Whereas you have even just a little bit of muscle and strength, then your biomarkers and, your blood results, those are gonna stay optimal even without even trying that much because your body is just functioning better. Now everything I say in this video is kinda referring to these extended fasts. Five, seven days probably. Anything less than five days, I still think is quite, you know, okay. Like, a three day fast isn't gonna wreck wreck your metabolism. It's not gonna make you lose muscle. It's not going to lower thyroid that much, in a irreversible way. And, yeah, like, everything less than five days is still fine, and I think that it's, you know, kind of okay to do every once in a while, maybe, like, a few times a year. You're not going to see any, like, you know, decrease in overall health and fitness by doing that. But if if you're going for, like, seven day, ten day, fourteen day fast that some people do online, then, yeah, I think that you will have, like, a quite a lot to lose. Or it's kind of like a lazy way out of, not doing the other things that, will contribute to your health and longevity, like exercise. Like, I think exercise is more important than fasting for overall health and, longevity. Calorie restriction itself is also needed. Like, even if you do, let's say, a ten day fast, you lose all the weight, you see improving the biomarkers, but then you, like, you know, gain that weight back by overeating again over the span of the entire year, then you're still not improving your health. Even if you do, like, a fourteen or thirty day fast even, let's say, you're still not improving your health. So in conclusion, I do think that a three day fast, forty eight hour fast, five day fast at max is fine. Like, you can do them a few times a year. What you will see is, better biomarkers. You will lose weight, calorie restriction, but that can also come with a bit of, like, negative side effects. Like, you can start a binge after you break the fast. You can see a drop in your middle, a great, and thyroid function, etcetera. Going for super long extended fasting, like ten days and beyond is definitely not what I recommend. And, I don't see any, like, real benefit to doing them either that you wouldn't get from anywhere else. If you want to learn how to optimize intermittent fasting and do it for improved body composition and health, then check out my intermittent fasting video course. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Steve. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.