Think that most people who watch this channel generally agree that, regular sunlight exposure is very beneficial for health in many aspects. And it's gonna strengthen immunity, help to regularly see circadian rhythms and, other things. But there are specific wavelengths of light that you get from sunlight that has an additional health benefit. Hey, my name is Simon and in this video, I wanna talk about the longevity and health benefits of infrared light. First, let's talk about the solar spectrum itself. The solar spectrum is divided into ultraviolet light, visible light, and infrared light. The visible light is the color of the rainbow that you can actually visibly see. Ultraviolet light and infrared light is something that you can't detect with your eyes. You can check out my other videos about the effects of light on your overall health but essentially blue light and green light they regulate things like your wakefulness. The amber and red lights they can help with more relaxation and anti inflammatory effects as well as melatonin production. Infrared light is divided into near infrared and far infrared. Near infrared starts from 760 nanometers reaching up until the one thousands and far infrared is beyond that. The most common source of infrared light that people get exposed to is the sunlight. But nowadays, you can also use infrared sonars and different kinds of light emitting devices to get that infrared light as well. When regular traditional sonars work by heating your body up from the outside, then infrared sonars work by directing infrared wavelengths onto your body and, heating up the body from the inside out. Infrared light is able to penetrate the skin and deeper into the tissue. The blue light stays relatively on top of the epidermal layer and then red light and infrared light specifically, they can penetrate deeper into the skin tissue and they can even reach your tendons and joint tissue. Near infrared light therapy has also been used in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease. And the way this works is that the near infrared light is able to penetrate the skull and reach your brain essentially. And there that light can help with mitochondrial function, it can stimulate neurogenesis and synaptogenesis which helps to grow new brain cells, improves the vascular function of the brain and stimulates endothelial cells, etcetera. So just, yeah, the brain the functioning of the brain improves and at the same time, the near infrared light can also reduce the inflammation that the brain, may be under especially if you're, you know, consuming some sort of a bad diet or you're suffering from another comorbidity that causes excess inflammation. From the antiaging side then, infrared radiation has also been used as an effective way to help with photoaging, skin photoaging and pigmentation so it can be used to treat wrinkles and, stimulate collagen synthesis. Feel how soft my skin is. So there are many direct longevity benefits that you get from infrared light. But for me specifically, the most interesting thing about infrared light that I like is the aspect of how it affects your melatonin production. In my opinion, melatonin is the most powerful anti aging hormone your body has and it, you know, does more than just regular sleep. It also regulates DNA repair, autophagy apoptosis, just reduction of oxygen stress, immune system. So all these longevity pathways that we talk about, NAD, autophagy, that they are in some way linked to melatonin as well. We know that red light is also promoting melatonin production. So red light therapy has been seen to basically help with melatonin production. And when you look at the natural circadian rhythm, then the red light that you get exposed to before, sun sunset, that is what, also helps with melatonin and the blue light is what, no, suppresses melatonin. So red light and infrared light can be beneficial for helping your body to produce more melatonin, especially in the evening. This 2019 study also gave a pretty good overview about the effects of sunlight and near infrared light specifically on melatonin production. As you can see, when your body, especially the head and the skull get exposed to sunlight, then, you know, the near infrared light will penetrate through the skull and it's gonna reach the gray matter in the brain. And, that is what also helps with the production of serotonin and melatonin and everything else that is, you know, what you get exposed to naturally when you are outside in, in sunlight. Big red standing by. So this is part of the reason why getting exposed to sunlight throughout the day is so beneficial, at least, you know, part of it. We know that sunlight helps with endorphins, it helps with moods and or energy production, etcetera. But in my opinion, this is also quite critical in terms of the antiaging and longevity side. So you need to have melatonin to repair and recover from the daily activities and to lower the oxygen stress etcetera to conduct the longevity pathways in your sleep. And one way to basically facilitate that you need the exposure to the near infrared light that will help you to produce melatonin at night. Of course, this is problematic for some places where you don't get access to that much sunlight. In the wintertime and early autumn even the sunlight decreases significantly and you don't get exposed to that much near infrared light anymore. Sucks. That's why I think that you know using maybe like infrared sauna or even these red light therapy devices is very beneficial. You know, first of all aspects of antiaging like it's gonna first help with the aesthetical side of the aging. You're gonna help with wrinkles and collagen synthesis, skin elasticity. From the physical longevity side, you help with joint integrity, cardiovascular health, risk factors and even the brain health is benefited from from that. And, lastly, from the circadian rhythm side, which is linked to all autologous NAD growth hormone, you also produce melatonin at night, and, that is gonna be one really good way to basically biohack your, light exposure any time of the day. The brand of red light therapy devices that I use is, Bond Charge. They use the same wavelengths that they've used in studies. If you wanna try out the Bond Charge red light therapy devices with the near infrared, then head over to bondcharge.com/cmlund and use the code SIM 15 for 15% off. The way I use it is that, I sit in front of the radar therapy device with infrared on for maybe like ten or fifteen minutes a day. And, yeah, I do notice that my mood is better, my energy production is better, and, generally, it does have a positive effect on your skin and, skin quality as well. You definitely don't wanna overdo this because, you know, it's still causing some aspects of radiation. I wouldn't recommend doing it any longer than twenty or thirty minutes a day the same way it applies to natural sunlight. Not enough sunlight is bad, too much sunlight is also bad so the optimal amount is somewhere in the middle. Alright that's it for this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized, stay empowered.