Collagen is very popular. It's one of the most popular antiaging supplements and proteins out there. Now to be fair, I've always been somewhat skeptical about collagen and the benefits it has specifically on the aging of the skin and the antiaging overall. But there are actually quite a lot of research suggesting that collagen peptides specifically have a positive effect on the antiaging of your skin and reducing wrinkles. Collagen is the most abundant protein in the human body, making up about 30% of all your protein by mass. It makes up your hair, teeth, skin, nails, organs, arteries, cartilage, bones, tendons, and ligaments. Collagen is derived from Greek, which means glue producer, and it's literally the glue that holds you together. Unfortunately, starting at the age of 20 you start to lose about 10% of your skin's collagen, so by the time you're 75 or 80 you have lost up to 50% of your skin's collagen content. Women overall have less collagen than men at all ages, but the rate of decrease in collagen is nearly identical in both of the sexes. So theoretically women should be more concerned with their collagen intake, but both men and women benefit from it because we all lose our collagen with age. Disappointed. Now besides that, there's also many studies again showing that, oral supplementation of collagen peptides specifically has a beneficial effect on human skin aging and physiology. So in this study they took two point five grams or five grams of collagen hydrolysate for eight weeks. And, at the end of that, after four weeks of follow-up, there was a statistically significant higher skin elasticity and in the, group who took the collagen hydrolysate. Another 2015 study found that, collagen peptide supplementation had an efficacious improvement in the hallmarks of skin aging. 2021, a newer study found oral supplementation of collagen peptides improved skin hydration by increasing the natural moisturizing factor content in the stratum corneum. A 2019 study also found that a collagen supplement improves skin hydration, elasticity, roughness, and density. Now, there are a few mechanisms by which collagen supplementation can improve skin health and skin elasticity. So the three mechanisms that could be are collagen fragments can be a precursor for collagen synthesis in the skin, so they help to produce your own collagen by the body. Collagen fragments can stimulate collagen and proteoglycan production in the skin. And three, collagen and its fragments can increase skin turnover by induction of regulatory T cells and M2 macrophages. So as you can see, there's quite a lot of evidence that shows that collagen supplements can have a positive effect on skin aging, mostly like skin elasticity, wrinkles, and the collagen density in the skin. But it mustn't be like regular kind of collagen. The, most of the studies do find that it's collagen hydrolysate and, that is essentially broken down into these small collagen peptides that are small and are actually able to you know govern or regulate these kind of benefits. So if you are looking for any kind of collagen supplement then definitely have to make sure that it is collagen hydrolysate peptides, collagen peptides. Besides skin aging, collagen peptides also have a positive effect on cardiovascular disease markers and overall longevity. So 2022 study actually found that, yeah, it has a positive effect on the reduction in LDL cholesterol and systolic blood pressure. Collagen peptides don't affect glycemic markers like blood sugar, but, they do reduce fat mass, LDL and systolic blood pressure. In terms of joint health and, osteoarthritis, then yeah, collagen peptides can also be beneficial in this area. So it improves, the repair of joints and tendons. 2019 study meta analysis of randomized placebo controlled trials. College of heart supplementation is effective in improving osteoarthritis symptoms. In terms of the dosage then there appears to be a dose dependent increase in the levels of free and peptide forms of hydroxyproline which is one of the main amino acids in collagen in human plasma after collagen hydrolysate ingestion. So in this study ingested thirty milligrams per kilogram, one hundred and fifty three or three hundred and eighty four milligrams per kilogram of body weight of collagen hydrolysate. And as you can see the, consumption of three hundred and eighty four milligrams per kilogram, which was the highest dose, led to the elevation of, the highest plasma levels of free hydroxychloroquine. The smallest dose of thirty point eight milligrams per kilogram led to a very, you know, insignificant increase and the one hundred and fifty three was somewhere in middle. So there was a dose specific, increase in the amount of hydroxyproline after consuming the collagen hydrolysate. So let's say for an average person or average male who weighs, about seventy five kilograms or eighty kilograms then this would be about like 40 grams of, collagen. For an average, female who would weigh maybe like fifty five kilograms, this would be like 22, 25 grams of, collagen. Feel how soft my skin is. As I said in the beginning, I've always been somewhat skeptical about the claims of collagen, but, looking at the research and trying it out myself, I do say that, yeah, collagen is quite beneficial for mostly, like, the skin aesthetics and skin anti aging by reducing wrinkles, increasing elasticity, and increasing the, skin thickness. I do consume a high protein diet but I also incorporate collagen hydrolysate peptides into my supplementation routine because, you know, there's not that much collagen that you get from whole foods unless you're eating a lot of, like, chicken skin, a lot of, tendons and ligaments or, like, consuming large amount of this, gelatin. The brand that I use and recommend is by Do Not Age because, I'm pretty much consuming, all my longevity supplements from this brand because, yeah, they're third party tested, purity tested, quality guaranteed. So if you want to try out some collagen, then, yeah, check out their hydrolyzed collagen peptides by heading to donotage.org and using the code Ceem for a 10% discount. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized, stay empowered!