This is the whole simple explanation for why regular exercise and intermittent fasting are good for health. These repeated cycles of mild stress and recovery and growth allow for for optimum growth and function of your muscles, your nerve cells. The growth in the nerve cells is increased. Welcome to the Seam Lund Podcast. I'm Joseem Lund, and today our guest is Mark Madsen. Mark used to be a professor of neuroscience at John Hopkins University and known for his early research on intermittent fasting. The National Institute of Health considers him one of the world's top experts on the potential cognitive and physical health benefits of intermittent fasting. This episode is brought to you by Blue Blocks, my favorite light and sleep optimization companies. Artificial light at night exposure is associated with diabetes, obesity, heart disease, cancer, and Alzheimer's. Blue Blocks provides the highest quality blue blocking glasses that filter out the specific wavelengths that have been shown to suppress melatonin in studies. Melatonin is more than the sleep hormone. It's also vital for longevity, antiaging, and immunity. Artificial light exposure suppresses melatonin up to 99% and makes your brain think that it's daytime before bed. That's why I love using blue blocks to guarantee my body is making high amounts of melatonin prior to sleep. They also have daytime lenses that you can use to reduce digital eye strain and retinal damage when working in front of a computer all day. You can get a sweet 15% discount off all the Blue Blocks glasses, red light light bulbs, red light devices, and sleep masks if you head over to blueblocks.com/seamlund and use the code seam 15. That's blublox.com/seamlund, and the code is Seam15SIIM15. Mark, welcome back to the show. It's nice to talk to you again, Sim. Yeah. It was, like, two years ago. I checked out when we last time talked, and, yeah. I mean, two years is not a lot in terms of scientific research, but, I do think that there have been, like, some pretty interesting studies recently coming out. And you also, released, your book, on the topic. So, we'll be talking about that today. And today, we also have a cohost, my girlfriend, Inka, who has also a master's in, neuropsychology, and, she'll be also basically helping us to, you know, ask questions about brain function and fasting and, those kind of things. So I think it's gonna be a pretty interesting show. But, yeah, maybe let's just talk start with, your book. You know? Yes. So what what happened was little over two years ago, I retired from my laboratory chief position at the NIH, and that gave me some time. While I was a lab chief, I had a big lab, a lot of postdocs, graduate students, junior scientists under me. I didn't have time to write a book on intermittent fast on the science of intermittent fasting even though we started research on intermittent fasting in the nineteen nineties. And in the meantime, as you know, intermittent fasting has become popularized actually, based on some human studies we did with Michelle Harvey in England, and we published a paper in 2011. And then a producer for the BBC, Michael Mosley, saw the the article, and he did a documentary for the BBC on intermittent fasting. And then that kind of ignited the Internet chatter. And in the and then since then, there have been now more than a 100 human trials of intermittent fasting, a lot of them in people with obesity, type two diabetes, but also some in in healthy younger people like yourself who, in my looking at your arms, it looks like you do some resistance training. And, we can talk about, all of this. And yeah. And I think that the thing I'm optimistic about now is that a lot of physicians have become aware of intermittent fasting, and they're able to at least talk to patients a little bit about it. And there's a lot of interest and clinical trials going on now in patients with various diseases, cancers, inflammatory disorders, type two diabetes, cardiovascular disease, even some brain disorders. Yeah. So, anyway, I I got around to writing a book on the science of intermittent fasting. There are really no books that go into any detail at all on the science of intermittent fasting. I tried to write my book, The Intermittent Fasting Revolution, at a level that at most educated people can understand a lot of it. And my goal was to educate people. From a practical standpoint, intermittent fasting is it's simple. It's just an eating pattern that involves extended time periods, at least say fourteen, sixteen hours with no energy intake, and and that repeated regularly daily time restricted eating, couple days a week, and eat only one moderate size of meal. So that part is trivial, but I think a lot of people are interested in what's going on in their brain and body, when they're doing intermittent fasting. Yeah. Yeah. And, actually, when last time we talked, you had recently published this study about basically, you know, fasting and, you know, claiming that, it's more than just, you know, the calorie restriction or more than just weight loss, that there's also, like, all these other things that happen in the body, all these beneficial processes. So, yeah, maybe, like, kinda give a overview about those things as well. Like, what is happening inside the body that is so beneficial, when you are doing intermittent fasting or when you are doing this at times of your eating? One effect of intermittent fasting that anybody who's looked into it all at all knows is that with these extended time periods without food, again, at least fourteen, sixteen hours, your body switches from using glucose stores in the liver to using fats and the ketones that are produced from the fats. And so this metabolic switch from glucose to ketones accounts for the fact that humans, animals in the wild, predators, for example, can go extended time periods, days, even weeks with no food intake, because they're using their fat stores and the ketones are supplying their cells with energy. Now ketones have been studied, and and the two ketones that are I'm talking about are beta hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate. Okay. So that those are the fuels for your cells when you're fasting. I should also say before I get into what's happening in in the brain cells is that if you exercise in a fasted state, so, for example, say you you eat dinner at six, 7PM, you get up at seven, you know, whatever, put your clothes on, hopefully, go out and run, run for an hour. What happens is this will, enhance the elevation in ketones. So for example and that's something I experienced. Well, we can talk about endurance. I'm most interested or have most knowledge about endurance, athletes. I used to be kind of a semi good distance runner and did a lot of trail running, you know, like half marathon trail races was what I liked the most. But, anyway, I personally found that, for these kinds of distances, anyway, I perform better if I start in a ketogenic state. And and this I discovered accidentally. I would go into the laboratory, like, six in the morning, and then I'd work till, like, three in the afternoon. And then I'd drive we have some nice trails near us who are ran. I drive to the trail. It'd be 04:00, and I'd run. And for a long time, I would eat, like, at eleven in the morning and then go running. But sometimes and I usually bring my lunch with me. So sometimes I forgot to bring my lunch. So I just, you know, go trail on an hour trail run, having not need anything. And my own personal impression was that I ran better when I had need anything that day. And this actually makes a lot of sense from a evolutionary perspective because animals in the wild, for example, a a predator, they have to be able to spend a lot of effort, physical effort to chase prey animals, time them, chase them when they're in a food deprived state, which it can be a week, two weeks. And, also, their brain has to be working well. And so my own regimen is I don't eat breakfast and then exercise in the morning, and then I eat all my food in a six hour time window each day. And I find my most productive time of the day from a cognitive standpoint is in the morning when I'm in a fasted state. Okay. So what's happening in cells? Many things. So ketones account for some of the beneficial effects of intermittent fasting. The ketones are a good energy source for cells. They're more efficient energy source than glucose. And, of course, the enter the ketones and the glucose go into the cells and then they're metabolized in in the mitochondria, the energy powerhouse of the cells. And then the so the glucose and ketones can both be used to generate ATP in the mitochondria. Now during this process of of ATP production in the mitochondria, free radicals are produced. And, actually, it turns out free radicals, they're generally thought of as bad, but they actually have normal functions in cells. But anyway, there's less free radicals produced with key when the cells use ketones compared to glucose. So when your cells are using glucose, there's more free radical damage to your cells than when they're using ketones. Okay. So then the ketones also have, signaling functions. They can stimulate cells and affect certain genes, turn turn on certain genes that do good things for cells that make them more resistant to stress and, more energy efficient. So I'm we studied in the brain. This gets a little complicated and, but just bear with me. If if you read my book, it hopefully yeah. I'm I'm talking fast and but my book, you can read more slowly. So in the brain, there's a protein that has been studied for many decades called BDNF, brain derived neurotrophic factor. BDNF has been shown to be play a critical role in learning and memory. It also exerts an antianxiety, antidepressant effect. And two things we know three things we know increase BDNF levels in the brain. One is what we're doing now. We're keeping our brain cells active by thinking, intensively. So neurons are more active. BDNF levels increase. Physical exercise, particularly aerobic exercise, increase BDNF levels in the brain a lot. And then the third is fasting, intermittent fasting. So BDNF levels increase. That enhances learning and memory. It actually increases the number of connections between nerve cells and the number of synapses. Most of the things I'm talking about have been shown very convincingly in animals, laboratory rats and mice, where we can actually take out their brains and, you know, cut them into sections and look under the microscope and count synapses and all these kinds of things. But there is evidence that exercise and activity in neural networks increase BDNF levels in humans. So BDNF is important for learning and memory. It also increases the resistance of nerve cells to stress. We showed this back in the '19 well, eighty nineties, early nineteen nineties. If we just take nerve cells and culture and we expose them to BDNF, then the more the nerve cells are more resistant to being damaged by free radicals, by conditions that we think mimic changes bad changes that are going on in the brain with aging and in Alzheimer's disease. So intermittent fasting increased BDNF, increased learning and memory, increased stress resistance in neurons. Recently, we found that intermittent fasting and exercise through BDNF increase will increase the number of healthy mitochondria in the nerve cells. So the nerve cells are then better able to generate the ATP that they need to run the synapses and function. So, anyway, that's, I'm rambling a little here, but those are some of the things, that we found. Is there some sort of, like, optimal time window for these benefits? Or might it be, like, some sort of prolonged fasting? Does it is there any downside? Might it harm the brain? Is it like is there some time effect up to which sort of brain benefits from fasting and when it starts to harm? What we know so, unfortunately, one one one the kinda key question you're asking is, what's the optimal intermittent fasting eating pattern for brain health? And the answer is we don't know. The the the studies out there so, like, for example, in our animal studies, we've used two different, eating patterns, intermittent fasting. One is every other day fasting. So twenty four hours, no food. Next twenty four hours, the animals have food available all the time. We just keep doing that. And then the other is daily time restricted eating where the animals will, eat all their food within, like, a four hour time window every day. And we never compared the every other day fasting to the daily time restricted eating in the same experiment. It was always separate experiments where we had a control group that were not on intermittent fasting. They had food available every day all the time. And so we compared that control group to either every other day fasting or daily time restricted eating. And both intermittent fasting eating patterns do the kinds of things I talked about, a few minutes ago that are good for the brain, enhancing learning and memory, making brain cells more resilient, able to resist stress, able to to maintain the energy, that keeps them, running well. Yeah. And in humans, it's the same thing. There's no one has compared in the same study daily time restricted eating to what's now called five two intermittent fasting, which is based on our early studies with the group in England, Or so we can't really say what's optimal. What we can say is compared to three meals a day plus compared to breakfast, lunch, dinner, and the evening snack, either daily time restricted eating or fasting a couple days a week Benefits. Improve improve health. Now as far as very long fasts, that's another unresolved question. Most of the the work there that I'm aware of comes from Europe. For example, in Germany, there's a it's called the. Their clinics is actually like a resort, but they have physicians, and they have extensive experience over many decades with long fasts of typically, they do ten to what ten to fourteen days, complete fast water. I think it's mostly water only. And they have done they have collected data on on people. So they come in. They will measure number of things, blood pressure, heart rate. They'll take blood, and then and then they'll have them. They'll be fasting for ten to fourteen days. And then at the end of the fasting period before they eat, they'll do this, you know, blood pressure, take blood, then they analyze the blood. And so they have a lot of very clear evidence that there's improvement in health indicators, for example, improved insulin sensitivity, reduced blood pressure, and resting heart rate during that two weeks. But what they don't have data on, is following up these people, after that Because, essentially, most of these people just do this once a year. And so an important question is, does that once a year long fast have have a long term benefit? Say the that so that the next year, they're in better health. We don't know. And the the thing about these short fast, like daily time restricted eating, is they can be easily incorporated into somebody's daily routine. And once once you've you're adapted to the new eating pattern, adapted in terms of no longer being hungry during the time period you'd previously been eating. A lot of people can stick with it. I've done this for more than thirty years, and it's just and with, say, a six hour time window each day, six to eight, it's pretty easy to get enough calories to, like, SIM for you or your girlfriend, you know, you're pretty fit and don't have much fad. And, Yeah. I think so what what are you doing, Sim, now? Are you are you doing intermittent fasting? Yeah. I'm, I've been doing that for, like, yeah, eight years, nine years. Yeah. And for the last five years, I was doing, like, one meal a day mostly. But now for the last few months, I've been doing one meal a day the majority of time, but, on some days, I also have, like, a second small meal. But it's but it's still within, like, six hours or something of that, all the calories, essentially, all the meals are How are you how many when you were on one meal a day, how many calories were in that meal? Well, yeah, that's a it's been it's been, you know, relatively moderate. Like, I, well, I, like, I haven't, like, specifically counted, although I would guess if if I were to guess, then it's, like, 2,200, maybe 21, 25. I do have, like, you know, I do this hack basically that to build muscle and still get stronger in a gym, then I consume, like, a protein shake doing my workout, and still eat one meal a day. So that's been the one of the best, at least, you know, best ways to maintain, like, progress in, the resistance training, and and still eating one meal a day. If I were to eat only one meal a day, then it's pretty hard to build muscle and strength. But it's fine with endurance or cardio. Like, it doesn't hinder my cardiovascular exercise either. But when it comes to, like, strength training and such, then I do find it valuable to have, like, a that's basically, like, a second meal, but it's not a real meal. It's just like a protein shake, in there. And that's only maybe, like, a hundred and hundred fifty calories, and the rest of the calories will be coming from that one meal. And and was that one meal is that ketogenic? I mean, that that's a lot of calories all at once. Right? Yeah. Well, I'm pretty good at eating or I'm able to eat a lot. But it's not it's not ketogenic, because it's first of all, it's gonna be, like, pretty high in protein as well, so it's gonna be not keeping me in ketosis per se. I'm not worried about that. I'm not trying to be in ketosis with that one meal. I do eat carbs on the days that I, workout. So it's a, it's like and it's not, like, super high in fat diet. I don't know, like, m c two a, all those stuff. I do eat, like, you know, regular meat, vegetables, tubers, some fruit, eggs, fish, and those kind of things. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's pretty easy, actually, for me at least. I don't I don't feel, you know, bloated or I don't feel discomfort from eating that. Maybe my digestion is very good. But Okay. Let's see. Where were we? Do What else would you like me to talk about? You want me to get in some detail, what's going on in the brain? I've I've talked some, but the there's there's much more. Yeah. It will be, like, interesting to know some of the some of the mechanisms, for example, involved in the main neurotransmitter systems like glutamate and GABA, and how might fasting affect the dose or, maybe the brain inflammation or those The neurodegenerative. That's Yeah. That's that's that's perfect. I'm it it just so happens that I've I've written a second book. It's it's at the publisher. I'm sure I'm gonna have to do some revisions, but the title of the book is sculptor and destroyer, the story of glutamate, the brain's most important neurotransmitter. So if I ask people in general to name name a neurotransmitter, so I'm talking about just general laypeople, not neuroscientists, or let's say ask them, what do you think the most important neurotransmitter in the brain is? The answer I get most commonly is dopamine or yes. And other people think serotonin. And it turns out that more than 90% of the neurons in our brains deploy glutamate as their neurotransmitter. Glutamate is the excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain. Without glutamate, your brain goes black. These other neurotransmitters like dopamine and serotonin, they only the only way they affect our behavior is by modifying the ongoing activity in the glutamatergic neural networks. Okay. So it turns out that and and my early work, when I was a postdoc, I discovered that I was studying brain development, essentially, and using, cultured nerve cells, and little bit in animal models. And I discovered that glutamate plays a very important role during brain development in controlling the growth of the dendrites of the neurons and the formation of synaptic connections between the neurons. So and that was kind of important at the time because back then, in the nineteen eighties, it was generally thought that glutamate functions after synapses are formed. But I showed that it plays an important role in in the construction of the neural networks. And then I got interested in cell death, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Because it turns out if if you expose neurons to high levels of glutamate, glutamate can kill them. The glutamate excites them to death, and that's what occurs in an epileptic seizure where the glutamatergic neurons are firing out of control. And if that happens too much, it can kill the neurons. And we think in age related neurodegenerative disorders like Alzheimer's, Parkinson's diseases, there's a more subtle insidious, what we call excitotoxicity, neurons being damaged by glutamate that occurs in these diseases. And in fact, patients with Alzheimer's disease, they have, like, twenty, thirty fold increased incidence of seizures compared to an age matched person without Alzheimer's disease. Okay. So in this second book I'm writing, I talk all about that stuff, the the roles of glutamate and the brain development, learning, and memory diseases. But getting back to my book that's out now on intermittent fasting, it turns out that that so this gets back to your question. I'm sorry. Your Sim's girlfriend, Ika? Or Inga. Yes. Yeah. Inga about glutamate and GABA. We found by recording the activity of glutamatergic neurons in a brain region called the hippocampus, which is critical for learning and memory, and it's also involved in anxiety and mood. We found that when we put mice on intermittent fasting, there's actually increased GABA inhibition of the glutamatergic neurons. So glutamate is the excitatory neurotransmitter. GABA is the inhibitory neurotransmitter. GABA functions to keep the glutamatergic neurons under control in a so that they're being when after they're activated, then they're inhibited, which is important to allow to prepare for further signals coming in. Anyway, bottom line is that the animals adapted intermittent fasting, there's better control of the of the neural network activity in the brain, and that occurs through enhanced GABA activity. And is the is this because of the increased ketone bodies in the brain? Yeah. That's a that's a that's a great question. It it could very well be. And, what Wannika is now her question is is very logical, based on her knowledge of the brain and and mine. Ketogenic diets are prescribed sometimes for people with epilepsy, particularly those that don't respond well to, drugs. And so it's very well established that ketones can, suppress neural excitability and and prevent seizures, epileptic seizures. And, yeah, if we if we take culture the very simple experiment, take cultured glutamatergic neurons, and and these neurons in culture, they will form neural networks. And they actually have there's ongoing electrical activity. If we simply add ketones, beta hydroxybutyrate, for example, to the cultured, then the neurons are, they're more able to resist being overexcited by glutamate. So that's, like, direct evidence that the ketones are sufficient to, reduce neuronal excitability. Yeah. Any other questions? No. I now I shouldn't say that the ketones do not explain all the beneficial effects of intermittent fasting and exercise on the brain. Yeah. Well, I was gonna actually talk about that. You know, besides all those things, there's also autophagy that's, also involved with, brain health and, basically cognitive function and preventing neurodegeneration. So, yeah, maybe you can talk about that. I don't know. Let's start with the brain pathology, but then maybe you can pick it carry on with other parts of the body. So your your your viewers will have seen in your and I kind of scroll through your previous podcast. They can refer back to your podcast that focus on autophagy. But, essentially, autophagy is a cellular garbage disposal and recycling system that in which damaged proteins, damaged dysfunctional mitochondria, other damaged molecules, they're detected and physically moved to an acid bath that chews up, you know, the damaged proteins, mitochondria. And, actually, it's really interesting. There's actually some recycling of amino acids. So and if if an amino acid is not damaged, it can actually be reused to for protein synthesis. So that's like like the recycling aspect of it. So what this autophagy system does is it it clears out any molecular damage. You typically, that damage is caused by free radicals. Free radicals damage proteins. They damage d your DNA. They can cause mutations. They damage the the lipid membranes of your cells. And any of that damage, if it becomes excessive, can lead to dysfunction and even death of cells. So this autophagy is very important for function and survival of all cells, including nerve cells. So fasting and also exercise will stimulate autophagy. Now at the same time that autophagy is being enhanced, pro overall protein synthesis in the cells is, turned down. And that happens because there's a pathway called mTOR, which, so SIM, when you take your protein shake mTOR is activated and that very quickly and efficiently moves the amino acids, you know, from your your protein that you consume, moves it into the cells, and puts the cells in a growth mode. So during the fasting and, actually, that's when you told me you're taking the protein shake while you're exercising, I got thinking that I don't know. Maybe wait till after. But, so that the fact during the fasting and exercise, that typically stimulates autophagy and shuts down mTOR somewhat. Fasting definitely will shut down mTOR. And then so the cells go into a stress resistance, conserve resources mode during fasting and maybe exercise. And then when you eat, rest, sleep, the cells go into a growth and plasticity mode. So I think your muscle cells don't get bigger while you're exercising. They get big bigger while you're resting and when you eat. Mhmm. This this is the whole simple explanation for why regular exercise and intermittent fasting are good for health. These repeated cycles, mild stress and recovery and growth allow for for optimum, you know, growth and function of your muscles, your nerve cells. The growth in the nerve cells is increased number of synaptic connections Mhmm. Which we've shown. And, actually, an increased number of nerve cells, There are stem cells in your brain that, they're in your brain in the hippocampus brain region. Right now, in all of our brains, some of them are dividing, and some of them can stop dividing and form new nerve cells. Those nerve cells can integrate into the neural circuits. In this brain region, the hippocampus, those stem cells are very important for what we call spatial navigation, spatial learning and memory. That is like, right now, I'm looking out into the forest here by our house. And, you know, if I go out on a trail run, while I'm running, my brain is working. It's very active, and it not only in the second by second aspects of the running and, like, you know, putting my foot on that log and and not putting it on that rock and so on, remembering where I'm going so I don't get lost. So, anyway, intermittent fasting and exercise will enhance our the ability of our us to remember things as we move through the environment. Mhmm. And I I think, and I've published papers on this. I'm a little concerned that a lot of people nowadays don't physically move through the environment much. Mhmm. And during evolution, these brain systems for generating cognitive maps, maps of our environment. You know, what did we see? When did we see it? What was it we saw? You know, was it a bear? You know, where were the the prey animals? You know, what all of that, we're not tapping into so much. Humans nowadays, our brains are very specialized for specific tasks, often just sitting in a computer, kind of doing repetitive things, not moving through the environment. And in fact, there's evidence that the overall size of the brain, the human brain has gotten smaller in the last ten thousand years since the agricultural revolution and where we've we have agriculture and don't have to forage every day or hunt. And that's based on measuring skull size of humans from, say, twelve thousand years ago versus the, you know, human brains today. So that's concerning. Our brains are getting smaller. Clearly, we're our neural circuits have been repurposed, and and some of them can focus on specific tasks. But, it'll be interesting to see what happens to general intelligence as we go forward. Well, maybe we'll figure or develop some sort of, you know, drugs to help with the brain. Well or or, cyborgs or Yeah. Brain computer interfaces. And and there's actually you know, this is there's people thinking about this and working on it with artificial intelligence. And, but for now, I think we and our and another thing, you know, in The United States, obesity is a big problem. It's increasing in a lot of European countries. Forty years ago, when I or whatever. When I first went to Europe so back then, there was already obesity was starting somewhat in The United States. And when I went to Europe back then, I'd like, wow. That there's I don't see anybody who is, you know, obviously way overweight. Now you see that some in Europe. If you go to Asia, not so much, although it's increasing there. And what happens is there's this transgenerational, propagation, poor diet, eating patterns, lifestyle, such that kids who grow up in a family where their parents are sedentary and eat, you know, fast food, junk food, The kids are very likely to have adopt the same eating patterns. You know, so this is a con concern. So education, podcast like you're doing now, are important. Unfortunately, so kind of a key thing, though, Sim, and Inke is the people who are watching these podcasts are generally health conscious people who are already thinking about these things. So, you know, how do we, you know, how do we kind of attract people to these kinds of podcasts or spreading of information that, are not so health conscious? And and when they go online, they're not they're not searching for something on exercise or diet or they're, you know, searching for whatever other things they search for, stock car racing in The United States or, you know, American football. Yeah. And You know, that kind of stuff. And I think that that's really the, an important thing. How do we get get access to these people and kind of tell them that actually changing your lifestyle is not that hard if you can stick with, like, an intermittent fasting eating pattern for a month or if you can get in shape over a period of a couple months. It won't be easy during that those first few months. But, you know, the end of those few months, you're you're gonna be feeling better. There's there's just no doubt. You'll you'll lose some weight. You'll feel better about yourself. And these things I'm talking about that are going on the brain, you know, and mood will increase, improve. Yeah. So I guess how do we have you thought about that, Sam? Because this is, like, a really important thing. We're we're kind of everybody's in their own little, what do you call it? I forgot what the term Bubble. Bubble. Yeah. Everybody's in their own little bubble, and and how do we get out of that bubble? I've been thinking about this. And Yeah. You wanna just Yeah. Well, I have an idea actually on on that, that, I think one of the biggest issues in this society, in this today's world is just the availability of poor products. Like, when people go, for example, the food stores, there are majority of the products are not actually food. There are some some, like, processed, food like things. And, like, studies in health psychology, for example, show that people just tend to go to what they are exposed to. So, for example, just placing in water, machine into a workplace make people drink more water. Yeah. Like, making this information sort of, available for them very easily would be one solution. And then, also, maybe somehow reducing some of the stuff that does bad for us. Yeah. So that that that's gonna require some some regulation or some efforts by government, it would seem like. Now for for, workplaces, there are a lot of places people work physically where they have cafeterias, and that that would be important, right, to have only healthy food in those cafeterias. Or at least have it have it available. Like, when I was studying at The UK, I was a bit shocked about the food choices at at some of the cafes around the campus, which was like there weren't a healthy option available. So even if you have the information, you still need the availability of of those healthy food options. Yeah. I have it. So in my book So this is my book, the intermittent fasting revolution. I have a chapter on, what I call the dark forces. And, one of them is what you mentioned, Inka, the processed fast food industry, you know, where you just put corn syrup and everything, fructose, highly addictive. Those those, turns out those simple sugars, glucose, fructose, you get a big dopamine surge. It's it's like taking a drug, and people become addicted to it in exact same way, the same changes in their own networks with drug addiction. It's, it's obviously, it's not as bad as drug addiction. But and then another thing that happens with these simple sugars is as the person gains weight, the their brain does not respond to signals, that would normally be coming from the gut that tell the brain the gut's full. There's a there's a hormone called leptin. And when you eat a meal, leptin's released actually from fat cells, and it goes through the blood to your brain, and it activates neural networks that tell you, hey. You're getting full. Stop eating. Well, people with obesity, they their brain does not respond to leptin. So they actually they feel like they're hungry a lot. You know? And we see this in The United States. We have, we have these food bars, all you can eat. Food bars where you you, I don't know, pay $20 and, you know, they have all sorts of meats, some, you know, desserts, some healthier food. And, you know, many number of times I've gone to these places actually, I used to go to these when I was a poor college student, and and then I'd eat one meal a day. Mhmm. And, you know, I it's all you can eat, so I load up. But, anyway, you go there and you'll see these people with obesity. And, like, I remember clearly once standing in line and these people with obesity around me talking, saying, I'm starving. I'm really starving. I can't wait to get in there and eat. Well, clearly, they're not starving. They're, you know, two hundred and fifty pounds, you know, five foot ten. I don't know. You know? No. They're not starving. Yes. They feel hungry. And the reason they feel hungry is what I said because they've become, obese and the whole systems that control their food intake are out of whack. However, if they can change their eating if they can reduce their calorie intake, intermittent fasting can help them do that. If they can start to get some exercise, if they can stick with it for a couple months, they go back to that food bar and stand in line, and they likely won't be saying, I'm starving. Yeah. But what what about the calorie restriction then? Yeah. Like, if you are eating, you know, once a day or even if it eats bad food or even, like, you know, surplus Yeah. Yeah. Will it still have, like, some, you know, health benefits? Or No. No. No. No. So I I'm not saying they should go to a food bar for every meal. I'm just saying they they should do I'm just asking you, like, you know, are some of the benefits of intermittent fasting partly from the calorie restriction or, you know Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. We're getting back to the beginning your questions at the beginning now. Okay. So the first demonstration that I'm aware of that health benefits of intermittent fasting, some of them go beyond what can be accounted for by reduction in calorie intake, was a study we published in, a journal called the proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences in 2003. So turns out, so we work with rats and mice, and there was this one strain of mouse. Then when we put that on put them on every other day fasting, over a period of weeks and months, there's essentially no calorie restriction because on the day they eat, they eat twice as much food as they normally would. Okay? So they're doing every other day fasting, but their their weekly calorie intake is not reduced compared to the control animals that have food available every day. And we found beneficial effects on the brain and with regards we actually looked at a epilepsy model looking at, damage caused to neurons by epileptic seizures, and the intermittent fasting protected the neurons against the seizures even though there was no reduction in calorie intake. And we did did some other things in animal models. And then in in the studies with Michelle Harvey in England, that got a lot of press and kind of ignited this intermittent fasting revolution. So those studies, we had two studies, both with a 100 women. They were overweight, and we randomly so a hundred hundred women in each study. We randomly assigned them to either two days a week eating only about, what do we do, 600 calories on those two days. The other five days that they were advised to eat normally, don't purposely overeat. So that was one group, that five two intermittent fasting. So on those two days, we actually measured ketones. The ketones are up. So six six hundred calories is not enough to keep your liver, energy replete. So on those two days, the the women are in a ketogenic state. Okay. But then the other 50 women, we had them eat breakfast, lunch, and dinner, but each meal had about 20% fewer calories than they would normally eat. Okay? And so the way we did that because we did this kind of back of the napkin calculation that these two groups over time, and it was a six month study, would actually have the same calorie intake. So in other words, 600 calories two days a week, is equivalent to 20% reduction in calories, each day, but but eating breakfast, lunch, and dinner spaced out so that in that group, the women weren't in a ketogenic state. They and they most of these women weren't exercising. So breakfast, lunch, dinner, no ketogenic state versus two days a week ketogenic state. So both groups of women lost about the same amount of weight over six months. But the women on the five two intermittent fasting had greater improvement in insulin sensitivity, and they lost more belly fat. More more abdominal we just measured waist circumference. Yeah. Anyway, so the answer to your question is intermittent fasting can, can enable health benefits that go beyond this calorie restriction. So in someone like you, Sam, who's maintaining body weight or maintaining muscle mass, you know, I I think intermittent fasting is good for your brain. I don't know if you can Yeah. I do. Tell me tell me if you have any Noticed that yeah. Like, I don't get any rainfall or, yeah, I also get the most productive things in the morning when I'm fasting. So Yeah. What about you? Inka, do you do you do this too, Inka? Yes. Yes. You can. I I have definitely the same experiences. I actually noticed, so I had a chronic migraine when I was growing up. Ah. Fasting is not generally recommended to migraineurs a lot, but I was able to see reduction clear reduction in migraines, when I started testing. So I don't know. For me, it works. And, if How how often typically I know it's kind of sporadic, but how often would you the frequency of your migraines? Well, I had In the past. In the past. Yeah. In in the past, when I was growing up, I had, like, from depending on the age, basically, but from 15 to twenty twenty eight per month. So on some months, I may have, like, a yeah. I was a pretty serious case. But now, currently, it's, like, from zero to three. So It's like genetic, your father also. Yeah. It it's genetic for sure. And, And did it Also, my migraine are, like, very short currently. Like, they were they may may have lasted the headache phase of the migraine may have lasted days for me, but currently, it's maybe And after you switch to, not eating breakfast Well, I did I did a lot of things, to be honest. Like, basically, it's the full lifetime a lifestyle that helps. So we we can't say for sure it's the changed eating pattern. No. No. But, for sure, like, I always had this, afternoon headache, after lunch, like, around one hour twelve. And after I stopped eating breakfast, I actually lost that afternoon sort of dip or headache. What what other changes did you make, though, besides changing your eating pattern? Oh, I've done a lot of changes to my life, like, reducing food triggers, possible food triggers of migraine, just changing the dietary patterns in general. But you you change that all at the same time? No. Gradually. Yeah. Depending on my learning and what I was able to do at the time. So the now what I'm gonna say now is just a joke. I'm not serious. Mhmm. But if we're gonna do an experiment, what we'd have you now do now is, I guess, first for a couple months, stay on intermittent fasting, but all the other things that you do go back to the way they were. Mhmm. And then if your, well, if your if your migraine incidence increases, then maybe it wasn't the ever the the intermittent fasting. If your mind's gradients don't increase, then stop intermittent fasting and see if they increase. Yeah. Don't don't don't do this, but that thinking is a scientist. That's Yes. That's how it should be done. You you could kind of figure it out, but you could be a guinea pig. But, no, I'm glad you're not having migraines, so stick with what you're doing. Yeah. And it was also the mental clarity just like the general cognitive performance during today. It just feels feels good, and there is a good workflow. And I I have a sister-in-law sister-in-law who has migraines. Mhmm. Have you gone to any online forums for migraines and or for intermittent fasting and see if anybody mentions have you have you just went Google intermittent fasting migraines? Yeah. There is a lot of contradictory information in my opinion. And, usually, it's like they like, they are just, it's not recommended, but it doesn't really specify to intermittent fasting. It's just fasting, like prolonged fasting. Then it's more like this kind of Ramadan type Mhmm. Many days fasting marriages Yeah. Because of the increased, like, cortisol and the sensitivity and that it might trigger or, you know, sensitivity triggers. I'm glad you mentioned cortisol, the stress hormone from the adrenal glands. So as you know and many of your listeners know probably that calorie restricting calorie restriction, intermittent fasting can extend lifespan in rats and mice by a lot. And there is this paradox for for a long time that neuroendocrinologists measured and people who study stress measured cortisol. Actually, it's it's corticosterone in the animals, but it's the same stress hormone. And when the animals are on intermittent and we did this too with intermittent fasting, the cortisol levels are increased, which is consistent with the animals being under some, like, mild stress. So that's kind of paradoxical because typically you think of high cortisol levels as a bad thing. Right? Well, acutely, it's a good thing, like, during exercise or or acute stress, but chronically, it's a bad thing. So what's the explanation of that? So when I was at University of Kentucky, I had a graduate student who was me and him were interested in this, and it turned out there was an endocrinologist there. And so what there's different ways cells respond to cortisol. There are two receptors for cortisol in cells. One is called the glucocorticoid receptor or GR. The other is called the mineralocorticoid receptor or MR. With chronic uncontrollable stress, like psychological stress, levels of MR go down and levels of GR stay up. Okay? With intermittent fasting, levels of GR go down, levels of MR stay up. And and we looked at this in the brain and neurons. So what we think is happening, at least in this regard and and I should say, there's evidence that chronic uncontrollable stress, being stressed out all the time is bad for your neurons. So, apparently, what's happening is the way that cells respond to this evolutionarily normal stress of intermittent fasting right? This is normal condition in prior to the agricultural revolution. The way the cells respond to the stress is different. Respond to the stress hormone is different depending on whether it's a bad stress or a good stress. Yeah. And fasting is one of those positive stressors. Yeah. Yeah. Do what do you think about then? And and and, actually, I I should tell you that I had my, cortisol levels measured, and they're at they were at, like, the upper end of normal. Mine was actually low. Like, mine mine was, yeah, like, I I measured them as well maybe, like, a few months ago, and, I had been fasting for maybe, like, eighteen hours. And, I had also consumed, like, caffeine before, so my cortisol but my cortisol levels were still low. Not not like not like very low, but, you know, obviously, like, within, like, a lower end or kind of in the middle somewhere. It's and and they weren't, like, super high. So No. Mine weren't mine were in normal range, but they were in the upper part. Mine was in the upper. Okay. So what's next? You haven't Yeah. I'll I will start wrapping up as well pretty much, maybe like a little bit I think a lot of people also want to know, like, you know, calorie restriction does extend, lifespan. What is the what is the implications in in fasting? And, also, like, you know, when it comes to, you know, fasting studies, then there's, like, in a might on the most, like, one day of fasting is obviously much greater stressor than for humans. Like, for humans, they can fast for much longer than but for most, forty eight hours of fasting equals, like, almost, you know, five days of fasting in humans or does that actually translate over to humans in terms of the results? We don't know. That's all I can say. Yeah. It's a good question. I have been contacted by people who do, like, two days a week complete fasting. On those two days, my assumption would be that there's quantitatively more activation of these adaptive stress response pathways, autophagy, than there would be, say, before eating lunch, if you're doing if you're doing daily time restricted eating, skipping breakfast. But on the other hand, the frequency will be less. Yeah. Yeah. I think it has to be kind of a balance and, like, we don't know if you like if you like more or how much is better or what's the optimal dose and, that kind of thing as well. And, even then, like, even if there weren't even if they are, like, in order to get the same life extension benefits, you would have to fast for, like, maybe five or seven days all the time. Even then, like, just the daily time sheet eating is still good for the incidences into it and the the metabolic switching and maybe sleep and cognitive function and those kind of things. Even if it didn't extend your lifespan, they still get, like, other beneficial effects on the health span and just overall vitality. The thing that I I like about daily time restricted eating is it it's just it's easy. You know, I'm productive in the morning. I think fasting two days a week completely then eating, you know, breakfast, lunch, dinner, the other five days, I don't know. My guess is that there'd be a big difference in my cognition and productivity. I don't know. It's two days compared to the five days, and I I don't know how well your everything adapts because of yeah. I I don't know. We're kind of diurnal creatures and and having some fasting pattern. I I just don't know. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I guess I just, you know, just confine your eating window maybe a little bit. Don't eat from, the moment you wake wake up until the moment you go to bed. Don't overheat calories and your exercise, of course. And, yeah, just maybe impose your body under this positive stressor a little bit. That's kinda maybe the most practical takeaway for most people. Yeah. Yeah. So I think, you know, if if you get a chance to look at my book, everybody, I have a lot of chapters goes starts out with an evolutionary perspective, a historical perspective on people who wrote about and and were proponents of fasting hundred years ago. Then I go into aging and, you know, a lot into mechanisms, a lot into specific diseases, cardiovascular disease, cancers, etcetera, even things like autism, which it turns out that, women who with obesity or type two diabetes during pregnancy, it's much more likely that their child will have an autism spectrum disorder than women who are healthy during their pregnancy. And, you know, I talk about moods, I that kind of thing. And then I have this section on diet, composition. We did a lot of the work on, that suggests that many of the chemicals in fruits and vegetables that are good for our health, the reason they're in the fruits and vegetables is they're like natural pesticides or toxins. They're in the fruits and vegetables for the purpose of keeping insects and us from eating too much of the vital parts of those. And, you know so it's caffeine, curcumin, which is in turmeric, sulforaphane in broccoli, etcetera. All of these healthy chemicals have a very bitter taste. If you if you take caffeine and put it on your tongue, pure caffeine, it's very bitter. If you have coffee beans or tea leaves sitting on your table, you will never find ants eating them. You know? The ants will avoid these chemicals. So, anyway, we evolved, anyway, I have a a I talk about that. I actually wrote an article for Scientific American on that seven years ago. Then I talk about how intermittent fasting might be incorporate. I talk about I have a chapter on practical aspects. How does one what might be the easiest for a person, what to expect, what's going on in the brain? Then I have some on how intermittent fasting might be incorporated into health care systems, medical education, and all that. And then I have a chapter, which I mentioned on the dark forces. So lot of information, and, you know, hopefully, that'll help some of your people understand, the science and practical aspects and, the future. Nice. Nice. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We'll be putting it all in the show notes as well then. But we can we can either get the book. Wow. Just go to Amazon. Just put Mark Matt if you just Google Mark Matson book, it has it has this, you'll see the you'll see this. You can get it from Amazon. Nice. Good. Do you have any kind of questions or anything there? No? Okay. Yeah. It's been great talking. And my last question is, what what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? Ah, what you're doing, resistance training, core work. I I was I started running in the nineteen seventies. Okay? In the nineteen seventies, runners, elite runners, their their training was they ran. There wasn't no cross training. There they did no core work resistance training. And somehow and I, you know, I think I'm fairly intelligent, but somehow I never I never started doing core work or resistance training to any extent. And it came back to bite me. Two years ago, well, a little before that so I'm, like, my mid sixties now. Started to have some knee osteoarthritis, so I decided to switch from trail running to mountain bike riding. And two years ago, I had an accident that was not a good situation. I complete on my right side, I completely tore my rectus abdominis from the pubic bone. And I had partial tearing of the adductor on the right, and I had some less damage on the left. So I went through three surgeries to try to rep to repair that. And then, during the recovery, like, my adductors were weak, and I started having pain and, associated with, peroneal tendons on the outside of the feet, which I still have. So I have this, like, my biggest problem now is this peroneal tendonitis. I had MRI. I don't have, like, any obvious tears in the tendons, but my adductors are still somewhat weak. And, anyway, my guess is if I would've done core training and resistance training, that that I wouldn't have got that damage. I don't know for sure, but it just seems like it makes a lot of sense to me. And the other thing with that is, during aging see, I'm I'm actually pretty weak. But you can you can see my muscle. And, actually, it looks bigger if I do. But yeah. Also, with age with aging and I really didn't know that I wasn't really into aging research for a long time. It is important to maintain muscle mass as you get older, and you have to get exercise to do that. So I'm doing some light stuff with light weights. My core, I still have some core issues, so I can't put, like, real strain on that. Actually, I had a hernia because of and this is really long story, but so they did the surgery. And where they did the surgery and where the scar tissue was ended up having a hernia, and I had to have that repaired. So all of this stuff has kinda snowballed. Yeah. Yeah. So, yeah, do your core work. Do some resistance training. Don't overdo it. And and also get some aerobic conditioning. Look at your resting heart rate. You know, it'll go down with aerobic exercise, and it's actually a good way to monitor your you should keep track of what your resting heart rate is. But intermittent fasting will lower resting heart rate and reduce blood pressure in most people. Yeah. Yeah. That's awesome. And it's also resistance ring also one of those things that wasn't, let's say, popularized and wasn't promoted, maybe until a few years ago. Maybe it's becoming more popular. But, yeah, like, in the mainstream health, it has never been, like, like, a very popular thing. It's always been, like, cardio, but it's coming coming back, like, in a bit faster as well. You know, but, personally, I my experience is that exercise is more important, has more beneficial effects on the brain and body than intermittent fasting. Yeah. I agree. Yeah. Because when I had to when I had to stop exercising because all these surgeries, I got I got depressed. You know? And it's very frustrating for someone who used to, you know, doing that. So I still do intermittent fasting, but I my own experiences, exercise is, like, more important. It's important to keep your weight down. Yeah. Intermittent fasting can help you do that. It may have some benefits beyond calorie restriction. It seems to, particularly for the brain, exercises as important or more important. Yeah. I agree. Well, yeah, good luck with the recovery, and, thanks for calling to the podcast. It was great to talk. Okay, Sam. It was good to talk to you again, and nice to meet you, Inka. And maybe few years down the road, we can touch base again. Yeah. Sounds good. Nice talking to you. Alright. Thank you. You're welcome. Bye. Bye.