Hey. Welcome back to the channel. My name is Simland. And in this video, we're gonna talk about Jeff Bezos again. So, basically, if you've seen recent photos online a few weeks ago, then, he was on this vacation in some sort of, I don't know, sea or yacht. And, he looked pretty quote unquote jacked for a lot of people and that got a lot of attention from, media. So in this video, we'll talk about is Jeff Bezos taking steroids, what kind of other supplements he may be taking and, yeah, is he naughty or not? I would love for it to be after after I'm dead. So these are the pictures that have been circulating on the Internet. His new wife and Jeff Bezos is also 57 years old right now. So as you can see, like, there's nothing, like, really crazy impressive about it. He looks, you know, pretty good for a 57 year old, but he's definitely not, somewhat of a, like, a bodybuilder or he's not, like, a fitness athlete, physique athlete at all. He's just, you know, he looks pretty muscular. He has, like, a mass behind him, but you can see he's still pretty, like, you know, chubby and, fat. You don't see, like, any visible abs or anything. You can see he has a bit of, like, man boobs even. So he has let's say, fat percentage is around 18% or something like that up to 20%. He has, like, a vein on his arm, which probably has gotten some attention while he's wearing clothes. But as you can see, there's nothing, like, crazy impressive about it. Is this physique achievable naturally? I do think that this physique is pretty achievable, naturally. You know, there's nothing yeah. I've seen, you know, 57 year olds who are even more jacked or even young a bit older people as well. So, yeah, I don't think that, you know, there's something crazy about this physique. Whether or not he's let's say for comparison, let's say Joe Rogan, who's 52 years old, then, you know, he does look even better than Jeff Bezos. Of course, he's younger, five years younger, but, you know, he still looks significantly better and more more in shape. Obviously, Jeff Bezos, he's not trying to be an athlete. He's just trying to be healthy and maybe help longevity a little bit and stay younger. But Joe Rogan, significant, has a better body composition despite being around the same year. And, of course, Joe Rogan has openly said that he's on TRT, testosterone replacement therapy, and he's taking a growth hormone as well probably. So it wouldn't be any, you know, surprise if Jeff Jeff Bezos also was taking TRT, which I think he probably is. He's, of course, working out and, eating healthy, etcetera. But, compared to Joe Rogan, then, Joe Rogan, who looks better, he's taking steroids. At least on the therapeutic amounts, he's not taking a lot. And I don't think Jeff Bezos is also taking any, like, serious anabolic. He's just taking regular testosterone. He probably isn't taking growth hormone, although he may be, but I think he's just on the testosterone replacement therapy. And someone someone else who is also in the fifties, Michael Hearn, maybe 52, who I think is undoubtedly on some performance enhancing supplements and higher doses, higher doses of anabolics and besides not just testosterone or maybe like higher doses of testosterone. So you can see like this is someone who is probably on serious amounts of anabolics. This is Joe Rogan who is on, like, TRT doses, and then Jeff Bezos here. Like, this could be achievable naturally. But because he is, like, the richest one of the richest man on earth and he has all the resources, he has all this, you know he actually, you know, funded this longevity company as well who is starting to do longevity research quite soon. So, yeah, he's interested in living longer and staying younger, so there's no surprise why he wouldn't do anything like TRT or growth hormone and such. I think he is on some small amounts, but his physique is completely achievable naturally. It's not some crazy impressive physique. It's just an average fifty seven year old guy who is in shape and lifts weights and obviously is, you know, in good health by the looks of it. Secret. Secret. Okay. I want it. And this goes to show as well, like, how important the muscle mass and resistance training is. If you were to put someone else who is 57 years old or someone else who is 50 years old and they don't lift weights at all, then you would see a huge, difference, in terms of the body composition and how young they look so to say. Because Jeff Bezos does lift weights and he trains regularly, he pays attention to his diet, then he does look a lot younger than he is. But he's probably still on some TRT, and that kind of thing. It doesn't have a huge impact on his physique, obviously, because he's probably not that diligent with it. He's not, that, let's say, careful with his nutrition and his training, but he does stick to it. And then there's someone like a legend of, you know, Jack Lalain who was obviously one of the best or one of the fittest man of history. And as you can see, like, even he he was in the seventies, he kinda looks even better than Jeff Bezos right now. So to say because he's a fitness professional and he he does that for a living. So, I don't I don't think that he was on steroids. Jack LaLanne was probably natural and, at least, like, in these prime years, he was natural. Maybe in his later years, he was taking something, but, most of that is still achieved naturally and he still looks better than Jeff Bezos right now. So just because of, you know, paying attention to the diet and, eating clean, then, you can still achieve a much more, let's say, significant physique and, still be healthier because Jack Lalain himself died at, like, ninety ninety six years old. So this is the kind of Jeff Bezos' transformation over the years. As you can see in his nineties, he was very skinny and very frail and a small person. And in around, like, February or 2014, 2017 where he started to take his, like, you know, training more seriously. And this was one of the first pictures that got attention to what his is he taking steroids and such? This is probably also when he transitioned over to do some kind of TRT, and he's been taking that for obviously maybe like a few years already. I'm scared. There's a lot of articles that also say that, you know, this is an that Jeff Bezos, he is natural, and he just follows this professional celebrity trainer's advice. We just eats tells him to probably eat clean and, do some weights. And to be honest, like, you know, he may like, he's the same trainer as Tom Cruise and some other famous people. So it's for sure, it's achievable naturally, but I don't think that why would Jeff Bezos want to do it naturally when he's already interested in living longer and funding all this longevity research and such so he has all the money, he has all the resources, he has the desire, and he probably is on some amount of TRT, etcetera. And for him maybe he wouldn't be considering that taking like steroids. He's probably not taking growth hormone, he's just taking a little bit of testosterone to help with his old age. That's kind of the end of the story. Alright. That's it for this video. Let me know in the comments what do you think, is Jeff Bezos natural or, what kind of TRT is he taking? Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is C. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.