If you would have to take only one pill just once and you would live forever, would you do it? Well, this is something that, was brought up by one recent, article where, just using rapamycin, which is a potent antiaging drug, that using that for just one time is as effective as lifelong treatment. So in this video, we'll take a look at this study and talk a little bit about, well, is it worth taking it? And, yeah, would you do it? You take the red pill. So here's the article on neurosciencenews.com, 08/29/2022, brief exposure to rapamycin has the same antiaging effects as lifelong treatment. So it's based on this, also study that was published on August 29, and it says long lasting cure protection from brief rapamycin treatment in early adulthood by persistently increased intestinal autophagy. So it's not a human study. They took Drosophila, which are flies, fruit flies, and mice, And only a three month treatment in early adulthood was enough, like this have, like this beneficial effects on longevity. In the fruit flies, a brief early rapamycin treatment of adults extended lifespan and attenuated age related decline in the intestine to the same degree as lifelong dosing. And in mice, the early treatment also induced a memory effect. So as you can see from this graph, starting the rapamycin treatment at day thirty instead of day forty five, that resulted in a little bit longer survival in, these animals compared to starting it later. Here, we can also see that, compared to chronic use of rapamycin, then, doing the rapamycin treatment only between days one to fifteen was giving pretty much the same identical results in terms of the survival and, the lifespan of these animals. And the reason why the uropamcin treatment did, extend the lifespan of these animals was because of this gut autophagy increase that was done with the drug. And when they overexpressed ATG one, which is one of the autophagy genes, then compared to the rapamycin treatment, then that pretty much gives the same lifespan extension as the just the overexpression of of the ATG one genes. So, yeah, like the reason why these animals live longer was because of this overexpression of ATG one, or increased autophage in the gut. As a caveat, you know, this is a study done on mice and fruit flies. So I don't think that it's probably gonna carry over to humans, or at least we don't know yet. And, even then, like a three month treatment of rapamycin in fruit flies or mice may be completely different in humans. We don't know how much would you need to use rapamycin for. I don't think it is three months because, you know, the average lifespan of, a mouse isn't that long. And, a fruit fly especially, they don't live, for decades, etcetera. And, yeah. Maybe for humans using rapamycin, that short term treatment of rapamycin rapamycin would entail that you have to take it for maybe, you know, ten years or even twenty years to see that extension in your lifespan instead of throughout your lifetime. So I don't know if it's still maybe it's not still worth it, to do it even if you do take it for, you know, imagine five years of your life you're taking rapamycin. Disappointed. So what is rapamycin? Essentially rapamycin is an, immunosuppressant drug and, the main mechanism by which it works and by which it does extend lifespan in other animals, what we know, is through the suppression of mTOR. And mTOR is this growth pathway in the body that, you know, does many good things. It grows muscle. It helps to rejuvenate, your tissue, etcetera. But in excess, it's also associated with aging and, cancer. This has also been validated by other studies. So, transient rapamycin treatment can increase lifespan and healthspan in middle aged mice. So, using rapamycin for three months is, sufficient to increase life expectancy by up to sixty percent and improve measures of healthspan in middle aged mice. So, yeah, rapamycin is the most powerful and the most, you know, potent anti aging molecules or drugs that we know right now. It's the most powerful one. It yields the most lifespan extension in these other model organisms and, animals. So but we don't have pretty much we don't have any human studies actually to assess that. And, currently, there are a few in the works of, looking at how rapamycin does affect humans, maybe in the longer term. But, yeah, it's something that is still very unclear. We don't know any answers in the long term when it comes to humans. Even later in your life, taking rapamycin can also extend lifespan, in mice. So, yeah, it apparently doesn't really matter when you take it, to see, like, an extension in lifespan. Probably based on, this study, the new 2020, '2 study, then taking it in your early adulthood probably may be better slightly. But, regardless, even taking it in your, let's say, late late in life, that still has positive effects on the lifespan of, mice and other animals. Wait a minute. Now the problem is that rapamycin also has, negative side effects. As I said, it's an immunosuppressant drug. It can have negative effect on your immune system, and, it can also have, like, a negative effect on your insulin resistance and metabolic health. Obviously, it can also have a negative effect on muscle mass and bone density indirectly. So, yeah, you don't wanna be blocking or suppressing mTOR all the time. You wanna have it at certain times to build muscle and, to maintain insulin sensitivity and a good metabolic health. So what I think of it, I'm not planning on taking rapamycin. Like, maybe, you know, I would for sure need more evidence to see what the long term effects are. Yeah. Like, I would think think that, you know, taking it very briefly, like, maybe, like, let's say you take rapamycin for a week or a few months is probably fine. You're not gonna have any long term negative side effects on your, longevity and health span. You probably will have actually, like, a positive effect. But it's there's just not enough, evidence to to suggest that it would have, like, any meaningful impact on your overall longevity. There are people online who have heard that are also taking like rapamycin. Maybe, you know, they have, like, these schedules where they take rapamycin maybe, like, once a month for a few days or something. Yeah. I mean, who knows? Maybe it is going to have a positive effect on longevity, maybe it isn't. I think there's many other variables that need to be taken into account. Yes. Suppressing mTOR periodically is probably good. Like, you don't wanna have the mTOR elevated chronically because that's just the recipe for accelerated aging and cancers. But at the same time, we don't know how much mTOR you need to suppress and whether or not rapamycin is the best way to do it. Maybe it's just an overkill. Maybe rapamycin is overkill when it comes to suppressing mTOR. Maybe all you need is to do just some time restricted eating and some maybe periodic fasting to already get those effects because fasting is also the most powerful way, like a natural way, non non pharmaceutical way of suppressing mTOR. And, if I were to choose then I would probably take fasting as a way to suppress mTOR and get the other longevity benefits that come from that. So yeah, I'm personally not convinced yet to take any rapamycin. Maybe, yeah, like in a I don't know, ten or twenty years when there's more human studies actually, maybe then I'll change my mind. But right now, when I'm 28 years old, I'm, yeah, planning on not taking rapamycin at all, for the, yeah, like next few decades for sure. And in the meanwhile, I'll just stick to more natural ways of suppressing mTOR and, you know, managing it. I'm not trying to suppress mTOR chronically, just periodically with some daily time machine eating and not eating six times a day etc. Not eating excessive amounts of protein and animal protein. Being mindful of the oral calorie intake and then incorporating some maybe periodic extended fasting into the mix as well. Alright that's it for this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.