Most people aren't doing one meal a day. I mean, it's pretty difficult, and it's not even necessary to achieve optimal health or body composition. But there are some people who are interested in doing that. I have tried it also for many years. However, I'm not doing, like, a strict one meal a day in the regular sense. I do have a twist. I have my own way of doing it. And in this video, I'm gonna talk about why I think that it's better than the regular one meal a day, at least for me. First of all, I'll say that, yeah, I do think one meal is great. I like it. I think that it's very convenient for both, time management side and convenience. It makes fat loss and weight loss also relatively easy. So when you look at this, recent January 2022 study, differential effects of one meal per day in the evening on metabolic health and physical performance and lean individuals, and they did find that, yeah, compared to eating three meals a day than the one meal a day did result in body weight and improved metabolic flexibility, it wasn't significantly greater than, the three meals a day, but it still has those health benefits that people are looking for when it comes to intermittent fasting. But the way I do it is that I have the regular one meal a day in the evening. Before that though, I have essentially like a protein shake doing my workout. And, the main reason for that is just improved performance at the gym and improved the muscle growth. That's the biggest reason why I do it. I've tried regular one meal a day where you literally eat only one meal a day within, like, an hour or something. And I've tried sixteen and eight method, something where you eat two meals. I like to, like, basically put it somewhere in the middle, like, find a balance between those things. I like one meal a day for the convenience. Sixteen and eight is probably more superior for muscle growth and muscle hypertrophy and muscle strength because you're eating more protein more frequently that leads to better muscle protein synthesis and, helps to achieve muscle hypertrophy faster. So what I do is that I basically put it in the middle. I'm gonna have one and a half meals. Essentially, one meal a day with a protein shake and some amino acids that, the main goal is to reduce muscle catabolism with the consumption of these amino acids and protein. And at the same time also give my performance a little boost whenever I do need it at the gym. Crazy science. The idea that you need to eat very small meals of protein throughout the day, there is some truth to that that, yeah, the more frequent that you do consume protein, then the more frequent they're gonna spike the protein synthesis as well. And this will in turn increase your positive balance in the protein turner instead of catabolism because you consume protein more frequently. This study 2014 did find that having, like, higher frequency of protein consumption through the day, throughout the day did carry over, like, more protein stimulated over the twenty four hour period than having only, like, a single meal or, like, a small time frame in which you consume your protein. Another 2015 study found that, on an energy deficit, calorie deficit, consuming protein more frequently does help with preserving muscle in a calorie deficit. Now, I'm not worried about losing muscle even if I am fasting for, like, you know, many days. I'm young, I'm able to build a fast and, my muscle catabolism is quite low because of that. But, you know, when you are doing one milli all the time, then the potential risk may be that, yeah, you over the course of years, etcetera, you will become more catabolic over time. And, to prevent that, then I think it's just, you know, worthwhile to have, like, an additional protein meal or some surge of protein before the actual meal to help, with that. Another, 2015 study found that having six meals instead of two meals was superior in preserving fat free mass or muscle mass during weight loss. So again, when you're in a calorie deficit, then having a slightly frequent consumption of protein is superior in maintaining muscle mass. Now, of course, you're not going to always lose muscle when you're even weighing one meal a day. I've done one meal a day, yeah, this type that I'm saying for up to six years and, I've not lost muscle, actually built muscle, increased lean body mass and I'm probably leaner as well a little bit because of the higher metabolic weight from the muscle mass. So, yeah, it works. It's still possible to get stronger and build muscle with one meal a day. But from my own personal experience and as these studies suggest, that it's quite hard to achieve that goal of maybe like peak muscular growth, etcetera, if you are always eating one meal a day. So it's very difficult to cram all that protein into one meal. Your body will absorb all of it. You're not gonna waste it. But you're only stimulating the protein synthesis once in that time frame. If the total protein is the same, you eat the same amount of protein in one meal or two meals, then you will build more muscle with the two meals because you're spiking the protein synthesis more often. So, you know, it depends on your goals, what you're looking for. I think that most people, they're fine eating one meal a day. I think that, you know, they would still benefit from having days where they have two meals or they would have, like, additional protein surge in that time frame. But if you're trying to build muscle, then you definitely need more than that. You definitely need more than that one meal. Maybe in the short term, you can get away with it or you're like undertrained. If you're a beginner in the gym, you don't have particularly large amount of muscle mass, you're a beginner, then you can even build muscle and lose weight at the same time by eating one meal a day because you're such a beginner. Your body is so, like, sensitive towards the stimulus that you receive. In that scenario, it's very possible to do. But when you become more advanced, so, to facilitate that or support that goal, then you would need to consume more protein more frequently. Protein rocks. So this is just how I do it. What I do is, yeah, one meal a day in the evening. And then during the daytime, before my workout or during the workout, I have a protein shake. Usually the whey protein, sometimes pea protein as well. Those are great, with essential amino acids, creatine. If you're not interested in protein powders or anything like that artificial, then, you can still, you know, replicate that same, routine by having some whole foods. Like, you can have, like, even, like, just one boiled egg or a meat stick or something else, liver crisps, something that has a bit of protein to turn on the protein synthesis. The key though is to reach the threshold for protein synthesis, which, is at least, you need at least two point five grams of leucine to reach that optimal intake or the muscle protein synthesis. And for that, usually, you need at least 20 grams of protein. If you're younger, if you're older, then maybe up to 30 grams of protein. So you need to have at least two meals per day when you're doing this, what I call targeted fasting. You need at least two meals per day with 30 grams protein each meal at least. Obviously, the one meal will have more. The last meal of the day will have more protein, but it doesn't matter. You need at least two meals that exceed the 30 grams of protein threshold or 20 grams depending on your age. If you want to learn more how to do this targeted daily fasting then check out my book Metabolic Autology and I also have a four week meal plan that utilizes and incorporates all these principles here. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized, stay empowered.