Welcome back to the channel. My name is Seem Lund, and in this video, we're gonna talk about how can you balance aging and having muscle mass. So this is what, David Sinclair calls, pulsing, if you've heard about, before. Make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. Before we get into the particular topic, then we'll play a clip from Huberman Labs podcast, where Sinclair talks about this idea of pulsing. So, yeah, let's just hear it. So my view of longevity, the way I treat my body is, I don't burn both candles. I have one end of the candle lit. I'm very careful. I don't blow on it. But I also do enough exercise that I'm building up my muscle, but I'm I'm not huge. Anyone who's seen me, you know, knows that I'm not a a professional bodybuilder. But I tried to actually here's the key, and I haven't said this publicly that I can remember. I pulse things so that I get periods of fasting, and then I eat, then I take a supplement, then I fast, then I exercise, and I'm taking the supplements and eating in the right timing to allow me to build up muscle sometimes. Because you can't just expect to take something constantly and do something constantly for it to work. And that's that's why it's taken me about fifteen years to develop my protocol. Protocol. Alright. Here's my proof as well. I do I think you know what I'm talking about. So, I have taken the DNA age test as well based on the DNA methylation age, that looks at your biological age. And, when I took it, I was 25 years old. That was two years ago. And my biological age was 16, my chronological age age was 25. And I do basically attribute that to my protocol, my health protocol, the diet I follow and all the things that I do. So I do think, that, it is what I do and it's not something that, you know, this is my current physique. I weigh about eighty five, eighty four kilograms. I'm not like, yeah, like a massive bodybuilder. I'm pretty strong. I'm stronger than 95% of people. I have more muscle than 95% of people, but, you know, it's not that I maintained this muscle, with my, you know, say, prior practices of, you know, those regular standard bodybuilding meals or whatever. This is actually that I've built with the same protocol that I follow today, with a very confined eating window and eating window, so let's say age 19 when I was in the military, I was eating, you know, three meals a day, sixty eight kilos, and just now 26, 27 years old, I've eaten one meal a day for five years, and I've still managed to build this physique, so I do think that, you know, my biological age is very, you know, appropriate for health and longevity. It's smaller than my actual chronological age, but at the same time I'm also, you know, I can show that I have, you know, good muscle mass and strength, so I'm not like withering away from the chronic calorie restriction. And it does go back to, you know, calorie restriction, you know, that this is the idea behind basically imposing some sort of nutritional stress on yourself And we know that this kind of hormesis through calorie restriction is one of the few known ways of extending lifespan in many species. And monkeys, mice, fruit flies, they all have similar pathway, similar results and humans probably do so as well. There are many reasons why calorie restriction works, like it blocks inflammation, it promotes mitochondrial biogenesis, it reduces insulin and hydroquin levels that then suppress mTOR, It activates autophagy, that is kind of the cellular recycling, removal of all material. It increases antioxidant defenses, glutathione and SOD. It increases sirtuins, increases AMPK that promotes sirtuins and promotes DNA repair. So, yeah, color restriction works because of these reasons. There's also the evidence that, you know, autophagy, the process of serial clearance, is associated with human longevity and human anti aging. So centenarians, they have basically enhanced autophagy lysosomal function and, several ml of the autophagy biomarker Pecline one are associated with increased health in centenarians. But on the other hand, where it comes to be, let's say, the idea of balancing your longevity with muscle muscle mass and protein consumption, then it goes back to, let's say, yeah, animal protein and enter. So there are studies that find that animal protein consumption is associated with bigger all cause mortality, whereas with plant proteins, it's reduced all cause mortality. And there are many reasons for that. You know, obviously, plant proteins are generally lower in calories, whereas animal proteins tend to be higher. And if people do eat animal protein more, then they may also be eating like a hamburger with McDonald's or, they may be eating bacon, which shut up just because of the high calorie intake, that will accelerate aging. Bake off. And in animal protein, there's also this amino acid called methionine that we know is also associated with accelerated aging and you know, like malignancies and cancers. So the reason why for that is because methionine stimulates this complex called mTOR. Obviously, leucine that, the clip the video clip we also talked about does the same. It promotes muscle growth, but mTOR can also have, like, negative side effects, like, it does accelerate immuno immunosenescence, accelerates aging, and may also increase malignancies in the body. But it does promote muscle growth as well. So mTOR is clearly good in some sense, but it can also be harmful in excess, but muscle mass itself is also very beneficial for aging. So, muscle strength and muscle mass are associated with longevity and reduced mortality. So people who have more muscle and strength, they generally are healthier. So obviously mTOR is needed in some sense, you don't wanna be deficient in mTOR. If you're low mTOR all the time then you're gonna get frailty and sarcopenia. So there are studies that find that low muscle mass, low muscle strength, a much smaller percentage of survival compared to appropriate muscle mass and strength. This probably doesn't apply to like bodybuilders and excessive muscle mass etcetera, but appropriate muscle mass, you know, who knows what it actually entails. How much is too much and how much is adequate, we don't really know, but you definitely do wanna be undermuscled, you don't wanna be frail, you don't wanna be sarcopenic and skinny fat, basically. Did you scroun the little bastard? MTOR is stimulated by, both leucine or amino acids and methionine, for example, as well as insulin and IGF-one. So clearly, you know, restricting protein isn't the only avenue of restricting mTOR activation. So you can also restrict mTOR by restricting your carbohydrate intake for example and not spiking your insulin several times a day. So if you look at, you know, the hierarchy of needs for your body then amino acids and protein are much more important for longevity and survival than carbs, for example. So the kind of easiest way to do is to not become like diabetic and not eat already too many carbohydrates, when it comes to mTOR stimulation. How How much protein is needed to stimulate mTOR then for that, you know, any kind of amount of, even like small amount of protein, 10 grams, one gram of leucine for example, that you can get from basically any food, even that will turn on mTOR Like, there's no getting around it. So it doesn't matter if you eat 60 grams of protein or 10 grams of protein, you will turn on mTOR to a certain degree and the threshold where you achieve maximum protein synthesis per meal appears to be around 30 to 40 grams of protein per meal. And even if you eat 60 or a 100 grams then you're not going to turn on mTOR more. So as long as you're eating 30 grams of protein at least in one meal, then you are already capping out the amount of mTOR you're turning on in that particular moment. So for example, yeah, you imagine you eat even like 10 grams of protein for breakfast, it's like cereal and a little bit of milk, you're getting 10 grams of protein or something and you're still turning on mTOR and IGF one and insulin levels and you're snacking all the time, you're spiking mTOR etcetera. This is much worse for your aging from the mTOR aging theory of, perspective of that, compared to eating even more amounts of protein, but you're doing it in a smaller time frame because, like I said, there's a threshold how much you can spike the mTOR in one meal. And even if you eat a 100 grams of protein in two meals, but you're eating a 100 grams of protein in six meals, then the two meals is still healthier for you because of the time restricted eating aspect. So you're spiking the mTOR two times versus six times for example. So yeah, like I said, even 10 grams of protein will spike the mTOR. So just Yeah. Eating six times a day even if it's low protein, that's that's much worse for your aging than the two meals and the higher protein intake will inevitably also be still superior to muscle growth and muscle maintenance. Like, I've eaten one meal a day. Well, technically two meals or or one and a half meals, that's another story that could you can check on my other videos, but yeah, I eat only two times a day with protein and I'm still being able to build muscle and my biological age is reduced and, despite eating like a very high protein intake, I'm not eating, like, a low protein diet. I'm eating plenty of a protein. And despite that, my biological age is still, you know, nine years younger than it actually, chronologically is. Awesome. I love protein. When it comes to protein intake, then obviously, the most important thing for protein and mTOR management and the methionine management can be still just intermittent fasting. Even if you spike your mTOR with high protein intake twice a day, then it's not nearly as bad as six times a day. And, on top of that, the ratios between methionine and glycine also matter. So studies find animal studies find that glycine supplementation can actually mimic methionine restriction. So, animals or rats that are fed more glycine, 8% glycine diet, they live four to 6% longer. In other studies, glycine supplementation can actually make animals live 30% longer. So, yeah, glycine is this kind of counterbalancing of methionine. So it reduces methionine toxicity and and has, like, other benefits. It boosts glutathione and lowers insulin levels or lowers blood sugar levels, for example. And, that's why I do think that a high methionine diet, basically a high muscle meat diet, a high diet with a lot of animal protein, muscle meat, that will be bad for aging because of methionine and that we know in a lot of studies actually to find that. Whereas with glycine, the glycine is, yeah, balancing that and how much methionine, how is glycine, it's hard to tell. For every gram of methionine you do consume, your glycine demand tends to increase by 0.5 to one gram. So I, you know, personally just do think that, your 50% of your protein can come from methionine because methionine is still essential amino acid. You need it for methylation, you need it for detoxification and, basically growth, but you don't wanna get a 100% of your protein from methionine. You don't wanna get a 100% of your protein from muscle meat or, eggs and fish. And the other 50% of your daily protein should come from, let's say, glycine rich proteins or collagen rich proteins, such as these, you know, tendons and ligaments, bones, beans are just and plant proteins are low in methionine. They don't have a particularly high amount of glycine but they're just low in methionine while still giving you protein. Whereas like, you know, drumsticks and soda, they just have more glycine and collagen compared to methionine. But I do think that a glycine supplement is also, let's say, beneficial because of that same reason. So it balances the methionine and it kind of makes up for some of the lack of glycine in a lot of people's diets. So the minimal healthy dose, I think, for daily consumption is like five grams of glycine. I personally take, like, ten grams because I think it's great. It's a great supplement. But, yeah, like, even doses of ninety grams a day have been found to be perfectly safe and no adverse effects. So anywhere from five to ten grams is enough to take a glycine supplement and getting a 50% of a protein from, let's say, more this collagen and glycine rich sources and 50% from regular methionine sources. How much protein in total should you eat? Well, the research is also pretty clear in terms of muscle hypertrophy that, muscle growth tends to peak around one gram per pound of body weight. Even 0.8 grams is adequate to, basically reach the threshold or reach the maximum threshold for muscle growth. If you eat more than that, then you're not gonna build more muscle. So you don't need to be eating more protein than 0.8 grams per pound of lean body weight. One gram per pound is also like a just good estimate to aim for. It's easy. Yeah. But you eating less than that, like eating 0.3 or 0.4, that will eventually lead to like these are these low protein diet, like longevity diets, low protein. People get, you know, hip fractures and they get low thyroid from that. So I don't think that it's kind of a good balance. The RDA of protein is also pretty low 0.4, 0.45. For maintenance, I think the bare minimum protein intake could be like 0.6 to 0.7 grams per pound. But if you want to still build muscle, then zero point eight and one gram per pound is is very good. I think it's gonna be very beneficial for just the health span and making sure that you don't, yeah, like get weak bones and get osteoarthritis later in your life. If you eat more than that 1.5, two grams per pound, then you're not gonna build more muscle, but you do minimize some of the fat gain. So protein is still beneficial for like, you know, burning calories and you can achieve a calorie deficit if you're eating like a high protein diet more easily compared to other, let's say, ratios. And even then, like their studies also find that calorie restriction still trumps protein restriction. It's better to be in calorie restriction than the restrict protein and you still live long the animals still live longer if they're in calorie restriction despite not being in protein restriction. So, yeah, don't get obese, basically. The optimal BMI yeah. That's what I'm gonna talk about is that the optimal BMI where the lowest mortality is found in studies is 22 to 25. So obesity is bad, overweight being overweight is bad, increases mortality, increases just disease risk, but if you're underweight then that can also be harmful. And a lot of the times the underweight people, they are also like substance abusers or they have some sort of other mental disorders that are also harmful for longevity. If you're a healthy person with good mental health, then I don't think that it's particularly harmful for your longevity if you are at a BMI of twenty, for example, but you still want to have, like, some muscle and be somewhere between twenty two to twenty five BMI. If you have 26 BMI, for example, like I do, I think I'm twenty six somewhere around there, then that's probably because of you have, like, muscle. So it's even then, it's not particularly accurate. Like, you can have some muscle even if you have a little bit of muscle mass, then your BMI is gonna be slightly, you know, it's considered you're gonna be considered overweight just because you have muscle, but it's not inherently harmful for your longevity because you have it's it's it's not fat mass, it's muscle mass. But obviously being at a BMI of thirty is probably too much even if it's pure muscle. If you have BMI of thirty and it's pure muscle, then that's just going to impose a lot of stress on your organs and you're gonna, you know, age faster because of that. So, yeah, maybe somewhere between twenty two, twenty seven is the kind of twenty eight at max is the, yeah, optimal BMI to be at. You crazy son of a bitch. If you want to learn more about these topics, then, yeah, you can check out my book, Metabolic Pathology, that talks, like, specifically exactly a 100% of these topics, like the eating frequency, mTOR, AMPK, ontologies, or do ins, well, all those things. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well, my name is Seem. Stay optimized, stay empowered.