Would you like to double your workout gains? Have 50% more strength, 200% more testosterone, and just recover faster from exercise? Well, in this video, I'm gonna tell you how to achieve just that with a biohacking technique called red light therapy. So like I said, red light therapy or photobiomodulation as it's called is a very effective way to pretty much recover from exercise faster as well as boost some of the workout gains that you get. It's actually quite often used by, let's say, high level athletes. And, it has been raised the question, like, whether or not we we should be allowed to use, photobiomodulation in competitions because, yeah, they may give, like, just an athletic advantage over competition. Nice. Let's talk about some more specific studies. So this 2011 study saw that low level laser therapy between eight after, like, 808 nanometers, that was actually quite an effective way to, increase one rep max leg press by 55% compared to the controls. They didn't see, like, an increase in muscle mass on the legs, but, yeah, the strength, the one rep max was 55% larger in the, low level, laser therapy group. Another study on the same wavelength, 808 nanometers 2,012, saw that, the, women who are doing endurance and using the, laser therapy experienced a greater reduction in fatigue after the endurance training than, the program without the low level laser therapy. And multiple studies before that have also shown that, even, up to, like, 655 nanometer, low level laser therapy can also, reduce the onset of muscle fatigue and exhaustion. In professional sports, photobiomodulation has been found to significantly increase the time of staying in the pitch and the significant improvement in all the biochemical markers that were measured, things like, yeah, like, time to exhaustion, the lactate accumulation in the, in the in the body and creating kindness and everything that didn't hinder performance were better in the athletes that got, photobiomodulation. What they did was pre exercise. So before the actual, game, they got this photopolymer modulation. In rugby players as well, high level rugby players, the similar effect was kind of seen that, the, subjects who got the photopolymer modulation performed better. In the rugby players, the, photopolymer modulation increased the, sprint time and best time of sprints and reduced the fatigue index. A 2016 meta analysis of, 16 studies involving 297 participants concluded that laser therapy with these photobiomodulation is effective in improving skeletal muscle exercise capacity and recovery. Another 2013, systemic review of, 12 randomized control trials, did find that, photobiotherapy administered before resistance training has been consistently found to provide this ergogenic and prophylactic benefit to skeletal muscle. So before the exercise before the resistance training has, like, this performance enhancing effect and, also has a recovery effect that you recover faster from the exercise. Another 2,015 systemic review with meta analysis, took about 12 of randomized controlled trials and, that did before exercise photobiomodulation with red and infrared light. And 10 of those randomized controlled trials reported significant improvement for the main outcome, such as just the performance. So as you can see, there are many studies, dozens of, randomized controlled trials, and, a few meta analysis have concluded that, yes, before exercise, red light therapy and photobiomodulation between the 650 to 830 nanometers between there has a ergogenic effect on the muscles. It improves performance, specifically muscle strength. And, afterwards, it also has post workout, it also has a recovery effect. So it speeds up recovery and, prevents the kind of or lowers the accumulation of lactate and creating kinase that happens with exercise and that hinders performance and, pretty much makes you recover for longer. So based on the studies, this is the most optimal way to do photobiomodulation for exercise performance. So you wanna do at least forty minutes before the workout and before the exercise. So it can cause it's called a preconditioning hormesis that you're giving your body the small hormetic effect, and your body is actually more resilient against the following, hormesis. So, you do the small hormetic effect from the red eye therapy at least forty minutes up to six hours before the workout. And, then your body is already capable of handling the exercise better, and it's all already, performing better during the exercise as well. And the duration is generally quite short. Like, only, like, three to ten minutes is enough. Then after the exercise, you wanna do, like, within ten to sixty minutes is to also do, like, a short follow-up with the regular therapy, like, three to five minutes as to, pretty much also boost the recovery and reduce the inflammation and reduce the lactate that, accumulates doing there with exercise. I personally have been using regular therapy for, you know, over four years by now. And recently, over the last year and a half, I've implemented the same protocol of doing it before, specifically. And, yeah, I do notice that, you get a better pump for sure at the gym, because of this nitric oxide that is increased from the regular therapy, and you work out better from that. And overall, over the past four years, I do also notice that, yeah, the recovery is quite amazing from the regular therapy with the regular therapy. And, yeah, your hormone levels are generally better and your sleep is better as well. So overall, I do recommend that, yeah, if you do have the access and you have the ability to use radar therapy for your exercise performance, then, yeah, this is the way to do it. And, yeah, especially for high level athletes, they will probably notice the biggest, results from this. And the brand with the specific wavelengths of red light therapy that, are beneficial for these purposes is by Boncharge. And, yeah, you can head over to boncharge.com forward slash and use the code for 15% discount of all the red light therapy products. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is SIEM. Stay optimized, stay empowered.