Welcome back to the channel. My name is Ceb Lund. And in today's video, we talk about the number one antiaging hormone in my opinion. Make sure to click like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. What is common among all these hallmarks of aging is the decrease in NAD, which is one of these coenzyme energy energy enzyme that's involved with many processes inside the body. But NAD is not the hormone, and it's not the hormone that we're gonna talk about in this video. So you have to kinda stick around for a little bit longer before I unravel what this hormone is. But, yeah, low NAD is what is causing the, hallmarks of aging or promotes it, and there's a reason why your NAD also decreased. So NAD itself is being recycled on a daily basis all the time. The widely produces it from different precursors, but the main comes from this salvage pathway that is governed by the NAPT enzyme. So NAD is being recycled all the time, and this NAPT enzyme itself is dependent off the circadian rhythms. So you need to be aligned with the circadian rhythms in order for the salvage pathway to work and in order to recycle NAD continuously every day. The problem is that when you and you get older, the, circadian hormones themselves become more dampened, and you don't produce that many of these, circadian hormones, like cortisol and melatonin. So they become more flat. They flatten out, and that is one part of the reason why you start to see this lack of NAD, lack of vitality, lack of repair processes. And melatonin, I unraveled it. So melatonin is the number one antiaging hormone in my opinion because, you know, it's part of the circadian rhythm, the main circadian rhythm regulation. It's part of many other things as well in the body. Like, it is a master or a powerful antioxidant. It, produces, different kinds of, you know, let's say, processes or regulates these, like, autophagy apoptosis, detoxification, growth hormone release, and many things are connected to the natural production of melatonin. But as you saw, the, as you get older, you produce less melatonin, which is, you know, problematic for both the circadian rhythm alignment as well as, sleep quality and all the other antiaging processes that occur. Sucks. Cortisol and melatonin are the main circadian hormones that regulate wakefulness and other other, processes. So cortisol rises in the morning, stays low, and, melatonin drops low in in the daytime, it'll produce much melatonin at all. And then it rises up high during sleep together with the or it rises and it starts to conduct all these, antiaging processes. Like, you just recover or repair your body, detoxify the brain, go through autophagy, start to recycle NAD. All of those things happen in this critical time period in your sleep, mostly deep sleep, around, like, 11PM up to, like, 1AM, etcetera, when your melatonin production production peaks. But the problem is that, you know, if you're not producing melatonin, then you're not gonna experience those things as well. And we also see that disrupting the circadian rhythms is linked to aging and, comorbidities, diabetes, obesity, neurodegeneration, Alzheimer's, metabolic syndrome, and, even cancer. Those things are linked to circadian disruption. So you wanna be aligned with the circadian rhythm so that you could produce this melatonin and maintain this, optimal, you know, let's say, swing and, big swing and big, like, variation in the circadian hormones. A lot of cortisol in the morning and a lot of melatonin in your sleep. The problem is that, you know, there's many things that inhibit melatonin. And, in the modern world, the biggest inhibition of melatonin comes from artificial light, like the screen, like this light, like the phone, like, yeah, car rides, traffic lights, all those things inhibit melatonin because of the blue light and green light spectrum. So everything between, like, 400 to 550 nanometers is what inhibits melatonin, and you inhibit melatonin up to, like, 90%, with that light. Whereas things, red light and amber lights, 600 to 700, those don't inhibit melatonin. And, that's kind of the problem. So the solution to that is, obviously, you can turn off the lights, but, you know, you don't really want to do that. Most of the time, you want to, you know, check your smartphone or whatever. Look at the look at the computer. In the modern world, we also have biocking technologies that you can use equipment. So my favorite ones, the top ones are blue booking glasses to filter out the blue light because most of the, blue light that regulates circadian rhythms and melatonin goes through the eyes. So you wanna block the blue light with these blue blocking glasses that filter out the specific wavelengths, the green and blue light. And you can also use red light bulbs, which are amazing. I love them. I have them in my bedroom. And, this office actually also has, these things. And, yeah. You just turn them on before bed, like, thirty minutes, an hour before bed. And you avoid all this, stimulating and, melatonin suppressing blue light that you have. And the key is to also have, like, things that are flicker free. So the flickering that most LED lights have, that is also inhibiting melatonin. So we wanna have flicker free red light bulbs that actually have the specific, nanometers. Like the specific nanometers will be, you know, 600, 700 nanometer range, not just regular LEDs. If it looks like red, then it may not have the actual nanometers. It can just look red, but it still comes with some blue light in there or at least it flickers. And, yeah, like Blue Blocks is the brand that I think is the best one in this field and circadian rhythms and sleep optimization. They have now actually rebranded themselves as Boncharge. And, yeah, that's their new branding. The company is the same. If the people are the same, there's different new name, and they just, you know, include a lot more of these other wellness products that you can look out for in the future. And, yeah, these are the number one, basically, products for this and the highest quality. They work. They've been tested. And the ones that I use personally as well. So you can head over to bondcharge.com/seamlund, and you can use the code seam to get a 15% discount. Alright. That's it for this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is SIEM. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.