Obviously there's many things in the world that make us age faster like not sleeping enough, being stressed out, being sedentary, overeating, etcetera. But there are a few things that slow down this process and make you age slower. So in this video I'm gonna talk about the number one thing that slows down aging. Do it. Alright. So the number one thing that slows down aging is calorie restriction. And, this is by far, you know, the pretty much the only thing that we have shown and proven to, extend lifespan in other animals virtually in all species and to slow down the eating process. Obviously, if you are eating less calories then you will, you know, prevent obesity and you're not gonna gain that much weight, which will already have a positive effect on your longevity and increasing your health span. At the same time, calorie restriction is also a hermetic stressor that, causes a positive stress to the body and activates these different longevity pathways that have these beneficial effects in extending lifespan. There's also many studies, mechanistic and actual experimental studies in, animals as well as humans that, you know, shows that calorie restriction is beneficial for longevity. And in animals, at least, it extends lifespan quite a lot. And in humans, the calorie restriction, there's no, like, you know, long term experimental studies that show that, But there are, yeah, you know, mechanistic studies and short term studies that do find that it has some positive effects. So calorie restriction does many beneficial things to your body. And, one of the biggest things is that it lowers inflammation, which, you know, obviously, inflammaging is a term that describes excess inflammation and chronic inflammation causing different kinds of, age related diseases like diabetes and cancer and Alzheimer's and cardiovascular disease, those things. Calor restriction is a very powerful, let's say, inhibitor of inflammation and reducer of inflammation. And, this also has a positive effect on maintaining NAD levels and improving sleep and improving immunity. All those things are quite crucial for anti aging purposes. Calorie restriction also reduces insulin and IGF-one signaling, which is kind of the main, actually, longevity pathway that many people, you know, don't really talk about because insulin and IGF-one, yeah, it people talk about mTOR but what stimulates mTOR the most is actually insulin IJF one. And so carbohydrates, I guess carbohydrates as well as proteins both stimulate this and turn on the mTOR pathway which in excess, you know, means associated with some accelerated aging. Blocking the mTOR pathway also increases the expression of these other longevity pathways, the stress resilience pathways, and, let's say, DNA repair pathways, DNA repair proteins, as well as, increasing autophagy, autophagy proteins. Foxoproteins are quite, related to longevity and, different kinds of, you know, antiaging defense systems get turned on, in response to calorie restriction and the stress that you, experience from that. Excess mTOR actually can cause immunosenescence, so whereas the, expression of calorie or autophagy through calorie restriction can actually preserve that. Calorie restriction is similar to, like, exercise that it increases this, enzyme called AMPK, which helps to, promote mitochondrial biogenesis and, essentially helps with, yeah, fat burning, ketosis, and stress resilience. So these are the mechanistic reasons why calorie restriction has a positive effect on longevity. The it comes down to just reduction in inflammation, reduction in metabolic disorders, increase in these antioxidant defenses, increase in cell self, and cell recycling, and, yeah, just increase of DNA repair. On the other hand, color restriction obviously also helps you to prevent obesity, which, I do think that is one of the biggest contributors to accelerated aging. And, yeah, if you are, let's say, with a BMI above thirty or thirty five even, then, you do cut down multiple years, even decades of your life. Whereas being in mild calorie restriction helps you to lose weight, it helps you to prevent obesity, and you have better biomarkers, and into doing it, just, you know, healthier overall. You've got fat. Now the thing with calorie restriction is that, you know, it's still very hard to pull off that, food is tempting, and it's hard to under eat calories in a world where food is everywhere, especially if it's hyperpalatable at the same time. So it does require, you know, significantly more self discipline and self control than, like, exercising. Exercise is, relatively simple compared to calorie restriction, at least long term calorie restriction. That's why you shouldn't look at the calorie restriction like in isolation. You have to look at it in the context of, entire lifestyle. So, you know, calorie restriction is, describes being in a negative energy balance, and you can achieve that in negative energy balance, yes, by eating less food, less calories, but also moving more and exercising more, which increases your calorie expenditure. So overall, what matters most is the, you know, that you are in a somewhat of a, like, a calorie deficit and you're not overeating calories. So kind of the best go to rule right now to follow is that, yeah, just don't over eat calories, don't get fat, don't get a BMI above thirty, which is, associated with increased mortality and associated with these metabolic disorders. Stay with a BMI between twenty and thirty, somewhere between there. Don't overeat too many calories, exercise regularly, eat whole foods, eat healthy foods with plenty of nutrients. And doing some form of time restricted eating can also help with, basically mimicking some aspects of calorie restriction because both exercise and time restricted eating stimulate the same pathways as calorie restriction does, and it mimics those effects. Alright. That's it for this video. If you want to learn more about this, then check out my intermittent fasting video course. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.