Welcome to the Sim Lons Podcast. I'm your host Sim Lons, and today I'm playing you a presentation I gave about the benefits of red light therapy. This episode is brought to you by Blue Blocks, my favorite light and sleep optimization companies. Artificial light at night exposure is associated with diabetes, obesity, heart disease, cancer, and Alzheimer's. Blue Blocks provides the highest quality blue blocking glasses that filter out the specific wavelengths that have been shown to suppress melatonin in studies. Melatonin is more than the sleep hormone. It's also vital for longevity, antiaging, and immunity. Artificial light exposure suppresses melatonin up to 99% and makes your brain think that it's daytime before bed. That's why I love using blue blocks to guarantee my body is making high amounts of melatonin prior to sleep. They also have daytime lenses that you can use to reduce digital eye strain and retinal damage when working in front of a computer all day. You can get a sweet 15% discount off all the Blue Blocks glasses, red light light bulbs, red light devices and sleep masks if you head over to blueblocks.com/seamlund and use the code seam 15. That's blublox.com/seamlund and the code is seam 15, s I I m 15. So yeah, like the topic or the title of the presentation is gonna be about photobiomodulation, which, sounds like more complex term but it describes just like light therapy with different kinds of lasers or LEDs, and, red light therapy is a part of that. So I will, yeah, I will I will cover, like, the idea of, red light therapy, etcetera. But I will also talk a little bit about, blue light and just other, like, wavelengths or what effect do they may have on the human body. So, a little bit about myself as well. Name is Sim Lund. I'm in Estonia. I'm I've written several books about just health and biohacking. I'm a public speaker, consultant. I have a degree in anthropology. And, what I'm most known for is, like, biohacking or, like, health optimization. And that's what my topic or my content is also, about mostly. So these are some of the these are the main books that I've written. Diminutive Fix, I've coauthored with doctor James, Daniel Antonio. I've written metabolic pathology and Stronger by Surf and myself. The Mineral Frick Fix is also with doctor James. And the latest book, we coauthored the three of us with doctor James and Tristan Kennedy, who is also the nutritionist of Conor McGregor. And, the foreword of that book is by Ben Greenfield, who's like a pretty renowned biohacker himself as well. So what is bio photobiomodulation? Basically, it's like this very broad concept or, field that includes many things related to, like, light therapy. And, that can be these low level low level laser therapies, these LED therapies, as well as using different kinds of like these red light red light and infrared light panels and devices that emit these red lights, and they have different effects on the human body. But this includes all of these under the umbrella term of photobiomodulation. And this field itself of light therapy was kind of invented or pioneered by this Danish physician, Niels Finsen, and who actually got like a Nobel Prize in nineteen o three as well for his light therapy work. And he was like a pioneer in this field, one of the first people who use it. And, yeah, back then he was using also like different kinds of light wavelengths and bright light exposures and, yeah, lasers as well as some red lights to help people. At his time, there was like a lot of this, you know, tuberculosis and lupus and different kinds of skin conditions, smallpox and those kind of things. And he actually successfully used the red light to treat, like, the smallpox lesions. So these are one of the before and after pictures, which are, yeah, quite, like, intimidating, but still, like, pretty remark remarkable transformations from the use of red light therapy for specifically the skin, and he definitely got like a Nobel Prize for that. And there's new new studies, as well as showing that, you know, blue and red light, both therapies, those can have positive effects on acne, for example, so helping with skin health in different ways. So, like, blue light, we'll talk about later, has, like, more antimicrobial effects, whereas, like, red light has anti inflammatory effects. So, So like the combination of them can be quite useful for skin conditions and skin infections. So what is light? When we think about light or we see light, then it's just something that we see and something that brights up, let's say, the room or outside the daytime. But light itself is, you know, made of many parts and different components. So, this is the solar spectrum that, describes the wavelengths of light that you get from, the sun. And, you know, you can see it's the u UV light that has different, UVC, UV, UVA. And then there's the visible light spectrum. This is the visible light that we see actually. And this includes all the colors of the rainbow. So violet, blue, green, yellow, orange, amber, red, and, eventually, it turns into infrared. Right? So that's what all the lights that you get from the sun. And all of these different wavelengths have different effects on the human body. So, like, you know, everyone knows infrared sonars, those have some health benefits and but just the visible side of looking at the light or the light stimulating your body's, let's say clock systems as well as just penetrating the skin for example, those have effects on the body depending on the wavelength depending on the wavelength between the nanometers of 400 up until 700 somewhere there is the visible light that is most commonly used in light therapy sessions. And as you can see, like, the violet is somewhere between 445, blue 450 to 500, and the six the red light is like six hundred and twenty and seven hundred. So every all these have their own unique, like, spectrum or, let's say, signature. So this is a bit brief, like, summary or a sketch about the effects of light on the body. So, like, blue light, I said, has antibacterial effects, and blue light therapy is also used, quite, commonly for depression and mood disorders. So low mood, low energy, seasonal affective disorder is quite easily solved with just bright light exposure to blue light. And the blue light has an important role in, like, starting the daily circadian rhythm. So in the morning, you're supposed to wake up and get exposed to some blue light, which you naturally get from the sunlight. And that will just signal the circadian clocks inside the brain and the body that, you know, it's daytime and, start rolling and get things on the run, and this increases your energy levels. Artificially, you would you know, if there's no sun, then you would get it from some sort of, most commonly just technology. You get that from blue light from that as well. But there's some specific like these face lamps, sad lamps or winter lamps or whatever. Those kind of things are also quite common. Then there is a green light. A green light, the biggest effect it has is on, let's say, migraines and pain response. So it helps to kinda relieve migraines, reduce pain, improves mood mood and also skin pigmentation to a certain extent. Then amber light reduces skin redness, helps sensitive skin and boosts red blood cell production. And lastly, red light is the anti inflammatory light that reduces inflammation, helps with acne, helps with wrinkles, and also boosts melatonin, which is the body's like sleep hormone. And, naturally, you would get the amber light and red light when the sun is setting. And, yeah, like the basically, the sunset gives you this signal to the brain that it's about to become night time and you should you know prepare for sleep. That's how the natural cycle works. So what is specifically the effects of red light? Red light or a near infrared, that stays between six thirty to 900 nanometers, that has a quite an interesting effect on the body because of, causing like a small amount of this oxidative stress to the system. So, the red light, it, once it basically reaches the mitochondria or penetrates the body, then, it produces the cytochrome c oxidase, which is a molecule, mostly you mostly in response to this oxidative stress a little bit. And this causes, reactive oxygen species or increases reactive oxygen species that are free radicals. And, in small amounts, these free radicals actually have, like, a health benefit on the body similar to, like, exercise. So exercise also increases these reactive oxygen species and, other, let's say, beneficial stressors like the sauna or, yeah, like hypoxia, those kind of things. Low oxygen states, they can cause this beneficial effect on the body, which hormesis describes this. Yeah. Like, what doesn't kill me makes me stronger almost. That the body will end up becoming better as a result of that. Then cytochrome c oxidase also increases ATP or adenosine triphosphate, which is the energy, molecule. And, this ATP is then used for energy production, collagen synthesis, and tissue regeneration. And, the tissue regeneration also comes from improved the blood flow that is mediated through increased nitric oxide. So all these things are the reasons why red light has, let's say, benefits on the skin or benefits on, just overall inflammation levels and healing of the body. The red light is more almost like a healing side. Whereas, like, blue light is very stimulating. It can be beneficial at certain times of the day and in certain amounts. But an excess blue light obviously can also be harmful, but, you know, the same applies to red light. It's just generally the red light because it kinda links together with the natural day and night cycles to, like, end of the day and nighttime, then that would facilitate more recovery and repair because the body repairs itself mostly when it's, nighttime. So it's not it's not supposed to, like, hunt or chase animals. It's supposed to, like, rest and rejuvenate. So, as you can see then, the red light also penetrate penetrates the skin much more than other wavelengths of light. So, even so that the near infrared or deep near infrared go quite deep into the hypodermia hypothermis. And, the red light also reaches quite deep, whereas violet and blue light stays quite near the surface. So, yeah, the red light can almost be, beneficial for, you know, cellulite in some sense because of that. And the infrared, will actually be beneficial for the joints and tendons and, bones because it goes so deep into the system, into the body. It can reach those locations as well, whereas blue light and green light, for example, aren't able to do that. So what are some of the, researched benefits of red light? So I'll just mention a few of them or the main main effects, has been used to help arthritis, osteoarthritis, knee arthritis, those kind of things. It's not going to completely, you know, cure it, but it does alleviate the pain and, alleviates the symptoms of, these joint disorders by reducing inflammation and helping to direct more blood into those regions. Red light also stimulates collagen production that helps with, cartilage rejuvenation and, like, tendonitis or those those kind of, injuries. For example, red light promotes blood flow. And with better blood flow, you basically have a greater supply of nutrients into different kinds of regions of the body, which will then facilitate faster recovery both from injuries as well as faster recovery from exercise sessions. And this blood flow also helps with muscle growth and developing new capillaries. Red light lowers inflammation and helps to alleviate stress. So basically it can be beneficial for like thyroid disorders or any any the arthritis, for example, is also caused by, you know, a lot of information. So the red light, you know, helps to lower that and, can be beneficial for that. It speeds up wound healing, so it stimulates energy production and lowers inflammation, which then allows the body to heal itself faster plus with a greater blood flow to the region. That's also the reason why it helps with wound healing. Collagen synthesis, and reduces wrinkles. So as you can see, it's not like, you know, crazy results, but it's still a bit significant or at least you can some noticeable difference you can see from using the red light. It helps with the low thyroid or hypothyroidism by reducing inflammation and improving energy production, improves athletic performance quite well. Just athletes who use this, any kind of photobiomodulation, they have faster recovery times, but also just greater speed and strength and muscle growth even in some cases where they use it chronically before exercises. So where do you get the red light? Like I said, naturally, you get it from the sunset. You get it some red light during the daytime as well from the, let's say, morning sun, but the amount of it is much smaller compared to the evening. So in the evening, you get the whole lot more red light compared to the morning. In the morning, you get predominantly blue light. But even then, I mean, the amount of red light that you let's say therapeutic red light, it's very hard to get that from solely this, like candlelight or sunlight. Of course, they help still with the circadian rhythm. They can help you to make you fall asleep. They can help you to relax maybe, but they're not enough to, let's say, help with arthritis or help with exercise recovery or those kind of things. For that, you would need some major, let's say, therapeutic effects you would get only from this like low level laser therapy or these, red light panels that are basically the difference is that you don't just you're sitting in front of the panel and it's hue this much bigger dose. You get a much more concentrated source and you the therapeutic the time of that will also be much smaller. You'd like you would need to sit in front of the panel for only like ten to fifteen minutes compared to, you know, the sunset. Then for that you would sit have to sit there for, you know, maybe ten hours or something. And, yeah, like I said, there's these panels but also like the infrared sonars are a form of photobiomodulation. A lot of the infrared sonars have these some lights in them that also have these effects. So I'll just briefly differentiate between infrared sonars and regular dry heat sonars what's the difference. The biggest difference is that the traditional sauna heats up the room basically and then your body temperature will also rise because of sitting in a hotter room. Whereas the infrared sauna, the infrared wavelengths directly penetrate your body and then your body heats up from the inside out. So it's kind of a different way of heating up. You still will get the same health benefits like improved cardiovascular health, better blood flow. You're gonna excrete the toxins through sweat. You're gonna kill off some pathogens and infections. So you're gonna have a stronger immune system. Those things are similar. But, yeah, the way you get there is different. And the the infrared sauna will still have this unique effect of the penetration of joints so that the light will have a better effect on, like, arthritis and those kind of things because of being able to stimulate this, ATP and collagen synthesis inside the joints, whereas with the heat stove, it's not that possible. And the main difference between them besides that is just the temperature. So with the dry head sauna, you can heat it up to a much higher temperature, whereas the infrared sauna stays around 50 to 60 degrees Celsius. So it's a bit, but you still feel quite hot because the infrared, wavelength still heat up your body quite intensely. And the infrared or near infrared wavelengths have also been found to have health benefits in studies, so besides arthritis and inflammation in the joints. It also stimulates neurogenesis and synaptogenesis, which basically means the growth of new neurons and synapses, which then just, you know, keeps your brain healthier, prevents neurodegeneration, helps to postpone or, prevent Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease by just keeping the brain healthier and, more much well supplied with, neurons and connections. Because the the, near infrared light is still also able to, you know, reach the brain if it, if you, let's say, shoot some near infrared light into the head. In terms of exercise, as I mentioned, then, there's evidence to show that, athletes who use the photobiomodulation before and after exercise, then they build more muscle and strength. And the formula for that that we discussed in our book, A Win, was that or the studies that we discussed in the book, show that it has to be something around like an hour or something like that. Up to six hours before the exercise, you do thirty ten three to ten minutes of, this red light. Then you exercise, and then you wait ten to sixteen minutes, again after exercise, and then you do, again, the red light. So that is kind of the most optimal formula for at least athletic performance when it comes to, the photobiomodulation. But, you know, if you're doing it for the health reasons, then it doesn't really matter when you do it. And in total, yeah, like, the total amount of time is also somewhere between, you know, fifteen minutes or twenty minutes a day. You don't need more than that. And, the red light, as well as an area for red light, is is a form of hormesis. So, it's a describes a beneficial stressor. So it causes this small amount of oxidative stress and reactive oxygen species to the body, but the body kind of supercompensates or hyper responds to it by becoming stronger and turning on all these different beneficial processes inside the body. So with red light, it also like the dose matters. So, too much can be harmful, too much red light, too much infrared light, too much sunlight is gonna be harmful. Not enough can also be not really beneficial because of, at least from a circadian side, you want to get some red light naturally to help with sleep and those kind of things. But, yeah, generally, kind of the it's the sweet spot is somewhere in the middle so that you get exposed to some amount of this, benefit of your stress and, that's going to make your body stronger actually than it would be otherwise. I'll talk a little bit more about light generally. So light is more than just, you know, something that you see or detect. It's actually a form of like nutrition or like epigenetics because of the way it regulates all these different processes inside the body. So light that goes into your eyes reaches the brain and regulates the circadian master clock which is called the suprachiasmatic nucleus. And this, master clock is, controlling all these different minor smaller clocks spread throughout the entire body. Like every organ has a circadian clock, every cell has a circadian clock, and they're all communicating together with the master clock inside the brain. And these circadian rhythms, they regulate DNA repair, they regulate autophagy, which describes the elimination of, like, old cellular debris and material. It regulates detoxification, it regulates digestion, regulates your hormones, regulates insulin sensitivity, fat burning, methylation, and so as NAD plus production. And NAD plus is more more linked to like longevity and antiaging. So all of it can be, tied back to some aspects of light, of how light, basically, in a circadian manner controls these processes at different times of the day. And the biggest, most major circadian rhythm is the melatonin and cortisol cycle. So, cortisol, the stress hormone or alertness boosting hormone, and melatonin, the sleep hormone, as well as like a repair hormone. And, naturally, you start to produce cortisol in the morning. It starts to rise at 5AM, peaks at 9AM, then drops down, stays low all the way until the evening, stays low in the, night as well when you're sleeping and then starts rising again in the morning. Melatonin stays low all morning and daytime when it's, the sunlight and starts rising then, a few hours before bed. 9PM peaks at twelve at midnight, stays elevated still until dawn and then, decreases. So these are kind of these these are this is the way your body is evolutionarily supposed to function, that you're supposed to have this cortisol and, rush your energy in the morning to wake up And it's supposed to kind of keep you energized throughout the entire day as well. Whereas at night when you're supposed to sleep, that's where the body is producing melatonin, the, sleep hormone to help you fall asleep. But it also regulates all these different repair processes like pathology, NAD, growth hormone, apoptosis and those sort of things to kind of keep you more repaired and youthful. And, from a light side, then the cycle looks like this that in the morning you get, like, more blue light and green light and lit much less red light as well as at noontime. In the evening, it shifts. You get very little blue light and a lot of red light. And at night, you know, ideally, you would want to sleep at pitch black darkness. But the, you know, the only naturally naturally, light exposure that you would get at night would be like candlelight or by a campfire, because there there's no like artificial light sources in the jungle or in the nature, at least not in the past there weren't. And, you know, charging up with sunlight is also, like, quite important for overall health. So like I said, like, the blue light boosts wakefulness and alertness, as well as the morning sunlight will do that in terms of kick starting the circadian clock system and, just making sure that these, clocks are running in sync, with the, day and night cycles of the environment. Because if they are in sync, then your body's gonna stay healthy, your body's gonna produce a lot of NAD and a lot of energy. Whereas if those clocks are out of sync, basically, you do a night shift or, you have jet lag and those kind of things, you don't get a natural sunlight, then, those clocks are out of sync and, you're gonna be experiencing a lot of health, let's say, issues eventually because night shift, for example, is considered like a carcinogen. So, yeah, it's quite bad to be out of sync with the circadian rhythms. And, yeah, if you don't have, actual sunlight or it's cloudy, like here in Estonia, it's pretty much cloudy all all the time, at least in the winter, then, using these kind of bright bright face lamps are quite a game changer for just making sure that the circadian clock system is still running optimally. And, the but the problem is still that, you know, the artificial light sources, they can be still damaging to your, let's say, eyes or overall skin quality because of the amount of blue light that you get. So they come quite imbalanced in a sense that, the natural sunlight is quite balanced. You get a decent amount of blue and green, but also a lot of red light. But the LED lights for example they can be just you know just blue light. Especially at this cheap office lights they can be just blue light and no red light. And this kind of prevents the anti inflammatory effects of red light from repairing some of the oxidation that you get from the blue light. So just excess blue light can damage your eyes, can cause myopia and can cause like skin issues and accelerate aging in other ways. So you do want to get you know still some of the more balanced spectrum of light, not just excess blue light. And blue light also at the wrong time can be quite damaging to your sleep. So blue light is the biggest suppressor of melatonin, the sleep hormone. So, smartphones, LED lamps, computer screens, television, those things will suppress your melatonin production and then can you know, basically make you sleep worse or, make you not fall asleep. And, obviously that's gonna be bad for their recovery because you're not gonna produce melatonin and, this will also be damaging to your aging if you don't make enough melatonin and you're not sleep, well. Whereas more like halogen lumps, amber lights, they produce they suppress much less melatonin. And, natural red light sources like candlelight, campfire, bonfire, those don't suppress melatonin almost at all. So the key should be to get exposed to blue light in the morning but not get exposed to it before bed. So that's why Maura is also wearing these blue looking glasses that, basically filter out the blue light and prevent your body from not producing melatonin. So with these glasses, you will still be able to look at the computer screen and still produce melatonin because the blue light doesn't get through. So the only this only the eyes matter most, with the zuclidean, let's say, melatonin production, that the up to, like, 95% of the signaling happens through the eyes. So you just need to protect the eyes. And it's not gonna matter through the skin that much. And, yeah, that's it from my end. This was my presentation and, yeah, I'm gonna open up the chat for some questions.