Hey. Welcome back to the channel. My name is Seeb Lund. I'm Inka. And, today, we're gonna track our blood glucose levels for the entire day using the, CGM by VeriStable. And, yeah, I just wanna look at how different foods, different supplements, different beverages affect our blood sugar levels. Make sure you click a like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. So it's, 07:30 right now. I just woke up maybe, like, an hour and a half ago or something. When I woke up, my blood sugar was around 89, 87, 88, 90. And I took a cold shower, it went to a 105. And now it's a 100 that I just, measured. And what about you, K? When I woke up, it was, 79 or 80. And then but one day, I noticed that these things spike my blood sugar, blood glucose. So women's Health vitamin gummi bears. Yeah. Women's hair vitamins, and they have glucose syrup, sugar, and maltodextrin. This I took one around 06:30, and this is what happened. So it went to one hundred and seven at the highest. And now it's lowering. Now it's now it's lowering. Yeah. So check your supplements. Yes. But now we are we're just gonna drink a little bit of coffee with some, milk. It's like a cappuccino, basically. I put some alopectin as well and glycine and cinnamon One hour later. So it's been about one hour, and, we're gonna do the measurements. 107. So did rise a little bit. 92. I think the coffee actually helped to stabilize the response from the candy, mate. Well, you walked a bit as well. Yes. I didn't work that. Yeah. I mean, naturally, your blood sugar should rise in the morning a little bit after you wake up. The Cortisol rise in the morning. So Yesterday Quick test, blood sugar response to apple. Is it true that one apple a day is good for your blood sugar? We will see it in a second. Oh, 6.5. So it peaked a bit and dropped. So it did rise from the apple. 7.3. It went higher than I expected, though. Yeah. So I'm good with it. So apple is low GI, basically. Low glycemic index. But the fructose is still enough to raise the mushroom. Yes. And a flashback. So when we look at that, the, let's say, post morning coffee, then you can see it stays pretty stable throughout the entire first half of the day. Like, 90, a 100, somewhere between there, 97, 92, and it actually started to drop until lunch. And, I actually had, like, another coffee around twelve or something. And from there, it was similar, and, it actually dropped a little bit. So I went to eighty, eighty three. This is where I had been actually fasting for a long much longer time, and it stayed low until the dinner time. My lunch was pretty pretty normal, like some protein, prawns, chickpeas, salad, and, went in a predictable way, sort of higher. Usually, it's a bit lower or a bit more stable. It doesn't really do that peak, but it goes a bit more stable. Then stays pretty stable until the dinner, which is somewhere here. And, actually, here, after the lunch, I went for a a twenty minute jog, like a short jog. Mhmm. So After dinner. Yeah. So it was pretty efficient in bringing the glucose back down. For me, I started eating dinner. My my glucose was a 100, and it, spiked to, like, a 120. We did have, like, a lower carb main course and then, like, some, granola homemade granola that you made, very tasty, but, like, still, like, a bit higher carb. It actually had trehalose, which is yeah. It's a hearty sugar. And stevia. Yeah. Vanilla, but it also had cinnamon and stuff too. Yeah. It was a very lower. Very nice. Not one didn't spike at all, and it went down a 126 in max. And it's low right now. So that's very healthy or very kind of new normal response in that sense. Alright? So, there you have it. This was just one single day of tracking our blood sugar with the CGM. I think it's I think we didn't have, like, any well, at least you had, like, one of the insights that this, one supplement spikes your glucose. And I know some other supplements as well that have, like, some sugar do it. So, but for me, it was quite predictable. Mhmm. And even sweeteners. Yeah. In supplements, they actually add that stuff to many things. So definitely check your supplements. Yeah. I mean I mean, like, you know, these things don't they have, like, two calories or something, but it still spike the blood sugar, which is very interesting. And remember, like, last time we did it, like, the oat milk and the coffee also spiked very high. And the but the amount of the oat milk is, like, you know, how much is it? Like, one tablespoon or something, a bit more. Mhmm. So, yeah, it's, it's very interesting of how even, like, small amounts can affect your blood sugar quite substantially. Yeah. If the glycemic index of the sugar is very high. Yeah. But on that, where can people find you on social media? I'm at Inka Immanen in Instagram, and my webpage is inkaimmanen.co. And I'm Simland. Thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click like and subscribe. Stay tuned for the next video. Stay empowered.