So is this the One Ring? One ring to rule them all. Hey. My name is Seeb Lund, and, welcome back to the channel. We're gonna take a look at the Oura Ring, the three point o, the newest version. I've been using the Oura ring for, you know, the different ones since the first generation for, yeah, five years. So this video I'm gonna make a review about, you know, how does it work and what's my opinions about it. Do it. So if you're not aware, then the Oura Ring, it's this, very handy and convenient ring that tracks your sleep and tracks your readiness and tracks your activity, measures your heart rate, your time spent in deep sleep, REM sleep, light sleep, and how many times you wake up during the daytime, etcetera. It also tracks your steps. It tracks your HRV. And, yeah, generally is like, I think one of the most, you know, smallest, fitness trackers or health trackers that is out there. It's definitely, you know, doesn't look like any different from an actual ring. So this is my wedding ring, and this is the Oura ring. So they're actually quite similar, but but it's a bit, yeah, a bit bigger. Of course, the first generation ring was a lot bigger than this one, but, yeah, regardless, these are comparisons of the second generation rings. So these two are the second generation, and this one is the third one. So there is no, like, look difference, no visual difference between the second and the third generation. The only difference between them is that the third generation ring has more sensors, it measures more things, and, yeah, so to be more accurate and gives you more data in terms of, yeah, how it functions. So right now I'm in the Oura Ring app and, basically, you have uploaded my data here. I'm checking my tonight's scores. So my readiness is 78, good. Sleep, 74, could be a bit a bit better. So I've slept six hours and forty two minutes. My resting heart rate is 40 beats per minute, which is very good. HRV heart rate variability, 92, or this average of HRV is 92 for this week. And, yeah, gives you, like, overview of your current stats. Let's take a look at the readiness. So resting heart rate 40, HRV at night 103, respiratory rate 12.8 per minute, body temperature minus 0.2 Celsius, body temperature optimal, sleep, pay attention, sleep bands, pay attention. I didn't sleep that long today because, yeah, I had, like, a long day yesterday. But, regardless, you can see different kinds of, you know, measurements that you've, accumulated over the course of the night. So let's take a look at sleep. Total sleep time, six hours forty two minutes. Time in bed, eight hours. So, you know, obviously this is because I'm, sleeping next to my wife and, in the morning we don't wake up immediately. Efficiency, 83%. So very still very efficient sleep, compared to the total time. Restfulness, good. REM sleep, one hour three minutes. Deep sleep, two hours fifty two minutes. So a lot 43% of it has been, deep sleep that I got latency three minutes. So it took me three minutes to fall asleep. Average blood oxygen, 98%, which is a new feature of the Gen three. So measures your SPO two, which is, yeah, very beneficial actually. I'm noticing if you get, any infection or illness, if you get some sickness, then your, SPO two will also drop and you have a higher respiration and a higher heart rate and lower HRV. But, yeah, I'm not sick at the moment and everything is optimal. My respiration or breathing rate is optimal. HRV is high, super high, And, heart rate is also high. Today, I haven't like moved that much yet. It's only twelve a 12PM here. So, yeah, only 4,000 steps today and activity, daily movement, etcetera. Yesterday, I had more activity. So, I actually stepped 15,000 steps yesterday, which is, very good. You can also see trends in the app. So it looks at specific trends of different metrics. If you go back in time, you can see all these charts looking at your average measurements of the specific you know, biometric. And yeah, as you can see, my HR is always been pretty high. REM sleep, I actually get quite little REM sleep for some reason. And the reason I think that is some of my deep sleep probably is categorized as REM sleep. And that's because of yeah. Maybe it's not, you know, a 100% accurate still. There's maybe some shortcomings that may come but, it's also because I wake up super early. Like, I wake up usually yell around six or even before that and five five or 6AM. And that's the reason or that's part of the time where you get a lot of the REM sleep earlier in the morning. So I wake up in early and that's why I may not get that much REM sleep. Disappointed. So overall, what do I think about the Oura Ring? You know, like I said, I've been using it for five years, the different, generations, and, I've always loved it. I think, you know, because it's a ring, it's not some sort of a band around your wrist or some other, like, bulky device. It's very convenient. It's very easy to use. It's stylish. I mean, it's a cool ring, and it's small. So that's what I like. It's also accurate. I do think that, the results that I get, reflect my own subjective feeling of, you know, how do I feel actually as well. But, yeah, of course, there are maybe a few, let's say, maybe five or 10% is inaccurate. So most of it is, I think, yes, still very accurate. But there is, of course, with technologies, maybe like a five or 10% mismatch that may occur. Now with the third generation ring, there has been a lot of controversy. People have been super mad at Oura for, you know first of all, they released a new ring, which, you know, still costs, some money. And the price of the Oura ring is, you know, it's not cheap. It's, €367. Looking at this website, you may get it a bit cheaper even in some places, or but, yeah, generally, it's not like a cheap toy. It's still like a gadget. And if you have to buy another one of these every, let's say, two or three years, then it will add up. For me, you know, for me, yeah, like, I think it's worth it. Like, they've never given me, like, a free ring, and I'll, you know, disclaim that I've always bought my own ring. And, yeah, still, I think for me, it's kind of worth it because I like to track my sleep. I've done it more so in the past, of course, when I have started, then I paid more attention to these a lot. And nowadays, I still track it. I still wear it, but I'm not, like, checking it every day like this, wanting to see my scores because, you know, I still follow the same routines and I know what I'm gonna get pretty much on a daily basis unless I change something. But I do check it maybe like once every three or four days for sure to get some data. What are some other specs of the ring? It's water resistant up to 100 meters. It's lighter than a conventional ring. It's four to six grams only, so it's pretty lightweight. You don't feel it on your ring, on your finger. Made of titanium, very durable and wearable. Yeah. Like, I've used these, you know, for gym workouts. I've gripped kettlebells and barbells with it. They don't break that easily. So I've or I've never broken a ring and they still work. They also have a charger, USB c cable, very convenient. And, yeah, you may still develop some scratches. So it's not like pure gold or it's not pure metal. So the color can scratch off. So this generation, two ring, I don't know if you can see it, it has a little bit of, scratches on it because of being used a lot compared to the new one. This one, you know, I have used it for a year, and this one doesn't have any scratches because it's still new. So it will, you know, over time, get some scratches. Or maybe it's the just the gold one because I have the black one. I haven't used it that much, but this one doesn't have any scratches or it doesn't has hasn't lost the color. Another controversy that the Oura ring, goes through right now is the new membership feature. So basically, starting November 1, the, people who get the ring will first get one month for free. But after that, they need to start paying, six months sorry, $6 per month to basically get access to the full features of the platform and of the ring. If you don't get a membership, then you will just see, like, the scores of your of your, top three things like your sleep, restfulness, and, activity scores. You don't see the details of, you know, the actual deep sleep and actual HRV and, how many times you woke up. But those things, you don't see the details, but you just get a score of, you know, how well you slept or how restful you are. Suck. In that sense, many people don't like it. Many people have just quit it. And of course, yeah, it will add up, a lot more money to the total cost. So if you use the ring for like a year, six months per $6 per month, you're gonna pay like $72 per year additionally to get access to the full features. And this is, you know, not the Oura Ring is not the only one doing this. Whoop has a membership, which is like another competing, sleep tracker and many other of these devices are shifting to a membership, like a model. I'm, you know, to be honest, I'm not a fan of that. I don't I don't like having, like, an additional membership cost. I don't mind paying it if I would have to, like, get access to the data. I think it's still valuable. But let's say, yeah, it's definitely turns off the desire to get the ring for and many people will probably, yeah, not choose to get the ring just because of that. One ring to find them. Overall, do I think that the Ouring is worth it? I mean, the device, the gadget itself is, I still still very good. I like it. I'm gonna continue using it. The price, you know, getting it only for $367 or euros for the one thing, for that, I think it would be worth it, for the single payment. The membership, for that, I guess, depends on your situation and it depends on your need to track your sleep. If, you are struggling with sleep, you don't know what's the issue, then measuring your sleep will give you, like, still very beneficial, insightful data about what's going on. And for sure, you can use that data to make positive changes and see what needs to be fixed. So in that sense, in the short term, for even, like, you know, six months or five months of using that, I think you will learn a lot about your sleep and see some improvements just because of tracking. And other cases, if you're, you know, struggling financially or you're already sleeping perfectly or you don't have any complaints, then, for you probably it's not worth it to get the ring and start paying the additional membership. So, yeah, in that scenario, maybe not worth it. I personally, yeah, like I said, I am using it. I'm not really planning to stop, and maybe next year or somewhere I may cancel my membership. I don't know yet. I don't think that long ahead of what kind of gadgets I'm gonna use. But, yeah, we'll see. I personally still, you know, will continue to use it. Alright. That's it of this video. Check out the description for the Oura ring if you are interested in getting that or learn more about it. Thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.