Sure most of you have already heard that the FDA banned NMN, especially beta NMN, as a dietary supplement in The US. We don't know yet if it's gonna be banned across the entire world and whether or not it applies directly to NMN, not just the beta NMN. But regardless, I thought I'd make this video about another potential, much cheaper and more widespread supplement that can replace NMN and that you can use for antigen purposes and to raise your NAD levels. Execute order 66. So the supplement is niacin. And niacin has a long track record of having health benefits, especially in reducing cardiovascular disease risk and reducing cholesterol levels. And, when it comes to NAD metabolism, then niacin and any other form of niacin like niacinamide, nicotinamide or niacin alone, has been found to also have a positive effect on NAD levels and raising NAD levels. So this 2020 study actually found that, yeah, NASH in supplementation in, like, patients with mitochondrial myopathy was able to cure systemic NAD deficiency and improve muscle performance. So the niacin supplementation increased muscle strength, mitochondrial mass, exercise performance, glycogen, liver fat reduction, hemoglobin reduction, etcetera. So what they did was that they gave niacin in doses of seven hundred and fifty to one thousand milligrams a day to patients and their matched controls for ten or four months respectively. Blood NAD increased in all subjects up to eight fold, and muscle NAD of patients reached the level of their controls. Another 2021 study found that even a single oral supplementation of nicotinamide within the daily tolerable upper limit increases blood NAD levels in healthy subjects. So, they have done previous studies with two hundred milligrams of nicotinamide, which increases blood energy levels. But in this particular study, they, gave the participants of five healthy adults, oral supplementation of five hundred milligrams of nicotinamide, which did increase significantly blood NAD levels after twelve hours and showed a trend of increase after forty eight hours as well. But supplementing a hundred milligrams of nicotinamide or water intake only didn't change the NAD levels. So apparently, like, the threshold appears to be like two hundred milligrams of nicotinamide for this to have like an NAD boosting effect. So how does it work? You know, their body produces NAD in different pathways. The main pathways are, Pricelinealer pathway, the Denoma Biosynthesis pathway, and the Salvage pathway. And nicotinic acid or niacin goes through the Pricelinealer pathway that creates NAD. The denormal biosynthesis pathway works with tryptophan, and you have the salvage pathway that uses nicotinamide that you can get from that or a supplement that, helps with NAD recycling through the salvage pathway. And the vast majority of the daily NAD actually comes from the salvage pathway. So, yeah, it's actually much better and more important to boost your energy levels with the salvage pathway where the nicotinamide comes into play. It is a cyst that, you can meet your daily, like, a price handle pathway demand with NAD production with only like twenty milligrams of daily niacin. But like the vast majority of it still comes from the salarach pathway and even if you do get all the NAD from your diet, then you would still want to have the salilage pathway working properly because that way is recycling the NAD. Every time you produce NAD from any source, even if you take the supplements NMN or on the ketamine riboside, a lot of it still goes back to the salish pathway and is recycled. So that's why you need to have the NAMPT enzyme working properly, which requires actually circadian rhythm alignment and some exercise. And boosting that with nicotinamide is one of the, you know, like a core essential, like, supplements I would take for everyone pretty much, like, because it's gonna help with the salvage pathway, it's gonna help with other aspects of energy production and metabolic health. So there's no, like, you know, downside to it. So in conclusion, niacinamide, nicotinamide, or niacin, they're all great ways to boost your energy levels, and they are a much cheaper and, much easily accessible alternative to NMN. And, you know, I think that NMN still has, like, a lot more potency than narsinamide or nicotinamide when it comes to, like, acutely raising your ND levels. But over the long term, you still want to focus on narsinamide and, the salus pathway specifically to make sure that you do recycle your NAD. If you want to learn more about that, then check out my, circadian NAD activation system guide. But on that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized, stay empowered.