All the coffee drinkers across the world, they can be very happy because there is a new study that showed how, habitual coffee consumption, moderate coffee consumption, is associated with reduced risk of cardiovascular disease and or cause mortality. So in this video we're gonna take a look at the study and what are some key takeaways. So this is the study, an actually pretty new one, 09/27/2022. The impact of coffee subtypes on incident cardiovascular disease, arrhythmias, and mortality. So basically they took actually quite a large segment of people, so almost a half million people, 58 year olds with an average year. And they followed up over the course of twelve years or so and they looked at, you know, the type of coffee consumption and how many cups a day, how does it affect cardiovascular disease and overall mortality. And they did find that all cause mortality was significantly reduced. So all coffee types with the greatest risk reduction seen with two to three cups a day. And this is the graphical abstract of the study, half a million people and decaffeinated instant and ground coffee, which is interesting that they're both even like the instant coffee, which is generally considered not to be that healthy, even that had a positive effect. So basically, arrhythmias that, the ground coffee, the green line was still associated with the lowest incidence of arrhythmias and, two to three cups, even like four to five cups of ground coffee was associated with the lowest, rate of arrhythmias. Instant coffee was also actually quite similar and decaffeinated didn't have any, significant impact on the arrhythmias and even like less than one cup a day, which I don't know how you measure that, maybe like espresso, that actually had an increased incidence of arrhythmias. Cardiovascular disease. So you can see, yeah, like one to two to three cups a day of ground coffee was associated with the lowest, incidence of cardiovascular disease. And the other coffees were a bit, lower association, although it was still better than no coffee consumption at all. Overall mortality, you can see ground coffee beats or in all cause mortality, all the other types of coffee quite significantly. And yeah, like the lowest reduction in all cause mortality is two to three, two to three cups per day, which is, yeah, quite a like a moderate amount and it's not significant. Or it's not like crazy, crazy high amounts of caffeine. Usually you can have like maybe two hundred to three hundred milligrams of caffeine, from that. So the reason why instant coffee may be associated with, like, a bit less benefits than ground coffee probably has to do with, like, the polyphenols and stuff like that. So the ground coffee has more polyphenols. I think they have probably, like, different processing method as well. Like, the instant coffee generally is, you know, processed and heated and whatever they're doing dehydrated, which can like harm some of the beneficial compounds in the coffee and make them more dangerous. Whereas the ground coffee, regular ground coffee, the pure pure coffee, that has like all the benefits in terms of the, longevity effects and the reduced risk of all cause mortality. I'm gonna also quickly look at the Science Daily article about this study, and it's pretty much the same story, but I'll just, add a bit of nuance to this or we'll go into more detail. The usual coffee type was instant in a 198,000 participants or forty four percent of the participants, which is very interesting that forty four percent of the, half a million people use instant coffee. Ground coffee only 18.4% and decaf 15.2%. There were a 100022.4% non coffee drinkers who served as the comparator group. So, yeah, they did compare it to non coffee drinkers, which is, you know, what you have to do if you want to see the effects of coffee on the longevity markers. In total, about six point two percent of the participants died during the follow-up. And, all types of coffee were linked with a reduction in death from any cause. The greatest risk reduction gene with two to three cups per day, which compared to no coffee drinking was associated with a fourteen percent, twenty seven percent, and eleven percent lower likelihood of death from decaffeinated ground and instant preparations. So fourteen percent decaf, twenty seven percent reduction in all cause mortality by ground and, instant coffee eleven percent reduction, which is quite still, you know, good. In terms of cardiovascular disease, then a decaf was associated with six percent reduced, incidence of cardiovascular disease. Twenty percent for a ground coffee, again much larger and nine percent for instant coffee. So the instant coffee appears to have a better effect for heart disease than a decaf. But overall mortality, the decaf is better than instant coffee, which is interesting. Overall, I think that, yeah, instant coffee is not like a healthy thing that you you want to consume. If you can definitely ground coffee or decaf. But I mean, every once in a while, if you're just, you know, on the run and hurrying, then yeah, like instant coffee apparently still, somewhat okay. So in conclusion, drinking some coffee is good for your heart disease risk as well as overall mortality. The, most optimal amount to drink per day appears to be at two to three cups of ground coffee. That gives you the best risk reduction and, yeah, that's also where you get the most of the health benefits from that. Alright. That's it for this video. But if you are interested in reversing your biological age, then I am looking for a few more people who want to do that, who want to reverse their biological clock and reverse aging. If you're interested, then message me the word health on Instagram or email info@seamlund.com and I'll send you all the details. But on that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized, stay empowered.