Hey. Welcome back to the channel. My name is Sim Lund. And in this video, we're gonna talk about balls again. So in one of my previous videos, I talked about how red light and, UV light can benefit, like, spermatogenesis and even testosterone levels. So in this video, we're gonna actually look at the opposite of, how cooling down the testicles can actually benefit sperm count and potentially testosterone levels as well. Alright, everyone. Chill. Make sure you click the like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. So there are actually quite old studies even since the eighties and sixties even showing that, high temperatures, hyperthermia has has a negative effect on sperm count and fertility. So, high, basically, scrotal temperatures are associated with impaired spermatogenesis as well as infertility even. AD study again, role of temperature in regulation of spermatogenesis and the use of heating as a method for contraception. A large body of research confer confirms the vulnerable nature of spermatogenesis to relatively small increases in testicular temperature. So, heat based therapy, saunas even having used as a potential way to be used as a contraceptive. So, yeah, this is actually quite old knowledge of how excess sauna, excess heat specifically around the testicles will be, negative for fertility and the sperm count. Disappointed. Even as early as '65, there was this study that found that effect of induced intrascrato hyperthermia and testicular function in man reduces sperm count. And, funny enough, in oligosporic individuals' application of wet heat, 43 to 45 degrees Celsius to the scrotum for half an hour on six alternative days resulted in a decrease in sperm count within eleven to one hundred and twelve days. So essentially, there's like a threshold or the optimal temperature for the testicles where they function the best. And if they surpass a certain threshold, then they're gonna shut off the spermatogenesis and, be bad for sperm count and fertility. And in specimens of semen kept at 37 degree sperm, sperm loses their motility and viability. So 37 degrees Celsius is where, at least when you, contain the sperm in, like, labs, those kind of things, that's where the sperm sperm motility drops and, that's your average sperm temperature is like one to two degrees below 37. So usually your testicles are around 34 to 35 degrees Celsius. And if they reach 37, then actually that's where the drop off occurs and that's where the shut off. If kept at four degrees Celsius, they retain their viability but lose their motility from so called thermal shock. So four degrees Celsius is also not good. It's too cold, causes thermal shock, although they retain their viability, but they lose their motility. It isn't ideal, but, you know, it's, you know, just, you know, you don't wanna be going to extremes. You don't want too much heat and you don't want too much cold either, but you do want, like, cool, like a cool environment, not super cold. The best temperature to keep semen in order to preserve sperm motility is at 20 degrees Celsius. And, this is, you know, this does refer only to the the basically, semen, like, you know, containers in labs. It's, doesn't refer to humans, but, yeah, like 20 degrees Celsius, would be if if you contain semen in, like, a tube or something in the laboratory. That's where the optimal temperature is. But for humans, yeah, like, apparently, like, the average temperature for, let's say, males would be, like, 34, 35 degrees Celsius to be, on an everyday basis. If you want to, you know, cool them down a little bit, then they that may actually have some positive benefits. Besides just, you know, cooling the testicles down, it can have also like this basic constrictive effect on the testicles and, even the penis itself to help with blood flow after it rewarms or becomes slightly warmer again. So there is like some different mechanisms by which just cooling down the testicles has a positive effect on your sperm count, sperm motility, sperogenesis. And, as I said, like some people have experimented themselves as well, they see an increase in testosterone levels. So different channels like, Lucas Owen from Ergogenic Health and, Igor Steve, I've actually seen a video by him, by looking at different people who have actually seen an increase in the testosterone levels as well by doing it in the short term. Chill out. There are also studies that support that cooling down the testicles basically has a positive effect on testicular function. At 2005, improvement of semen quality by nocturnal scrotal cooling in oligosospermic men with a history of testicular mallecent. So, it's the best time to actually to cool down the, testicles at night because your testosterone production peaks at night and, you're going to go into a bed underneath a blanket that kinda heats up your body. So it's maybe also wiser idea to cool down the testicles beforehand to prevent any like overheating at night. You don't wanna be using like, you know, super fluffy blankets, super heavy blankets that, raise your body temperature too high because, elevated body temperatures also reduce your sleep quality. And, people who have, you know, to who sleep into, hot environments, they have worse sleep quality as well. So there are, you know, many reasons to cool down the testicles before bed and, just, you know, keep your overall bed temperature also slightly cooler, at least for men. This is a good, you know, like, tip to remember that, you know, okay. Let's say high temperatures or mounted testicles are gonna be bad for spermatogenesis, fertility, and testosterone levels. So, you know, yes. One, maybe start applying certain like ice packs, a few a few times a day, or you can also do like cold showers, cold baths, all those things. I prefer to do it like that. It's more like, you know, you it's you do it together with other purposes. You actually add brown fat, etcetera. You improve your metabolic rate and those kind of things. But the, you know, one key thing is to also not be in this very tight and constricted posture all day. So sitting posture even has been associated with or considered to be a possible reason why there is like a decrease in sperm quality in men. So just sitting, being in this contracted posture and, basically having the legs together as you would when you're sitting, like crossing the legs is probably also very bad for sperm quality and sperm motility because of, you know, your testicles are gonna get overheated. So man spreading, you know, as controversial as it is, is actually good for men fertility and men, testicular health. So you want demand spread a little bit. So, sit with your legs apart and, ideally, even like, you know, standing workstations, I like those. You're, you know, you're keeping the feet slightly more apart allows the testicles to cool down a little bit. You can also you use the ice pack while you're working, put it in the pants, and multitask at the same time. And that's a good strategy essentially. Cool. Fortunately, there's ways to basically reverse the, decrease in semen quality or sperm count, when you are exposed to some high heat. So even if you are taking saunas very often or you're, you know, basically sitting very much at work or whatever, then you can still reverse it. Like, you know, the spermatogenesis shuts off only for the time being as it's in that high temperature state. And after you cool it down or you stop the heat exposure hypothermia, then eventually, the sphenogenesis will, resume. So, you just need to cool down your testicles. And when it comes to, let's say, frequent or hot baths, hot tubs are bad because you're they're actually much worse than sauna. Like saunas probably don't do a lot, if you're cooling down your testicles while they're in the tops, hot baths, whirlpool baths, those are probably much worse. Those are like directly heating the testicles with warm water and that's gonna be pretty bad as shows as shows this study. A consecutive cohort of infertile men had a history remarkable for wet heat exposure in the forms of hot tubs, jacuzzi, or hot baths. So that's bad. And, once they stopped doing that, they saw even like up to a 491% increase in total motile sperm counts after they stopped doing the jacuzzi basically. But as I said in my previous video, you know, there's still some benefit to also exposing the testicles to, like, red light red light therapy devices like this BlueBlox one. Those also have positive effects on spermatogenesis and testosterone levels. And, I wouldn't, like, stop doing that because of that. Because this red light doesn't actually that the red light isn't going to increase your body temperature. It's not gonna increase the temperature of the testicles. It's just gonna shoot the red light onto there that, then has positive effects on ATP production and sperm production. But, like, maybe things that heat it up like infrared can be problematic in terms of heating up the testicles directly, and the regular sauna as well. So the best way to kind of, you know, prevent that would be just, you know, you can use an ice pack or cold water during the sauna session itself or you can do it immediately afterwards. So so that's what I always do. I do take the sauna regularly, but I also, after the sauna, I use the cold water to cool down the testicles or use an ice pack afterwards. So yeah. The red light is great. You can use it with no worries. It's essentially, you know, harmless to that. It's not going to heat the testicles. But if you do expose yourself to some sort of heat, then use the ice pack, cold water, cold bath or anything like that. If you do use the ice pack, then I would say that, you know, you don't wanna be yet directly putting the ice on the strata. You wanna, you know, have some, let's say, some linen or some cloth between there so it wouldn't like directly harm the skin or cause some sort of, you know, damage directly. You wanna have it slightly indirectly cooling down the testicles. But yeah. Like a few minutes, even two to five minutes, let's say one to three times per day is, let's say, the optimal protocol. But even if you do it once a day is pretty good. Depends on, you know, what's the situation with you. Like how heated your testicles get and things of that. The main takeaways is, yeah, don't heat your testicles. Keep them, ventilated. Keep them cool. Cool down testicles frequently throughout the day. Use an ice pack, cold water, cold shower, whatever it is. But, yeah, the red light can also be benefit and, has some positive effects. Alright. That's it for this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Steve. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.