After after eight years I can't do it. Hey. Welcome back to the channel. My name is Siim Lund, and I wanna make this introduction about how I'm gonna stop doing sixteen and eighteen method of intermittent fasting. But if you've seen my videos previously, if you've watched my channel for a long time, then you know that I've actually been doing one meal a day for the last five years. But in this video, I wanted to just, you know, go through why I switched over from sixteen and eight into one meal a day in the first place when I did it five years ago. Make sure you click a like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Doing I've been doing intermittent fasting in some shape or form, since, the end of high school. And by now, it's almost like ten years. I've been doing that consistently. I've tried different methods of, inward fasting. I've tried one meal a day. I've tried the Warrior Diet. I've tried extended fasting. I've tried alternative fasting and the sixteen minute method. I think that the sixteen minute method is actually one of the best, methods and the best windows for doing intermittent fasting. I think it can work virtually for all people and, can give you, you know, the vast majority of results that you're looking for when you're doing intermittent fasting, whether that be body composition, productivity, or longevity and health, and those kind of things. Sixteen Eight Method is a great is one of the best ways of doing intermittent fasting in my opinion. Actually, I did the Sixteen Eight Method for the first five years of, my intermittent fasting journey. I saw great results from it. I still progressed at the gym. I was getting stronger. I was building muscle. I would never go back to, like, a three meal a day, schedule, but I would still do some form of sixteen and eight at least. So the reason I stopped doing the sixteen and eight method around five years ago when I switched over to one meal a day didn't have anything to do with the sixteen and eight method in of itself. It still worked. It It still gave me great results. I could have kept going. But the reason I switched over to eating one meal a day was because of mostly, like, time management. Like, back then, I was actually first starting this YouTube channel and first starting my blog and everything related to, you know, starting to write books and all those things. So I had to have, like, a lot more time in a sense. I was, like, really, you know, working hard and working long hours every day. Basically, I was working from the moment I woke up until the moment I went to bed. It made sense for me to even skip the second meal that I was having, and I was switched over to just eating one meal a day. And, that was what, you know, motivated me in the first place to switch over to one meal a day. That was mostly, like, time management and productivity wise. Nice. From health side, I didn't see any, like, drastic changes. From the work outside, I didn't see any, like, huge changes either. The most biggest reason had to do with just, you know, time management. End of flashback. Now I've been doing one meal a day for five years. I've tried different methods of doing one meal a day as well. I've tried the strict one meal a day where you're literally eating only one meal a day, but I've also incorporated, having, like, a protein shake and some amino acids during the fasted window before you're working out. This is obviously much better in terms of strength and muscle growth. If you're eating only one meal a day, it doesn't really work the best for, let's say, resistance training and working out. But you're not gonna be, like, as strong and as, big and as, let's say, fit as you could be if you have, like, additional protein intake before that one meal a day. I still do the one meal a day for the productivity and all the time management wise. Just for this reason alone, I wanna continue doing the one meal a day. But to overcome the limit of this fitness aspect and body composition aspect, then I incorporate this protein shake and amino acids before working out, and that gives me basically the, like, maintains my time management and productivity. And at the same time, I'm still able to, you know, build muscle and to get stronger over time. You crazy son of a bitch. You're dead. I did actually return to doing the sixteen and eight method just to, like, experiment and to break things up a little bit a few months ago, to see, you know, what happens. I did eat, two meals a day consistently for maybe, like, a few weeks. I didn't see, like, any, like, negative changes either. Like, I didn't have, like, any, like, maladaptation or anything like that. I just didn't, like, feel comfortable for me. I just, you know, prefer to just eat one meal a day and, the rest of the day kinda fast. Keeps me a bit hungry. Like, I I think that small hunger is actually that I enjoy. Like, I enjoy getting a bit of hungry during daytime, for both the cognitive and the, like, physical benefits that I get from that. It maintains maybe like a bit of, yeah, a bit of like this drive, a bit of more focus, mental sharpness, those kind of things I see more when I do one meal a day. Obviously, this is not suitable for people who, aren't comfortable with hunger. There are many types of individuals who may not be, like, suitable for going that long times without eating, actually. They may get mood issues. They may get anger issues. They may get pissed off. In that case, you don't need to do that. I'm not saying one meal a day is the best. It just suits for me, maybe some other individual as well. But a certain type of individual who tends to, like, get overly stressed out, overly anxious, overly moody, overly angry, or they may overly overeat after they break the fast. And then for them, one mil day isn't suitable. For them, the sixteen minute method is, perfect. And even then, like, you don't need to do the sixteen minute precisely. You can even do just a fast of twelve hours or fourteen hours that already is very good from a circadian rhythm inside and it does help to, you know, not spend the majority of the day in a fed state already. Winning. So the reason I stopped doing the 16 method has nothing to do with the 16 itself. It's just that I prefer to spend more time in a fasted state. I like the mental acuity and sharpness and kind of the light lightness that I get from that. It hasn't interfered with my body composition or fitness, side either, but I do have to, like, incorporate some protein before my actual meal so that I could progress in the gym. Like, with a strict one minute a day, I haven't seen that it's possible because of your being too catabolic, essentially. Usually, I have the protein shake, during my workout, which is around, like, twenty hours of fasting. So it's, you know, it's a very still a narrow time gap, but it does give me, like, this additional boost that I need to maintain progress. If you do want to learn about intermittent fasting and want to do it without the side effects and get all the benefits, then check out my video course about it. It's over five hours. It has over 35 videos, and it's four k quality HD, and it's very, well made. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized, stay empowered.