Welcome back to the channel. My name is Seem Lund. And in this video, we're gonna react to doctor David Sinclair who, talks about how mTOR and protein are going to accelerate your aging. Make sure you click like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. So the first clip we're gonna play is gonna be actually his own new podcast, which I recommend you to check out, Lifespan with doctor David Sinclair. And in his with his cohost, they basically go through, their book that they, wrote together. And, yeah, we'll just skip to the clip where he talks about how, basically mTOR and the protein can contribute to aging. We have a little bit of understanding how sirtuins are are turned on by fasting. We talked about two other classes of longevity genes in the first episode, mTOR and AMPK. Do you wanna go really briefly through how these genes are impacted when we restrict calories when we fast? The first one is mTOR, which stands for mammalian target of rapamycin, the drug rapamycin. We talked a little bit about it in the last episode, but let's refresh everybody's memory. This is a protein complex in cell that registers amino acids. When you have a lot of protein, it's gonna activate this mTOR protein complex that allows the cell causes the cell to build things. One of the reasons eating state allows you to build more muscle, but that's not a recipe for longevity. What we know from many animal studies, even in yeast, if you down regulate the activity of this mTOR protein complex, you get longer life. Why? Because it's activating process called autophagy, which recycles proteins. So when you're hungry, this autophagy will get all the old proteins, put them in the recycling bin, and then bring them out as fresh proteins. And that seems to be really important for longevity. In fact, even if you just inhibit mTOR and stimulate autophagy, that's sufficient to extend the lifespan of flies and even mice by dramatic amounts even 30%. So let's kind of analyze it a little bit. MTOR, the mammalian target of rapamycin, yeah, protein complex regulates growth pathways, regulates things like muscle growth, regulates things like nerve cell growth as well as, you know, cancer cell growth and fat cell growth. So, yeah, there are some benefits to having mTOR, but there are also some negative side effects to mTOR. And there are a lot of, studies in many species showing that, yeah, mTOR is kinda crucial and central to the aging process. If you have overexpressed mTOR or it's like a dysfunctional, express some sort of genetic mutations, then those animals die sooner. They get cancers and, tumors. Whereas if you inhibit mTOR, then, they live longer and they're healthier. So one ways to one reasons for that is because of mTOR inhibits the process of autophagy that, recycles the cells from different kinds of old material. And mTOR signaling also, you know, makes everything grow and you may develop a cancer sooner because of that. So there is a lot of truth to that, that the mTOR complex is related to kind of aging, is a central regulator of lifespan and aging. Many studies have found that. And even, like, suppressing mTOR, inhibiting mTOR in humans with, like, rapamycin and these different kinds of drugs, that has been shown to be beneficial for the immune system and, just general longevity. There's no human studies that mTOR inhibition is going to extend your lifespan, but there is animal studies and there is studies that it improves some aspects of health, like, just health span, so to say, the better immune system function and that kind of thing. You're getting too old for this year. So if we look at this graph from the study that I just showed you, then, you can see mTOR c one, the complex one that regulate that is regulated by feeding and fasting, cues. Basically, if you're fasting, then you suppress mTOR and, you're going to go into this more state of increased pathology. If you're eating, then you're going to stimulate mTORC one that leads to anabolism and growth. So excess growth will just accelerate the aging process and and even, like, cellular senescence increases. The senescence, which is describing the zombie cells, cells that aren't any, like, with any function but they're just staying there and spreading inflammation, that is increased by also mTOR c one. So you don't wanna be having mTOR c one activated constantly. And, yeah, chronic or the problem is that chronic mTOR inhibition can also be bad, can cause, like, muscle atrophy, muscle loss, can reduce beta cell proliferation. So to say your pancreas will produce less insulin. You become slightly insulin resistant because of that, reduced adipogenesis, which is, you know, good thing that you're not really growing fat cells, but you're not really growing muscle cells either, so there is a balance to it. And, I mean, chronic overactivation of is also bad. You will develop insulin resistance and muscle atrophy through other means because your body isn't able to basically utilize, the nutrients that you get and you will get also excess adipogenesis or basically fat cell growth and adipose tissue growth. So there is like a bell curve, to mTOR activation and health as this study also points out. So calorie restriction, we know, is the best way to basically extend the health span and longevity in humans as well. So that is kind of the at least the best known way of doing that. There was this rapamycin that suppresses mTOR therapeutically that has some benefits on interactivation, but it's not as good as color restriction, so to say. Rapamycin can also have some negative side effects, whereas natural means of suppressing mTOR tend to be better. And obesity, obviously, that is a situation of excess mTOR activation because, like, high blood sugar levels, high insulin levels, those will keep the mTOR c one activated all the time because, mTOR reacts not only that's why it kind of we can go into some of the idea of a protein. So let's say, so, yes, mTOR is activated by protein and amino acids, but also, glucose and insulin increase mTOR c one. So if you have diabetes, high blood sugar levels, insulin resistance, then, you have mTOR c one activated chronically because of the way, glucose and incident turn on the mTOR complex. So, yeah, if you're obese and with diabetes, then your mTOR is gonna be turned on all the time, and that does apparently shorten lifespan and also accelerate these comorbidities and different kinds of aging related diseases. Whereas if you don't if you restrict calories, if you under eat a little bit, then, this doesn't happen. In 48% body fat. Next up, we'll react to, a clip from Huberman Lab, which is, Andrew Huberman's podcast, and they also had David Sinclair as a guest. So we'll react to this clip as well and give some, more context and information. In order to maximize their wellness and fitness and in some case, muscle growth and also just wellness. But what I interpret lastly is that losing, because it triggered your cellular growth is actually pro aging in some sense. Is that right? Well, it could be. That's that's what the evidence suggests. And, again, it goes back to the debate, should you supplement with growth hormone or testosterone? All of these activities will give you immediate benefits. You'll you'll bulk up more. You'll feel better immediately. But based on the research, it's at the expense of long term health. But I tried to actually here's the key, and I haven't said this publicly, but I can remember. I pulse things so that I get periods of fasting, and then I eat, then I take a supplement, then I fast, then I exercise, and I'm I'm taking supplements and eating in the right timing to allow me to build up muscle sometimes because you can't just expect to take something constantly and do something constantly for it to work. And that's that's why it's taken me about fifteen years to develop my protocol. So here he talks about the content of the amino acids, in the protein that, does basically, is the key that regulates the mTOR complex and the aging pathway. So, yes, mTOR is most sensitive to these, branch chain amino acids. Leucine, isoleucine, valine, those are the most anabolic amino acids, so to say. So they they promote protein synthesis the most. They were the mTOR responds to them the most, and, actually, leucine is the critical amino acid required for turning on mTOR. So if you have low leucine but high protein, then you may not necessarily turn on the mTOR as much, as you would with high leucine in a meal. So that's why I I that is what I agree with you as well that, leucine can be, let's say, pro growth. It's definitely pro growth. Whether or not it's pro aging is another story again because, you know, obviously, you don't wanna become too frail. You don't wanna become, catabolic, and, you don't wanna become, basically, like, very skinny and skinny fat because of suppressing your nTOR all the time and not eating any leucine because you do need leucine and protein to build muscle and maintain, different kinds of you know, has good aspects of health. So mTOR can be bad because of it, increases senescent cell growth, causes immunosenescence, promotes malignant growth, accelerates growth in general, causing insulin resistance, declines or decreases beta cell function, may cause muscle atrophy and inhibits autophagy. But the mTOR against low aging by building making you build muscle, there is an association between muscle mass and muscle strength with longevity. So people who have more muscle strength than muscle mass, they basically have live a bit longer or at least their health span is longer. You have more bone density obviously because of having more muscle mass. Neurocell growth requires mTOR. Neurogenesis requires mTOR. Glucose homeostasis in the short term, is benefited by mTOR because mTOR does help with the insulin production, or insulin sensitivity and t cell activation as well, which is, basically responsible for the immune system. So in the short term, yeah, these, mTOR activation or at least infrequent activations of mTOR are very beneficial that if you, get exposed to mTOR every once in a while, not in chronic amounts, not as you would in, insulin resistance or obesity, then that would be quite beneficial. Now the question is, okay, how much is too much or how much would you want to stimulate them? Or, that is the kind of key, question. And, obviously, the average person who doesn't really care about their health, they may eat, from, you know, the moment they wake up until the moment they go to bed, six meals a day, sometimes even more. And all those meals, even small snacks, those will spike incidence, spike blood sugar, and those will also activate mTOR. So your body will be in this chronic growth stage all the time. It never has the opportunity to turn on pathology or the other longevity pathways because it's basically fed continuously, and that accelerates the aging of, let's say, at least health span. Your health span and your biological age will be accelerated because of being in this chronically growth chronically fed state, and you're never in this repair state and recycling state. Whereas if you, let's say, skip a few meals, which is intermittent fasting at what Davis and Clare also ends up, you know, promoting that you do a time restricted eating, you confine your eating window into a small time frame, then, you're going to see drastically different results because you only spike nTOR maybe, like, twice a day or once a day depending on your eating schedule. And at other times, you basically go into a deeper states of pathology and, you turn on the sirtuins as well, these other longevity pathways, that are associated with some improved health span. And, the situation is much different, so to say. Because the problem is that this is the something that, I kinda slightly disagree with him in that sense that according to David Sinclair, then you would also need to restrict your overall protein intake just because of the association of higher protein intake and higher leucine and amino acids with the activation of mTOR and suppression of lethargic, which I slightly disagree with because, you know, you can't avoid turning on mTOR even like eating like a banana will turn on mTOR. And banana is low in protein. Eating a steak will turn on mTOR because it's high in protein. But, you know, how much different it doesn't mean that eating a steak would activate mTOR more than, eating a banana would. Or let's say a high carb meal that is low in protein, you eat an entire basket of bananas or, let's say, equivalent of calories, 500 calories of bananas versus 500 calories of steak. Both will turn on mTOR. And, maybe the steak will turn on the mTOR a bit more because it's in higher protein, but the, you don't need to necessarily restrict the protein, because, there's a threshold how much mTOR you can cap off per meal. And, this apparently in human at at least in human studies, you see that from muscle building perspective, if you eat 1.6 grams per kilogram of protein, then you're not gonna see any increased muscle growth after that fact. You will see the muscle growth, plateaus after 1.6 grams per kilogram of body weight in protein intake. And you can eat 2.4, you can eat five point zero grams per kilogram of protein. You're not gonna build any more muscle and it does means that you're not really, you know, you're not really turning on more mTOR either, so to say. So there is a cap off after which this, mTOR stimulation will not happen anymore. Eating less will basic it could mean it doesn't necessarily mean that you're not stimulating more mTOR either because you could be eating basically sugar and, a lot of like the average obese person, person with diabetes and metabolic syndrome, they're not eating a high protein diet. They're eating a relatively low protein, but they're still having this mTOR activated and then they're experiencing accelerated aging because they're just eating too many calories and eating too much sugar and carbs. That also turns on mTOR. So, yeah, the the protein intake itself is just one aspect of it. The other aspect is how many carbs you're eating, how much insulin are you spiking, and the eating frequency, how many times a day are you doing it. Because like I said, even a small snack will activate mTOR, and the key much rather or much rather or much smarter, more effective way to limit mTOR activation instead of reducing protein intake would be to just confine your eating window into, let's say, one to two meals. Then you don't really have to worry about the mTOR activation. And, yeah, there are studies that find that the maximal amount of protein synthesis that you can achieve per meal is around 20 grams, 20 to 40 grams. You're not going to stimulate protein synthesis more if you eat 50 grams of protein, for example. And that is because mTOR will directly turn on protein synthesis and you can basically there's no direct way to look at how much mTOR you activated. There's no there's no blood work blood marker for that with the exception of maybe, insulin and IGF one levels. You can assess maybe your, I don't know, mTOR activation, but that's a lot of very accurate way of doing it. But, yeah, the protein synthesis peaks at 20 to 40 grams of protein per meal. And even if you eat a 100 grams from a huge steak, then you're not going to turn on more mTOR in that meal. The body taps off. So the eating frequency, if you want to overcome this limit, if you want to turn on more mTOR, you want to, you know, you want to build more muscle, you want to age faster, then you would have to spike the mTOR, let's say, six times a day. And if you even if you eat, let's say, 200 grams of protein, which is more than your body needs, you know, double the amount that your body would need per day, but you do it within one to two meals in a smaller eating window, then you still activate mTOR twice, compared to eating that same amount of protein across six meals. You would spike the mTOR six times and thus your overall daily, let's say, speed of biological aging for the lack of a better word, from the mTOR theory, that would be, worse for your longevity just because of having this higher eating frequency. That's kind of the main point. So you can you could you don't need to restrict your protein intake as long as you're doing time restricted eating. And, if I were to I would I I do agree that excess protein, excess amino acids, this leucine and maybe other amino acids like methionine in the mix, they potentially could contribute to faster aging, but only if you're eating six times a day. If you're eating twice a day, then it doesn't really matter. If you're eating once a day, then it matters even less because your protein synthesis will cap off after the 20 to 40 grams protein limit mark. And you do need at least 20 grams of protein per meal to, you know, maintain muscle and such. If you eat less, then you're eventually gonna lose muscle and become catabolic and cachexic. So so, yeah, you don't wanna be eating a chronic low protein diet, but you can, basically biohack or you can sidestep some of the mTOR stimulation by doing time restricted eating, essentially. The amino acid perspective, then, another amino acid besides leucine that accelerates aging or is associated with aging is, methionine. So there is quite a lot of evidence which is that, yeah, like excess methionine turns off turns on this mTOR pathway as well as increases IGF one levels, which will promote the growth of malignancies and tumors. But supplementing with, glycine has been found to, basically counteract this negative effect on longevity, by balancing methionine. You know, most people eat too much methionine. They would, eat a lot of steak and, red meat that are high in methionine, whereas they don't eat a lot of any glycine at all. And, plant based, that's also one of the reasons I think, like, plant based proteins can be beneficial for longevity because of their naturally low in methionine and naturally low in, leucine. So, yeah, excess I think excess protein could accelerate aging if you're eating too frequently, eating six times a day, that will be bad for your longevity, of high protein intake and high methionine intake specifically. And, associated with also eating, high methionine foods, like a lot of meats and a lot of eggs, fish, they're all high methionine. And as long if you don't supplement glycine or if you don't get at least a part of your daily protein from plant based sources, then that could be probably bad for, let's say, longevity or the lifespan side. It doesn't say anything about your health span. So probably like a high high meat, high carnivore diet is pretty good for your health span. Well, you will have energy, you will have good muscle mass, you will have strong bones, you will have good insulin sensitivity, You will have yeah. Just, you know, your health span is good, your functional, fit and etcetera, but it probably isn't the best for the lifespan directly linked to lifespan of, how many biological or chronological years you're gonna end up having, whereas it is maybe good for the health span. So, yeah, basically, there is a there is a balance that you need to achieve. Like, Claire says that sometimes you spike mTOR, sometimes you consume the high protein intake, and at other times you kinda keep it low. How frequently you should spike and pulse this protein and the mTOR, that depends a lot on your your goals, your, dietary, choices, your eating schedule, how much you exercise, and those kind of things. You exercise a lot, you want to build muscle, then obviously you would need to spike the mTOR and protein synthesis more frequently. If you, do time restricted eating, you eat only once or twice a day, then you don't really need to worry about it. I don't think so. Like, I've eaten a pretty high protein intake, for a long time. And, like, if you look at my let's say, how do you measure your my mTOR levels, there's no direct way to measure the mTOR levels. But if if I measured my IGF one levels, then my IGF one levels were very low, like a 100, which is much lower than someone who restricts protein. And the reason for that is because of eating only once or twice a day. And, from a mTOR suppression side, then fasting is a much bigger suppressor of mTOR than a restricted protein. And, yeah, I guess the goal or the end message is that just do times you're eating. I think that's the best way to both activate autologie and suppress mTOR, and you don't really have to worry about being on this very low protein diet that may potentially be bad for other aspects of, health and longevity like muscle mass and bone density. You crazy son of a bitch. You're dead. Alright. That's it for this video. If you want to check out, what I do, then you can read my books about this, topic as well, metabolic mythology and, others. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.