I am not eating any food for the next thirty days. Hey. Welcome back to the channel. My name is Seem Lund, and, today, we're going to react to, mister Beast making a video about how he fasted for thirty days. So, yeah. Mister Beast is some sort of a, like, a big YouTuber with millions of subscribers. He does different kinds of challenges. And, yeah, the newest one that he uploaded was, thirty day fast. And, given that I am, like, you know, somewhat of an expert who I know a lot about fasting, I've done fasting for over eight years, different types of fasting, and, I've written books about it as well. A lot of research done. So I could just, you know, give some more comments about, you know, what he's doing and, also talk about, you know, the results. Make sure to click the like and subscribe as well for future videos about optimizing your health and performance. Do it. I am not eating any food for the next thirty days. Wait. Why TB, hungry? This is what I currently look like, and I weigh two hundred and twenty pounds. And when I say no food, I really mean it. This was the hardest I've ever pushed my body in my entire life. Seriously, do not try this at home. I had a whole team of doctors watching me every single day. They kept track of all my vitals like these to ensure I didn't have a heart attack or worse. Thanks, doctors. And if I for any reason eat food in the next thirty days, Chris, you're gonna shave my head. No. No. There's no way he's going to thirty days. We're shaving his head. The talent has officially begun. Guess who won't need these? So, like, yeah, first off the bat, you know, obviously, it's a very, like, crazy hyped up, you know, attention seeking video, like that's up. Maybe his way of editing, I don't know about that. But yeah, like, you know, it's like very stimulating. This is, you know, when he starts to fast, like, it would be interesting to see, like, what he looks like or what he does. Like, is he so animated after day, ten or day twenty five? You're right. And since I'm not eating for the next thirty days, I might as well get rid of all the food in my So let's maybe look at some of the what he's eating right now. This is what I can see from the fridge. I mean, some Gatorade, the juices, Sunny d. I don't know what that is. Looks like some deli meat, some berries, planet oat, some yogurts, maybe chicken or meal prep type of thing. What are you eating? I'm not. Also some sort of, Skinny Pop pretzels. Yeah. Like a lot of, you know, I would say like a pretty average standard, American diet. I'm not. I'm not eating. And can you guys help me remember all this food? Where is he? It's like legit He does weigh like two hundred and twenty pounds, which is I would imagine that he's, you know, a bit chubby or maybe like a dad bod or something like that. I don't know. But, yeah, that kind of goes to explain why he has maybe like a little bit extra weight. So this food obviously is very hyperpalatable and, high in calories. So, yeah, he just eats too much too much calories. Calorie of food in this house. Give me a question. If a fly flies into your mouth because your mouth is open and you accidentally swallows, is that how he's eating? Probably. Yeah. We're that serious. So, yeah, like, if a fly flies into mouth, then it's protein. I'll see you guys later. You forgot the Cheetos? Say it to the door. Alright. The challenge is now getting serious. The boys are gone and my kitchen is completely empty. Also, Chris actually broke my microwave. The microwave for pro. Thanks a lot, Chris. I'm laying in bed about to go to sleep and it feels weird not having a snack before bed. I'm staying strong. I'll see you guys tomorrow. Typically, when I wake up, the first thing I do is I go eat breakfast. But obviously, I can't do that now, so I guess I just go film videos. The only thing going in my mouth for the next twenty eight days is water. Let's go see how much weight I've lost. To be honest, I probably weigh basically the same. Yeah. Like I said. And I'm about to go start filming a different video. So today Yeah. So he lost one pound for after, overnight fast, which is Like a different video. Water or maybe, like, he went to the bathroom. And then they spent a hundred days in the circle. Comment what you think is harder. Spending a hundred days in a circle or not eating food for thirty days. Filming on a completely empty stomach is much harder than it sounds. By the end of it, I was drained. That's probably, like, four or five hours of filming. And honestly, man, I need to go to bed. I'm tired now. Hey, Jam Chain. What you got there? Oh, just some McDonald's. I'm blowing the smells your way. You are. Jimmy, you want to eat me? It's the end of day number two. Not gonna lie. I'm actually really hungry and, yeah. I'll see you guys tomorrow. The hardest part is going to bed after the first day, if you're doing this long fast. If you ever done it, then the hardest hunger or the biggest hunger you experience is around twenty four hours, twenty six hours, something like that because your body is still, like, you know, used to eating regularly and you have to kinda overcome this hump. But in my experience, a lot of people always say that, you don't actually feel hungrier. Like, there isn't, like, this exponential increase in hunger up till, you know, the point of, fourteen days, etcetera. Like, the hunger plateaus after maybe, like, day two or day three. Three. We'll say that days three through six are the hardest, but for the most part, I feel fine. I'm just a little sluggish, and I just feel tired. That is, yeah, like, very common. You you just, because of the same reason your body switching from, this carb based fuel sources that you ate into ketosis, and that usually causes, like, this keto flu and lethargic and tiredness, because of not eating and you're still getting used to the switching into using ketones, instead of a glucose. But a lot of it can be, like, you know, prevented. It's also like dehydration from the, lack of electrolytes and lack of salt. So if you are, I wouldn't recommend ever doing, like, a pure water fast only. Like, you need to have electrolytes to prevent the refeeding syndrome and to prevent, cramps and, you know, the salt actually is HGHU, helps you to maintain energy levels, maintains, you know, brain function and How much do I weigh? So I'm down two and a half pounds in the last day. That's actually pretty crazy. But it does make sense because So that's mostly just water weight. It's not really like real a little bit fat obviously, but, mostly like, water weight water weight and, glycogen. He's also not eating, so the food has less stuff stuck to his stomach. I took a giant poop this morning. We're about to do a photo shoot for my snack brand, Beastboss, and it sucks because I can't eat them. This is making me hungry. That's me smiling through the pain. You need me to take a bite of this? This? Yes. They want a photo of me taking a bite of the bar. Can I have permission? I'll spit it out. I promise. Yeah. You can do that. It's a picture. You can have a shape in it. I hate you. Alright. I'm hanging up. Fake biting chocolate. So, yeah. There's one, like, interesting things, that a few, like, studies have found is that, you know, the sensor you you can actually, like, secrete, the, cephalic phase response is what it's called. You can actually secrete insulin if you, like, look at something and then you salivate over it. Like, okay, this nice piece of chocolate, so technically he could like probably raise his insulin levels. And you know, it depends on what you consider as breaking a fast. Like yeah, raising incident, by looking at this through the cephalic phase response, or drinking like Diet Coke, something that could technically be considered as breaking a fast. But I I don't I don't consider like that. I think only, like, calories would break the fast. And even then, like, a few other calories, like, things that don't raise insulin or some, small amounts of calories probably aren't enough to actually shift you from a fasted state into a fade one technically. I was like, I'm not that hungry. This isn't too hard. Now I'm like, bro, I need to eat food. The boys told me they have a surprise for me, which is basically a nice way of them saying they're about to torture me. We just rented an ice cream truck because we wanna shave Jimmy's head. Oh, I'm sorry, Trita. Alright. Let's go. Yeah. Oh, Jimmy. I hear music outside. And now they're screaming my name. Oh my gosh. Hey. Hey. We got ice cream. Did you use my credit card for this? Of course. We did. What? Will we use our own money? Of course. Screw you guys. I just clicked in my head that these goofy goobers, I could be trying to tempt you this entire time. They're literally throwing ice cream at my window. Oh my god. Did you guys just break the window? So I mean, like, what yeah. Obviously, you know, overhyped then it's like, over dramatic. Like, yeah, breaking the ice breaking the window with ice cream and throwing plates at microwaves. So I mean, they're just doing it for, like, attention or clickbait. I don't know if you know. It's definitely nice. Very, like, overstimulating. You guys do realize I'm renting this from a friend. I was recording some videos for the React channel, and it really just it drained me, man. So much Jimmy James nap time. He gets low on calories. I'm I'm low low on the energies. I also just didn't sleep that well last night, and I can barely keep my eyes open. I'm on a couch in the the studio, and I'm literally just sleeping. That is very common. Like, you just want to sleep all the time. If you're fasting for longer than, you know, forty eight hours and you wanna take a nap, you can fall asleep almost anywhere, like you're dragging your feet all the time, you're thinking about food, you're hungry somewhat a little bit, you're not even actually, like, you know, hungry in that sense, but you're just yeah. You feel like almost giving up, if that makes sense. Like you feel like you're, you just I'm just gonna lay here and, you know, close my eyes and not wake up or something like that. And your sleep quality tends to suffer a lot. You're not able to stay sleep asleep for that long. You're not gonna have, like, you know, a continuous sleep period. You're gonna wake up at least a few times or you're gonna sleep only, like, maybe two or four hours after a certain amount of days of fasting. Okay, Patrick. Watching people eat chocolate, It's been twelve days since I've thirteen? Twelve? I don't even know what day. And the day only got worse from there. I was so nauseous that I couldn't feel for more than twenty minutes without sitting down for a break. Oh my god. I'm gonna throw up. At one point, I almost scrapped the Chocolate Factory video because I was so low energy. Can I sit down for a sec? Yes. That that can definitely happen. Like, it's crazy to think or paradoxical that, yeah, you you can throw up while fasting, but, yeah, for some reason, like, it tends to happen. You're pretty nauseous. And I think it's, you know, just a hypoglycemia. And though low blood sugar levels, he wasn't in ketosis before the fast. He's not on a ketogenic diet. He's not keto adapted probably. But if you are in ketosis, like what like you want to get into ketosis as fast as possible with the fast so that you would start to use ketones and you would avoid, like, this hypoglycemia and nausea and those kind of things, at least as much as possible. Like, by day ten, you're still gonna have some episodes of hypoglycemia even if you're in ketosis. But, with the keto adaptation, you can at least postpone it a little bit. And by the end of the day, I felt like I was gonna pass out. So we headed to check with the doctor. I think it's pretty low on energy. So I'm gonna talk to a doctor and see what we should do. I think we should shave your head. And then you can eat any of the food. True. It is actually kinda tempting right now. I really am hungry. Your hormone levels came back and it showed you are doing good with your fast. I believe you. I saw you sleep eight times today. It's definitely starting to catch up to me. Your electrolytes still look good, but I'm a little bit concerned about your energy level. When you start to feel worse, we can always break the fast for your safety. Yeah. We break the hair off your head. And this is why you need medical supervision when you do these long fasts. I don't know what I'm doing. I'm listening to him. I mean, right now he's doing a challenge. Obviously, he doesn't wanna shave his head, but, in the real world, you shouldn't like you know, because he's trying to push himself further because of not wanting wanting to shave his head. Like, in the real world, you shouldn't, obviously, obviously, just, you know, do something stupid and push yourself for no reason. And, day 10 by day 10, you know, it's still pretty, somewhat dangerous to fast even for, like, you know, I'll have to do I just fly out on day 13, so I weighed myself from home. That's 18 pounds under where I started in just two weeks. We're heading to Vegas to come up with the Ford Ramsay. All this flying is really starting to catch up. Flying while fasting is pretty nauseating. Like, taking off while flying and you haven't eaten for, like, two days, even seven days, ten days, you feel like you're gonna you feel like you're gonna pass out, when the when the plane takes off. No. I would not like you guys. Welcome to Scramble. I'm cooking my favorite dish, scrambled eggs with some close friends. And today, please welcome mister Beast. Thank you. What a great hype hype man. I have to also say, I'm doing a video where I try not to eat food for thirty days. And if I do have to shave my head, I'm gonna try not to eat what he makes. I'm gonna make a sandwich. Are you telling me now you're not gonna eat it? It depends. Unless it looks really good. I have Pisco or Grims. Yeah. Just take a little bite. Right? How do you fast for thirty days? Well, I'm not a doctor, so I don't wanna tell you how do you how. What was that song of the poop? I'm tired. You're letting me cry. These are so special. Holy crap. Beautiful. Oh my god. It's supposed to be sloppy, rich, delicious. Okay. So I think, like, obviously, he could have fasted for longer, but I think, he felt the peer pressure from, Gordon Ramsay, and he didn't want to, like so you know to Gordon Ramsay, probably that's one of the reasons he broke the fast. But he mentioned that, yeah, like, he's not gonna eat a ton of food because of, refeeding syndrome, which is very accurate and true. Obviously, maybe he talked with a doctor or something. So, yeah, like, refeeding syndrome describes this rapid shift in electrolytes after you break the fast. And, what happens is that if you eat something that has carbs and, something spikes your insulin a lot, then it's going to basically clear your bot stream from these last remaining electrolytes that are there. Like, you're fasting, your electrolytes are low, you raise the incident, the incident channels the the remaining electrolytes into the cell and your bot stream stays very depleted of all these, electrolytes and that is like even lethal. It's very it can be deadly. You can die to refeeding syndrome, because of this rapid change in electrolytes. So you don't wanna be breaking a fast with something that has high carbs and that raises your insulin. You wanna start with food that has, you know, some good minerals and vitamins, but you can also you can definitely have you have to have something that's salty as well, like bone broth or some any kind of soup, liquid, whatever you can have, even just regular salted water, to raise your electrolyte levels in the blood and that would avoid the refeeding syndrome. So, yeah, don't eat especially after fourteen days, don't eat something that has high amounts of carbs and that raises insulin. Otherwise, you know, you can go into coma, you can die for sure. I can shave my head. Why do we have so many razors? I hate you, Gordon. I love you, Gordon. Thank you. You ready? Go for it. I'm scared I'm gonna mess up, but I literally Oh, lovely. Lovely. That feels oddly good. The only time you're gonna see me like this. For the the next five months, I'm gonna be wearing a hat. So there's the end of the video. He didn't go to day 30. I thought he possibly could have done that, but the video was too short for that, and he finished the fast around day 14 with a bit of a, like, a bite of a burger. Essentially, he did, like, follow some of the similar, messy progress as regular people would. Like, he would feel tired, he would feel lethargic a little bit, he would think about food, he would be hungry, which is, you know, something to be expected. And of course, it was good to see that he was worried about refeeding syndrome, which most people tend to not do. You don't wanna be having, like, some you don't wanna start eating and gorging food immediately after the fast. You wanna be careful with that and, obviously, you know, having some sort of medical supervision is beneficial. I wouldn't recommend going for thirty days without medical supervision. In terms of the weight loss, he had lost in total, like, 18 pounds, something like that, within the fourteen days, which is, you know, good. Most of it is generally like water or some fat as well, some muscle for sure. He's not in ketosis and, things like that. But, yes, to be expected. Is this, you know, somewhat of a healthy way to lose weight? Like, I'm personally not a fan of using this extended fast as weight loss tool, and you don't need to do that. You can definitely still see those results with a with, like, a regular way of eating, calorie restriction, or essentials of intermittent fasting, daily time free eating. I wouldn't need to you wouldn't need to go for these long fasts. And, definitely you don't even start to see any of the health benefits after, like, maybe day five or day seven. Like the benefits of autophagy and, aepiplosis and those things, they tend to plateau around day five. And after that, you just, you know, you start to lose more muscle and, it's hard. You go into like very low thyroid and refeeding syndrome, those things. So, generally it's not worth it in my opinion to fast any longer than five days. Thirty days definitely is, you know I mean if you do a thirty day fast, you could, like, wreck your metabolism for at least several years or even decades. So I wouldn't definitely do that, unless you, you know, are very, like, knowledgeable about it or, something like that or you have, like, a ton of body weight loss. The longest fast in history was over a year by this, over a Scottish man, maybe, like, a hundred years ago. And, he had, like, obviously a ton of weight lose. So for him, it was not safe. But, yeah, he also did it with medical supervision. Alright. Let me know in the comments what you think about this. If you want to learn more about intermittent fasting then check out my free intermittent fasting guide. Other than that, click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. Thanks for watching this video. My name is Siim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.