Does protein make you age faster? That's what most of the longevity scientists and health influencers do say very often. That eating too much protein accelerates your aging because of stimulating mTOR and causing other ailments. However these people almost never talk about the effect of carbohydrates on insulin on the mTOR pathway and aging. So in this video I'm gonna talk about how both protein as well as insulin and carbohydrates affect your aging and which one is worse. Yes, there is a lot of mice studies and fruit fly studies and other rodent studies showing how suppressing mTOR is beneficial for slowing down aging. So mTOR is this growth pathway in the body that regulates cell replication, neurogenesis muscle growth, fat cell growth and cancer cell growth as well. So it makes everything grow. It makes the good things grow and bad things grow. And the thing with mTOR is that if you keep replicating your cells, your cells keep growing, then they are shortening their lifespan as well. In the process, you're reaching the end of the cell line faster because of every cell they have their replication limit. It's called the Hayflick's limit, which means that, you know, there's only a certain amount of replications your cell can make before it becomes senescent and turns into like a zombie cell. Protein is a big stimulator of mTOR because of containing amino acids and the specific amino acid that is most responsible and causes the biggest increase in mTOR activation is leucine. So it's one of the essential amino acids and leucine is directly the one that activates muscle protein synthesis and turns on mTOR. That is what the association between protein intake, aging and cancer and all those things comes from. The, leucine as well as other essential amino acids like methionine will, increase mTOR activation and raise IGF-one levels, all of which are linked to shorter lifespans. Wait a minute. However, it's actually the type of protein that matters more than the the overall protein content. So methionine and excess methionine intake is the one that is also associated specifically with cancers and shorter lifespans. Whereas methionine restriction, consuming less methionine foods is seen to have a positive effect on longevity and anti aging. However, this methionine restriction has been seen to work even without resuming methionine if you get enough glycine. So you need to balance your methionine intake with glycine, another non essential amino acid to counterbalance the toxic effects of methionine. So overall when it comes to protein and mTOR then it's specifically methionine, excess methionine intake that raises homocysteine and causes a lot of toxicity in the methylation pathway that then shortens the lifespan of animals. And you can counterbalance that with getting more glycine as a supplement or from dietary foods. And there are certain proteins as well like collagen proteins that don't stimulate protein synthesis and they don't stimulate mTOR activation either. So from a protein side and not all protein is the same, you would need to consume a bit more collagen and glycine rich proteins like tendons, fish skin, chicken skin, ligaments, as well as gelatin and jello. Those are the highest sources of glycine. Whereas higher source of methionine, muscle meat, chicken, fish and eggs and protein powders, those kind of things. When it comes to carbohydrates and insulin, then insulin is actually one of the direct activators of mTOR, the mTOR complex as well. So insulin, even if you say like you go on a low protein diet to want to live longer but to eat a lot of carbohydrates, then it doesn't matter because the insulin from the carbohydrates will also activate mTOR. So if your theory is that mTOR equals bad, it accelerates aging, then you should also be in a low carb diet at the same time whilst restricting methionine and protein intake. In fact, insulin and IGF-one signaling is one of the main known pathways of anti aging and longevity that we know regulates lifespan in other animals. Excess insulin signaling makes it more likely that you develop insulin resistance and diabetes as well as it also increases IGF-one levels which then promote the growth of cancers and tumors. There is some association between excess IGF-one levels and cancers and, aging, but the same applies to low IGF-one levels. So if your IGF-one levels are too low, then that also increases risk of mortality because you need IGF-one to grow muscles, enhance your bone density, and the same applies to mTOR. If you suppress mTOR all the time then you're gonna get sarcopenia and frailty which then increases your risk of falling off the stairs and dying to a hip fracture. So there's no like real wins when it comes to aging, there's only trade offs. So, the mTOR pathway, yeah, excess mTOR activation, especially excess methionine intake does accelerate aging in my opinion and it increases the risk of cancers, but the same applies to excess carbohydrate and excess insulin signaling. So like the balance, the most optimal thing to do with both carbohydrates and protein is to be somewhere in the middle. You don't want to be on a low protein diet because it increases the risk of hip fractures and osteoporosis. Being on a super high protein diet, yeah, it may raise your IGF-one levels. It can increase your methionine levels as well too much, which then accelerates aging especially if you're not getting enough glycine. And when it comes to carbohydrates and insulin signalling, then being on a low carb diet and low insulin all the time may also increase the risk of insulin resistance. It also is tied to low thyroid function, low leptin signalling. So yeah, from a metabolic health side you do need a small amount of carbohydrates and insulin signalling to maintain optimal metabolic flexibility. Excess insulin and IGF-one signalling is also bad because it can increase your risk of diabetes and insulin resistance. So obviously the answer is somewhere in the middle. Where this middle is, how many carbs, how much protein you shoot it, depends a lot on your particular situation. It just goes back to like finding a balance and balancing these different pathways. Balancing the entor pathway, balancing incident signaling, and then finding, you know, the answer of someone in the middle. If you are interested in reversing your biological age, then I'm looking for a few more people who want to achieve that. If you're interested, then message me the word health on Instagram or email simsimeland dot com. But other than that thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click, click, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Sim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.