There are many things that decline with age, and it's it's trying to figure out, you know, would correcting that decline actually result in improved health. It it may do. I'm I'm I'm not I'm not saying that this molecule isn't exciting. I think it is exciting. But but I think that that excitement needs to be generated. Sorry. It needs to be directed to well conducted human trials because, you know, otherwise, the supplements that that people would be taking, you know, the the list would just be massive. Welcome to the Sim Lund podcast. I'm your host Sim Lund. And today, our guest is doctor Brad Stanfield. Brad is a medical doctor from New Zealand. He also makes YouTube videos about extending health span and longevity. This episode is brought to you by Blue Blocks, my favorite light and sleep optimization companies. Artificial light at night exposure is associated with diabetes, obesity, heart disease, cancer, and Alzheimer's. Blue Blocks provides the highest quality blue blocking glasses that filter out the specific wavelengths that have been shown to suppress melatonin in studies. Melatonin is more than the sleep hormone. It's also vital for longevity, antiaging, and immunity. Artificial light exposure suppresses melatonin up to 99% and makes your brain think that it's daytime before bed. That's why I love using blue blocks to guarantee my body is making high amounts of melatonin prior to sleep. They also have daytime lenses that you can use to reduce digital eye strain and retinal damage when working in front of a computer all day. You can get a sweet 15% discount off all the Blue Blocks glasses, red light light bulbs, red light devices, and sleep masks if you head over to blueblocks.com/seamlund and use the code seam 15. That's blublox.com/seamlund, and the code is seam 15, s IIM15. Doctor Brad, welcome to the show. Thank you very much for having me. Yeah. We have a nice, meeting going on like we are in New Zealand. It's, 5AM, and I'm, like, in Estonia, which is, 5PM. So nice little time zone differences. Yeah. And you have, like, a really, awesome YouTube channel about, just optimizing health span and, longevity. But you're also, like, a medical doctor, so, like, I'm curious. Like, are you still taking patients? So and, you know, what what made you, start the YouTube channel in the first place? Yeah. So I still see patients. So this is why we're getting up so early. Well, why I'm getting up so early now. So, yeah, I work full time at the clinic. So, I'm seeing patients, and that's my full time job. And then I do YouTube in the mornings and on the weekends. And I wanted to start this channel because I think there's so many different who can maximize their, their health within their life. Then towards the end of their life, they can still do the activities that they want to do and still be productive. Because, you know, I I I'm dealing with a lot of patients who are reaching their older years and, you know, that they're having to use walking sticks, walking frames. And you can see such a massive difference between people who have been able to look after themselves. You know, so so you've got some fantastic 90 year olds who can still get out and do the things that they want to do. But on the flip side, I've got some 65 year olds who are extremely crumbly with their health. And I think it's just sad that, you know, if if you start early enough, you can make a massive difference towards the end of your life. So I wanted to start this channel to discuss some of the research around that because I also realized that there's quite a lot of snake oil out there as well. So I wanted to provide people a resource that they could go to where I simply just focus in on what the research says, and keep that updated. Nice. Nice. Yeah. That's that's really, good. And you're right in the sense that, you know, if you're if you're if you haven't taken care of yourself all throughout your life or even in your late later years only, then there's gonna be, like, a huge difference between you and the person who doesn't take care of their health that much, and it becomes more pronounced the older you get. So, like, a person person who is 80 years old and they exercise regularly, then they look and probably feel like they're 60 years old or something compared to someone who doesn't exercise at all, and they feel like 90 years old. So, like, there's a the older you get, then they're kind of bigger the gap between people who exercise and people who don't exercise becomes. Whereas when you're, like, in your twenties, then there's not much not much difference, visible or, like, your biological difference in terms of your whether you're 20 years old or 30 years old. But, you know, the gap kinda gets so huge when you're, after, like, I would say, like, after your fifties or something, and it becomes, like, super important. Yeah. That's right. There has been some interesting data coming out this year showing the rate of metabolism for humans as we age, and it seems to drop off a cliff around the age of 60 years old. So it that's really where you start to see the differences, in someone who has been looking after themselves and as you say, has been exercising compared to those who don't. So, yeah, I just get passionate about that because there is so much that we can do. Yeah. Curious. You mentioned that study. I also saw that. And but one of the interesting finding from that was that, like, the metabolism did drop, but only in the, like, yeah, sixties and late later years. It kinda stayed very stable all throughout the forties and fifties, so it didn't change that much. So people who are saying, you know, that already in their thirties or forties saying that all age is catching up on them, like, and they can't lose weight that easily, we that isn't, like, really true because the metabolism the basal metabolic rate will stay the same, up until the sixties, etcetera. So it's, yeah, you know, mostly still, lifestyle habits and, these, overall routines that you do that matter more. And there's not there isn't anything inherently holding you back, until you are littered in your sixties or seventies. And in your fifties and forties, there's still a lot of, your your biology is still very, capable if you have been taking care of it, the proper way. Yeah. That's right. And particularly if you're maximizing the baseline. So so when you're reaching that point where your metabolism does start to drop off, if your baseline is higher because you've been looking after yourself compared to someone else, then that, you know, that that drop is is less com compared to someone else. So, again, there's so much that you can do. So I'm excited to talk with you about all those different strategies. Yeah. Yeah. But before listening to you, let's talk about, you know, some of your patients. What are some of maybe, like, the biggest things, that they struggle with, or the most often things, more most commonly struggle with, in terms of health span and longevity? Like, what are the aren't, like, biomarkers or, overall, indicators of just, aging and health? So I focus in on people who are who are truly ill. So for example, true type two diabetics. So I I get quite passionate about their health because there is such a difference that we can make around diet, exercise, and also specific medications that we can use. So if if I was assessing someone's health generally who who was otherwise well, some of the things that I'd be looking at is particularly things like, you know, their cholesterol profile, their hba one c, looking at their sugar levels, their blood pressure, their height, their weight, general things like that. I think if you you you can definitely get into the weeds of, you know, things like DNA methylation clocks and high sensitivity CRPs to look at your overall levels of inflammation. They're interesting, but I think that the things that that actually seem to matter at this point is, yeah, height, weight, blood pressure, diet, and exercise. Those are the things that you can really make a difference in, for for the otherwise healthy people. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. Like, those DNA methylation clocks and the biological age h clocks, yeah, they're super interesting, but they can be, I think they're not, like, fully, accurate or they can be, very sensitive to changes. And, yeah, even you in your, like, just the twenties, they're, like, bound to change as well. And, they don't they may not they can give, like, some interesting, things to know, but they they're not, like, you know, definite because, you know, for me, I will some people get, like, some crazy results that, they their biological age is, like, 25 or 30 and the or the, you know, the chronological age is 30 and their biological age is, like, 65 or something, which doesn't, like, really make sense. Whereas for me, like, it was, like, my when I did the test, DNA clock, then my chronology was, 26, and my biological age was, 16. So, you know, there's the I think it's it's it's definitely, like, super it's something interesting, and people want to know that what's what's their age like, in the, like, biological level. But, yeah, I'm I'm not sure they focus again, you know, the just the biomarkers, the kind of basic biomarkers. Yeah. I mean, with with the DNA methylation clocks, they they are interesting. My issue with them is that there's many different ways of measuring DNA methylation age, if you like, and we don't have a validated method yet. So for example, if someone doesn't exercise and you measure their DNA methylation age and then they do start exercising, you're going to see changes in DNA expression. And how do you then correlate that to say, well, instead of being 60, you're now 55. You know? Again, there's so many different ways of measuring that. And will that then correlate to, you know, resistance against disease or or a stronger metabolism? We don't have that data yet. So it's interesting. Mhmm. But personally, you know, I I'm not going to use my money buying a DNA methylation clock because, again, it it in my opinion, it's not telling me anything that I don't already know that, you know, diet, exercise, sleep, meditation, those are the things that truly matter. And I'm not gonna change any of that depending on what a DNA methylation clock tells me. Yeah. I I do think that there was one study that found, like, every, every, like, four years of, increased DNA methylation age was associated with, like, slightly higher mortality. But I think it is it's very, like, preliminary, and it's not, yeah, not not that, important or compared to, like, yeah, the biomarkers that determine whether or not you get heart disease or, metabolic syndrome and those things. Yeah. But, yeah, like, what are the some of the kind of the basics then, to let's say, you have someone who who is ill, who comes to who comes to you for help. They have, you know, bad biomarkers. They're overweight. They're, you know, not fit, and, they are essentially, like, you know, not expected to live a long and healthy life. So what what's kind of the starter starter pack to start putting them on the right track? Yeah. So the starter pack is making sure that you do have a baseline of their health. So again, it's height, weight, blood pressure, then it's the general if they're overweight, I'd I'd possibly look at their liver function because I would want to do a brief assessment to see if they've got fatty liver. Again, it will be h b a one c to look at their blood sugar levels and their cholesterol. That's that's the general scope, of of blood panels that that I would do. And then it's trying to find out, you know, why is that person unhealthy? So for example, if they're having a particularly bad diet that's high in sugar, is it are they comfort eating? You know, are they dealing with depression? Have within their life, have they recently lost their job or have has a family member recently taken ill? You know, there's a lot of it's easy to to look at a patient to say, you are overweight. You need to lose weight. Go home and lose weight. But it's far more complicated than that. And when you have a look at the weight loss data, it's extremely difficult for a person who is overweight to then lose that weight. And and that's been born out within within the data. Now there are strategies that that do improve your chances, but overall, it is difficult. And making sure that you're seeing the person as a whole is just so crucial. So, you know, if there is an element of depression, making sure that they're getting the help that they need, and then it's trying to find a diet that will then work for them. So, you know, there's a lot of different cultures of people that I see through the clinic. So it's making sure that we come up with a diet that will actually work for them and that you can, it's not just gonna be a yo yo diet where you can stick with the diet for a week or two and then everything goes out the window. It's about making small changes that are going to be permanent, and then you build on those changes. So and it's the same thing with exercise. So so that that's what we try and that's what we try and do with those people. And then it's making sure that we regularly follow them up as well. And then there's a bunch of other screening tools that that we need to do. So for example, if a 60 year old comes to me, and, you know, if if they're female and they haven't had their cervical smears, if they haven't had their mammograms, you know, if if we haven't looked at, you know, bowel cancer screening, all of those things we need to tick off as well. And and, again, those are the things that that truly matter that can if, you know, if you catch disease early, you can treat it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Totally agree. And, yeah, like, prevention is kind of the best, you know, health care in terms of, actually making sure that you don't get, sick because it's much harder to fix things, compared to, like, preventing them. And, the the earlier you start or the earlier detect something, then, the easier or the more likely it is that you're gonna, you know, cure it or live for longer. Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. But, what's what what is, you know, obviously, there's, you know, just living longer chronologically, but what's, like, the difference between, like, the health span and the lifespan? How do you are there anything, like, specifically that you look at in terms of looking at health span to process the then looking at the lifespan specifically? Yeah. So humans, they they've got a theoretical age limit, if you like it at the moment. It's about a 115 to a 120. That that's roughly the the the maximum lifespan that that we can aim for. But I don't necessarily think that looking at maximum lifespan is that interesting because, you know, say if you're an 80 year old and you're in a rest home and you've got the option of, you know, living in a rest home for another, you know, thirty years, Personally, I don't really want that. So I think it's far more interesting to look at health span. And what we mean by that is that the healthy years that you have on on planet Earth. And every again, everyone's got a different definition of that. But for me, health span is just being able to do the activities that you want to do, being independent with your mobility, being able to go for a, you know, a gentle run. If if you can maximize that time in your life, that to me is very interesting. And and there are ways that you can do that. And we've touched on some already, specifically around diet and exercise. There there are some treatments that are coming available and and the research is starting to support them, that that may add on to diet and exercise. But, yeah, I I suppose I just can't stress enough that it is diet and exercise that that truly matter and everything else. It's very interesting to talk about, but the research is still coming through. Yeah. Like, exercise, I think, yeah, is the kind of most powerful antiaging drug, there is. And, there is no, like, no supplement that does the same things as exercise, or as much as exercise does. And, yeah, it's it's pretty clear that, you know, if you don't exercise, then you're not gonna have, that longer of a health span. If you exercise, then you do lengthen the, functional years or the fitness years of your life that you're able to, yeah, just be more independent and, more healthier as well for a longer time. Yeah. That's right. Because, you know, muscle performance or or muscle strength, it it I believe I believe that the latest research is that it starts to decline from about 30 years old unless you're you're actually, you know, stimulating that, that muscle building process. So, again, there is such a massive difference that that everyone can make to their health. Even if you're starting late, you can still make a massive change. Like, take smoking, for example. You know, if if if someone's been a chain smoker for most of their life, if they do stop smoking, you can reverse a lot of that damage that you've done to your lungs. And, yes, you'll still have a residual chance of developing lung cancer. But in terms of the actual lung function, you can make a massive difference, and it it's exactly the same with exercise. It's never too late to start. Yeah. That's true. But what about diet? Like, you know, I got I I think I used I I saw some, videos about, you know, intermittent fasting and calorie restriction. So, what's what kind of, let's say, I don't know, principles do you follow in terms of the, the diet? And, are there any, like, yeah, you know, guidelines you follow, you know, personally? Yeah. Let's let's start with fasting first, and then we can go through different diets. So there was a lot of excitement around intermittent fasting or small window in the day. And that was born out from some mice data where if if you calorie matched mice, but one group of mice only ate within a small eight hour window in the day compared to another group of mice who could eat whenever they want. The group that was, you know, eating within that small window in the day had significantly longer life. They were fitter. They had less rates of obesity and, and diabetes. So the the hope was that we could translate that to humans where if humans were eating within a small eight hour window in the day, we would also see all of these exciting benefits. The trouble is a mouse and humans are vastly different specifically with the speed of our metabolism. So a mice fasting for sixteen hours in the day is vastly different to a human fasting for sixteen hours in the day. To to get roughly the the equivalent time, it would be the equivalent of a human fasting for around four days. So when you have a look at the the trials in humans, looking at time restricted feeding, if you match both groups for calories, essentially, there's no added benefit for time restricted feeding, which is an interesting finding. So, yes, there's been a lot of hype. But for me personally, I don't practice time restricted feeding because the data just doesn't support it. What I'm quite interested in is prolonged fasting. So so multi day fasts. And the reason for that is it seems that if if you if you do fast for longer than, say, forty eight hours, you burn through your reserves in your liver. And and once you do that, you activate autophagy, which is the process of clearing away old cell components. So essentially, it's it's getting rid of those old cell components so that when you start feeding again, you can rebuild new ones. So so, you know, out with the old, you know, damaged mitochondria and and rebuilding them. So that process to me is very interesting. So, you know, roughly every three months, I'll do between a five to seven day water fast, you know, taking a multivitamin at the same time. That type of fasting to me is interesting. Now we we don't have robust human data yet on those prolonged fasts to see, you know, how much of a difference it's actually making. But for me, from a mechanistic standpoint, it makes sense that if you if we are gonna see these benefits from fasting, it makes sense to have a multi day fast. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's true. Like, you know, mice are very different and, to get the equivalent of benefits of fasting from a from a mouse to humans, then you need to, yeah, like, fast for several days probably. And the other problem is you can't do it, like, all the time as a human. So, it's much or even even then, like, the even if you did work, the life that you live would be, like, a very, you know, sad or very kinda challenging or very difficult to be or constantly starving and, cold and that kind of thing. So, yeah, I think they're all, like, you know, possible ways of mimicking those effects of calorie restriction or extended fasting and, and, just, you know, getting some similar benefits without necessarily going to have to last for that long. But I do also believe that, an extended fast every once in a while will have these, longevity benefits even if it is mostly media, even if it were to be only mediated by calorie restriction, then even then, fasting is a way great way or easy way to kinda achieve a severe calorie restriction. Because, you know, for calorie restriction to work, then you also need to be in quite a quite a deep calorie restriction as well for a long time, and that is also, like, challenging in other ways. So, that's why, let's say, going through a three day fast only or a five day fast, it's a more more more like a compressed, very intense form of calorie restriction that, may actually have some additional unique benefits, besides just the calorie restriction as well. There's also some potential downsides of time restricted feeding. So there there's been interesting data coming through showing that when you, if if you've got a person who hasn't been previously time restricted feeding and you measure their, you you measure their, muscle bulk on a DEXA scan, for example, and then use then they start time restricted feeding, and then you redo the DEXA scan to look at their muscle bulk. It seems that their their muscle declines with time restricted feeding, which is an interesting finding. So it it it might not yeah. I I think that's one of the other crucial things is that with with fasting, we do need to be exercising as well. We need to be trying to hold on to our muscle bulk and our muscle performance, no no matter what type of fasting that we're doing. Yeah. Completely agree. Fortunately, like, you know, you can, for sure, like, prevent the muscle loss with, like, just making sure that you eat enough protein and, exercise resistance training as well. But, what do you think about protein then? Like, do you think, like, high protein or low protein diet is the best for longevity or what? Yeah. It's it's tricky. There there's a lot of different opinions out there, and that's just simply borne out because there's conflicting research. It's there's an enzyme within the within the body called mTOR. And mTOR, when you switch it on, it builds muscle. Trouble is when you switch on mTOR all the time, you're never activating autophagy, which is what we've talked about before. So it seems like you need a balance. You need periods of time where you're eating protein and you're switching on mTOR and building muscle. But equally when there's times where you're switching mTOR off, so so you're not having protein. And that's where fasting comes in, so that you can clear away those old cell components. So when it comes to what is the optimal, you know, protein intake for longevity, you you probably want to balance. You don't want too much, but you don't want too little either because you you you want both. You want periods of time again where you're building muscle, but also periods of time where you're clearing away old cell components. So for me, generally, with a diet, I'm just trying to strike a middle ground because I I want I want both. And I think I think diets where you go extreme one way or extreme the other way, you're you're opening yourself up to risks. And and we simply don't know that the best diet because, again, there's such conflicting information out there. Yeah. I think, like, almost any like, you're gonna die eventually. So, and and different diets affect that differently. Like, let's say, a low protein diet may have some effect on increasing longevity, but at the same time, it increases your risk of, hip fractures and osteoporosis. So you can choose to die from a hip fracture, or you can choose to die from, some other thing, that depends on the diet that you follow. So, yeah, it's, I think, yeah, like moderation and, just eating, like, a whole foods diet, without, excess calories and, without maybe, like, crazy crazy high spiking of, blood sugar and without crazy high fat and without crazy high proteins or kind of a middle ground, generally like a good, yeah, just a golden rule of plants. Yeah. It's interesting that you say that because I think a lot of the so called longevity community is coming around to that fact that, you know, it's it's a balanced diet that's probably the the best way to go. And, you know, taking your examples about protein, you're you're absolutely right that a low protein diet has been associated with longer lifespan. But, you know, you're you're probably going to be weaker or or, you know, not be able to do the things that you want to do on a low protein diet because, again, you just don't have the muscle strength to get around, and you do increase your chances of hip fractures and whatnot on a low protein diet. So coming coming back to that point of around 60 years old, that's where the body seems to flip. So it it for a lot of my patients that I'm seeing in the clinic now, if they're over 60 years old, I'm really trying to encourage them to eat more protein, again, to try and hold on to the muscle bulk that they've that they've got. So that I think that that would be quite a crucial thing is that, you know, a person who is 20 or 30 is going to have different protein requirements compared to someone who is 60 or 70. Yeah. That's that's so true. Like, there's your studies finding that after 60, the higher protein intake is associated with a longer longevity. And, before 60, it's kind of the opposite so that the because, you know, even then you don't need that much protein when you're younger, your body is has already more muscle and it holds on to it better, and you build muscle more easily. You stimulate protein synthesis more easily. Whereas in the after 60, you don't do that. So then you would need to compensate for that with a higher protein intake, which is, like, quite, interesting and funny. Yeah. But maybe let's switch gears to, supplements. So we also have a lot of videos about supplements, these different kinds of longevity, potential drugs and compounds. So but before we get into, like, the kind of a more popular ones, what are some of the maybe, like, yeah, like a starter pack as well for, like, a longevity supplement list or some of the ones that you think are the best cheapest ones and, like, kind of the easiest ones people, could use? Yeah. So before I get into that, I I do just want to emphasize, and I keep going on about this. No supplement is going to replace diet and exercise. So these supplements are trying to add on to, to that. So when it comes to supplements, if if you wanted to dip your toe in if you like, I I don't really see any downside for taking omega three. I think that, you know, that that's been around for a long time. There's a lot of safety data on it. There's a suggestion, that in 2020, there was a meta analysis by the Mayo Clinic, which, you know, when they combine all of the data together, it seems that by taking omega three, you do improve heart health. And by that, I mean, you likely reduce your chance of having a heart attack. So I I think if if anyone wanted to dip their toe into supplements, omega three would probably be the way to go. And the second one would be vitamin D. So a lot of people now are working indoors with not seeing enough sunlight, and therefore, our vitamin d levels are low. And I think it was in 2019 in the British Medical Journal, they supplemented vitamin d and they could see a clear and statistically significant reduction in coughs and colds for people that were taking vitamin d. So it's not just bones that we're helping with vitamin d. It also seems to be our immune system that we're helping with vitamin d. So I I think if if anyone wanted to, again, dip their toe in, omega three and vitamin d would be a good place to start. And then after that, we've talked a lot about trying to, you know, look after yourself with muscle performance and and muscle bulk. One of the most underrated supplements, in my opinion, is creatine. So creatine, there's a truckload of human data. We've been using it for a long period of time. It is a safe supplement and it it does improve muscle performance. And so in in terms of your workout and it also helps with muscle recovery. So initially, there were concerns around, you know, kidney performance and and would taking creatine adversely affect your kidney function. But there's no long term data suggesting that, which is great. So that would be probably the third supplement that that I would start is creatine. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Creatine also has, like, other besides the muscle performance side, it also has, like, cognitive effects and, healthy bone density, methylation, and, improves intelligence and IQ. So and I think that's a very, underrated for sure supplement and, just needed for overall energy production. So you need energy for everything, and it's kinda good. But what about one question about the omega threes. Obviously, like, I would imagine that the quality of the omega threes also matters because, you know, there's a lot of a lot of omega threes on the market tend to be, like, oxidized and rancid. So I think, you know, the the because once the fat, the poofas in the, fat or the fish get oxidized, then they actually become quite damaging to the body and harmful causing a lot of, like, this, lipid peroxidation and other stress. So, you know, what are what are real maybe, like, sources of omega threes that you, use or find? Yeah. You've touched on something vital is that, you know, the supplement industry is not regulated like what medications are. So it it's very important to try and do everything that we can to make sure that there's no added things within the supplements that we're taking and making sure that the supplements are actually what we want. So there's a there's a great resource called labdoor.com. And what they do is third party test a lot of supplements that we take. And on Labdoor, you know, there there's a lot of different brands that are tested for omega three and creatine and and virtually whatever other supplement that you want to take. So I before taking any supplement, I always check them against Labdoor to see, you know, which one is the so called best, which one's the purest, and and and go from there. So but for me, that's that's the the best way of making sure that the supplements that we are taking are safe. Gotcha. Yeah. Yeah. That's a good, resource to know. But what about some of, yeah, like, more, I'd say, more intriguing or, more, like, you know, popular longevity supplements, that are recently that you find or, what are what are what are, like, your most favorite ones in terms of, that actually may have, like, additional longevity effect? Yeah. So there there's a lot of different supplements out there, and it's quite tricky to navigate which ones are hype and which ones may actually pan out. So for me, what I what I try and focus in on is what the interventions testing program are coming up with. So the interventions testing program is a group in The United States. And what's special about them is that they run out of three separate labs. And so they'll take a bunch of supplements and they'll they'll test them in these three separate labs, with mice that are what we call genetically heterogeneous. So so that just means that they're not just one gene pool, that there are a variety of genes. So it tries to match the real world. And they'll placebo control, these supplements, and they'll see which ones will actually extend lifespan. And that there's been there's there's only been a few molecules that seem to extend lifespan. But what's great about this program is that it also that they publish all of their results. So a lot of molecules that they've tested don't have positive results. So they will publish those and we can say, you know, that one was hype. Let's move on to the ones that actually seem to be extending lifespan. So I suppose the the shining example of that is a molecule called rapamycin. So rapamycin, I think it was discovered in the 1960s. And currently within medicine, it's used as an immunosuppressant to stop organ rejection. So if people need a kidney transplant, they will take rapamycin to stop their body rejecting that organ. So it sounds like quite a radical idea that that's a molecule that can extend lifespan. But how that molecule works is that it acts on mTOR, which we've already talked about. So it seems that as we age, mTOR is switched on more and more. It's almost like the body is trying to compensate for our muscle decline. It wants to try and rebuild that muscle. The trouble with doing that is again, you're never activating autophagy. So that's where rapamycin comes in. If you it seems that if if we're using rapamycin intermittently to switch on mTOR, but then sorry, to switch off mTOR, but then also appearance where we're switching on mTOR, that seems to be providing a lifespan benefit. Now that's borne out in mice. It will be very interesting to see if that's borne out in humans. So, you know, that's personally why I'm why I've set up a clinical trial to look at rapamycin in humans. So so that's one example. There's a couple of other examples that, of molecules that we can actually grab onto. One of them is glycine, which is a non so called non essential amino acid. Glycine is one of the fundamental building blocks of an antioxidant in the body called glutathione. So glutathione levels in the blood at least decline with age, particularly around the age of 45 to 50. So it seems that, you know, when when mice in the interventions testing program, when they had quite large dosages of glycine, there was a lifespan extension benefit. So again, it would be interesting to see if that bears out in humans. There is there is some potential evidence that it will though. So there was a trial of COVID patients, and half of them were given placebo. The other half were given a combination of supplements called combined metabolic activators. And one of them well, some of those supplements, were to do with rebuilding glutathione. And when those when the combined metabolic activator, what the combined metabolic activated group actually recovered from COVID a whopping three days faster compared to placebo. So, you know, there there is some human data coming through around, you know, glycine and glutathione coming through. Yeah. Yeah. I I I do. I'm a huge fan of glycine as well. And, yeah, so one of my favorite, like, longevity supplements, that I take on a daily basis. And, yeah, besides, the the things that you mentioned, dibrolithone, it also has, this balancing effect on methionine, which, in excess has been linked to aging and, cancer even. So the glycine, like, just contracts methionine, and the glycer supplementation has been found to be associated with, basically, having the same effect as methionine restriction on longevity without necessarily restricting methionine. So I think everyone who e eats like a any kind of protein in larger amounts, they will definitely need to take the glycine to counteract that. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. And there's also been a few other examples of of methods that we were hopeful would extend lifespan but haven't. So one of them is, one of them is resveratrol. So resveratrol was tested by the interventions testing program at quite large dosages and it didn't extend lifespan. Another one is, aspirin. So in the initial trials with the interventions testing program at quite a low dose, aspirin was associated with a slightly longer lifespan. But at higher dosages of aspirin, there was no effect. It's actually the same with omega three. So omega three was trialed and it didn't extend lifespan. I personally still take omega three because I want to try and reduce my heart attack risk. There's also some evidence around cognition as well. So yeah. And then there's a few other supplements that that I personally take that haven't that that have been tested by the intervention testing program. So So one of them is nicotinamide riboside. So we've touched a lot about, metabolism, you know, with this podcast and how it seems to decline from about the age of 60. One of the central molecules to metabolism is NAD, which we can see declines as we age. And by taking precursors such as nicotinamide riboside, we can probably rebuild our NAD and make our metabolism more resilient against disease. So again, if that that's part of the combined metabolic activated group of supplements that was treating COVID patients with that three day faster recovery. So nicotinamide riboside, when it was tested again by the interventions testing program, it didn't extend lifespan. But I'm I'm more excited about what it will do for diseased states. Again, if if we catch COVID or there's fatty liver or, you know, something like that, nicotinamide riboside probably would help. Again, we're we're still waiting on more human data to come through. Yeah. I think I think it might be because of, you know, because of the role NAD has on the body. Like, you know, with high NAD, your body just has, like, more energy essentially to, do repair and, conduct antioxidant defenses and start to kinda clean out the the, like, be more resilient, essentially. But if you have a disease state like diabetes or high inflammation and you know, some other, like, say that you're not sleeping enough and those kind of things, then your NAD levels will be by by default lower because the body has to use that NAD to kind of counteract the disease state. And if you and then once your NAD gets depleted, then it's like a downward spiral that you start to become more vulnerable to those disease states and, that it depletes NAD further, etcetera, etcetera. So, yeah, like, maybe those NAD supplements and NAD boosters tend to be the best used when your body is on the recovered, or under some sort of, higher amounts of stress and higher amounts of disease state, to kind of pump up the NAD levels so that NAD that could be, like, you know, scooped off the top for the dealing with that disease state and, healing that and then being able to get back on track of the actual recovery process. NAD is, again, the resilience to disease. It's not so much lifespan extension that, you know, there's, you know, the the the mice data essentially doesn't support it. And if you have a look at, so there's a molecule called niacin, which used to be used a lot in medicine to lower cholesterol levels and and has been used for decades. So there's a lot of data on so called NAD boosting. And it doesn't it seems that it doesn't extend lifespan in humans. So the mice data doesn't support it. The human data doesn't support it. But what seems to be apparent is those diseased states by taking, you know, molecules that boost NAD, we are more resilient and then can likely recover faster from those diseased states. So yeah. Nice. Which one of the NNE boosters do you think is the kind of most, optimistic or has the highest potential? NMN, NR, or, nicotinamide, or NASAN? Yeah. It's there there's a lot of debate within the preclinical world as to which molecule is so called best. I think any supplement that we take, we need to make sure, first of all, that it's safe. So there's a lot of human safety data on nicotinamide riboside. And there's there's a good mechanism for how nicotinamide riboside can improve health. So personally, that's the one that that I've chosen. There's a lot of debate about, you know, how is NMN or NR actually absorbed into the body. Is it all converted into nicotinamide first before, you know, it actually reaches our cells? You get different replies from who, you know, different people within the preclinical world. So for me, I'm just going with the one that's got the most human data, which is nicotinamide riboside. So I personally plan on on taking that either when I'm under significant stress. So, you know, for example, when my second child comes about and there's gonna be significant sleep deprivation, I'll probably start it then. Otherwise, it started around the age of 35. Currently, I'm taking a small dose of niacin, so a hundred milligrams a day. I I do that again because we've got so much human data on it. It it is a safe molecule with those small dosages, and that is probably giving me all the NAD support that I need right now as a 30 year old. Mhmm. Yeah. For sure. I agree. I do take, like, NMN on days that I'm, like, sleep deprived or something like that, and I take, like, nicotinamide, the regular nicotinamide, on a daily basis. So, again, for the other benefits besides the NAD boosting, like, the other health benefits that it has. And, yeah, then the NAD booster, the little bit we get get from that is just, like, the side side effect of that, like, a good side effect. But I wanted to ask, like, just, like, thought that I got when you were talk when you were talking about, like, this because of the role of NAD and metabolism and the higher energy that you have, etcetera. Is there, like, any or yeah. Like, is there any longevity data about using ATP as a supplement? Because, you know, ATP, it's directly the end product of energy, or, you know, the the molecule of energy, and, with higher energy, your body will be just, you know, being able to, have higher antioxidant defense and to just do more things. So it's I haven't I have looked into it myself, but just the thought that I got, like, is there any, like, longevity data on ATP as a supplement? To be honest, I wouldn't have thought so because the this body burns through ATP in vast quantities every day. So you you'd have to be taking a a huge amount of of ATP, I would have thought, to to make a difference. And to be honest, I mean, if if you're requiring ATP as a supplement, I'd I'd be very skeptical about what's happening within the cell itself. If, you know, if if your cells can't produce enough ATP, you will die very, very, very quickly. So I I I wouldn't have thought that supplementing ATP would be would be beneficial because, yeah, you'd have to be taking vast amounts of it. And yeah. Yeah. So I I I wouldn't have thought so. Yeah. Well, maybe like it would be interesting to know. Maybe maybe they do a few studies in the future, but just a thought. Another cool thing that I've been recently interest but let maybe let's stick to the NAD side and, for a moment, how because it breaks the the sirtuins. So, sirtuins consume NAD to do their work, and they are, like, usually considered these longevity, molecules. And, SIRT two and six, SIRT six tends to be, the most associate or most promising one, most linked to longevity and lifespan. And, SIRT six is also, like, a supplement that can be used. So what are your thoughts on, like, sirtuins? Yeah. It's it's very tricky to answer because there again, there's so much conflicting data. When the hyperonsertuins first came out, you know, there there was there was a company that was sold for, I think, it was a $120,000,000 to GSK, around the hype of, you know, so called activating sirtuins. And and they and sirtuins were sold as longevity genes. Subsequent labs have have tested sirtuins. So and and there's actually some data suggesting that if you delete sirtuins, you will, and and yeast, it extends their lifespan. So, I'm not at all convinced, and and I don't think the research supports that sirtuins are longevity genes. You know, speaking with with people who were directly involved with, you know, discovering sirtuins, you know, people like doctor Matt Kavaline, you know, professor Brian Kennedy, you know, doctor Charles Brenner, none of them would would, I think, say that sirtuins are longevity genes. And and and they were directly involved, you know, with outlining how sirtuins work. So I'm and and, you know, the the mice data doesn't support it either, and the human data doesn't support it either. So I I I personally, I'm I'm not excited about sirtuins. I think they prop they, you know, I think we need sirtuins, but I don't think that trying to over activate them will will give benefits to to humans. Right. Right. Yeah. The the data just doesn't support it. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Maybe it's, again, like a minimal you need a certain threshold, and, after that, you don't need to activate them further. Yeah. Again, I I there's a reason why we've got sirtuins. But there's there's no convincing data. And and actually, I think there's more convincing data to say that they're not associated with lifespan, in terms of extending lifespan. Gotcha. So when it comes to sirtuin six, so overall that there are seven different sirtuins within humans. And the initial excitement was around sirtuin one. But, you know, I I think rightly so that the research hasn't really supported that trying to activate sirtuin one gives meaningful benefits to humans. So the attention seems to have changed to sirtuin six. And there was some mice data that came out showing that if you genetically alter mice to overexpress the two and six, that was associated with a longer lifespan, which is interesting. But again, you're it it's one, it's in mice, and two, you're genetically altering these mice to, to overexpress a two and six. So it wasn't supplements that that was doing this. So personally, I I I don't think that, you know, running away with a hype is is going to be useful for people. I think it it should certainly be researched. It's interesting, But I don't take us a two and six activator. I think we first need the mice data, then we need the human data to come through to make sure that those molecules that activates a two and six are safe and do activate a two and six in humans. And then we need, you know, larger trials to actually see, is there a meaningful benefit? I I I don't think at this point, taking sirtuin six activate is is a good use of money. Yeah. I don't I don't take the activators either, but I do do things that promote to do ins activation, like, you know, exercise and fasting and, calorie restriction and, also, like, the circadian rhythm side, which I think is quite underrated from the side, but because, like, the circadian rhythm alignment activates SIRT one or keeps it, activated. And that that SIRT one also, ties into together to the recycling of NAD plus through the NAMPT pathway. So, I think just being aligned with the circadian rhythm allows your, basically, circadian rhythm system to, help you to recycle NAD, on a regular basis. And if you have that working properly, then the requirement to supplement the NAD or sirtuins will also go down because your body's recycling the NAD itself. And that any NPT pathway is just, you know, circadian or independent. You need to circadian rhythm alignment to have that, working properly and to recycle the NAD. Yeah. I think there there's a lot of things to unpack there. So with NAD, it is central to our metabolism, and it is involved with a whole bunch of of different enzymes. Sirtuins are a a very small part of of what NAD actually helps to fuel. So, you know, I I I don't think that the, that the benefits to human health are to do with, you know, activating sirtuins. Because again, NAD, it it feels so many different things. And, you know, circadian rhythm, absolutely. You know, there's very good data showing that if you disrupt that circadian rhythm, that's, you know, associated with obesity, with, you know, diabetes, with heart disease. It's one of the reasons why I wanted to start working in a clinic so I didn't have to do shift work anymore. Yeah. But those, the the benefits of staying within that regular circadian rhythm, you know, I I don't think it's got a huge amount to do with sirtuins. You know, the circadian rhythm will affect so many different pathways within the body. So so to to say that most of those benefits are to do because of sirtuins, I I don't think that's that's correct. Because, again, it it so, you know, the circadian rhythm will affect so many different pathways. Yeah. I I agree. I was just saying that the circadian rhythm, end is is, basically, you end up with this higher energy through the circadian rhythm system, essentially. And Yes. Yeah. No. I'm sorry. What you're saying. Yeah. Yeah. And and sirtuins are in the middle of that. So you don't need necessarily they're not like, you know, the ones the key component, but they are, like, you know, in the middle of that that pathway. Yeah. I think that they are a component, but but equally that there's so many other things within that level, that that get influenced by high NAD and and a better recycling system of that NAD. Yeah. What about, alpha ketoglutarate? That's also, like, actually actually has had some human data showing that it's, it's it show it slows down, like, or, decreases the biological age or the DNA methylation age, But it's, yeah. Is it do you think consider that to be some good evidence that it may have some potential for longevity? Yeah. So I think it was last year that the, paper in mice came out showing I believe it was about an eighteen percent improvement in in mice lifespan when they were supplemented with alpha ketoglutarate. And, again, it's it's a very interesting molecule. And the study that that you're referring to, recently came out where they took I can't remember how many people it was, but they they measured their DNA methylation age. They they supplement with alpha ketoglutarate, and then they remeasured their DNA methylation age. And there was, I believe, an overall eight year reduction in the DNA methylation age. So that makes for fantastic headlines. But as we went through near the beginning of the of the podcast, looking at solely DNA methylation age, there's many different ways of measuring that. So it's it's quite and and so so it's quite difficult to interpret, first of all, the data. That study that that we're talking about now wasn't placebo controlled. So, you know, these these groups of people could have massively changed their diet. They could have started exercising more. They could have been sleeping better. And all of those things could have been contributing to this this better measurement of DNA methylation age. Yeah. So alpha ketoglutarate, it's it's an interesting molecule. I certainly think that it needs to have more human data. I think it's just important that the human data is you know comes out from placebo controlled randomized trials, with appropriate outcomes to see will there actually be an improvement in human health or not. Yeah. So I I I personally don't take alpha ketoglutarate yet. I'm still waiting on more data to come through to see if there is a true benefit for humans. Yeah. I I started taking it recently, just to, yeah, try it out. And, I think, yeah, I I agree that they should have, like, a lot more research. And, like, would be good to see, like, how it affects things, like, you know, the biomarkers, how it affects cholesterol and triglycerides and, blood sugar and those kind of things. So you see, like, more, yeah, actual, you know, more specific, data points. But, yeah, the thing with the alpha ketoglutarate is that, it also declines with age, the same with NAD and, and, like, you know, muscle, etcetera. But you can't really get it from a dietary source. There's no, like, food that that contains the alpha ketoglutarate. Like, it's just molecule in the metabolism. And, yeah, the only way to get it would be with a dietary like a supplement, but we don't know, like, whether or not, you know, whether or not it would raise your body's endogenous alpha ketoglutarate stores and whether or not it would have, like, any effect. But, yeah, like, theoretically, it would be something that, you know, does decline with age, and, the only way to get it would be, like, through a supplement. But, yeah, maybe it's the same with ATP. Like, maybe you don't need it. Yeah. It's it's tricky. There there are many things that decline with age. And it's it's trying to figure out, you know, would correcting that decline actually result in improved health. It it may do. I'm I'm I'm not I'm not saying that this molecule isn't exciting. I think it is exciting, but but I think that that excitement needs to be generated. Sorry. It needs to be directed to well conducted human trials because, you know, otherwise, the supplements that that people would be taking, you know, the the list would just be massive. Yeah. And and, you know, I I just get concerned. Yeah. If if people are taking a lot of different supplements, what is that going what is that combination going to be doing to them? And we've also touched on, you know, how pure are these supplements because the supplement industry is not regulated. So there there is the potential of doing a lot of harm by taking a lot of different supplements. So, yeah, you know, that that's the that's the other thing to consider. For sure. Speaking of the long list of supplements, so, like, what kind of supplements are you taking? Or, yeah, and maybe, like, explain some of the reasons why. Yeah. So I take a first thing, when I when I wake up, on days that I haven't exercised, I take a molecule, to produce sulforaphane. So sulforaphane is a molecule that activates an enzyme called n r f two. So essentially that that's like a master redox switch within the body. So if you switch that on, you activate a whole host of defense pathways against oxidants. Now when when activating nRF two was tested by the interventions testing program, there was a lifespan extension benefit. It was small, but it was there. So I I personally, take that in the morning. But there's also data showing that if you take molecules to activate your antioxidant defenses, that probably gets in the way of exercise benefits. So when you exercise, you're you're you are damaging your cells and you're releasing a lot of different oxidants. But it actually seems that when when you do have that burst of oxidants, it stimulates your cells to become more efficient to deal with those oxidants better. So if you if you remove those oxidants too quickly, you likely interfere with those with the stress response. So that's why I only take this molecule, on days that I don't exercise. I have you know, moving on to other supplements, I take collagen. So when I first looked into collagen, I thought it was just complete hype. But when you when you have a look at the human data, there there is improvements that we can see. There's improvements in skin health, and there's probably improvements in blood vessel health as well. So I take hydrolyzed collagen about ten grams. And and with that, I also take hyaluronic acid. So hyaluronic acid is also a supplement that I thought was complete baloney when I first looked into it because I I wasn't convinced that the body could actually absorb it because it's a very long molecule. But, again, the the human data is quite convincing that, you know, hyaluronic acid do supplements. When they're placebo controlled, it does improve skin health. So if it improves skin health, what other markers of health is it improving? So, you know, I I I also take that. We've also talked about how I take niacin. With niacin, there is, issues with, with boosting a molecule within the body called homocysteine. So to to reduce that, I take another supplement called TMG or trimethylglycine. Yeah. Yeah. And I also take omega three, vitamin d. Sorry. Take a bit of a list. No. No. Go ahead. Creatine as well. One of the other supplements that that I'm considering stopping is metformin. So I I do take metformin on days that I don't exercise. I'm not I'm not actually that I'm not that excited about the data on metformin as as what I once used to be. So, again, the interventions testing program trialed metformin. It didn't extend lifespan, which I think is is quite significant because a lot of the hype around metformin was in the mice started. So so some of the studies were showing a lifespan extension benefit. Whereas when the intervention testing program trialed it, which is the creme de la creme of my starter, there was no there was no benefit. So I'm less excited about that. What I am excited about in terms of diabetic medications, though, so which is what metformin is, there's a class of diabetic medications called SGLT two inhibitors. Essentially, what it does, it it works on the kidneys to make you pee out sugar. And when the interventions testing program trialed that, I believe it was a fourteen percent improvement in lifespan. And how it seems to work is that it it blunts the peaks in blood sugar levels. So instead of your blood sugar level spiking after a meal, it it flattens that curve. And it and that's the most likely reason as to why these SGLT two inhibitors improve lifespan. So I'm I'm considering stopping metformin, and I'm just waiting on a bit more human data to come through about the SGLT two inhibitors because that's a medication that I prescribe in my clinical practice to my type two diabetic patients. And we're getting fantastic results in terms of, you know, weight loss, decreased heart disease, decreased kidney disease, and you can see it with the markers that that we're actually testing for. Nice. Yeah. That's cool. Is that all? What's it up for us? There's a there's a few more. Okay. Well, I do. Go ahead. Yeah. Yeah. I I do take, vitamin k two. There there's there's a suggestion in the data that, so so vitamin k two works on a group of proteins called GLA proteins, which seem to control where the calcium goes in the body. So either it's gonna get deposited in in other tissues in the body such as your blood vessels, or is it going to stay within your bones, which is where you want it? The the human data looking at, vitamin k two, it's not that exciting for reducing heart disease, but it is exciting for, reducing fracture or or bone breaks as we age. So that's primarily the reason why I take it is to make sure that I I am activating my GLA protein so that my calcium stays within my bones as opposed to spreading elsewhere where I don't want it. Mhmm. I I do take a a very small dose of melatonin at night. I I, you know, there's I I take only three hundred micrograms. So so people with, who take melatonin, they're often mega mega dosing melatonin. And and I I don't really understand why people do that because the the dosages that they take are are far in excess from what the body will produce by itself. So I take a small dose of three hundred micrograms, and that's primarily to make sure that I'm falling asleep when I want to fall asleep. Melatonin levels, they decline as we age. So, that's one of the reasons why older people, they do struggle to fall asleep and stay asleep. It's simply they don't have enough melatonin. So, you know, taking melatonin in your older years, particularly a prolonged release version of melatonin, seems to make sense, particularly if you take it, you know, three or four hours before you want to fall asleep. But as of right now, again, since I'm 30, I'm not worried about my levels of melatonin. I just want to make sure that I fall asleep when I want to fall asleep. Yeah. The we we haven't really talked about senolytics yet. So senolytics are more like what it's a therapy where we're hopeful that we can remove old cells. So senescent cells are some people refer to them as zombie cells. So these are cells that have stopped dividing. They're still alive, and they're still releasing a lot of different factors within the body. And a lot of those factors are actually quite damaging. So the hope is that if we can clear away those senescent cells, to to make way for new cells, essentially, it's out with the old and then in with the new. Mhmm. It it's exciting. And I I take a molecule called fisetin, which is being trialed by the Mayo Clinic at the moment to see whether it will have human benefits. So for five days within the month, I will take fisetin. I'll also take that with, quercetin as well, which is another molecule that we're hopeful will clear away those senescent cells. Nice. Yeah. That's that's what's That's a bit of a list. But No. Yeah. I almost take almost all of them, besides, like, the metformin and, some of the other things that you mentioned. But, yeah, I do take a lot of them as and I think they they look relatively easy, like creatine and vitamin k two and magnesium. Maybe you do take magnesium. Yeah. I do take magnesium. Yeah. Yeah. Nice. Yeah. Like, in, those kind of things are pretty, good. But more, like, generally any adoptions, like, you know, vitamin c or, ALA or anything like that? Yeah. I recently did a video about ALA. And for for people with diseases so so we've talked a bit about, you know, diseased states and and how that's different to a healthy person. So in type two diabetics who have got nerve damage, taking ALA seems to alleviate some of their symptoms with with that with the pain that they get from that nerve damage, which is exciting. Trying to translate that though to hue to to otherwise healthy people, is very challenging Because there is my status showing that if you give ALA, it will shorten their lifespan. So what what we're probably seeing is that if if there's a imbalance of oxidants to antioxidants, if you try and restore that balance with things like ALA, that's probably beneficial. But for otherwise healthy people that are that have already got that balance, if you take things like ALA, you might be upsetting that balance where you've got where you're tipping the balance too much towards antioxidants and you don't have enough oxidants, which sounds a bit baffling, but, you know, we've already gone through how, exercise releases a lot of oxidants and and that initial oxidant stress is actually quite good for cells. So we, you know, you don't want too much or too little of really anything in the body. And that that includes oxidants to antioxidants. So I I personally don't take ALA, again, because I don't wanna upset that balance. And then when it comes to vitamin C, again, it seems that, you know, once you once you're hitting enough vitamin C every day, which you can get from your diet, there doesn't seem to be any benefit of megadosing, you know, vitamin c. There's been a lot of hype and a lot of studies looking into this. But, you know, the the data simply doesn't support taking vitamin c supplements so long as your diet is already good. You know? And and people who are suffering with cancer and are malnourished, then sure, taking a multivitamin absolutely makes sense, and that multivitamin would include vitamin c. But But for otherwise healthy people who have who had great diet, regular exercise, I I I can't see the benefit of using your money to to buy vitamin c supplements. Right. Right. Yeah. Yeah. So they're poison the poison is in those, and you need some stress or some some of this oxidation as well to, stay healthy. And, kinda completely nullifying it isn't always, like, the best thing to do. Yeah. That's right. Right. Well, it's been really awesome talking with you, and, we'll start wrapping it up. Before I ask my last question, what can people learn more about you and your work? To be honest, it's probably just checking out my YouTube channel. So I I've got my supplement list, there under every video. So that that would be the the best place. I'm still practicing, you know, medicine here in Auckland, New Zealand. So that that's also another way where you can meet me in person if you wanted to. But, yeah, I think what one of the things that we've, again, emphasized within this podcast is there is no substitute for diet and exercise and and high quality sleep. These supplements are interesting. There there's human data coming through that's starting to support, you know, taking these molecules, but you cannot beat diet and exercise. Yeah. For sure. And my last question what we'll put out the links in the show notes as well. And, my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or a habit that you wish you loved it sooner? I I would say, when I first started my YouTube channel, I was swept away with a lot of the hype that was within the so called longevity space that, you know, we were about to find ways to cure aging or or reverse aging. I I would say it's very easy to get swept up in that hype, but the advice that that I would give is, you know, be skeptical. Be very skeptical. And, again, you can't beat diet and exercise. You Yeah. You really can't. Yeah. That's true. Awesome awesome advice, and I agree. Well, it was great talking with you. And, yeah, maybe in the future when there's new studies coming out, we can do, like, a follow-up. Yeah. Absolutely. I would love to. Thanks for having me. Yeah. It was great.