Yeah. Like a starter package for for longevity supplement list or some of the ones that you think are the best, cheapest ones and, like, kinda the easiest ones people, could use. Yeah. So before I get into that, I I do just want to emphasize, and I keep going on about this. No supplement is going to replace diet and exercise. So these supplements are trying to add on to, to that. So when it comes to supplements, if if you wanted to dip your toe in if you like, I don't really see any downside for taking omega three. I think that, you know, that that's been around for a long time. There's a lot of safety data on it. There's a suggestion, that in 2020, there was a meta analysis by the Mayo Clinic, which, you know, when they combine all of the data together, it seems that by taking omega three, you do improve heart health. And by that, I mean, you likely reduce your chance of having a heart attack. So I I think if if anyone wanted to dip their toe into supplements, omega three would probably be the way to go. And the second one would be vitamin d. So a lot of people now are working indoors with not seeing enough sunlight. And therefore, our vitamin d levels are low. And I think it was in 2019 in the British Medical Journal, they supplemented vitamin d and they could see a clear and statistically significant reduction in coughs and colds for people that were taking vitamin d. So it's not just bones that we're helping with vitamin d. It also seems to be our immune system that we're helping with vitamin d. So I I think if if anyone wanted to, again, dip their toe in, omega three and vitamin d would be a good place to start. And then after that, we've talked a lot about trying to, you know, look after yourself with muscle performance and and muscle bulk. One of the most underrated supplements, in my opinion, is creatine. So creatine, there's a truckload of human data. We've been using it for a long period of time. It is a safe supplement, and it it does improve muscle performance. And so in in terms of your workout, and it also helps with muscle recovery. So initially, there were concerns around, you know, kidney performance and would taking creatine adversely affect your kidney function. But there's no long term data suggesting that, which is great. So that would be probably the third supplement that that I would start is creatine. Mhmm. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Creatine also has, like, other besides the muscle performance side, it also has, like, cognitive effects and, helps with bone density, methylation, and, improves intelligence and IQ. So and I think, yeah, it's a very, underrated for sure supplement and, just needed for overall energy production. So you need energy for everything, and it's kinda good. But what about one question about the omega threes. Obviously, like, I would imagine that the quality of the omega threes also matters because, you know, there's a lot of a lot of omega threes on the market tend to be, like, oxidized and bio rancid. So I think, you know, the the because once the fat, the puffas in the, fat the fish get oxidized, then it actually become quite damaging to the body and harmful causing a lot of, like, this, lipid peroxidation and other stress. So, you know, what are what are real maybe, like, sources of omega threes that you use or find? Yeah. You've touched on something vital is that, you know, the supplement industry is not regulated like what medications are. So it it's very important to try and do everything that we can to make sure that there's no added things within the supplements that we're taking and making sure that the supplements are actually what we want. So there's a there's a great resource called labdoor.com. And what they do is third party test a lot of supplements that we take. And on Labdoor, you know, there there's a lot of different brands that are tested for omega three and creatine and and virtually whatever other supplement that you want to take. So I before taking any supplement, I always check them against Labdoor to see, you know, which one is the so called best, which one's the purest, and and and go from there. So but for me, that's that's the the best way of making sure that the supplements that we are taking are safe. Gotcha. Yeah. Yeah. That's a good, resource to know. But what about some of the, like, more, as in more, intriguing or, more, like, you know, popular longevity supplements, that are recently that you find or, what are what are what are, like, your most favorite ones in terms of, that actually may have, like, additional longevity effect? Yeah. So there there's a lot of different supplements out there, and it's quite tricky to navigate which ones are hype and which ones may actually pan out. So for me, what I what I try and focus in on is what the interventions testing program are coming up with. So the interventions testing program is a group in The United States. And what's special about them is that they run out of three separate labs. And so they'll take a bunch of supplements and they'll they'll test them in these three separate labs, with mice that are what we call genetically heterogeneous. So so that just means that they're not just one gene pool, that there are a variety of genes. So it tries to match the real world. And they'll placebo control, these supplements, and they'll see which ones will actually extend lifespan. And that there's been there's there's only been a few molecules that seem to extend lifespan. But what's great about this program is that it also that they publish all of their results. So a lot of molecules that they've tested don't have positive results. So they will publish those and we can say, you know, that one was hype. Let's move on to the ones that actually seem to be extending lifespan. So I suppose the the shining example of that is a molecule called rapamycin. So rapamycin, I think it was discovered in the 1960s. And currently within medicine, it's used as an immunosuppressant to stop organ rejection. So if people need a kidney transplant, they will take rapamycin to stop their body rejecting that organ. So it sounds like quite a radical idea that that's a molecule that can, extend lifespan. But how that molecule works is that it acts on mTOR, which we've already talked about. So it seems that as we age, mTOR is switched on more and more. It's almost like the body is trying to compensate for our muscle decline. It wants to try and rebuild that muscle. The trouble with doing that is, again, you're never activating autophagy. So that's where rapamycin comes in. If you it seems that if if we're using rapamycin intermittently to switch on mTOR, but then sorry, to switch off mTOR, but then also have parents where we're switching on mTOR. That seems to be providing a lifespan benefit. Now that's borne out in mice. It will be very interesting to see if that's borne out in humans. So, you know, that's personally why I'm why I've set up a clinical trial to look at rapamycin in humans. So so that's one example. There's a couple of other examples that, of molecules that we can actually grab onto. One of them is glycine, which is a non so called non essential amino acid. Glycine is one of the fundamental building blocks of an antioxidant in the body called glutathione. So glutathione levels in the blood at least decline with age, particularly around the age of 45 to 50. So it seems that, you know, when when mice in the interventions testing program, when they had quite large dosages of glycine, there was a lifespan extension benefit. So So again, it would be interesting to see if that bears out in humans. There is there is some potential evidence that it will though. So there was a trial of COVID patients, and half of them were given placebo. The other half were given a combination of supplements called combined metabolic activators. And one of them well, some of those supplements, were to do with rebuilding glutathione. And when those when the combined metabolic activator, what the combined metabolic activated group actually recovered from COVID a whopping three days faster compared to placebo. So, you know, there there is some human data coming through around, you know, glycine and glutathione coming through. Yeah. Yeah. I I I do. I'm a huge fan of glycine as well. And, yeah, so one of my favorite, like, the longevity supplements, that I take on a daily basis. And, yeah, besides the the things that you mentioned, dibrolithone, it also has, this balancing effect on methionine, which, in excess has been linked to aging and, cancers even. So the glycine, like, just contracts methionine, and the glycer supplementation has been found to be associated with, basically, having the same effect as methionine restriction on longevity without necessarily restricting methionine. So I think everyone who eat eats like a any kind of protein in larger amounts, they will definitely need to take the glycine to contract that. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. And there's also been a few other examples of of methods that we were hopeful would extend lifespan but haven't. So one of them is, one of them is resveratrol. So resveratrol was tested by the interventions testing program at quite large dosages and it didn't extend lifespan. Another one is, aspirin. So in the initial trials with the interventions testing program at quite a low dose, aspirin was associated with a slightly longer lifespan. But at higher dosages of aspirin, there was no effect. It's actually the same with omega three. So omega three was trialed and it didn't extend lifespan. I personally still take omega three because I want to try and reduce my heart attack risk. There's also some evidence around cognition as well. So yeah. And then there's a few other supplements that that I personally take that haven't that that have been tested by the intervention testing program. So one of them is nicotinamide riboside. So we've touched a lot about, metabolism, you know, with this podcast and how it seems to decline from about the age of 60. One of the central molecules to metabolism is NAD, which we can see declines as we age. And by taking precursors such as nicotinamide riboside, we can probably rebuild our NAD and make our metabolism more resilient against disease. So again, if that that's part of the combined metabolic activated group of supplements that was treating COVID patients with that three day faster recovery. So nicotinamide riboside, when it was tested, again, by the interventions testing program, it didn't extend lifespan. But I'm I'm more excited about what it will do for diseased states. Again, if if we catch COVID or there's fatty liver or, you know, something like that, nicotinamide riboside probably would help. Again, we're we're still waiting on more human data to come through.