George Orwell has a quote, at the age of 50, everyone has the face they deserve. So this is probably just describes how your aspects of aging and even skin aging, biological aging, all of those things are dependent off the person's lifestyle. So in this video, I'm gonna talk about the five things that speed up skin aging and decrease your skin collagen. Do it. Of course, with age, we all see a natural decrease in skin collagen, and it starts even at the age of 20. Starting at 20, you're gonna see a decrease of your skin collagen by about 10% per decade. So there is nothing that you can really do about that because with age, we, will experience different things that, decrease collagen production and impose more damage to our skin collagen. But, we're still able to kind of determine the speed of that. So number one is oxidative stress. Oxidative stress directly damages collagen tissue in your skin. In the twenty first century, we're exposed to a lot more oxidative stress from air pollution, heavy metals, persistent organic pollutants, pesticides, herbicides, glyphosate, etcetera. And these will also have a negative effect on your skin health and oxidative stress. But even if you live in a very clean environment, you're still exposed to higher amounts of oxidative stress from the sun because of damage to the ozone layer. So UV radiation from the sun is actually one of the most, like, natural and the one of the biggest contributors to oxidative stress to your collagen and your skin overall. Over the past few decades, we're exposed to a lot more UV radiation from the sun because of the damage to the ozone layer. That excess UV radiation causes more damage and oxidative stress to the DNA and protein structure of your body. Some things that can help you to counteract that oxidative stress from any source is just having a proper, strong antioxidant defense system activated in your body that includes, glutathione, superoxide dismutase, and other things. Even things like NMN and polyphenols from coffee have been shown to have a positive effect on the antioxidant defense status of your skin and reduces the oxidative stress. Number two is gonna be advanced glycation end products or AGEs. Advanced glycation end products or AGEs are molecules created from sugar and proteins reacting inside the body. AGEs are involved in the formation of wrinkles and skin aging because they break down collagen that holds the skin firm. Glycation directly releases m m p one, matrix metalloproteinase one, which is an enzyme that breaks down collagen. Excess UV radiation actually also increases m m p one, which, then decreases collagen. Glycated collagen accumulates in the skin and the cartilage as we age, and this accumulation dramatically increases after the age of 40. Probably the biggest contributor to the formation of advanced glycation end products is just eating foods that have a very high glycemic index. So these big spikes and big rises in your blood sugar levels will have a bigger formation of the AGEs that then speeds up skin aging. So you would want to make sure that you have proper incidence activity so that whenever you do raise your blood sugar levels, you would clear it faster and to also opt for foods that lower the blood sugar spike. So things like vegetables, proteins, as well as just eating lower glycemic index foods. Glycine is actually one of the best antidotes to AGE formation because it, lowers the blood sugar response from a meal by about 30%. Supplementing glynac, glycine, and n acetylcysteine at a dose of one hundred milligrams per kilogram per day of both glycine and n a c has been found to lower insulin resistance by 22% after just fourteen days in type two diabetics. Carnosine and beta alanine are other supplements that can also help to, reduce AGE formation and protect against them. Number three is gonna be hyperglycemia or just high blood sugar levels slash diabetes. So this is just obviously gonna contribute to AGE formation and having a higher blood sugar level, you know, like a diabetic range, prediabetic range is constantly obviously damaging your vascular tissue and, blood vessels, but also damages the, the collagen structure in your skin. So the advice here is probably very similar that you just have to make sure that you have better insensitivity and not eat foods that really spike your blood sugar level too high. Number four is gonna be low grade inflammation. So inflammation is, you know, in different ways, many ways, it can contribute to accelerated aging, especially skin aging as well. And obviously, it just damages the collagen structures, but it also wears down your antioxidant defense systems. If your body is always having to deal and waste its antioxidant defense resources for the inflammation, then, obviously, it doesn't have any other resources to deal with the exogenous oxidative stress that we are exposed to. Generally, the healthy lifestyle is a very good antidote to inflammation. You have to exercise regularly, see properly, avoid chronic stress, don't get exposed to, yeah, like, unnecessary, sources of inflammation and foods that have inflammatory effect on your body. And even things like saunas and ice baths and cold exposure can also lower the inflammation. So there you have it. These are the things that reduce your skin collagen and speed up skin aging. If you want to learn more about all aspects of collagen and skin health, then check out my new book with doctor James and Nicole Antonia called The Collagen Cure. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized, stay empowered.