Hey. Welcome back to the channel. My name is Sim Lund, and in today's video, we're gonna talk about my personal supplement routine. Before I begin, I have to clarify, like, what is my purpose with different kind of supplements. The reason why I would consider taking a supplement has to do with, like, yeah, like, just the longevity benefits and aging benefits. I don't even need, like, sleep supplements per se. I don't need any, like, specific supplements for certain, like, conditions or deficiencies. The only reason I am taking different supplements is primarily for, like, the longevity benefits. And this is a warning, I'm also going to name, like, some specific brands that I'm using because I know, like, there are gonna be dozens of people asking, like, what kind of brand are you taking for that kind of a supplement. So I'm just going to already preemptively name them in the video, and you can check out some of the links for those products as well in the description. Chill out. Usually, after I wake up, I don't take, like, my supplements immediately. I'm going to pretty much wait, like, an hour or two, and I usually do them, like, on an empty stomach and without any, like, coffee or without any teas or anything of that. So the sub ones I take in the morning within one to two hours after waking up, one of the main ones is a SIRT6, which is a product by Do Not Age. And this is actually, like, a new compound. And, obviously, sirtuin, many people know that SIRT6 specifically is the one that is helping with DNA repair and also, like, some aspects of circadian regulation. So this is a very, let's say, new supplement. We don't have, like, that much research about this, but it's definitely not one of the, like, the priority list of supplements to take. Another supplement that are usually to take in the morning would be, like, NMN. So this is also for NAD production, and, NMN is, we do have studies on NMN and its benefits for raising NAD levels. Of course, NAD levels are one thing that do go down with age. I don't take NMN every day because I'm still very young. My energy levels are naturally very high. I don't have any, like, energy issues. The only time I am taking the NMN is at times where, like, I might have, like, had a bad night's sleep, I might have had some circadian mismatch, or if I just feel tired, like, every once in a while, whatever, I'll just take, like, this NMN. And on the other days where I'm not taking the NMN, then I do still want to support the natural NAD recycling. So this is where the niacinamide comes into play. So when your body is producing NAD, most of it goes back into the recycling pathway, and, niacinamide is actually one of the bottlenecks of that cell latch pathway. So niacin is another NAD booster, but niacin works through a different pathway. Niacin or nicotinic acid works through the price handler pathway. So there's three pathways of producing NAD, price handler pathway, the denovo biosynthesis pathway which uses tryptophan, and the salvage pathway. The vast majority of your daily NAD comes from the salvage pathway and this is the one that decreases with age as well. Like the elderly aren't able to recycle their NAD that much which is the reason why they have such low NAD levels, part of the reason. And niacinamide is the bottleneck for boosting the or making sure that the salvage pathway works properly. And the circadian rhythm alignment is actually also, the bottleneck, part of the bottleneck for the salvage pathway. So that's why, you know, obviously, bright light exposure is crucial and maintaining circadian rhythm alignment and niacinamide is in there. So I'm I'm kind of, like, targeting the NAD salvage pathway of boosting the salvage pathway so that it'll work, properly. So this is not the same as niacin. Like, the niacin is different. It works through a different pathway, and there's, like, a limit of how much benefit or how much NAD you would get from the price under pathway, which is the niacin pathway. So that's why you overcome that limit with the salvage pathway. So you can pretty much make infinite amount of NAD if you have the NAD salvage pathway working properly. For that, you need circadian rhythm alignment and niacinamide. So the niacinamide is different as niacin. I'm personally not taking niacin, although it has pretty good benefits for the lipid profile and cardiovascular disease health. Trimethylglycine, so if you are taking NMN, then you do lose some of the methyl donors. So the NMN can then make you excrete some methyl donors, and methylation is obviously very important. And TMG also has, like, other benefits, like it actually helps to lower homocysteine levels, which is important for cardiovascular disease. Again, next supplement that I take is a glucosamine. So this is just a regular glucosamine sulfate that I'm taking. I'm taking three grams. So that's the higher dose that you want to take, and the lower doses really haven't been found to be effective. So only, like, doses of up to one point five to three grams has been found to be actually beneficial for the joints and stuff like that. I'm taking it for the cartilage, the joints, but also, like, the anti inflammatory benefits and the autophagy regulating benefits. So glucosamine is an autophagy regulator. It's an inflammatory and in a lot of, like, several epidemiologist studies, they find that the glucosamine use is associated with, reduced all cause mortality and reduced cardiovascular disease mortality. Next supplement is HMB, which, is this kind of brand, Iron Max. I don't think that many people most people won't need this supplement because, I mean, HMB is just a metabolite of leucine. So first of all, it's much more expensive than regular leucine, and it's certainly if you don't need it if you're eating breakfast, for example. So I take it in the morning in the fastest state to mitigate against muscle catabolism. So I do, like, a pretty extended fasting window. So I have a pretty narrow eating window because I'm also very physically active. I train a lot. I have good amount of muscle mass. I'm pretty advanced in, like, strength training and stuff like that. So I take this supplement to counteract some of the potential muscle catabolism that might occur if I'm just, you know, fasting too long. The only thing is, yeah, like, if you are eating breakfast, then you don't need it because this is only gonna, like, counteract the lack of eating. Glycine and NAC. So glycine, I take multiple times a day, and, I take in this I'll actually make tea. So the first kind of supplement that I take in the morning is, just some tea with a little bit of glycine, like a teaspoon of glycine, makes the tea a bit sweeter. And some day some days of the week, I'll take NAC because the NAC plus glycine combo is very powerful for boosting glutathione. And we have several human clinical trials showing that the the glycine NAC combo is beneficial for reducing the hallmarks of aging, improving many aspects of age related decline. I don't take it every day. NAC might reduce some of the adaptations to muscle hypertrophy training that's why I'm taking the NAC only on on generally like the rest days or some days if I am training in the afternoon or something then I'll take the NSE on the morning. It's not necessary to take it like every day. If I were to be like older then I would take it every day but, at my age I don't need to take it every day and it might actually be counterproductive on some of the days. And last supplement on the list is calcium alpha ketoglutarate. At least like in 2021, we had this one study show that six months reduced the biological age of age of humans. The next time I'm taking supplements is before my workout. So I usually work out in, like, the noontime around twelve to 2PM, so I'll have a whey protein to support the muscle anabolism and reduce the muscle catabolism. So I think that working out fasted is fine. You're just not gonna see that you're not gonna see that much results. After a certain point, you're gonna hit the plateau if you always work out fasted. I'll get 30 of protein from the whey protein, which is usually, like, one and a half scoops of the protein that I'm taking. And into there, I'll also had collagen peptides. So I'll take, like, ten grams of collagen peptide, something like that because collagen before I workout is going to help with the collagen synthesis in the joints. We have studies showing that, if you take collagen, like, one hour before the exercise, then the the mechanical tension on the joints with is going to, like, help to stimulate the collagen synthesis in that particular joint. Taking the collagen before the workout is the best time to do so if your concern is, like, the, you know, joint aspect. But you can take for the skin health and stuff like that, you can take collagen, at any other time of the day. I'll just sneak it in there together with the whey protein, so, I'll get it together and I'll get the joint benefits more pronounced. I'll also add a little of glycine to the mix, so three grams of glycine because glycine actually lowers your body temperature which then boosts your physical performance. So one of the reasons why you bonk during exercise has to do with your body temperature overheating. You overheat and cooling down the body before the exercise has been shown to boost endurance specifically and power as well in some studies where you they, like, cool down the hands with, like, these mittens or whatever. And, the like, you you can do more reps after that because your body temperature is cooler and the threshold at which you bonk or when you reach fatigue is higher. And glycine actually also just lowers your body temperature and taking the before taking it before the workout helps you to prevent the overheating. I'll also add Inositol into there. Inositol, very beneficial for even, like, neurotransmitter production. It helps with sleep and physical performance and insulin sensitivity. I'll eat like a piece of dark chocolate. So there is very nice brand, Nordkode, which has this 90% dark chocolate. It's the best dark chocolate that I've tasted. It has MCT oil as well plus cocoa nibs, so it's very kind of tasty. I'll add like one eat like one square, which is maybe like 50 calories, and the dark chocolate obviously has a lot of these polyphenols, it helps lower blood pressure, tasty add actually helps to boost dopamine, which then, puts you into, like, the focus zone as well for the workout. Then creatine together with this citrulline and taurine, so we have this gorilla mode and some other, like, compounds that help with the pump. So they help to, like, vasodilation, which then obviously, is very beneficial for muscle hypertrophy. It's the non caffeinated pre workout stimulant free. I don't like to have this, like, stim stimulated with caffeine pre workouts because there's just too much caffeine in there. Then after the workout, I'll have dinner and, have some food. With the food at dinner, I don't really have that many supplements depending on the day. One supplement that you do have on pretty regular consistent basis is chromium picolinate. So this you can get this kind of, from Amazon, I think, and it has one thousand micrograms of chromium. Now chromium is mostly known for improving insulin sensitivity and helping with blood sugar regulation, and it does have studies showing that it helps with, insulin resistance and diabetes. Now why would I take that? I don't have diabetes. Well, the thing is that chromium also has studies showing that it improves body composition. The way it lowers your blood sugar is by enhancing the actions of insulin and then shovel more glucose into the cells. So it has, like, slight anabolic effect by enhancing insulin's action. Now you do get very limited amount of chromium from foods, like the highest highest amounts of, chromium foods are like oysters and clams and broccoli and oatmeal and stuff like that. The issue is that the absorption of dietary chromium is only, like, 1%, and, you do lose a lot of chromium through sweat as well. So if you work out for one hour, you lose up to, like, ten micrograms, which is, like, half of your RDA. And I also take the sauna almost every day of the week. I take the sauna, like, four times a week. Twenty or thirty minutes sauna session, I'll I'll lose as well, like, the half RDA, the second half of the RDA. Then you would literally need, like, five hundred to one thousand micrograms of chromium to replenish your chromium stores. Four to five days a week, definitely on the days that I take the sauna, I take the chromium. If I don't take the sauna, if and if I don't work out, then I don't take it. If I'm not working out, if I haven't lifted weights, then I'll take another supplement that helps with the blood sugar regulation, and it's actually like a longevity supplement as well because it it activates AMPK, suppresses mTOR, increases autophagy. So it's like a fasting mimicking supplement. Berberine, you just don't want to do it after you've lifted weights because otherwise, you're not gonna see that much improvements. You don't wanna suppress mTOR after you've lifted weights. At that point, you want to enhance the mTOR or enhance the recovery and anabolism with the chromium, for example. But on the days that you don't lift, this is the day where you want to kind of accelerate the fasting pathways, which berberine does quite quite nicely. And also with the dinner, I'll take maybe three grams of glycine because glycine also lowers blood sugar levels and glycine is the one that balances methionine. Any food almost has methionine, especially animal protein, which is very high in methionine, and, methionine restriction is also linked to a long longer lifespan in different animals. So I'll take glycine for that reason with the dinner. And the last supplements on the list, the evening supplements, so like pre bed supplements. So my evening, like, routine starts like an hour before and I'll, you know, dim down the lights, wear blue blocking glasses. I don't use, like, any skin creams or stuff like that, but I have started to use this natural skin care brand, Alatora Naturals. So they have actually products without any fillers, without any, like, artificial ingredients, Face cleanser, you just I'll just, you know, wipe my face with this. And then they will also have this gold serum that actually has olive oil, rose water, hemp seed oil, marine collagen. So these products help to, you know, help with the skin collagen synthesis. The other supplements that I'm taking, melatonin. I don't take melatonin every night, and I do stick to, like, a smaller dose. For example, I'll take only, like, zero point one to zero point three milligrams, which is almost the amount that your body makes naturally. And the reason I do that I don't have sleep problems. I sleep fine. But the reason is to do with the the antioxidant benefits of melatonin. So melatonin is a very powerful antiaging hormone, and, you want to, like, make sure you have adequate amount of melatonin before or while you are sleeping for all these repair processes to work together. If I have, like, some bad sleep, if I have circadian jet lag, or if I just slept bad the night before and I want to catch up on that, then I'll take, like, a larger dose, like one to two milligrams. But that only happens, like, once every two weeks or something like that. The North Code magnesium is also good. There's also the bio optimizer's magnesium breakthrough. The North Code also has six forms of magnesium. I do get adequate amount of magnesium from my diet. I don't suffer any symptoms of magnesium deficiency. My blood work is, very good. So this is more like insurance policy. Like, magnesium is hard to come from foods and, just a few days of the week, I'll just take a little bit of magnesium. I'll take two hundred milligrams or four hundred milligrams depending on how I feel. And, on the days that I haven't lifted, on the days that I haven't worked out, I'll also take NAC with a glycine. And the glycine, I take actually every day. Like, three grams of glycine knocks you out pretty good, lowers your body temperature, which helps you to fall asleep, boosts GABA, the, relaxation neurotransmitter, and, yeah, just makes you feel nice and ready to go to bed. Like, in total, if I count it, then, yeah, it's almost like fifteen fifteen pills a day. Of course, I've consumed more pills in the past, but this is my current stack that I'm taking. And there are maybe, like, a few additional supplements that, I am taking on and off. Maybe like Allicin, I might take. But, generally, this is my current routine, and I think that this is giving me, you know, 90% of the results. Like, I could try to aim for, like, some other 10% results with, some other supplements, but I think this is a pretty good stack. You can check the links in the description for these products. But do you want to slow down aging and live longer? If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@simlant.com, and I'll send you the details. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Sim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.