Let's be honest. There are many supplements out there that are just a waste of money. In this video, I'm gonna give you the top six supplements that are just not worth it in terms of the cost, and I'm also gonna give you some alternatives to some of them that are much cheaper and more effective. But do you want to slow down aging and live longer? If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@cmelon.com and I'll send you the details. Do it. The first group of supplements that are a waste of time are these different kinds of creatine. Now don't get me wrong, I'm a huge fan of the regular creatine monohydrate. This is the form of creatine that has the most research that it is effective for improving physical performance and also having all of the other health benefits related to brain aging and overall longevity. It's just that there are dozens of different kinds of other forms of creatine out there that are much more expensive and not even that effective as the regular creatine monohydrate, such as creatine HCl, buffer creatine, creatine ethyl ester, etcetera. Now these different types of creatine were created so that supplement manufacturers could, you know, come up with, like, a certain problem that creatine is causing you some sort of digestive issues, creatine is gonna give you hair loss, creatine is gonna mess up your kidneys or whatever, and they create this new form of creatine saying that this new form of creatine doesn't have those negative side effects. Where in reality, the regular creatine monohydrate doesn't have those side effects either. It's just that they create a problem and then they offer you a solution, which in the form of this scenario is the new form of creatine that you should take. So you don't need to take any other fancy form of creatine. You can just take the regular creatine monohydrate which is the most effective, the most researched one, the safest and is also the cheapest out of all these different forms of creatine. The second supplement that I think might not be worth it is spermidine. Now I have talked about spermidine on the channel before and I do think that it's a very beneficial compound and there are some studies showing that dietary spermidine intake is associated with reduced all cause mortality and reduced cardiovascular disease. Now the issue is that those studies are done on dietary spirulina, which you can get from certain foods like mushrooms, vegetables, cheeses, some meats, and wheat germ, and spirulina, and those kind of foods. So healthy foods already have a certain amount of sperinine and a higher dietary intake of sperinine is what's associated with the reduced mortality risk. We don't have any data about the longevity benefits or increased life expectancy benefits of, supplemental spermidine so it's just I think it's probably not worthwhile to take the supplemental form of spermidine because you want to focus on the dietary spermidine anyway. And even then there are some sources of spermidine that you can consider a supplement like chlorella, spirulina, wheat germ. They are very high of spermidine and they're still much cheaper than the spermidine that you get from a supplement. So if you want to boost your daily sperminin intake, which is, I think, a smart idea, it's worth to boost your sperminin intake, then get the sperminin from chlorella, spirulina, all g supplements and, also, like, wheat germ. And then make sure you eat the dietary sperminin as well from different vegetables, mushrooms, tjias and some meat. The third supplement on the list is NMN and nicotinamide riboside. So that's another maybe a controversial one especially from my channel who have I have, like, covered the benefits of NMN before. And I do think that NMN as a supplement is very effective and it does, like, even subjective, if you take it you would feel more energy and you would feel, like, the benefits from taking that. There are studies showing that NMN does improve parameters of metabolic health and increases your NAD levels which is beneficial for longevity and aging. But whether or not it's worth it is slightly different. Like, yes, if you're, let's say, 60 and above, then NMN would be probably in my personal snack that would take it every day, like, one one thousand milligrams every day all the time because at that age your natural energy levels are somewhat declining. If you're in your twenties, thirties, and forties, you probably don't need to take NMN or nicotinamide riboside for that matter every day and, it's certainly quite expensive. So you probably won't notice that big an effect that would justify the higher cost of NMN. Only if you have low levels of baseline NAD levels, whether that be because of not sleeping enough, circadian rhythm mismatches, poor lifestyle, being overweight, not exercising enough. Those things will reduce your natural NAD levels. And in that scenario, it makes sense to, like, boost it up with, this NAD booster like NMN or nicotinamide riboside. If you're feeling tired and exhausted during the daytime, then you first should look at your sleep and exercise. Are you overtraining and are you sleeping enough? Because, you know, fixing your sleep is free and fixing your workout is also free. So before you start taking some sort of a supplement that raises your energy levels and, like, makes you feel better, like, fix the underlying issue of why you might feeling exhausted. A much cheaper alternative for people who are already doing everything right to, like, keep their NAD recycling active is niacinamide. So niacinamide or niacin or just anything like vitamin b three is going to feed into the salvage pathway of NAD recycling and that is gonna be beneficial for just keeping your NAD levels recycled and higher at a baseline level even if you're doing like pretty you're following a pretty healthy lifestyle. In that scenario, you should take niacinamide only when you have certain like chronic conditions or if you're above 60 or like 50 or something like that. Only in that scenario I would say that taking NMN or nicotinamide riboside is worthwhile. Supplement number four is gonna be probiotics. You know, the issue with those probiotic supplements is that you don't know necessarily if that particular strain of probiotics is what you need. So you could take, like, some random strains and you might not benefit from that at all and you actually might get some negative symptoms from that. Like, you could easily cause yourself SIBO if you take, like, some random probiotic supplements or if you just take them in large quantities or too much. So probiotics are something that you certainly need to supplement based on, like, your gut health right now. And then based on that, you can choose what kind of a probiotic you need. Number five is gonna be BCAs and EAAs. So, certainly BCAs are a huge waste of money because you only get three of the branched chain amino acids out of the nine of the essential amino acids. So if you were to ever consider supplementing extra amino acids then make sure that it is the essential amino acids, EAA's, that has all the nine essential amino acids because to trigger a protein synthesis and to support muscle anabolism then you would need all of the nine essential amino acids. So the BCAs, you only get three of them out of the nine. And if you take the BCAs then you would only use it mostly for energy production. So you're just creating pretty expensive urine and, you're just using it for, like, exercise performance, it doesn't really have that significant exercise performance boost like you could take, like, dextrose or d ribose or just, you know, plain sugar and you would get a bigger exercise performance boost probably than just taking BCAs. If you are getting adequate protein intake every day, you're hitting your daily protein goals, then the amino acid supplementation even with the EAAs is not really you're not gonna see any, like, significant benefits from that because you're already getting adequate amount of protein into your diet. Now the only exception is that you could take the essential amino acids in the fastest state if you're fasting. Let's say you're doing a sixteen and eight type of interval fasting or even one meal a day, then in that scenario taking the EAAs in the fastest state in the morning is worthwhile because it's going to reduce some of the muscle catabolism and you're gonna maintain more muscle tissue. Like, I've experienced that when I'm taking EAA's in the fastest state, I do notice the benefits in terms of maintaining lean tissue. But, at other times, if you were to eat breakfast, lunch, and dinner, then you certainly don't need the essential amino acids even granted that you're getting adequate protein for your day. Big mistake. And the last supplement on the list is gonna be resveratrol. So I've made a few videos about resveratrol as well and the main reason is that it's not really like a longevity supplement. Like, there is, like, almost no actual human studies showing that it has any, like, longevity benefits. There are a few, resveratrol studies studies showing that it does improve your lipid profile, cholesterol levels and just glucose regulation. But if you're, like, healthy, you follow the healthy lifestyle, you exercise regularly, you're at a good body composition, then you shouldn't really expect any, like, longevity or lifespan extending benefits from resveratrol. So there you have it. This is the list of the supplements that are pretty expensive and I think that they're not worth it. Of course, some of these supplements in some situations are worth it. Like, I do think that taking EAAs in certain situations is worth it and you can also take NMN and nicotinamide riboside in certain situations like I take NMN if I'm experiencing some sleep depth or jet lag and in that scenario it is quite worth it but on our everyday use I'd much rather take something that is much cheaper and more suitable for my age, which is the niacinamide. If you want to try out some of the supplements that I think that are worth it such as collagen peptides, creatine monohydrate, hyaluronic acid, berberine, and vitamin d three, then check out donotage.org. Use my code seam for a 10% discount. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seam. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.