Which longevity supplements actually work, and which ones are very overhyped? This and a lot more I'll be covering in this q and a episode. If you want to ask me a question, then make sure you follow me on Instagram at simlund. It's showtime. Alright. The first question is name some of the most overhyped, longevity supplements that aren't worth it. I have I think I have probably made at least a few videos about this topic on my channel, not specifically maybe, like, overhyped. But I have covered, like, what are the most expensive and, like, not worth it supplements in terms of the price on the channel. You can look it up on the the search. You know, when we're talking about overhyped, then we have to still have to ground it in, like, evidence. You know, what I consider overhyped would be that people say that it does x or it's, like, super effective or somethings. And in the longevity space, it's gonna be that this supplement is gonna, you know, cure aging and make it live a lot longer. And the evidence doesn't support that. Or there's also some, like, yeah, just miss misinformation about the magnitude of the effect or something else related. So that's what I would consider overhyped. And, there are certainly a lot of supplements in this field that, could be considered overhyped, you know, starting with resveratrol, you know, NMN and nicotinibriboside. To a certain extent, they're all overhyped because when people, you know, are listening to different kinds of, scientists and, longevity influencers on social media, then, yeah, like, when they hear about Resveratrol or NMN or something like that, then, you know, the reason they start to take in take it is because they think that it's going to make them live longer and slow down aging. Now there is no evidence as of now that it's true. Like, we don't have any evidence in even in animal studies that resveratrol or NMN or nicotinamide riboside that it would, like, extend lifespan or that it would even slow down the biological aging. Obviously, it's still early with at least NMN and nicotinamide riboside, but it's not early with, resveratrol. So resveratrol has been around, you know, even twenty plus years now, and we still don't have the evidence that it would, like, work directly on lifespan or aging. And in fact, there is a lot of, you know, contrary evidence that it doesn't work even doing that, even in animal studies. Like, human studies are obviously completely different. We don't have almost any longevity supplements proven to work in humans, in terms of extending lifespan. Of course, they work in some other ways by extending, like, healthy biomarkers or, like, slowing down some of the hallmarks of aging, which we'll cover later. But, in humans, it's obviously very complicated to know which ones actually work. But, yeah, like, even in animal studies, the resveratrol story is kind of debunked almost that, it can have in humans some effects for, like, maybe lipid profile or blood sugar management and those kind of things, but it certainly has no, let's say, life extension effects even in animals. And I don't think that it is true in human studies, or in in humans. It's not going to pan out, that way either. And it's certainly overhyped in terms of that. And I think the hype around the reser reseratrol is declining. It it's certainly not as hyped as it was back in the early two thousands when it was first, like, discovered that, oh my god, these sirtuin activators, etcetera. You can check on my other video about reserotrol and sirtuins. But, yeah, the main short, the short story is that resveratrol doesn't really have, like, life extension effects even in animals. And, yeah, it's it might have, like, some metabolic effects in humans, but, yeah, it's definitely one of the most overhyped, and it's certainly not cheap. It's one of the more expensive supplements. And I think the price to benefit ratio for healthy people to for these biohackers who are taking resveratrol four life extension, then it's certainly not worth it. And a lot, has to do with over being overhyped, in my opinion. With NMN and Nicotemar riboside, then, at least as of now, we don't have either, like, any life extension or longevity benefits. What we find with, NMN and Nicotemar riboside is that they can help with some aspects of, you know, metabolic health and also, like, hallmarks of aging or, like, functional decline. So, like, NMN can affect, like, walking speed and those kind of things, maybe cognition in the elderly, or insulin sensitivity. But, you know, does that characterize or does that account for actual life extension or longevity? Then, yeah, we don't know. In animals, there are also no studies showing that it would have those, like, life extension effects when I'm talking about nicotinamide or NMN. So I think they're certainly overhyped, but I do still find value in NAD boosters in certain situations, specifically around circadian rhythm mismatch. If you have some chronic inflammation, if you have, you know, sleep deprivation where your body would need to have more NAD or you need to, like, recover from, decline in NAD levels, then I would still find it useful even for healthy individuals to use it as, like, a short term booster for lack of a better word. But it doesn't, you know the it's certainly overhyped because people think it's going to do things that it's not proven to do, if that makes sense. It's it works. It's, you know, it it works in certain parameters of health, but it's, overhyped because it's not proven to actually have longevity benefits or it's not proven to have life extension benefits even in animals, if that makes sense. And I think I'll I'll cap it at this point right now. The three most overhyped would be resveratrol, nicotinamide riboside, and NMN. And as a bonus, I'll maybe mention, like, spermidine is also pretty overhyped, not because that spermidine itself as a compound wouldn't be good. We have actually quite nice data in human, like, epidemiological studies and prospective studies that at least dietary spermidine intake is associated with reduced mortality and reduced Alzheimer's and heart disease even. But it's, the dietary spermidine, not the the supplemental spermidine. And many of these supplement companies might might make the leap thinking that just supplementing the spermidine is what is gonna mediate those results. But we just don't know that yet. We don't have the same evidence with supplemental spermidine when it comes to the effects of dietary spironidine on health. And, you know, it could also be that just the healthy foods that keep you healthy and help you to reduce your mortality risk, those foods generally also contain spironidine. So even then, you know, it's not specifically proven that spermidine itself as a compound has antiaging benefits. It might be that just the healthy foods that would make you healthier also contains spermidine. It's almost like a food that contains either protein, carbs, or fats is going to make you live longer. And, you know, all foods contain proteins, carbs, and fats to a certain extent, like, in different ratios, obviously. But, you know, just saying that a food has a specific compound is what is gonna give you the longevity benefits is, is far fet or is is too too big of a leap, in my opinion. You know? Healthy foods contain many different compounds. They contain vitamins and minerals. They contain spermidine, and they contain different kinds of amino acids, etcetera. And, you know, chances are it can be just the healthy foods that give you those health benefits, not necessarily like a specific compound inside. Or it could also be just the sum of all parts, like all the minerals and all their compounds inside healthy foods is what make them healthy in in in certain amounts. This episode is brought to you by Alitura Naturals. Alitura brings you the best natural skin care products for radiating skin and antiaging. Regular skin care products are full of ingredients and fillers that actually cause more harm than good. Alitura uses only active ingredients sourced and handcrafted in Hawaii. Their products contain zero fillers. The Alitura night cream received the twenty twenty one Clean Cirt beauty awards for best face cream. Alitura also has skin moisturizers, clay masks, serums, and cleansers. Head over to alitura.com and use the code seam, s I I m, for a 20% discount. And the next question is gonna be the opposite of this. So, like, the supplements that actually have evidence, what is, like, the most evidence based longevity supplements out there. I recently made an Instagram post about this as well. I listed out my, like, top five. Obviously, this list could be longer. There's maybe a few more of the sub supplements that you could add there. But, in this context, I'll just, cap it out at five. So the top five are creatine, glycine, NAC, magnesium, and an omega three supplement in some form. And, of course, I've talked a lot about glycine and NAC. Many people aren't surprised about that, and the reason is simple. There is actually quite a lot of human clinical trials showing that the glycine and NAC combo increases glutathione levels. And because of that, it helps to reverse the decline in functional aspects or that, you know, happens with aging, like muscle strength, gait speed, cognition, and body composition status. Those things decline with age, and the gliathion increase through glynaq helps to reverse that, and it also helps to reverse some of the hallmarks of aging related to, like, mitochondrial function, telomeres, cells in essence, and those kind of things. So that's, I think, that pretty good, you know, because you don't have that kind of evidence when we're talking about some other supplements. Like, we definitely don't have it with resveratrol or NMN or negatone bromide or even, like, vitamin c or some other, like, more older supplements. We don't have that kind of evidence, but we do have it with glycine and NECs, which is why I think it's one of the most evidence based longevity supplement, for humans, at least. And, you know, whether or not it's gonna work in the elderly, like, younger people, we don't know that, it probably you know, your growth heart level start to decline after the age of 45. So chances are it's more effective after the age of 45 than before. And, you know, someone in their twenties or thirties probably has little to nothing to gain from at least regular supplementation of glynaq. They might benefit from it periodically in certain situations, but they don't need to do it that frequently unless they are experiencing accelerated biological aging or they have some comorbidities like diabetes that reduces gluethon, metabolic syndrome that lowers, gluethons or other other kinds of inflammatories conditions that lower the gluethon status. But after the age of 45, when your body you know, the gluethon decreases and your body is just experiencing this insulin aging, because it's called age related inflammation, then, at that point, it's much yeah. I think pretty much a daily thing that would take, like a glycine and NAC combo, every day pretty much after the age of 45. Now creatine creatine is certainly the most evidence based sports supplement in the world. And because of that, I would suggest that it is, yeah, probably, like, the most evidence based supplement as a whole. Like, it just, has a lot of research benefits specifically around sports performance, muscle strength, muscle power, and, you know, muscle mass as well indirectly and kind of speed develop and those kind of thing, anaerobic exercise performance, it comes down it's it's, yeah, like, the top one supplement, for that by far. And you don't need any fancy, like, forms of creatine. Just the regular creatine monohydrate does the trick. But, creatine also has a lot of longevity benefits. Obviously, maintaining muscle and maintaining muscle strength and muscle power is incredibly important for antiaging and longevity because, you know, you with age, you do see a decrease in muscle mass and muscle strength, but you specifically the biggest thing that you lose is type two muscle fibers. So the fast twitch muscle fibers, the speed, you lose the speed, which is, you know, a lot more important when we're talking about preventing falls and preventing hip fractures. So if you're falling off the stairs, then your slow twitch muscle fibers aren't going to save you that much. You need to have the fast twitch muscle fibers. You need to have the speed and agility and quickness to grab a hold of yourself and grab a hold of the staircase or something like that to prevent the falls. Creatine also has brain benefits. So there's a lot of creatinine in the brain, and your brain uses a lot of creatinine to produce ATP. And the, you know, demand for ATP is massive by the brain. Like, your brain, you know, your brain consumes probably the most ATP in in relation to its, mass. So your brain comprises only, like, you know, less than 5% of your total body weight, but it consumes up to 20% of your total energy per day. So it consumes a lot of ATP, and creatine helps with a lot of, let's say, aspects of cognitive function as well as it has neuroprotective effects because of that as well. So your brain just maintains better health, just by having higher creatine stores. And creatine supplementation has also been shown to pretty much help with aspects of cognitive decline in the elderly at least. And, lastly, creatine indirectly helps with longevity by reducing your sleep demand. And the probably the biggest reason probably has to do with, how it affects your brain, creatine stores, and energy production. So if your brain has more creatine stores, then, your demand for sleep also is lower, so you can get away with less sleep. Obviously, you do want to sleep, as, as much as you need. But with age, you see a decline in total sleep duration and sleep quality, which, is linked to melatonin production and the circadian rhythms, etcetera. But if you take, you know, creatin and we have human studies showing that creatinine supplementation, especially over a long period of time, reduces the sleep pressure or reduces, like, sleep demand. And it's also been found in athletes who are experiencing sleep deprivation that the creatine supplementation, mitigates against or attenuates the negative side effects of sleep deprivation on performance. So with sleep deprivation, you see a decline in your physical performance, specifically like the fast twitch performance, like explosive performance. But with creating sublimation, you can mitigate against that. So that's another just, I think, a very simple for the elderly especially who are sleeping worse, their sleep quality is worse, they sleep shorter, and they're also more susceptible to cognitive decline and neurodegeneration than creatine is, like, an nootropic or, like, a brain health supplement first and foremost. Obviously, it has a lot of these physical performance benefits, which are just a bonus, I think. But for longevity purposes, then the biggest, like, I think the biggest reason I would take creatine as an elderly person for longevity purposes would be the brain benefits and the the sleep. Next supplement that I cover is gonna be magnesium. So, obviously, many people know the importance of magnesium. It's I call the master mineral. It governs pretty much every function, every process inside the body. You need magnesium for energy production. You need magnesium for virtually every other process inside the body. And we have a lot of data suggesting that, you know, first of all, dietary magnesium intake is associated with reduced heart disease and reduced mortality, but we also find that that magnesium status is, like, linearly associated with atherosclerosis. So the lower your magnesium status, then the greater burden of atherosclerosis there generally is. And the higher magnesium status, then the lower that, burden. So, obviously, making sure that you eat plenty of foods that contain magnesium is the starter point. Pumpkin seeds, seafood, fish, leafy greens, almonds, nuts, whatever kind of other seeds and, things like that. But the issue is that most of the foods are very depleted of magnesium because the soil is depleted of magnesium and, certain food processing, etcetera, can also reduce the magnesium content. So a lot of people are magnesium deficient, and it's hard to find magnesium from foods because of the same reasons that I just mentioned. You know, first of all, how many people eat pumpkin seeds on a regular basis? You could maybe get, a lot of magnesium from, like, if you eat oysters every day or something like that. But, again, it's it's gonna be hard to, like, reach the optimal intake of magnesium. And, sometimes your magnesium requirement could be a lot higher than the RDA. So the RDA is four hundred and twenty milligrams. But, let's say in a in a state of higher inflammation, higher stress, which a lot of people are, and, a lot of light a lot of things that deplete your magnesium, like high high blood sugar levels, you know, cortisol levels, even like circadian rhythm mismatch, artificial light exposure, all those things that increase oxygen stress and inflammation in the body or reduce your sleep quality, all those things just increase your magnesium demand. And chances are most people would actually benefit from a magnesium intake of, like, six hundred or seven hundred milligrams per day. If you have some sort of a chronic disease like diabetes or hyperinsulinemia or hyperglycemia, then even thousand milligrams could be, you know, worthwhile. So that's why I think, magnesium supplement is such such a such a simple and easy win. You gained a lot of benefits, and it's very safe. It's been, you know, repeatedly shown to have benefits, the magnesium status per se, and, reducing, like, the risk of incident cardiovascular disease and those kind of things. So I think it's just a such such a simple win with a huge upside. Like, you gain a lot of, you know, the best or the, you know, the least you could or the smallest things you could benefit from by taking the magnesium would be, like, better sleep or lower stress. And if you are someone who experiences those kind of things, then, you know, why not why not take, like, a magnesium? And the last supplement that I mentioned is omega threes. Obviously, you know, fish oil or supplementing fish oil is one of those things even, like, everyone's grandma knows or they've heard that, supplementing fish oil is good for heart health and reducing, the risk of, cardiovascular disease, which, you know, in the totality of evidence is true. Like, there are some studies finding that that, there there is no effect in supplementing fish oil or omega threes in reducing risk of, heart disease, but the totality of evidence suggests that, yes, it does. And, the omega threes, specifically, EPA and DHA have a lot of health benefits in terms of lowering, like, inflammation, lowering oxygen stress, having insulin sensitizing effects, and, those kind of things. So if you just look at the totality of evidence, then it does suggest that you know, I mean, I mean, this there's just so many trials repeatedly since, I don't know, like, the eighties and nineties, showing that, yes, they, you know, in whatever form the omega threes come from, whether that be fish oil or, like, cord liver oil or some something like that, that the omega threes, you wanna just get a sufficient amount of EPA and DHA into your system every day. And that amount generally falls around, you know, one point five to three grams of EPA, DHA combined per day is what generally is is the amount associated with the reduced mortality. And what you also find is that people with the highest EPA and DHA levels in the blood have a significant lower risk of heart disease, significantly lower risk of all cause modality, and Alzheimer's disease and dementia as well. Alright. Next question. Is there an optimal time to train, like after eating, after walking, after waking up, or something like that? Yes. There is, you know, if you were to live in a perfect world where you can always control your daily routine and your schedule, then, you know, at least depends on the type of training. So what we do know is that strength and power, peak in the afternoon from a circadian rhythm standpoint. So you are stronger and more explosive around four to 5PM in the afternoon than you are in the morning. So if you are some sort of a person who does power lifting or weight lifting or you just want to hit larger numbers at the gym and you really want to optimize it, then, yes, the best time to train would be around, you know, three, four, 5PM, something like that. Now if you're the person who can control the schedule, then the best time to train for whatever type of training it is, then it's obviously at any time you can. I would, you know, always be careful with working out in the middle of the night or, too late in the evening because, you know, if you mess up your sleep and you mess up your circadian rhythms, then I I think, you know, it might not be that worth it. Like, I would wait for the weekend when you're free from work or something like that and then have, a workout at the optimal time, rather than to, like, really think that you need to work out every day even if I'm working out at midnight and, I'm going to bed at 1AM or something like that. So I I I think if you can choose then workout for strength purposes in the afternoon, if you are doing cardio, then you can workout pretty much at any time. I wouldn't do cardio maybe, like, five hours before bed because if you raise your heart rate too much, then it can disrupt sleep quality. And the same applies to, like, HIIT cardio, stuff like that. Don't do, like, any super intense form of exercise at least four to five hours before bed. Cardio is fine if you do it in the morning because, it's good for actually kick starting the circadian rhythm and in increasing this, energy recycling in the morning, which is a great thing for the circadian rhythms and overall, like, metabolism. But for strength training, then you are stronger, yes, in the afternoon. And the kind of definitely, I wouldn't do, like, very intense heavy, strength training, like, in the morning. You, like, you might actually be at a higher risk of injuries, if you are, like, immediately after waking up, you're going to hit the gym for some heavy weights. Like, of course, it's better than nothing, but if you can choose, then, yeah, the best time to do so in the in the afternoon. Now in terms of the meal timing, then I do think that, working out after food is slightly superior, at least for strength and maximum power. So if if you are doing cardio, then you don't need to eat. But if you are, you know, doing some sort of a weight lifting or power lifting type workout, then you are always gonna be more stronger after, eating. You know, I've worked out fasted hundreds of times. I've done strict one minute a day where I work out and then I eat, but, it was never as effective for muscle or strength development as the method that I'm doing now, which is I call the targeted intermittent fasting. So I have a protein shake, and then I work out, and then I have, the food after the workout. So that's a much more effective way because you're gonna have more amino acids in your bloodstream. So those amino acids reduce your muscle metabolism, so you build more muscle as a result of that, and you're probably also stronger because of just having more energy from that. You could also eat, like, some simple carbohydrates before the workout, but I wouldn't have, like, a massive meal immediately before the workout. So, like, I wouldn't eat, like, burgers and fries. I wouldn't eat, like, massive pasta or even, like, a massive steak is probably too too heavy for for the workout immediately. If I were to, you know, eat something immediately before a workout, then I would stick to something very easy to digest, like either eggs, cook some eggs, maybe fish is even fine, but, like, a protein shake or something. Whey protein is the most bioavailable, the fastest absorbing, fastest digesting protein in the world. And, yeah, I just slam a protein shake, whey protein, and then I'll be able to work out pretty much in, you know, less than an hour or thirty minutes, even, like, in five minutes if I want to. Alright. Next question. We know that plastic in the kitchen is generally not healthy for cooking purposes, what are some other, like, ingredients that we need to be careful with? So, yes, plastic, I would, like, not really use plastic for almost anything. I would certainly not use plastic to microwave things, not use plastic to put, like, hot or warm liquids or, warm food in. The only safe thing that you can use plastic is, like, storing cold food in. And even then, you know, it's not the most optimal, but I wouldn't, like, really freak out about that. So if you store, like, some sort of, leftovers, you can store them in a plastic container in the fridge, but don't, like, heat up the plastic container when you are about to eat it. Or if you are, like, trying to warm it up, you would put it into, like, a stainless steel pot or a ceramic pot or a pan or something like that before you, eat it. But, you know, the if you can choose, then obviously the BPA free versions of plastic are a bit better than with BPA. But even then, b e BPA free means that they just have something else that, you know, the marketing hasn't caught up with. Most people are careful with BPA because the kind of social awareness around BPA has reached a boiling point where the the marketers of these companies are okay. They know that BPA is bad, so we're gonna replace it with something else. So we say BPA free, but we have, you know, BPS or B P Y, whatever other because, you know, there's hundreds of these different chemicals. They just put BPA instead of BPA, they'll have BPR, BPP, whatever, and it's as bad. It's just that people don't know that it's bad. So they think it's BPA free, and thickening is fine, but it has the other compounds that are equally as bad. So with that being said, I wouldn't use real plastic for anything that is liquid and warm and hot. Cold is, you know, kinda fine, but, again, it's not the most optimal. What you would what you could use is, like, glass. Glass is the kind of safest alternative or stainless steel. That's another or ceramic. So that's kind of the safest materials. When it comes to other dangerous, let's say, compounds on the cooking ware then, like, Teflon that, is used to coat the frying pans with, that also contains the xenoestrogens. And if you obviously what you know, when you're using the frying pan, then you're gonna use high temperatures that mobilize those xenoestrogens into your food. So Teflon is another one of those compounds that, I wouldn't use for frying pans out of the nonstick pans than, like, a stainless steel or a ceramic pan is, again, the most optimal method. I wouldn't use, like, a cast iron steel pan either because the cast iron steel is just going to leach the iron into your food. So you might be getting too much iron in that scenario as well. Maybe if you're anemic, it's fine, but most people, especially men, aren't. So for them, it actually increases the risk of heart disease, in my opinion. Like, excess iron exposure is not good. So cast iron pans aren't, healthy either. The healthiest frying pans are, yeah, like stainless steel or the, ceramic pans. So overall, stay away from all things that contain plastic. And, ideally, also be wary of the nonstick, you know, pan pans or whatever, like the, spatula or something like that. That can also be made of, like, some sort of silicone or something. It's better than plastic, obviously, but, you know, if you can use, then use, like, a wooden spatula that or, like, some sort of iron spatula, like, stainless steel spatula, again, which is much more, like, safer ingredient. And And the same actually, like, cutting boards. That's something that I also recently learned that the cutting boards, if they're made of plastic, then, you know, if you're cutting with a knife, then you're actually cutting into the the cutting board and you're cutting into the plastic. So that also, like, you know, you're pretty much exposing your food to those microplastics, and you might actually, like, eat the same microplastics if you actually accidentally put it into a salad or something like that. So the best cutting board, again, is also wooden cutting board. So wooden is actually, you know, it's, the safest kind of, ingredient. Next question. I've got an energy drink problem. Is that really bad for your health? Well, you know, when you look at the ingredients on energy drinks, whatever, Monster or something like that, then, you know, most of the ingredients, they look nice. Whatever, Monster or something like that, then, you know, most of the ingredients, they look nice, like b six or niacin and other kinds of vitamins and stuff like that. And you you would say that, okay. These, vitamins and stuff like that are healthy for me. You're a yes and no. I mean, technically, the only harm of energy drinks just comes from the high amount of caffeine. So one energy drink, like one Monster, has around, like, a hundred and fifty milligrams of caffeine. You know, the NoCo, which is the smaller like, a more fitness brand, is a smaller bottle, but it contains a hundred and eighty milligrams of caffeine, which is a lot more. And I think, you know, the safe amounts of caffeine per day for an adult is generally around, you know, two hundred, two hundred, I think, is a kind of a safe dose, and up to, like, four hundred milligrams is also fine. But, again, you're kind of starting to push the envelope a little bit, and your sleep quality will probably suffer if you get, like, four hundred milligrams every day. So, technically, if you drink, like, one energy drink that contains a hundred and fifty milligrams of caffeine, then it's not gonna be unhealthy, quote unquote quote unquote. It's just going to pretty much increase your caffeine levels in the blood that can disrupt your sleep quality. And some people are also more sensitive to that. They can get jittery. There's nothing inherently bad about that except for the, yeah, like, the high amounts of caffeine. Like, of of course, younger individuals and some people can overdose on caffeine, especially if they take powdered caffeine. So that's why I'm not a fan of powdered pre workouts because they just contain so many so much, caffeine, and you can easily overdose on that without being careful. But with energy drinks, you still have to drink a lot of them. And unless you're literally addicted to energy drinks that you're drinking four to five cans a day, then, it's not it's not on it's not going to, like, harm your health granted that everything else is in check. And, of course, if the energy drink contains sugar, then that's a kind of a different story. Like, the Nocos, they those are sugar free. They're sugar free monsters as well. But if you're getting the regular, Monster that contains the sugar as well, then that's that's unhealthy, yeah, because of the sugar. The caffeine itself isn't that unhealthy in moderation. Yeah. People have different feelings about caffeine, but if you look at the data, then caffeine alone in small amounts, one hundred to two hundred milligrams a day, there's no data that it's harmful or that it would, like, be unhealthy. And, actually, if you look at the data, then, you know, coffee consumption, two to three cups of coffee a day is actually associated with a significantly lower risk of all cause mortality and lower risk of heart disease and lower risk of liver cancer and those things. With coffee, it's obviously because of the polyphenols and the antioxidants inside of coffee, but the some of the effects might be mediated by the caffeine as well. So, again, the sugar energy drinks are bad. If you drink, like, one to two, maybe I would I wouldn't I wouldn't drink any more than, like, one. I I at least personally, I wouldn't want to consume any more than 200 of caffeine per day. But if it's below that, then I don't see any reason why it would be, like, harmful. You know? It's it's caffeine, and, you know, caffeine can have different effects in different people. Depends how you react and how you use it. Like, if you drink, like, any drink before a workout and you have a good workout, then it's, like, might be a net positive because you're, you know, gaining getting more gains and more results at the gym by increasing your energy and, alertness with, the caffeine. Alright. Next question. What is the optimal amount of cardio? So cardio, I think, is underrated for sure. Like, many people in, like, longevity and the biohacking world, they're almost, like, neglecting cardio, and they're just doing weightlifting and stuff like that. You obviously wanna do both. But if you look at the effect in risk reduction or the size of risk reduction, then cardio or at least moderate exercise outperforms vigorous exercise and having higher cardio respiratory fitness alone outperforms having high muscle strength alone in terms of reducing all cause mortality risk. So cardio is more effective in reducing heart disease risk and all cause mortality risk. But if you combine them together, then you see a greater reduction, if that makes sense. It's just that the cardio is going giving most of the results or a significantly higher proportion of those results. How much is too much? You know, technically, I would even suggest that at least in the short term, even overtraining with cardio, probably isn't going to be bad, like, at least in the short term. Yes. You might lose some sleep. Yes. You know, you might start to get some injuries or stuff like that. But in terms of your biomarkers, all the biomarkers would generally improve if you're doing, like, a lot of cardio. The only thing that might increase is some of those DNA methylation patterns. So what we do know from, at least, my own experience as well as some studies that overtraining or, excessive exercise, whether that be weightlifting or cardio, then that can accelerate, the markers of biological aging. Now whether or not it actually reflects actual biological aging or the speed of your biological aging is not clear or at least there's no evidence that those clocks would actually, you know, predict your mortality or your speed of aging. They just measure certain things. And we know that over exercising accelerates those clocks, if that makes sense. And but, fortunately, we do have, like, you know, some studies, meta analysis finding that even up to eight hundred minutes per week of moderate, exercise, which includes zone two cardio and hiking and walking and anything that is not vigorous and anaerobic, then even up to eight hundred minutes per day still gives you a reduction in heart disease and all cause mortality risk compared to getting two hundred minutes per week. So it's a linear reduction in the risk. So the more moderate physical activity you do per week, the lower your risk of old cause mortality and heart disease, at least based on, the stud recent studies and meta analysis that we, have. But the same isn't true with vigorous physical activity, so weightlifting or anaerobic cardio. So with that kind of exercise, you see a more like a j or u shaped curve with zero amounts of vigorous activity being bad, but excess amounts of vigorous activity also being associated with increased risk. So somewhere in the middle, like and, with weightlifting, it's generally around, like, sixty to eighty minutes per week, maybe up to a hundred and forty minutes at max. And with vigorous exercise, which would probably include weightlifting plus high intensity exercise, high intensity cardio, then it's gonna be also somewhere around, like, one hundred fifty minutes or two hundred minutes at most, per week. But there is no similar linear reduction the same way with moderate exercise. So, you know, if you're doing eight hundred minutes of intense exercise per week, then you are probably increasing your risk because of because of overtraining. But doing zone two cardio or other forms of moderate physical activity up to 800, we don't I haven't seen data about a thousand minutes per week, but I would presume that it still it still follows a similar trend that even to even a thousand minutes per week of moderate physical activity like hiking, walking, and zone two cardio output here as well, that even then you would probably see a reduction in the benefits. So what's the optimal amount is, you know, how much you can do almost or how serious are you are you are, in terms of reducing your risk. If you are really gung ho or, you know, super motivated to reduce your risk as much as possible, then, yes, like, eight hundred minutes per week apparently is the best in terms of reducing the risk. Do you need to do eight hundred minutes per week? You know, hard to say. You have to also look at other factors, how it's going to affect your sleep, how it's going to affect your, you know, stress levels and, those kind of things and, and your biomarkers. Like, people react differently to exercise or, you know, their biomarkers might react differently at least in the extremes of exercise. But, generally, your biomarkers will improve. It's just that, you know, at what point are you reaching the point of diminishing returns? At what point are you causing more inflammation and causing more oxidative stress, with, the overtraining? So I need to kinda find out, okay, how much can I do and how much is is my kind of point of diminishing returns? Me, personally, you know, I do try to do at least two to three workouts of zone two cardio per week, which generally involves, like, thirty to forty five minutes of zone two cardio. But, obviously, I walk every day as well. So I'll walk every day at least one to two hours. I have, like, the standing work desk and the walking treadmill, so I'll be I'll be able to work while I'm walking. But, obviously, I walk outside as well, go for walks in the park and stuff like that. So I'll be getting, you know, per week, I'll get if I were to guess, I would get at least 600 or five five hundred to six hundred minutes per week of moderate physical activity. And with intense physical activity, I'll I'll I'll be getting, like, three forty five minute weightlifting workouts per week and maybe, like, a twenty minute high intensity cardio session per week. So that's in total gonna be a hundred and fifty minutes per week, something like that, of vigorous physical activity. And I think that's a pretty good starting point, at least based on the evidence, that you don't wanna overdo intense exercise, but you can certainly overdo not overdo, but you can still do a lot of moderate physical exercise. You can do hundreds of hours of moderate physical activity per week and still see benefits in risk reduction. Alright. That's it for this video. If you want to ask me a question in the future, then make sure you follow me on Instagram at seamlund. But do you want to slow down aging and live longer? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@seamlund.com, and I'll send you the details.