Hi. I'm Siim and we're here in Chennai, India at the amazing Leila Palace. This week I had my retreat together with a local longevity clinic called Ivo. It's been an amazing experience because Ivo offers a whole host of many different kinds of longevity tests you can do. We got 183 biomarkers measured, we got a full body MRI, echocardiogram, VO2max test, DEXA scan. In this video I'm gonna walk you through some of the results I got from these tests and share my experience. I'm actually a long term partner with Ivo and I'll be coming back to India for these retreats many times in the future. So you can check out the link in the description to know when you can join us next. Day one we took it a bit easier we had a pretty long flight for nine hours and we just wanted to adjust to the new time zone before doing any tests. We met the team, got to look around the hotel and just got accustomed to the new place. But I did get a nice physiotherapy session and a posture analysis done with an AI based posture analysis. I found that I was slightly leaning towards my left side. My head was also leaning a bit forward which based on the calculations made my head weigh twelve point eight kilograms whereas normally for my body size it should be six kilograms Now that's quite astonishing, surprising as well and it's definitely not good for your long term health to have your head tilted forward and putting much more pressure or more weight to the head. My right lat muscle was also supposedly much bigger and stronger than my left side which makes sense because I'm right handed, I'm right hand dominant and I have also noticed that when I'm lifting weights then my right side tends to be a bit stronger. And as a result of that for compensation when my right side is pulling in a little bit my left side had leaned a bit forward. So that's what caused like an imbalance in my posture and also resulted in my left side leaning forward and a little bit tilted with the head forward as well. So I did a scan first then I got twenty minutes of physiotherapy specifically myofascial release technique which then helped me to pretty much open up the stiffness that caused some of the misalignments and as a result of that my left side corrected significantly, my head also tilted back more normal where it should be and it relieved about 28% of the tension or improvements. I saw 28% improvements in my posture with just twenty minutes of this physiotherapy. Day two me and my wife got blood work done in the morning and we looked at a 183 different biomarkers starting with some of the more basic ones like cholesterol, glucose, hemoglobin a1c, lipoproteins, etcetera but some more advanced biomarkers as well. The results came back great. You get like a pretty much like a folder with all the results from the blood work. I had everything in the healthy ranges including lipoproteins like ApoB which are the main atherogenic particles that drive atherosclerosis. The only thing that was slightly elevated was homocysteine which is also a risk factor for heart disease. My levels weren't super high. They were 16 micromoles per litre whereas the reference range is zero to 15 and I had only like one micromole above the reference range. Some of the doctors thought it could have also been caused by some sort of a recent infection that could raise homocysteine levels including some of the other immune cells. After the blood tests I took a DXA scan for body composition and bone density. My muscle mass was well above average and my bone density in my spine and femur were at the highest level. Then I took a VA two max test to assess my cardiorespiratory fitness. It's a fitness test where you progressively increase the speed of running on a treadmill. A higher v r two max has been consistently shown to be associated with reduced all cause mortality. My score for the v r two max was quite astonishing. It was 66 milliliters per kilogram per minute, Which is in the elite category even for 18 year olds. So my VO2 Max is very good compared to my age of 29 and even so it's still excellent and in the elite category of 18 year olds. Now I was quite surprised that I got this high number because four months ago I did my first DO2max test. I got a result of 53 milliliters per kilogram per minute which is still above average and it's not near elite levels but it's certainly above average. But over the course of this four months I've increased it by 13 ml per kg per minute which is a lot. The reason why I got such a dramatic change from 53 to 60 six ml per kg per minute has to do with the fact that I wasn't doing a lot of cardio when I, you know, started the first VO2 max test. So my body was very sensitive to the new adaptation. So I saw very fast improvements in my VO2 max because I started to do a lot more cardio and train my VO2 max specifically. And, you know, over the last four months it has increased 13 points which is, quite amazing. I also measured my resting metabolic rate by breathing through a tube for ten minutes. Based on the test, my resting metabolic rate, which is the amount of calories my body requires to stay alive at rest, is 3,300 calories which is quite high. So my metabolism is quite high and very fast. Instead of looking at my calorie intake I'm much more concerned about my body composition, my fitness status and like your body fat percentages. I think those are more relevant when it comes to the calorie intake. Days three to five I took different kinds of tests to see whether or not there's something wrong with my body not detectable by blood work. I got a full body MRI, ultrasound, echocardiogram and some other tests. Fortunately, they all came back normal as well. No abnormalities or malignancies were detected by the MRI which itself was an interesting experience. But you know the best thing about the eye valve clinic is that they can do these things here all at once at an affordable price and very conveniently together with medical professionals who help you to interpret those results. So, this is the, you know, the main perk of the iWo is that they do it here altogether in this amazing five star hotel and it's very cheap compared to doing it like in America or Europe for example. After that I also got a face skin analysis that looks at the aging of your skin and what are some of your weaknesses. My skin was generally fine but it was a bit dry and sensitive. I've never used, like, moisturisers for my skin, but based on my skin type, I probably should because it's going to help to keep the skin a bit more moisturized and hydrated. I did get a HydraFacial skin treatment as well, which just cleans the skin from dirt and black spots and improves the skin hydration. At the final night I got a sleep apnea test to analyze my breathing. Sleep apnea can be quite dangerous to your long term health because you're literally suffocating in your sleep. My results came back normal and I don't have sleep apnea. Usually the biggest risk factor for sleep apnea is being overweight and obese. Now I'm not overweight but I do have like a thicker neck because of doing strength training. So people who are exercising a lot and they have a bigger neck then they they could just also have sleep apnea without knowing it, even if they are normal weight. So these were some of the treatments I got during the seven days that I've been here. I didn't get all the possible tests. You could get actually a lot more tests. The best thing about this retreat is that you get a complete systematic overview of your current health and where are your risk factors. So the retreat program is significantly cheaper than if you were to get all of these tests done in Europe or America. But the quality and the accuracy is the same. You have a 130 medical professionals helping you and guiding you through the tests and you also get to stay at the five star Leda Palace with amazing service and amazing food. So if you want to join me on the next retreat then make sure to check out the link in the description. But other than that thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Si. Stay optimized, stay empowered.