David Sinclair is one of the most known people in the longevity space. Now, of course, David Sinclair promotes a generally healthy lifestyle that includes exercise, good diet and sleep, but he also takes a few supplements for the sake of longevity and antiaging. So in this video, we're gonna take a look at his supplement stack. But do you want to slow down aging and live longer? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@teamland.com, and I'll send you the details. Do it. We have an article by Novice Labs that is also involved in, like, the anti aging space off the list of supplements David Sinclair takes and it's actually pretty new, newly updated 02/28/2023. So here's the list. Actually, you can see that there's only 12 supplements, which is interesting and quite a big contrast to someone like Brian Johnson who takes over one hundred supplements per day. First nicotinamide mononucleotide, NMN one gram per day in the morning. So this is an this NAD booster. Resveratrol one gram per day in the morning. Metformin eight hundred milligrams in the evening. So I guess that's also per day. Vitamin d three, ideally four thousand to five thousand IUs per day. Vitamin k two, ideally one hundred and eighty to three hundred and sixty micrograms per day. Astatine, not specified which one. Seven. Low dose aspirin, eighty three milligrams per day. Alpha lipoic acid ALA, recent status unknown. Coenzyme q ten, recent status unknown. Spermidine, one milligram per day in the morning. Quercetin and fisetin, five hundred milligrams each once per day in the morning. And lastly, trimethylglycine or betaine, five hundred milligrams to one thousand milligrams per day. My first impression is that, I mean, that's a pretty good stack. Of course, David Sinclair is the diehard resveratrol fan. I'm personally not really that enthusiastic about resveratrol, or there haven't been enough evidence in humans to suggest that it actually has any longevity benefits. And the evidence in animal studies is also quite conflicting and not that impressive. But the other supplements that he's taking and the pharmaceuticals, generally, I would agree that they have, like, some positive benefits at least in terms of longevity and aging specifically for his goals probably. Like, he has maybe specific goals for his health and longevity, and I do think that, those would, like, support those goals for him. But Novus Labs has also given out some of the, like, science and studies of these supplements and their own comments about these. So NMN, it's, one of the most popular NAD booster supplements, compared or contrast to nicotinamide riboside NR. Now, personally, I think that both of them work. There's a lot of discussion whether or not NMN actually works or not, but there are human studies showing that NMN does raise NAD levels in humans. And, you know, how big of a difference does NAD boosting or raising NAD levels actually has in terms of lifespan anonymity, we don't know yet. But we do know that it does elevate NAD levels. So that's, know, that's the only thing that matters in this context in terms of whether or not you believe in NAD is a different story, but it does elevate your NAD levels and both of them work. So one thousand milligrams of NMN is a pretty large dose and even two hundred fifty milligrams per day has been found to result in elevated NAD levels in humans. So I personally think, yeah, like, a thousand milligrams is quite a lot. You probably don't need that much, but depends on your age as well. Like, if you are someone in their 50s, like, everything clear, then, yeah, it does make sense to maybe take, like, a larger dose of one thousand milligrams. Someone like me who is in my twenties, yeah, I don't take NMN every day. I do take it on, let's say, some days that I do miss out on some sleep or I have just, like, circadian mismatch or something like that, then I do take, like, five hundred to one thousand milligrams. But, yeah, it depends on your age and depends on your baseline energy levels whether or not you do need it because raising energy levels itself, like, it it's it's not like a linear fashion. Like, the more NAD you boost, the healthier you're gonna get. It doesn't really work like that. And, generally, I would suggest that that, the minimal effective dose at, like, a daily basis to take is probably better. Next up, rosaryoteol one gram per day. So this is the very, let's say, controversial supplement and I personally don't believe in resveratrol that much. I think that the evidence isn't convincing enough and there are also potential side effects especially in terms of VO2 max and even testosterone levels in males. Now there are studies in humans that resveratrol does improve cholesterol and lipid profile and just metabolic health, but, those individuals already have some aspects of, you know, poor metabolic health. I don't think that it's resveratrol that's gonna have any significant effect if you're already healthy. And the activation of sirtuins and the longevity pathways you get from that is very, you know, murky in terms of that. There is no consensus yet about it. And, even, like, a lot of the evidence suggests that, yeah, it doesn't really work in terms of lifespan. But it might help with things like, yeah, metabolic profile and, your lipid profile and those kind of things if you have issues with that. Next up, we have metformin, the prescription diabetic drug. As far as I'm aware, David Sinclair doesn't have diabetes. So, yeah, he's taking it for the sake of longevity. There are, like, yeah, some human studies showing that metformin may have benefits for antiaging and longevity. But but those studies can be a bit misleading and you actually control for that or you try to replicate those results then, yeah, it doesn't really have any extraordinary benefits for non diabetic people. If you do have diabetes then, yes, it can be very beneficial and very powerful. And I think maybe, like, every once in a while to take metformin for the sake of lowering your blood sugar, so, like, cycling between periods of lower blood sugar and this more ketotic state with the periods of higher carb intake, etcetera, is probably the best in terms of longevity for non diabetic people. If you have diabetes, then obviously you need to take it pretty regularly. But if if you don't have diabetes, then it doesn't make sense to take metformin continuously in my opinion because, yeah, it might have some negative side effects for the other aspects of health and longevity, which is, you know, muscle anabolism and just overall metabolic health. It's a trap. Next up, vitamin d three and vitamin k two. So that is a good combo in my opinion. Generally, most people, especially if you're not living in a very sunny environment, you know, you if you live somewhere like in the Northern Hemisphere, then you generally would need, like, some vitamin d at least some parts of the year. Now a dose of four thousand to five thousand IUs per day is very kind of moderate and it's good like a maintenance dose and there are studies showing that vitamin d supplementation is associated with reduced mortality. And you still want to get natural sunlight exposure even if you are taking a d three supplement because you get a lot of the other health benefits from sunlight as well that you don't get from the supplement itself. Now k two is beneficial for the bone health, but also preventing atherosclerosis. So taking, k two with the d three is a good combo because you're gonna prevent the calcium buildup that may occur if you do just take, vitamin d three alone. So statin prescription drug as well for high cholesterol levels and heart disease prevention. Again, I don't think that David Sinclair has atherosclerosis or he doesn't have, like, heart disease or anything like that, but he does take the statin as a preventive drug to help to keep the cholesterol levels as low as possible, I would presume. Now, again, there's a lot of controversy whether or not it is, you know, been it or needed to keep your cholesterol levels that low all the time, and I I'm not gonna, like, really comment on that. I think that, you know, if you have already existing atherosclerosis and you're at a high risk of heart disease, then in that scenario, again, the statin would probably save your life in a lot of ways. But if you're healthy, you don't have high cholesterol necessarily and you don't have heart disease or anything of that, I wouldn't say that in that case, the statin would be needed. But again, like David Sinclair, he's it's his decision and, that's what he chooses to do. Next up, we have a low dose aspirin. So this baby aspirin, eighty three milligrams per day. Now the effect or the mechanism of benefits of aspirin has to do with the anti inflammatory benefits. I do think that, yeah, in, periodic use or in certain situations, the aspirin is quite beneficial, especially, yeah, if you're under sleep deprivation or whatever other higher inflammatory state, then, the low dose aspirin is quite beneficial. I do take it as well every once in a while, especially if, again, I have, like, missed some sleep or something like that, I'll take that. But, continuous chronic use of aspirin might increase the risk of gas gastrointestinal bleeding. So, you have to be kinda careful with that as well. So if you don't really suffer from any, like, inflammatory state, then I would keep the, either the dose of the aspirin very small or you would just use it only on the situations where, you know, you actually have some information that you need to deal with. Alpha lipoic acid, so this one, the main, let's say, benefit for that is gonna be for gluathione boosting, so antioxidant defense. Interestingly enough, he doesn't take glycine or NAC, which I would argue is actually even more potent of a stimulator for glutathione and the antioxidant benefits, I'm pretty sure there's more studies, human clinical studies, showing the benefits of glycine and NAC than alpha lipoic acid. Coenzyme q ten, so a mitochondrial supportive supplement may be increasing energy production and those kind of things, but, I'm pretty sure there isn't, like, actual lifespan or longevity evidence about it. Spermidine, one milligram per day in the morning. So spermidine is another one of of the popular longevity supplements right now that is on the scene and there is some studies showing that dietary spermidine intake is associated with reduced mortality and reduced cardiovascular disease mortality as well. But, the keyword is dietary spermidine. So there is no studies about supplemental spermidine having those benefits. And I personally think that, yeah, you probably want to get it from the dietary spermidine sources, which includes like, cheeses, mushrooms, vegetables, even meat, and some other just just generally, like, healthy foods have spermidine, but the highest source of spermidine are, like, wheat germ, mushrooms, and cheeses. And in those studies, actually, you want to get eleven milligrams of spermidine. That is where you see the reduction in mortality and that it's up to, like, thirty percent lower compared to less than nine point six milligrams per day. So David Sinclair, it's interesting that he takes only, like, first of all, the supplement, spermidine, and only one milligrams per day. So, like, the one milligram isn't gonna do, like, a lot. You want to get at least eleven milligrams even if you do believe that, the supplemental spermidine would contribute to that reduced mortality. Senolytics, quercetin and fisetin, five milligrams each once per day in the morning. So, yeah, I mean, the senolytics are, I think, a valid strategy because the senescent cells are one of the hallmarks of aging, and, there are only, like, a few compounds that actually do do, like, help to clear out those senescent cells. Should you take the senescent or senolytics every day? Maybe. Maybe it depends on your, you know, health status, depends on your age, etcetera. So generally, if you're unhealthier, you're gonna accumulate more senescent cells and, the more, like, senolytics you would need. I don't think David Sinclair is necessarily unhealthy. He's definitely, you know, much healthier than the average person. So I'm not sure if if, a Synalytics every day would make sense because Synalytics can also, you know, impair some aspects of wound healing, and, you just may cause, like, more collateral damage as well in terms of, you know, the, wiping out the senescent cells. And the last supplement on the list is trimethylglycine or TMG. So, this is another methyl donor. Let's say it's gonna be good for methylation. And if you look at some of the studies on actual reduction in DNA methylation age in humans then the dietary sources of trimethylglycine like betaine and liver and dark leafy greens have been like an important part of that. So it does make sense to take trimethylglycine as a supplement as well because he's taking NMN. So if you take NMN alone, then you do lose out on some of the, like, the methyl donors. You, like, excrete some of the methyl donors. So you need to take TMG preferably or some other methyl donor supplement with NMN. And, the TMG also has, like, some other health benefits as help to lower homocysteine levels, and it might have some benefits for athletic performance as well. So overall, I would say that it's a pretty well balanced stack. Of course, there are some things that I'm not taking from that stack and there are some things that I'm a bit skeptical about. But overall, first of all, it's not that many supplements. It's only, like, 12 supplements that he's taking. I don't know what else he's taking. He probably takes some other supplements. He might take a collagen supplement. He might take NSE. I don't know. But this is the list that we have, at least based on this article. If you want to learn about my own personal supplement stack, then you can get a free PDF by clicking the link in the description. But other other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.