Carbohydrates, they're one of the most controversial food groups. To bring clarity into this topic, I looked at all the studies in regards to carbohydrate intake and mortality risk. And in this video, I'm going to outline you the conclusions of these studies. Party pooper. The first paper on this topic, it's the 2018 meta analysis in the journal The Lancet. They observed adults in The US between the ages of 45 and 64 over the course of twenty five years. The results show the u shaped association between carbohydrate intake and all cause mortality. An intake of 50 to 55% of total calories from carbs was linked to the lowest risk of mortality. Getting less than 40% of calories from carbs was linked to a twenty percent higher risk of mortality, and getting more than 70% of your calories from carbs was linked to a twenty three percent higher risk of mortality. A 2022 reevaluation of this 2018 paper pointed out that the original study didn't look at low carb diets as a specific intervention, but instead relied on data from prospective epidemiological studies. The data was obtained from food questionnaires, which has a very high rate of error and inaccuracies. What's more, the subjects were questioned twice at a six year interval. Now this is quite important and a huge flaw of epidemiology studies. You know, how many people remember what kind of foods they ate over the past six years, not to mention how many times they ate these foods every week in the course of this six years. Lastly, the strength of association in the study wasn't that great either as as the low carbohydrate intake only yielded a twenty percent increased risk of mortality compared to the moderate intake. The authors also pointed out that there are short term clinical trials showing that carbohydrate restriction has been seen to improve metabolic syndrome, diabetes, and weight loss. A 2021 meta analysis on 23 clinical trials discovered that six months of following a low carb diet resulted in higher rates of remission compared to the control diet. However, after about a year, the differences between the diets evened out. Similar outcomes have been seen in weight loss studies where it's shown that the differences between low carb and low fat diets flatten out after a year. Now these randomized clinical trials are still done in the free world, meaning that they don't control for all the energy intake. In metabolic ward studies where all of the energy intake is controlled for and kept equal between the groups, carbohydrate restriction hasn't been found to be a superior to high carb intake as long as the protein and calories are matched. When it comes to mortality and carbohydrate intake, then the biggest problem is that we obviously can't do lifelong human studies. It's virtually impossible to do a lifelong metabolic ward study where you control all the food intake of humans and even like a randomized clinical trial is very hard to do over the course of multiple years. That's why when it comes to mortality and dietary patterns, then kind of the best evidence we have or the only evidence that we really have is the epidemiological studies. The 2017 PURE study among individuals from 18 different countries across the globe found the lowest total mortality at a carbohydrate intake of fifty to fifty five percent and higher risk of mortality above sixty percent. The highest quartile of carbohydrate intake, which was 77.2% of total calories, was linked to twenty eight percent higher risk of mortality compared to the lowest quantile, which was forty six point four percent. For total fat intake, the highest quartile, which was 35.3% of total calories from fat, had a twenty three percent lower risk of mortality compared to the lowest quartile, which was ten point six percent of total calories from fat. The results suggest that a balanced diet is what gives you the best reduction in mortality risk. In this study, the lowest mortality was forty six percent for carbohydrate intake and thirty five percent fat intake. So it was this kind of a balanced diet that was found across the globe to be associated with the lowest risk of mortality. Another important factor that contributes to this finding is the quality of the diet. A 2023 prospective cohort study among 371,000 subjects discovered that a healthy low carb diet was associated with a five percent decrease in mortality. An unhealthy low carb diet was associated with an eighteen percent higher risk of mortality. When it came to the low fat diet, then a healthy low fat diet was linked to eighteen percent lower risk of mortality, sixteen percent lower cardiovascular mortality, and eighteen percent cancer mortality. This is supported by a 2020 study among 37,000 US adults age 20 or older that found unhealthy low carb and low fat diets were associated with higher total mortality. So the food quality and the quality of a carbohydrates matters when it comes to reduction in mortality risk. If you eat an unhealthy food, even if it's moderate carb or high carb or low carb, doesn't matter, then the unhealthy food is what's going to increase your mortality risk. How many carbohydrates a person should eat depends on their metabolic health. Individuals who have insulin resistance type two diabetes or obesity might benefit from short term periods of carbohydrate restriction and low carb diets, but there's no evidence that they're superior. You could also achieve the same effects with a high carb, low fat diet. However, based on long term decades long of epidemiological studies, we do find that a carbohydrate intake somewhere between 45 to 55% is associated with a lower risk of mortality than carbohydrate intakes above sixty percent and below forty percent. So most of the evidence points towards the fact that a moderate carbohydrate intake somewhere between forty five to fifty five percent is what gives you the lowest risk of mortality and lowest risk of cardiovascular disease mortality. Coincidentally, a carbohydrate intake of 48% is 56% of total calories has also been seen to be associated with the highest levels of serum clotho, which is a transmembrane protein linked to longevity. Now the role of this cloth of protein and longevity is still under investigation. We don't necessarily know what's the actual impact of this clathoprotein on your longevity. But it is interesting to see that the highest levels of this clathoprotein are also the same levels of carbohydrate intake that's associated with the lowest risk of mortality, but there's no causal link that we know of. So at the end of the day, you have to figure out which diet works for you the best. You have to look at your blood work to understand what's the optimal carbohydrate intake for you. Healthier individuals are, of course, able to eat more carbohydrates with less side effects, but that's actually a good thing. If you're able to eat more carbohydrates without it affecting your blood sugar and insulin levels negatively, you're in better health than your all cause mortality is naturally gonna be lower. The individuals who have poor metabolic health, they can't eat that many carbohydrates without it affecting their blood work negatively. So these individuals with poor metabolic health at a baseline will already have a higher risk of all cause mortality at baseline. So you can't really compare apples to oranges when it comes to different people and their carbohydrate intake. Healthier people are able to eat more carbohydrates and because they're healthier, their risk of all cause mortality is also lower. If you do want to slow down aging and add healthy years to your life, then I'm looking for more people who want to do that. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@seamlun.com, and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.