I know that I'm at least partly responsible for the fact that glycine has become a very popular supplement right now. I have covered glycine in multiple of my videos talking about that it's one of the best longevity supplements that you could take. But no one really talks about how much glycine specifically you need and also why just taking a collagen supplement might not be enough to cover that demand. It's showtime. So first of all glycine has a lot of benefits for longevity. Number one, it can mimic methionine restriction which has been found to be beneficial for life extension in multiple animal species. Glycine also increases autophagy and glutathione, the master antioxidant in the body. Glycine also supports collagen synthesis which is good for the facial aging and glycine also inhibits advanced glycation end products or AGEs which are gonna be very beneficial for preventing heart disease and diabetes. Now your body does make some glycine but the amount is quite small. Your body makes only three grams of glycine per day. That's far from what's considered optimal for collagen turnover or other vital functions like Glutathione, Creatine, and Heme Synthesis. To make the Glutathione, Creatine, and Heme, you would need three grams of glycine. For collagen turnover, you need at a minimum of twelve grams of glycine. So at a minimum you need fifteen grams of glycine a day and keep in mind that when your body only makes three grams and those three grams would be used to cover the essential functions which is the glutathione creatinine heme synthesis, then you still need twelve grams of glycine from other sources for collagen turnover. However, the demand for glycine for collagen turnover could be up to 36 grams. We don't know precisely what is glycine's recycling rate. If glycine's recycling rate is 95%, meaning that you lose 5% of it, then 12 grams is enough for covering your daily collagen turnover. But glycine's recycling rate could also be similar to cysteine which is 85%. That would mean that you would need actually three times more glycine ending up with 36 grams of glycine for collagen turnover. So scientists aren't precisely clear what is glycine's recycling rate. Rate. It could be 95% which means that you would need only 12 grams of glycine for collagen turnover but it could also be 85% meaning that you need 36 grams of glycine. Glycine makes up every third amino acid in collagen. The reason is that glycine is the only amino acid small enough to pack into the central core of the triple helix which allows the three polypeptide chains to come close enough to wind together tightly. So the less collagen or glycine you consume the slower your collagen turnover. So overall collagen is 30% glycine. For every 10 grams of collagen you only get three grams of glycine. So you can do the math of how much glycine you would need. Three grams your body makes itself endogenously day. If you take a collagen supplement like ten grams of collagen then you're gonna get three grams of glycine from that as well. On a regular diet like the average person's diet you might end up getting only three to five grams of glycine because most foods aren't really that high in in glycine. That barely covers the 15 gram demand for optimal health. Disappointed. The reason why we don't make optimal amounts of glycine is that glycine synthesis in the body isn't regulated by its demand. There is a quote unquote weak link into metabolism when it comes to glycine biosynthesis. The reason why natural selection and evolution has kept suboptimal glycine synthesis is that it's not detrimental to immediate survival but it does reduce the quality of life in the long term such as osteoarthritis, osteoporosis and having high homocysteine levels. That's why it is important to increase your dietary glycine intake. From one ounce of gelatin powder you're gonna get around five grams of glycine, a 100 grams of pork skin snacks give you 12 grams of glycine, a 100 grams of chicken skin, 3.3 grams of glycine, a 100 grams of beef, 2.2 grams of glycine and 100 grams of sesame flour, 3.4 grams of glycine. So most people aren't eating these glycine rich foods, like they're not eating any tendons, broths and stews and those kind of things. They're not eating any skins, they're eating mostly muscle meat. The leaner types of muscle meat and protein sources that are actually lower in glycine and higher in methionine. One of the biggest longevity benefits of glycine is methionine restriction. Excess methionine and low glycine have been found to shorten lifespan in animal species and glycine can counteract the harmful effects of too much methionine. So unless you are eating specifically glycine rich foods like pork skins, tendons, ligaments etcetera or the only glycine rich food you eat is the collagen supplement which gives you only three grams of glycine then you still need at least five to ten grams of glycine as a supplement. So that's why just taking the collagen supplement isn't enough to cover the fifteen gram demand you need every day. Ten grams of collagen is giving you only three grams of glycine and if you add it on top of your three grams the body makes itself and maybe the three grams you get from your average diet then you're only gonna get to nine grams of glycine in total which still leaves around five grams of a deficit. So you either need to like double the dose of your collagen supplement or you would just need to add the glycine supplement in there. But like we said, the demand for optimal glycine intake could be even up to 36 grams if the glycine recycling rate is worse than we think. Especially if you have an increased burden on your liver or cardiovascular system. Glycine has liver protective and cardiac protective effects and the demand for glutathione as well as glycine as well as collagen synthesis drastically increases under the conditions of different chronic diseases like diabetes, fatty liver and heart disease. So what I like to do is I definitely take a collagen supplement. I take like ten grams of collagen every day. I do eat some gelatinous foods. I make my own gelatin so it's kind of a nice dessert but I definitely still add at least five to ten grams of glycine into my day as well because of the reason mentioned. Your body doesn't make enough glycine and you don't really get that much glycine from just the collagen supplement. And when it comes to yes specific medical conditions and chronic diseases then your demand for glycine could be even higher. If you want to learn everything about the forgotten role of glycine and collagen in optimal health and longevity, then check out my book with doctor James DeNicolantonio called The Collagen Cure. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well as my name is Seem. Stay optimized, stay empowered.