What are the top five things you can do for a healthy long life? What is my current training routine like? And what are the macronutrients that I consume? This and a lot more in today's q and a episode. If you want to ask me a question, then make sure you follow me on Instagram where I do those q and a's there regularly. It's showtime. Alright. The first question is top five things to do for long, healthy life. Now I do believe that it mostly comes down to the fundamentals. Like, there is very little evidence that any of these super fancy things like fancy supplements or fancy exercise routines or fancy diets have any, you know, significant effects on lifespan and longevity. It mostly comes down to nailing down the fundamentals and making sure that you don't, like, get a particular chronic disease early in life. Because the biggest thing that determines your, you know, maximum lifespan pretty much comes down to when are you getting these chronic diseases that most people die to. Like, if you look at the top killers worldwide, then their heart disease, stroke, and, neurodegeneration, cancer, diabetes, and those kind of things in developed countries. In developing countries, they're obviously, like, these infectious diseases as well. But in developed countries, the Western world generally it comes down to noncommunicable diseases like heart disease, cancer, diabetes, and neurodegeneration. And when you look at the average age of heart disease, then it's pretty much around 65 years. The average age of a heart attack is is 65. The average diagnosis of cancer is also around 65 to 70. And the average diagnosis of, neurodegeneration and dementia is around 80 years of age. So most people the reason why heart disease is the number one killer is because most people die to heart disease around their sixties and seventies. And that is kind of the biggest bottleneck in terms of determining your maximum lifespan. Like, if you get heart disease in your sixties, then it's very unlikely that you will live to a 100 years old, for example. Whereas if you get, you know, heart disease maybe a few decades later, like in your eighties or nineties, then the chance of you getting to 100 is still quite high. And this is what also you find in the centenarians. The centenarians are divided into like three main groups. There are these survivors. These people get a particular chronic disease, whether that be cancer, heart disease, or neurodegeneration before the age of 80 and still make it to the age of 100. Then there's the layers. Those people are the ones that don't get a chronic disease up until the age of 80 years old. So they make it to 80. And then after that, they get a chronic disease and then they still make it to a 100. And then there's escapers. These are the ones that don't get any of these chronic diseases, up until the age of a 100. So these are the kind of pure, you know, most genetically best blessed or with the most healthiest lifestyle that avoid all these chronic diseases up until the age of a 100. So the biggest rate limiting step to how long you're gonna live is heart disease, primarily. Like, most people will die to heart disease, like, one out of three or four people will die to heart disease and is the biggest, like, bottleneck in your maximum lifespan. So for optimally living longer and healthier, it comes down to making sure that you don't get these chronic diseases. And this is a topic of my next book as well, which is called The Longevity Leap. And the idea behind that is that in order to live longer, you need to shorten the gap between health span or health adjusted life expectancy, which means the age or the duration of a life living disease free and your maximum lifespan. And in so doing, you would also be able to see an addition of a few extra years to your lifespan by doing that. So making sure that you avoid the chronic diseases is comes down to prevention, preventing yourself from getting the chronic diseases. That is what is pretty much the most powerful way to ensure that you live longer. And, obviously, it's also the most powerful way to ensure that you live longer disease free, which improves the quality of those life of those years. So the longevity leap is gonna just talk about, yeah, how do you bridge the gap between your health span and lifespan, and how do you delay and postpone these chronic diseases, with, the proper lifestyle, like, habits and those kind of things. But, you know, chronic diseases, heart disease, neurodegeneration, cancer, diabetes, they are, you know, lifestyle diseases. Obviously, there's genetics that contributes to that, but it's lifestyle and a lot of, you know, dietary practices, metabolic health, your fitness, all those things contribute to that. So taking a step back, what are the, like, the top five things that you can do to live a healthy long life? It comes down to, yeah, disease prevention and delaying those diseases. So what I would put the top five things into this list would be making sure that you're not overweight is probably, like, one of the top ones because obesity being overweight, it increases the risk of all the chronic diseases. Like, it increases the risk of diabetes, neurodegeneration, cancer, and heart disease quite a lot. And an obese person is expected to live around five to twenty years shorter because of, the accumulation of these comorbidities and, development of these chronic diseases. Most people might not die to obesity per se, but they die to heart disease. But they get heart disease because of being obese, for example. So make make making sure that you're not overweight and obese is quite crucial in my opinion, maintaining an optimal BMI and optimal body fat percentage. You don't wanna be overweight. You don't wanna be obese. You don't wanna have this, excess amount of visceral fat as well. So even if your BMI is normal, but you have a very high waist circumference, then you're still metabolically sick because of the high amounts of visceral fat. And the visceral fat is actually one or more more relevant in terms of metabolic syndrome and poor metabolic health than actual BMI or actual, like, body fat percentage. So, you know, waste waste circumference, body fat percentage, and making sure that you're not overweight and obese is number number one, I would put for sure. Then the second thing would be maintaining, like, a physically active lifestyle. Exercise is the most powerful, you know, activity for even, like, protecting against obesity. Like, if you are physically very active, then you are probably you're you're, like, at risk of developing obesity and becoming overweight is also much lower. And exercise itself also has many additional longevity promoting effects. Like, exercise pretty much targets everything that you need for longevity. Like, it protects against heart disease, it protects against neurodegeneration, protects against diabetes, protects against obesity, protects against, cancer, and it also slows down the speed of biological aging. So it maintains your biological youth for longer by activating these different longevity pathways and obviously maintaining a physical, let's say, body that is also younger and healthier for longer. If you have higher muscle strength, higher ear to max, higher flexibility, all those things, then they are indicative of biological youth, if that makes sense. So you age slower and you maintain, the physical function of someone who is decades younger by staying more physically active for longer and maintaining, like, a higher level of fitness. The third thing is to eat, like, a balanced diet. I don't believe that there is any, let's say, more of these, like, on the spectrum diets or which whichever direction the spectrum goes, like either a plant based, super heavy vegan diet or a carnivore diet, animal based diet, I think both of these spectrums missed the mark of what what it means for longevity. For longevity, you don't wanna be eating obviously too many carbohydrates, but you don't wanna be eating too many fats either. So it comes down to like a balanced micronutrient split. That's what I've come to the conclusion of after years of research and years of, you know, trying out different diets myself as well. I think, like, a macro split, which I'm following right now as well, of something around, like, 25% protein, 40% carbs, and 35, 30% fat is probably, like, the most optimal macronutrient split. Like, a Mediterranean diet is obviously the most evidence based diet for heart disease and brain health. And and I think that, you know, something very similar to that is also probably the best for longevity. And, you know, eating a wide variety of plants and animal foods and dairy products and some grain whole grains as well is probably the most kind of optimal way of eating. But the most significant you know, the overarching principle of diet is the calorie intake. Because it doesn't matter what kind of diet you follow, if you're overeating calories and you start to gain weight, you start to accumulate fat and visceral fat, especially, then it doesn't matter what kind of diet it is. It's still bad for your longevity. So any diet can work to a certain extent, granted that it maintains a normal calorie intake and granted that it keeps you at a normal body composition as well. You don't wanna become overweight and any diet that makes you gain or become overweight and obese is harmful even if it's a healthy food, diet. So calorie intake is king when it comes to diet and then kind of, opting for more like a balanced macronutrient split is what I do right now and I think generally is, you know, most, at least based on the evidence, is gonna give the most benefits for longevity as well. Number four is a very important point as well because this is what most people, you know, give themselves heart disease with, which is smoking. So smoking is very bad for, you know, pretty much all chronic diseases. It's the biggest thing that contributes to heart disease and even cancer and neurodegeneration as well. So smoking is definitely like a zero tolerance policy. There's no healthy amount of smoking. Like, any amount of smoking is actually actually very harmful for you. And in one particular study, they found that smoking one cigarette per day puts you at fifty percent of the risk of heart disease as smoking 20 cigarettes per day. So even just smoking one single cigarette per day puts you at fifty percent of the risk as smoking 20 cigarettes per day would. So you can imagine that, you know, any amount of smoking is bad and even a single cigarette puts you at a significantly increased risk of heart disease and, it's almost as bad as smoking 20 cigarettes a day. Obviously, there's a huge difference between one and twenty cigarettes per day in terms of how much you need to smoke, but in terms of the risk, it's only 50% the same. And, there's literally, like, no benefits to smoking, especially the most con conventional, cigarettes that you see. So I have a zero tolerance for smoking and, alcohol consumption as well. You know, there's a lot of controversy about is moderate alcohol consumption healthy, can you get away with one to two drinks or something like that? You know, it's it's confounded by some of the epidemiology studies that find that the individuals who don't drink alcohol at all, they're at a higher risk than those who drink moderately alcohol. I'll tell you right now that, you know, those those studies are, first of all, epidemiology studies. They, obviously don't take into account the healthy use of us. And, there's also the problem that people who can't drink at all, they might have some other health conditions that prevents them from drinking, so they're already at a higher risk of mortality. So alcohol is also something that has no health benefits. You know, I think if you do drink, you could get away with maybe one to two drinks per week. If you drink, like, three nights per night, then that's already too much. I think, like, you you know, two drinks per night is also too much. But if you drink, like, one one drink, let's say, on Monday, the second drink on Friday or something like that, then you can probably, you know, you can get away with it. It's not gonna have any adverse effects, but, generally, alcohol is also something that in my book, in my, you know, worldview and philosophy is also zero tolerance, that it has no health benefits and it only increases the risk of, you know, whatever kind of a disease it is, especially, fatty liver disease. So, yeah, alcohol and smoking, you wanna avoid those things as much as possible and, you know, ideally never do it for the rest of life, at least what I think. And lastly, the last point is stress management because chronic stress is something that does eat you quite a lot. We're not talking about, you know, shortening your lifespan immediately, but stress just, accelerates biological aging. So you start to gather or, you know, you start accumulate the age really that comorbidity is much faster. Like, if you are stressed out all the time, then your blood pressure is probably higher, your blood sugar levels are probably higher. And over the course of decades, it's not you know, the chronic stress isn't gonna kill you in months or years. It takes decades of being chronically stressed out to accumulate the stress related comorbidities like hypertension and diabetes and, kidney disease and those kind of things. So managing stress is quite important from the perspective of biological aging that you want to make sure that you're not stressed out. And there's many things you can do to that, you know, to manage your stress, you know, spending time in nature, taking the sauna, you know, having a dog, playing with your dog or something like that. All those things can help to lower your stress. But the biggest thing is probably, yeah, just avoiding the unnecessary stressors in your life. There's many necessary stressors in our life. You know, many most people have to work. They have to earn a living. They have children. Those are kind of necessary stressors. Like, you can't, you know, eliminate your work. You can't eliminate your family or something like that. But you what you can do is still manage the other unnecessary stressors, like your environmental stressors, your, you know, exercise related stressors as well, like, don't overtrain if you're already stressed out because of work. So manage or exercise in a way that prevents overtraining and make sure you fill your bucket or, like, empty your stress bucket bucket with downtime, like, you know, spend time doing things that you enjoy. Don't always just, you know, go go go in this mode. Take time to spend in nature. There's a lot of research showing that nature bathing, spending time in nature is very beneficial for lowering stress and strengthening the immune system and just, you know, the light exposure, the grounding, the clean air, all those things are good for your longevity as well. So nature bathing is pretty underrated, but it's very powerful for stress management and longevity as well. And, lastly, like, some of the more positive hormetic stressors like the sauna, maybe a little bit of cold exposure as well can train your nervous system to be more resilient against stress. If you overdo it, if you'd overdo the ice baths every day for, you know, months upon end, every day ice bath, every day sauna, then, yeah, you might become stressed out. But in moderation, they can actually obviously increase your HRV, which increases your resilience against stress, but also boost parasympathetic activity, which is the kind of, you know, relaxed rest and digest state of your nervous system as opposed to being in this, sympathetic, state, which is the stressed out state. This episode is brought to you by Alitura Naturals. Allitura brings you the best natural skin care products for radiating skin and antiaging. Regular skin care products are full of ingredients and fillers that actually cause more harm than good. Allitura uses only active ingredients sourced and handcrafted in Hawaii. Their products contain zero fillers. The Alitura night cream received the twenty twenty one Clean Cirt beauty awards for best face cream. Alitura also has skin moisturizers, clay mask, serums, and cleansers. Head over to alitura.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 20% discount. The next question is best protein and most absorbable. Well, if you look at the, like, actual just biochemistry, then the most bioavailable and the most absorbable protein is probably whey protein. Like, it always tops the charts in terms of bioavailability and the protein synthesis response. It tops egg protein. It tops plant based proteins. It tops beef protein, etcetera. Whey protein is the most anabolic kind of a protein there is. Now it doesn't really matter, like protein bioavailability and protein absorption or the speed of absorption, it only matters in a certain situation. Like, it only matters if you're eating a low protein diet or if you're, like, malnourished or if you're, yeah, like, a professional athlete who just really needs to get highly bioavailable and highly absorbable protein very fast to recover from the workout or to prepare for the next workout. If you're a regular person who eats adequate amounts of protein, then doesn't really matter how bioavailable the protein is. If you're getting sufficient amounts of protein so if you're getting at least a 100 grams of protein per day, a hundred and ten, twenty, even a 150 grams of protein per day, then it doesn't matter what's the bioavailability because you're getting such a large amount of protein that your body will just get all the amino acids that it needs, to cover protein synthesis and to maintain muscle tissue and to, you know, build muscle tissue as well at that point. So the larger your protein intake is per day, then the less important the quality of the protein is. If you're eating a protein restricted diet, like you're eating only 70 grams of protein, 60 grams, 50 grams, then the more important the quality becomes because you're already at a low smaller intake of protein. And it has been found that at adequate doses, it doesn't even matter what type of protein it is, whether that is whey protein or plant based protein or beef protein or casein protein, whatever it is, you you might you might just need more if it's lower quality. So for example, 30 grams of wheat protein, to get the equivalent response for protein synthesis from a plant based protein, you might need, like, 40 or 45 grams of plant based protein. So you need less protein in total the higher the quality is. So if you're eating an animal based diet, then you actually need less protein because the protein is higher quality. Whereas if you're eating more plant based proteins, then you need a little bit more protein to make up for their quality, if if that makes sense. But at sufficient amounts, the protein synthesis is the same and the final outcome is also the same, if that makes sense. If you're eating, let's say, a 110 grams of protein from animal based sources, then that's the equivalent of maybe eating a 150 or a 160 grams of protein from plant based plant based sources. And vice versa, if you're eating, you know, a 150 grams of animal based protein, then a 110 grams of plant based protein is worse. You know, obviously, because it's less protein, but it's the quality matters at that point as well. But if you're eating a 110 grams of animal based protein, then, you know, that's pretty much covers all the demands for maintaining muscle tissue. And, to get the same response from plant based proteins or something that is less bioavailable, even like beef protein powder, for example, compared to whey protein, then, you would need a larger dose. So, like, a hundred and fifty grams. Next question. Do you have a training plan or split or you just do random stuff and listen to your body? Well, I definitely don't do, like, random stuff. I have a plan that I follow. It's not specifically in my notebook that, okay, this is exactly how many reps and sets I need to do, etcetera. What I follow is a push pull leg split. So three days of the week, I work out with, resistance training and I cycle between push muscles, which are chest press, shoulder press, maybe triceps, things like that. Pull, muscles, which are pull ups, dead lifts, rows, and leg muscles, you know, squats, lunges, Bulgarian split squats, even Romanian deadlifts, and those kind of things. So I just cycle between these three main muscle groups. And you don't really need more than three workouts per week. You know, working out more than that is actually counterproductive, in my opinion. It's certainly counterproductive for longevity purposes, and it might be counterproductive for even muscle building purposes unless you are, you know, taking anabolic steroids or something. If you're a natural athlete, then working out more than four times a week is probably overdoing it. And you would you would, you would be getting more benefits from incorporating more cardio at that point. Once you get three workouts of resistance training per week, then you don't need more than that, and you would be better off adding some cardio, in my opinion, for longevity purposes at least. For muscle building purposes, it might be a bit different. But, yeah, I follow a push pull leg split, and, sometimes I'll do, you know, barbells. Sometimes I'll do calisthenics. Sometimes I'll do dumbbells or kettlebells. So it just depends on the situation. But what I do still follow is the cycling between push muscles, pull muscles, and leg muscles. What I actually do is probably push muscles, leg muscles, pull muscles, maybe leg muscles again, and I I try to cycle between upper body and lower body. So I never do, like, two upper body days in a row because it's kind of overkill in my opinion. So I'll do either upper body, lower body or or something like, you know, upper body cardio, upper body, lower body cardio. So I'll try to kinda, keep some variety in there and never train the same muscles, you know, twice in a row, if that makes sense. In terms of the reps and sits, then, my main focus is gonna be mostly strength based movements. You know, I'm out of my kind of desired body composition in terms of muscle mass. I don't want to build additional muscle mass, like, I'm pretty above average with my muscle mass already and I don't want to add like, I don't need to add any extra muscle tissue. And I would much rather keep my body fat percentage low and focus on the strength based movements because the strength based, you know, looking at the research, then strength is more important for longer longevity. Whereas muscle tissue, you know, yes, it does go down with age, but if you train for strength, then you're gonna have plenty of muscle tissue as well. So you should, you know, primarily focus on the strength trying to get stronger because strength is more of a reflection of health, whereas muscle tissue is more of a reflection of, you know, what you eat and how much protein you eat generally. Like, you can build muscle on any kind of diet as long as you're getting enough protein. Like, you could eat, like, just Twinkies and get a protein shake and still build plenty of muscle. And, you know, I mean, same applies to strength as well to a certain extent. But over the long term, you know, looking into decades into the future, then what matters more is gonna be strength in my opinion. And, having more strength also means that you will have plenty of muscle tissue as well. So I like to focus on strength. So I'll train low on the lower rep ranges, mostly like three to six reps per set and, three to six sets per exercise as well. The exercise I do, like, very little exercises. I do maybe three exercises per workout. So if it's a push workout, I'll do, bench press and and shoulder press and maybe, like, some dumbbell flys on the side or delt flys as they're called. On the pull workout, I'll do pull ups or deadlifts and maybe forearm curls. That's it. Only three exercises. That's it. Takes me thirty to forty five minutes. I'm done. For the leg muscles, I'll do only squats and maybe, you know, Bulgarian split squats or something like that, and, pretty much done as well. So you don't need to spend hours at the gym. It's actually counterproductive in my opinion, and, focusing on strength is, I think more important than just focusing on the muscle mass. What are the best glycine sources in vegetables? So, plant based foods generally don't have a lot of glycine. They don't have a lot of methionine either, which is good. So from the longevity side and maintaining a balance between methionine and glycine is beneficial. So making sure that you don't get too much methionine and not enough glycine. If you eat only muscle meat, then you're gonna get a lot of methionine and probably not enough glycine. So you want to balance that with some of the collagenous proteins like pork skin, chicken skin, drumsticks, bone broth, gelatin powder. Those things have the most amount of glycine, and they don't have that much, methionine. When it comes to plant based foods, then yeah. The thing with plant based food is that they don't have almost almost any methionine at all, and they have very little glycine as well. But the but the ratio is pretty good. Like, the ratio between methionine and glycine on plant based foods is pretty good. So I do like to include, obviously, a lot of vegetables and different kinds of foods in my diet. Specifically, the highest glycine rich foods that are vegetables are you know, soybeans are actually probably one of the highest, vegetable source of, glycine. And the lat in Latin, soybeans mean glycine max. So that's kind of a interesting, translation that soybeans mean, glycine max, but they're not really the highest source of glycine per se. Like pork skin or gelatin powder is the absolute highest amount of glycine from dietary sources. So, you know, soybeans, beans itself, legumes, they have, obviously, they have a little bit more protein than broccoli, for example, but they have more glycine as well and less methionine. So these are the kind of the most plant based, foods that have the most glycine. But you shouldn't rely on getting that much glycine from just plant based foods. It is true that your glycine demand on a plant based diet is probably smaller than on a meat based diet because the plant based foods also have very little methionine, so you need less glycine to balance the methionine, but you still need at least 12 grams of glycine for collagen turnover. So if you are eating only plant based foods, then you're probably not getting those 12 grams. So you will want to add, like, either a gelatin powder in there or, you know, eat some of the other you may collagen peptide supplements as well or just eat some of the other collagen rich, proteins like pork skin, chicken drumsticks, and those kind of things. Next question, what are the three best supplements everyone should take? I think number one is collagen peptides because you start to lose your skin collagen content already in your twenties at a rate of 10% per decade. So it's like if you start taking collagen in your forties and fifties, then it's already too late in terms of that because you have already lost at least 20% of your skin collagen content. So the earlier earlier you start with collagen peptides, the better. And this is one of the supplements I think, like, everyone should take for the rest of their life. I don't see at least in terms of the acidic side because it helps with there's, like, multiple human clinical trials showing that collagen peptides improve skin aging and slow down the hallmarks of skin aging. So it's a pretty well well researched supplement in that regard. And the second supplement I would probably add is, I would say like, you know, glycine because, you know, you get some, glycine from collagen peptides, but it's not nearly enough. You know, I personally take at least five to six grams of extra glycine on top of my already existing diet. And, the specific brand of collagen peptides I take also has five extra grams of glycine per scoop. So I'm getting, like, eight grams of glycine per scoop of my collagen pro protein. So I'm still, like, supplementing at least ten grams of glycine per day from all the different sources, from supplemental and the collagen sources. So but, you know, yeah, the demand for glycine for optimal antiaging, I think, yeah, is around ten to twelve grams per day. You could get that from diet as well. Like, if you eat a lot of gelatin powder, then, yes, you can get it. Just drinking, like, a cup of bone broth isn't enough. Like, you're not gonna get it's a research that, you can't get adequate amounts of these quality precursors from bone broth. You would need, like, either a higher pork skin diet or something of that or to just, supplement with collagen peptides or extra extra glycine. And the third supplement, you know, whether or not you need to take it depends on your age and depends on the other factors. I'll put I'll name two supplements here. They're gonna share the spot for number three is they're gonna be NAC and melatonin. Now everyone doesn't need melatonin. Everyone doesn't need NAC, especially if they're younger than 40 years of age. It's been found that, you know, your gluethan levels decline rapidly after 45, and your body is able to resist oxidative stress before the age of 45. But after the age of 45, the gluathione levels rapidly decrease, and that's where you start to see also the age related diseases, and you start to age much faster as well. So if you are over the age of 45, then I will certainly take NAC every glynaq and NAC combo, glycine and NAC. It also is very, you know, researched. It has many, trials showing that it reverses whole marks of of human aging and improves functional outcomes, such as muscle strength and gait speed and cognitive function. So, you know, someone in your forties and fifties and sixties, I would take NAC at large doses as well pretty much every day, like five grams even because that's what's been shown to, help with the hallmarks of aging. The same with melatonin, you don't technically need melatonin in your twenties or thirties, but in your fifties, you will certainly need to take like a I would I would certainly take, at least, like, one milligram of melatonin per night because your your melatonin production decreases with age similar to Glurothon, and you make around 10 times less melatonin when you're 50 years old compared to when you're in your puberty. And, you know, melatonin is a very powerful antioxidant. It has many anti inflammatory benefits. So something if you are, you know, trying to age the most optimal way for longevity purposes, then, yes, melatonin in your fifties is something I would, yeah, certainly take every night pretty much. But before that age, you know, I'll prefer to take, like, a smaller dose every now and then. I don't take it every night, but, yeah, like, just trying to boost your antioxidant defense with, like, zero point one, zero point three milligrams melatonin before the age of 50 is also a good idea in my opinion. Next question. I know vaping is also harmful, but it's, like, 90 to 95% safer than traditional smoking. Right? Better to avoid, though. You know, yes, vaping might be slightly better than regular smoking, but at the same time, it's equally as bad. So, you know, you might not be, like, causing that much ox chemical oxidative stress to your lungs as you would with a traditional smoke or a cigarette, but you are still causing chemical oxidant stress through the inhaling of these vapors that have, obviously, these different kind of chemicals in it. So they're both equally as bad in my opinion. Like, I don't know who who came up with the idea that vaping is safer than smoking. Like, the research doesn't really back that up. It might reduce your risk slightly compared to traditional smoking. But remember what I just said before, even smoking a single cigarette per day puts you at fifty percent of the risk of heart disease as smoking 20 cigarettes a day. So let's say you do vaping, you know, most people don't vape just once a day, they might vape five to six times a day, then vaping five to six times a day is probably as bad as smoking one regular cigarette, probably a bit worse. So that already puts you at fifty percent of the increased risk of heart disease as smoking 20 cigarettes per day. So, no, like, I don't think vaping is safer in the long term. It's in the short term, it is safer, but in the long term, it's equally as bad, in my opinion. And, yeah, you know, don't vape. It's kind of very bad for you. It's kind of useless thing. It's certainly not healthier than regular smoking. And, yeah, just try to avoid these kind of, activities, whatever kind of smoke it is, like the hookah pipe that, or the water pipe, that's very bad. Regular regular smoking of cigarettes, that's bad. You know, there's some some, ideas that smoking cigars where you don't inhale the smoke is somehow safer. I haven't found any research to back that up, but I would say that, you know, even smoking the cigars over the long over the course of decades is still very bad for you. I don't think it's, you know, safe that it somehow prevents you from getting an increased risk of heart disease or cancer. Like, over the course of years and decades, you will still probably see the same increased risk. Maybe maybe a few percentage is smaller, but like I said, you know, smoking a single cigarette per day puts you at fifty percent of the increased risk of 20 cigarettes per day. So just any amount of smoke, any amount of smoking activity from whatever source it is is bad. And, you know, you should have, like, a zero tolerance policy, in my opinion. Next question, can you take creatine even if you're not working out? That's an interesting and good question. So creatine, obviously, is the most popular supplement for muscle strength and muscle building, but creatine has a lot of other health benefits as well and longevity benefits. Like, it improves brain, it reduces sleep demand, it supports methylation, and, it's also been found to have, like, some antiaging and longevity benefits in the elderly through maintaining muscle strength and muscle mass and also improving cognitive function. You know? Yeah. Taking a creatine supplement, even if you're not working out, is probably still worth it, and it will give you some benefits. If you are working out, then you will probably see, you know, more results from creatine supplementation, but that's also because you're working out. So, you know, it doesn't matter if you're working out or not. You would benefit from creatine, at least in some way. If you're not working out, then you would see probably a better result in terms of your or or you would notice more improvements in your sleep and, cognitive function. But if you are working out and you take creatine, then you will obviously see also increased muscle strength and muscle power, maybe a little bit of muscle mass as well or through the intramuscular water retention. So, yeah, you will see benefits from creatine even if you're not working out, in my opinion. Maybe the dosage would be somewhat smaller if you aren't working out. So if you're working out, then you would you know, the kind of good safe dose to take is, like, three grams, five grams if you're a heavier male. But if you're not working out, then maybe, like, two grams already is enough. So I wouldn't I don't think there's some kind of good idea to take very large amounts of creatine, like, ten grams or something like that. It's kind of not needed. You might get gastrointestinal symptoms from very large amounts of, creatine, and it might, you know, over the long term might impair your kidney function as well. But if you're taking only, like, two, three, five grams, then that's a safe amount. It's just that if you're not working out, then your demand for the creatine is also a bit smaller. So because creatine is used for ATP production, specifically the phosphocreatine system, which is then, like, a maximum anaerobic performance. So if you're not engaged in a lot of explosive and strength based activities like power lifting or sprinting or stuff like that, then you don't then you're not, like, burning through your keratin that much, either, but you will still gain the benefit, from the cognitive aspects of keratin. And the next question is similar to the smoking topic. So, nicotine without tobacco, good or bad? So nicotine is an interesting substance. Obviously, you get nicotine from cigarettes. You get it from cigars. I guess, you know, some, vapes also might have some nicotine in it. I'm not sure. I have never, like, actually vaped. But, you know, you can get nicotine from nicotine gums, nicotine patches, and these nicotine sprays as well. So nicotine, the I guess, the biggest benefit to nicotine as a compound alone are its nootropic effects. So it can have some cognitive enhancement benefits, like it can improve your focus and attention span. I personally use the nicotine gum every once in a while. I think I use it maybe, like, once a week or something like that. And, it's a it's a pretty good, like, a compound for, yeah, like, doing cognitive work. It can increase your, like, focus a little bit, put you into the zone quite nicely. If you combine nicotine gum with a little bit of coffee, then that's a pretty good nootropic. Like, you're gonna be in the zone for for many hours by doing that. But the nicotine in large amounts, it can also have some negative side effects, like, it's actually vasoconstrictive, so, it reduces blood flow. So chronic use of nicotine in large amounts probably isn't that of a is not is not a good idea in terms of cardiovascular disease. So from the brain health side, small micro doses of nicotine is good. It, can improve, like, cognitive function. It might even have some neuroprotective effects because of that. But over the long term in chronic use, I wouldn't say it's the best for cardiovascular disease. So I wouldn't use it, like, every day. I would use it, like, you know, a few times a week and stick to, like, a dose of, you know, one to two milligrams at a time. If I'm not mistaken, then nicotine also has benefits for testosterone. It inhibits aromatase, which is the enzyme that converts testosterone into estrogen. So it could have, like, some testosterone boosting effect as well and lowers the aromatase activity. So, yes, nicotine is an interesting compound alone. You don't wanna get the nicotine from cigarettes and smoking. Obviously, if you are interested in taking nicotine, then, like, the nicotine gums, one milligram, try it out. If you take it on an empty stomach, you might get nauseous, and it can, you know, feel uncomfortable. But if you take it, you know, with food or something after food, then, yeah, it can be a pretty good nootropic agent and helps you to, like, you know, focus on the work. And the final question is, do you still do OMAD? I absolutely love it and picture myself doing it long term. Is it viable? I haven't been doing, like, a strict OMAD for the last, you know, six years. Like I said, I've always done my version of OMAD, which I call targeted intermittent fasting. I have a protein shake before my workout, then I work out. And in the evening around 5PM or something, I'll have my dinner. So it's, you know, one and a half meals a day. I consume most of the calories after the workout because I think that's where my body is most insulin sensitive and that's where my body uses the nutrients the most. And there is some benefits to working out semi fasted, by activating AMPK and working out in a glycogen depleted state. You I think that you will gain, like, some supercompensation effects as well in terms of the longevity pathways and metabolic health, obviously. But it's, not very smart or it's hard to work out fasted all the time. So that's why I have the protein shake, which give me around 30 grams of protein. And, that is enough to make progress and build muscle and gain strength at the same time. And then I'll have the rest of my calories. In the evening, I don't eat too many calories. I eat maybe 2,200, something like that, 2,200 calories per day. And that maintains a lean body composition year round for me while still having a high amount of muscle mass and a high amount of muscle strength as well. So I think I'm for me, it works perfect to get the best best of both worlds in terms of body composition and training and, the longevity side. Now is the regular OMAD viable for long term? At least, you know, the way I do it, it's been viable for the last six or seven years, so I haven't seen any, you know, problems with that. But regular OMAD of eating strict one meal a day depends, yeah, like, how much you train. If you don't have a particularly strenuous exercise routine and you're not super lean, then you can probably do it quite long. If you're overweight, then you can easily do OMAD. If you're not working out, then you can easily do OMAD. But if you start to be more advanced in your training, whether that be cardio training or strength training, then you will see you will need something extra, in my opinion, at least in terms of maintaining muscle tissue and getting enough protein. Because, yes, eating just one meal a day isn't optimal for protein synthesis and muscle growth and muscle building. But, adding, like, a protein shake or just eating two meals in total instead of one meal, can overcome that. So, you know, it depends a lot on your training status, your metabolic health, and your body fat percentage. The lower your body fat percentage, then, it's better to get an additional meal. But the higher your body fat percentage, then you can easily do OMAD for a longer time, if that makes sense. Alright. That's it for this video. If you want to ask me a question in the future, then make sure you follow me on Instagram at simlun.com. But do you want to slow down aging and add healthy years to your life? Then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@simlan.com, and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. So you optimize, stay empowered.