Brian Johnson is an American entrepreneur and venture capitalist who sold his company Braintree to PayPal for $800,000,000. At the age of 43, Brian started what he calls Project Blueprint with a goal of reversing his biological age as much as possible to 18 even. After almost two years, Brian has worked with over 30 doctors and medical professionals to reverse his epigenetic age by five point one years, slow his speed of aging by 24%, and achieve over 50 perfect biomarkers that are lower than his chronological age. All of this has costed him up to $2,000,000 per year on different supplements, cutting edge medical interventions, and accurate measurement of hundreds of biomarkers. I've already made a thorough review of his daily routine and food regimen last year, so you can check it out for more information. But in this video, I'm gonna go through again his blueprint protocol and current results. Do it. My objective with blueprint is to demonstrate aging escape velocity Using the best science, trying to do all the appropriate interventions to neutralize my aging process. So I think the perfect place to start is to just check out his, protocol and, you can check it out yourself at blueprint.brianjohnson.co. Now first off the bat, I have to say that, you know, he's still very amazing in terms of what he has accomplished. When you look at the before and after photos of him then yeah, he definitely looks a lot younger than he was before. You can be play the devil's advocate in terms of that. He just got fit. He just lost weight. He just got leaner. He just, yeah achieved this like difference because he just got fitter. Of course, you know, he looked like an average 45 year old in my opinion before. He wasn't like overweight or obese. He was probably a little bit like excess body fat for sure. But now he's definitely very lean and, much, you know, in a better health. But personally, I do think that he has, you know, actually reversed his age from the, like, a epigenetic level because he has actually just measured all of these different biomarkers. He has taken all these tests that, do show the age reversal based on, like, the average. Obviously, he's comparing himself to the, you know, someone who is, normally a 35 year old or 18 year old, for example. But the problem with that is that, you know, the average 35 year old already is pretty in pretty bad shape and pretty bad health. It doesn't actually know whether or not it actually means anything. It just means that he's super fit for his age. He's fitter than 99.9% of someone else who is 45 years old and he's probably fitter than 99% of someone else who is 35 years old compared to 18 year olds, then he's still very fit. Is he, like, younger biologically than someone who is 18 years old or 20 years old? We don't know that. But we know that he just he just, you know, compared to those individuals in that same age group, he's doing a lot better than a lot of these other individuals. It's really a stacked process of maybe a 100 different things. I do. Because you have to think about the the body in its entirety. Now personally, I have also done epigenetic age tests. I have measured my DNA methylation clock, which is the Horvath's clock that is kind of considered the gold standard in terms of measuring biological age. And when I was 25 years old, which was like two years ago, I did the test and it showed that my biological age was 16, which was nine years younger. I haven't retested the Horace clock right now, but I'm gonna do it in a few weeks. And we'll see what has, like, changed over the course of two years. But regardless, I think what Brian Johnson is doing is amazing. Like, yeah, there's literally no one else who is doing such, like, rigorous actual experimentation and testing of the things that he's doing. And like he said, yeah, like, he's not saying that this is what works. This is the he he says, like, this is the data based on him and this is what has worked for him especially. So obviously there may be some individual differences, but the framework and the main principles that he follows are still applicable to pretty much everyone. I, based on, like, my own understanding and looking at the protocol, having gone through the protocol, you know, last year myself in terms of looking at how it works, I must say that, yeah, I think everything that he's doing is working, and everything that he's doing is pretty much, you know, backed up by some science. Because he's doing so many things all at once, we don't necessarily know, like, what is the biggest lever in terms of what is giving the biggest results, and some of the things that he's doing might not work at all. And we don't know that specifically. We know that all these things together apparently have reversed his biological age, but we don't know necessarily, like, what is this exact thing that is working, what is this exact thing that is giving the 80% of the results. So here is a glimpse of his blueprint. Basically, he eats about 1,900 calories per day, which is approximately 24 or 25% calorie restriction. He's primarily vegan or a 100% vegan, except he has said that he the only like animal product he's taking is collagen peptides, for the probably the skin and joint benefits. 70 plus pounds of veggies a month. So he eats a lot of vegetables, nuts and seeds and, kind of, yeah, plant based foods, beans and stuff. A hundred plus pills per day. He measures blood, stools, saliva, urine, MRI, ultrasound, etcetera. In the morning, he's taking, Green Giant, which is kind of this, first breakfast plus fifty four pills, then one hour workout, super veggie, which is another meal, skin, oral, hair, eye, care, routine, travel to work, nutty pudding, and, third dish, which is thirty four pills. So the first thing that he consumes upon waking is the green giant. It's eight ounces of water, spermidine, two tablespoons of cholera powder, which gives about thirteen point five milligrams of spermidine, which is good because according to, studies then, people who get over eleven milligrams of spermidine a day have, their lowest risk of mortality. And people who get less than eleven milligrams of spermidine have a higher risk of mortality. So, yeah, definitely I'm a huge fan of spermidine as a supplement or from foods. The highest sources of spermidine from food is aged cheese, chlorella and mushrooms, generally. Amino complex seven point six grams, So probably some amino acid powder. Creatine two point five grams, which is a good dose even, like three grams. On a vegan diet, he probably would even benefit from three to five grams. Probably collagen peptides twenty grams. So, yeah, like, this is the only animal product that he's taking. I would guess that it's probably like a marine collagen, I guess. Cocoa flavonols, which actually also has been linked to reduced heart disease mortality as well. These are called cocoa polyphenols because they're very high in polyphenols and powerful, like, antioxidants, ceil and cinnamon, which is very good for insulin sensitivity, and the morning pills, the fifty four pills in the morning. Then he works out for one hour, does different kinds of exercises, super veggie, which is gonna be actual breakfast, which, is pretty much like blended together. He eats it, like, in a blended form, but, yeah, you can obviously maybe eat it like this. So black lentils, 300 grams. Weight cooked. Broccoli, 250 grams. Cauliflower, a 150 grams, shiitake or maitake mushrooms, 50 grams, one glove of, garlic, ginger root, three grams, lime, one cumin, one tablespoon, apple cider vinegar, one tablespoon, hemp seeds, one tablespoon, and after prep, drizzle, one tablespoon of extra virgin olive oil. So, yeah, I think extra virgin olive oil is very good for very it's also very high in polyphenols and very good for cardiovascular disease prevention. And, these autophagy regulating polyphenols are obviously very antiaging as well. Nutty pudding, so five hundred to a hundred milligrams of almond milk, three tablespoons of ground macadamia nuts, two teaspoons of ground walnuts, one teaspoon of ground flaxseed, half Brazil nut, one tablespoon of non Dutch cacao, one teaspoon of sunflower lecithin, a half teaspoon of ceil and cinnamon, one cup of blueberries, raspberry strawberries, three cherries, two ounces of freshly squeezed pomegranate juice. And the last third meals are different kinds of, plant based meals about 500 calories each. Beets, asparagus, almonds, arugula, shallots, balsamic, Dijon, mustard seeds, which, yeah, actually help with glutathione. So combining these, you know, mustards with the cruciferous actually kinda enhances the sulforaphane. Orange fennel salad, orange fennel, goji berries, pecans, grape tomatoes. Yeah. Different kinds of, kind of plant based meals. And last, stuffed sweet potato, 500 calories. Again, sweet potato, chickpeas, grape tomatoes, avocado, radishes, cilantro, limes, lemon, jalapeno, etcetera. Fun fact, on blueprint, you'll eat over 70 pounds of veggies, berries, and nuts per month. And, he obviously also blends it together, so it makes it a lot easier to consume. And I do believe that, yeah, just eating more vegetables and the plant based food will have a positive effect on your health. So because first of all, the plants and vegetables are very low in calories, so it's very hard to overeat and it's also easier to adhere to a calorie restriction. So Brian Johnson has said it, that calorie restriction is also one of the biggest levers or or the levers that improves his biological age and slows it down, which I also agree with. Calorie restriction, at least in virtually all species, has been found to benefit aging and slow down aging and even reverse aging in many ways. So calorie restriction works through many mechanisms. It increases autophagy that clears the body from senescent cells and just, you know, this, dysfunction of mitochondria. But also calorie restriction increases NAD levels, which obviously is used for virtually everything. You have more energy. Your body has more powerful, you know, defense measures against all oxidative stress and sun damage and all those things. If you have higher NAD levels, calorie restriction also reduces inflammation. Calorie restriction activates glutathione or increases glutathione, suproxact dismutase. So, yeah, calorie restriction pretty much slows down aging, and, you know, putting it hold stop is very hard. You have to be on a calorie restriction for a very long time, and you also obviously have to consider the other aspects related to aging like muscle fitness, muscle strength, cardiovascular function, etcetera, which Brian Johnson is doing. He's exercising every day or what we're on over. So, yeah, like, if you look at it, then the biggest things or the biggest contributors to his antiaging routine are, what, number one, the calorie restriction, the 25 calorie restriction, which is quite severe, and, exercise are the biggest two levers in terms of the, you know, the age reversal, in terms of the aesthetic looks of the body, like you reduce the fat around the face, around the organs, etcetera, but you also improve the muscle tone, muscle fitness that makes your just body look, younger. From the actual, like, epigenetic and biological side, then the third pillar to this is sleep. So sleep is when most of these antiaging processes occur. Like your body is, you know, increasing melatonin when you're sleeping that has very powerful antioxidant effects. Your body is regenerating NAD in your sleep. Your body is conducting autophagy in your sleep and brain detoxification in your sleep. So all the magic happens in your sleep. You kinda have to think of it in a way that during the daytime, you, like install different programs, etcetera, or you like you tell your if you look it up like a computer, you put these different messages information into your like word documents or program. But at night when you're sleeping is where the saving and where the kind of installing of the program occurs. So that you you install an update during the daytime, but the actual update is, like, processed and put into the system when you're sleeping. And that's how I look at it at least. From a diet side, I do agree again that, more like a plant based eating has a more positive effect on the aging and longevity based on the studies and, like, different mechanisms as well. Because, you know, if you look at the mechanisms, not only like the epidemiology, which does favor more plant based eating from a mechanistic side, then, yeah, like suppressing mTOR, limiting that increasing autologie, then that does also favor somewhat of a more plant based intake because these plant polyphenols, they're obviously very potent in activating autologie and having these antioxidant benefits on your system as well. But they also, like, keep the mTOR activation lower, which I do think that at the root of, you know, like, at the root cause of the issue, then mTOR excess mTOR activation at least does have, like, a negative effect on aging. Like, there is some controversy about that in terms that, you know, you also need some mTOR for building muscle and maintaining muscle, but at the root of it, I do think that, like, excess mTOR activation is still kind of what are you one of the main reasons why we age. Do you need to be, like, a 100% plant based? I don't think so. Like, you probably can get away with, like, you know, maybe 80% plant based, 20% animal based or something like that, and it would be virtually the same as being a 100% plant based. So that's what I think personally. But a 100% animal based probably kinda leans on the other direction, from an epigenetic aging side. You can also mimic this with different means, like you need to restrict methionine and you need to restrict mTOR activation, which both of, will increase the speed of aging. And you can mimic methionine restriction by, yeah, eating more, like, these, lower methionine plant based proteins as well as taking glycine. So glycine actually has been found to mimic methionine restriction without restricting methionine. So, yeah, you need to increase your glycine, which you get from collagen and more, like, plant based foods, but also, like, you know, skin, tendons, ligaments, and those kind of things, not just muscle meat. So excess muscle meat probably does have, like, a negative effect on aging because, yeah, excess methionine will raise your homocysteine and also increases mTOR and IGF-one levels, which both in excess will, or are linked to aging. And also time restricted eating or intermittent fasting is also, like, a very powerful way to, suppress mTOR. And based on my, like, lifestyle and based on my understanding of the science, then, yeah, like time restricted eating can actually give you very similar effects in terms of, like, the methionine and mTOR activation even if you're eating, like, a higher animal protein intake, because, you know, with mTOR, you can only pulse it so high in a given time frame. And if you eat only like once or twice a day, then it doesn't matter that you do, like, eat something that has more methionine, for example. But overall, I do think that, yeah, like a more plant based intake generally is better and, you do want to, like, make sure that you don't get excess methionine. You wanna balance it with glycine and doing some form of time sheet eating is like the cherry on top in terms of making sure that you do suppress mTOR. Because fasting, being in a fasted state is the most powerful way to suppress mTOR besides taking like rapamycin or something like that. So here are the supplements that he's taking, which is quite a lot. Upon waking, a Carbose, which is like a diabetic supplement, helps to like clear the bloodstream or you absorb less glucose, basically, which is a prescription supplement, Ashwagandha, b complex, Rocomax, which I guess would be some sulforaphane booster, vitamin c, cocoa flavanols, d three, DHEA, which, is a testosterone precursor, vitamin e, EPA, garlic, ginger root, glucosamine, sulfate, iodine, lithium, which actually we also found from one of my previous videos that, yeah, lithium use is also linked to lower mortality from the brain side, especially lycopene, lysine, methorin, again, prescription drug, nicotinamide riboside, n a c, turmeric, taurine, ubiquinol, which is a mitochondrial supplement, zeaxanthin, and zinc are the supplements that he's taking upon waking. So, you know, I do think that using metformin and these glucose, you know, disposal agents or, like, more like prescription diabetic drugs, In some ways, they can definitely have a very positive effect on aging because they suppress mTOR and they reduce your blood sugar levels. They improve your lipid profile, all those things. And, yeah, they do have many, you know, antiaging effects but, you know, they also have, like, some negative side effects in terms of, you know, actually having a negative effect on, like, your anabolism, etcetera. You won't be able to build that much muscle and it's gonna may potentially have, like, a negative effect on your, like, exercise performance as well. But obviously, you know, Brian Johnson, he doesn't have a problem with that because he's over exercising or he's exercising so much that it probably compensates for the use of these diabetic drugs, in my opinion. He's not taking rapamycin, at least that's what I'm not seeing here, so I think rapamycin is much more powerful than metformin and rapamycin probably has more side effects as well because it's immunosuppressant. So taking metformin probably like every once in a while is fine, like you take it I wouldn't take it per every day as a normal person. If you don't have actually, like, diabetes and your biomarkers are perfect, then you don't need to take metformin every day, I think. And the same applies to this carbo's. If you are interested in doing something like that, then I would maybe use like berberine. As in because berberine is actually referred to as like a natural metformin, which has pretty much the same effects as metformin, but it's like a degree lighter. It's not as severe in terms of the effects and it has negative or less side effects as well. So, yeah. I think I think him who is like just completely committed to this anti aging protocol, for him it makes sense to, yeah, take metformin just in case almost. Just in case to make sure that it actually has these desired effects. But as under like a normal person who might be watching this, then I don't think that you need to take metformin necessarily. At least like not every day. With dinner, again, acarbose, Brocomax, vitamin c, coco flavanols, EPA, garlic, ginger root, glucosamine, sulfate, hyaluronic acid, lysine, tyrosine, metformin again, nac, nicotinamide riboside, turmeric. So that's interesting. He's taking, oh, actually he is taking rapamycin as well biweekly. So, yeah, that makes sense, to take, the rapamycin not every day for sure. But every once in a while is probably, more worth it. But, yeah. He's taking rep metformin for dinner as well, which is gives him two grams of metformin, per day, which is quite a lot. I'm not sure if it's kinda needed to do that much. So because he's already like super lean, he's already exercising a lot. So I don't he's kind of overkill in my opinion probably, because his blood sugar levels are probably like super low already. And like suppressing mTOR all the time chronically is probably not the most ideal in my opinion. But yeah, all the other supplements I do think are kind of worth it to take especially, you know, the let's say the coco flavonols or EPA or garlic. Those are like very easy wins for even like a normal person to add into their routine. Before bed three hundred micrograms of melatonin, which I do think is a good idea to help with the kind of rejuvenative anti aging processes that occur in your sleep. Other supplements, so extra virgin olive oil, thirty milligrams or thirty milliliters a day. Pea protein, twenty nine grams a day to increase the protein intake probably. Dark chocolate, fifteen grams. Rapamycin, thirteen milligrams biweekly. So yeah. Like, every other week, I guess. And, I wonder if it's taking, like, every day of the week, every every other week, or, just once a week every other week. That would be interesting to know. Testosterone, I saw two milligram patch six times a week. And, yeah. It's he's taking TRT basically to raise his testosterone levels. And in one of his, like, videos that he made with his doctor, he did talk that, the calorie restriction that he started tanked his testosterone, and his testosterone levels were that of a 70 year old, which is, yeah, obviously, you know, the opposite of what he wants and the opposite of what he claimed in his protocol. And he did add the TRT to bring his testosterone to normal levels and, yeah. I think that's a big that this is also a very, like, a big confounding variable. You know, you I I first of all, I do think it's actually a good idea to take TRT in your, like, fifties or forties, or sixties or seventies especially. But it does, you know I'm not against it. I'm I think it's a good idea for sure. And I would, you know, do anything in terms of the supplementation to, like, reverse the biological age clock, but, you know, probably the average person doesn't have access to that unless they actually have a medical condition of low testosterone levels. Overall, I do think that, what Brian Johnson is doing is amazing because, yeah, no one else has measured so many things. No one else has, like, invested so much time and money and effort into this probably than him. He's one of the first one to, like, document this, entirely. And it's very exciting to see, like, what happens, you know, next, where how far he's gonna take it. There are people who are, like, criticizing him slightly for, you know, the money invested into this. They say that, okay, if you if you spend $2,000,000 per year on this, why don't you spend that money on actually conducting research? Like, why don't you invest that money in, like, some other stem cell research or this NAD research or whatever color restriction research, etcetera. Yes. That's a valid point. But I think it's more, you know first of all, it's his money. He he can do what he wants with it and it's also his body. Like, you know, if he invests it into research, it's gonna take, you know, decades probably even for us to actually get any applicable, like, let's say, information from that that you can implement. So he wants to reverse his age right now. So that's why he's doing it right now with his own body. He's investing all the money into his own body in that sense. So I think it's, you know, yeah, it's very good that he's doing it at least on himself because even he's doing it on himself, we get a lot of, you know, things based on or we get a lot of right results. We know some of a little bit in terms of what is the possible in terms of age reversal. Of course, there's the caveat that we don't know exactly what is the thing that is giving him the 80% of the results. He's probably doing a lot of things that are unnecessary. We don't know which ones are the unnecessary part. We know that at least the vast majority of results that you can do especially is to, you know, obviously clean up your diet, exercise regularly a lot, get good sleep, and probably increase like your fruits and vegetable and plant based intake. That's probably like the biggest takeaway for the average person that they can take. Of course, there is also like a few of these supplements, but I don't think that there's any supplement that gives you like the 80% of the results. Maybe like metformin or repamycin for a diabetic could give, like, 80 of the results for them. But, like, you still have to implement the fundamentals, which are the, like, you know, exercise, good diet, calorie restriction, I think, is very huge. Maybe time restricted eating, getting good sleep, and, being, like, a more, you know, balanced diet in terms of the plant based intake. Do you need to invest $2,000,000 per year into this? Probably not. Like, I would imagine that the vast majority of this cost is spent on, like, the doctors. Like, he has 30 doctors. Obviously, those doctors don't work for free. They also need to get their salaries. All these medical tests aren't free. He has to take all these tests, take all these measurements, and, yeah, that's probably the vast majority of this money is going to. Like, the actual supplements, the actual foods, I would imagine you can, yeah, spend maybe, like, a few 100 or maybe, like, a thousand dollars per month for all these supplements and all these food and all these exercise. And the extra would be on like the actual medical, like, advisors, medical, you know, tests and all those things. In conclusion, what Brian Johnson is doing is great. I think it's amazing. He's definitely reversing his biological age and we're getting a lot of, like, valuable data from that. It's just that, yeah, we need to actually know what to do with all this data now, and we definitely need more people to, like, replicate it and, you know, use it to actually conduct actual, like, clinical research. If you are interested in slowing down aging and reversing your biological clock, then I am looking for more people to go through my process and my routine. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@simlan.com, and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well as my enemy SIEM. Stay optimized, stay empowered.