This video, we're gonna compare the evidence suggesting whether or not cardio, meaning cardio respiratory fitness, or muscle strength is superior for longevity. But do you want to slow down aging and live longer? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word healthtoinfo@atseamland.com and I'll send you the details. It's showtime. First off, it's evident that physical fitness in general is one of the best predictors of longer life and reduced mortality. Both card respiratory fitness, which is measured by VO two max, and muscle strength, which is usually assessed with grip strength, are linked to reduced risk of mortality and greater life expectancy. So obviously, being either a more strength focused athlete or being a more like an endurance athlete doesn't matter compared to being sedentary and not exercising at all, it's significantly better in terms of longevity. But there are only a few studies that actually compare head to head the differences and which one is superior in terms of mortality risk when it comes to cardiorespiratory fitness, meaning your higher e o two max, and your muscle strength. One of the biggest studies actually comparing the two from UK, the combination of cardiorespiratory fitness and muscle strength and mortality risk. They basically used the UK Biobank database and they got adults of over a half million of adults aged between 40 to 69 years of age. From this data pool, they took over 70,000 men and women. So here we have the results on this forest plot essentially and, they're measuring all cause mortality. If you're not aware of the hazard ratio, then hazard ratio of one is usually used in clinical trials to mean that there is no difference or there is no like significant difference between the two and a hazard ratio of 1.5 for example means that it's like a fifty percent higher risk of mortality in this scenario. So as you can see the, card respiratory fitness, if you have low card respiratory fitness and low grip strength at the same time, so you have low strength and low cardio, then that's a hazard ratio of one. If you have low strength but middle or, you know, moderate card respiratory fitness, then your hazard ratio is 0.62. So the lower the hazard ratio, then the lower your risk of mortality and the better it is. So 0.62 is still pretty good, that meaning that you have low strength and moderate card respiratory fitness. It means that you have like thirty four percent lower risk of mortality. If you have high cardiorespiratory fitness in the context of being low grip strength, then the hazard ratio of that is 0.58, meaning that it's forty two percent lower risk of all cause mortality. If, however, you have middle grip strength, so moderate grip strength and low cardio respiratory fitness, then your hazard ratio is 0.78, meaning that you experience around a twenty two percent reduction in your mortality risk. If you have moderate cardioid respiratory fitness and moderate grip strength, then that's a hazard ratio of 0.67, meaning that is thirty three percent lower risk. If you have high cardioid respiratory fitness and moderate grip strength, then your hazard ratio is 0.53, which means that it's forty seven percent lower risk of all cause mortality. And lastly, we have high grip strength, so being very strong, but if you have low card respiratory fitness, then the hazard ratio is 0.71, which means twenty nine percent reduction in, all cause mortality. If you have high grip strength but moderate cardio respiratory fitness, then the hazard ratio is 0.56, meaning that it's, forty four percent reduction and lastly the kind of best of, you know, elite athlete in terms of that highest cardioid respiratory fitness and highest strength 47% reduction. So actually if you have moderate grip strength and but high card respiratory fitness, then it's the same risk reduction compared to having high muscle strength and high card respiratory fitness. So it appears that you peak out in terms of their line mortality risk reduction benefits if you already peak at moderate grip strength. But when it comes to cardio respiratory fitness, then the cardio respiratory fitness significantly still provides you a greater reduction in mortality risk, going from moderate to high cardiorespiratory fitness. To recap, compared with the lowest cardiorespiratory fitness category, the hazard ratio for all cause mortality was zero point seventy six and zero point sixty five for the middle and highest card respiratory fitness categories respectively. The highest grip strength category had a hazard ratio of 0.79 for all cause mortality compared with the lowest. So the highest quartile of cardio respiratory fitness outperformed the highest quartile of grip strength in terms of risk reduction and even the middle cardio respiratory fitness did better than high grip strength. So based on this study, having high cardio respiratory fitness, fitness, meaning that you're in the top level of fitness with cardio respiratory fitness, you have up to fourteen percent lower risk reduction compared to being the highest with the grip strength. What? So if you compare head to head things in isolation, you just compare your VO2 max and your grip strength, then the cardio respiratory fitness appears to be much more important in terms of reducing your all cause mortality risk. But obviously, the greatest reduction in your all cause mortality comes from having both high grip strength and high b o two max. A combination of the highest cardiorespiratory fitness and the highest grip strength yielded a hazard ratio of zero point fifty three for all cause mortality and zero point thirty one for cardiovascular disease mortality compared to the lowest cardio respiratory fitness and the lowest grip strength. So you can see that having the highest cardio respiratory fitness and having the highest strength at the same time gives you the biggest reduction in your all cause mortality and it is kind of the main message as well. You want to reach the highest level of cardioid respiratory fitness as possible for you and the highest strength as well at the same time. But if you were to prioritize which one is like more important then appears that the cardioid respiratory fitness is a little bit more important in terms of reducing the all cause mortality. You want to just at least reach middle level of strength and after that you don't see like exponential reduction in your risk of mortality. But going from middle cardio respiratory fitness to high cardiorespiratory fitness does provide you some additional reductions in your mortality risk. I'm the party pooper. And this, I think, is one of the most powerful things in terms of longevity that you could do. Having low cardiorespiratory fitness is linked to a four times higher risk of all cause mortality compared to having high cardiorespiratory fitness. Smoking typically increases your mortality risk by two to three times, but having low cardiorespiratory fitness increases your mortality risk by four times, which means that being unfit, being with poor cardio is almost as bad as smoking for you. A twenty twenty two study saw that being extremely fit was categorized as having 14 METs. So based on this 2022 study, the lowest risk of mortality is at 14 mits, which in VO two max is about forty nine milliliters per kilogram per minute. And that appears to be like the cutoff point that you want to reach for, like, the maximum longevity benefits in terms of your VO2 max. You want to have a VO2 max of at least 50. Just lifting weights and doing no cardio probably isn't enough to reach the 50 VO2 max limit that you want to reach. Now, if you're untrained, you've never trained, then your VO2 max will increase if you just start lifting weights. We have research showing that doing resistance training does increase VO2 max in the elderly who are untrained, but that's just because of becoming fitter. But if you're already lifting weights and you've adapted to it, then you're not going to see, like, additional benefits in terms of increasing your VO2 max from just resistance training. You need to incorporate some interval work as well as zone two cardio. And I still want to emphasize this point, being unfit, having poor cardio, and having low VO two max is as bad for you as smoking. There is no supplement. There is no diet. There is no food that reduces your mortality risk more than having high VO two max. Boosting your VO two max and working on your cardio respiratory fitness based on multiple studies, based on the evidence, the current evidence that we have is the single most powerful thing you can do to reduce your all cause mortality risk and promote longevity. So in conclusion, both high strength as well as high cardio respiratory fitness are both beneficial for reducing all cause mortality and promoting longevity. But if you compare them head to head, then cardio is significantly more powerful. Ideally, you obviously want to do both. You want to have high cardio, respiratory fitness and high strength at the same time. But you should definitely not neglect cardio because the cardio actually gives you a lot bigger reduction. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.