Everyone pretty much knows that exercising is good for your health and longevity. But there are some additional tips and tricks that can have a positive effect on your health span and reducing risk of mortality. So in this video, I'm gonna cover these top hacks that are not exercise. It's showtime. The first thing that I'll start with is sauna use. I have made multiple videos about the benefits of taking a sauna, but the basic overview is that taking a sauna four times per week compared to once a week is associated with sixty three percent reduced heart disease mortality, sixty five percent lower Alzheimer's risk, and sixty six percent lower risk of dementia. That's a massive effect. In fact, I think that taking the sauna is the second most powerful thing you can do to your health after exercise. The sauna mimics a lot of the benefits of exercise through causing hyperthermia or a mild fever. The hyperthermia activates heat shock proteins that repair damage and miscellular proteins, clear out free radicals and debris via autophagy, increase glutathione and antioxidant, regulate cardiac muscle function, and and reduce muscle catabolism. In one of the studies, those who went to the sauna four to seven times a week had a sixty three percent less likely to experience cardiac death and fifty percent less likely to die from cardiovascular ailments compared to those who use it once a week. Their all cause mortality risk was also forty percent lower. So as I can see, those benefits are compared to taking a sauna once per week, which is still a significant difference compared to not doing the sauna at all. So imagine what are the health benefits between people who take the sauna four or more times per week versus never. Now the sauna is very popular in the Nordics and Eastern Europe. It's not so popular in other Western countries like The UK or The US. In Finland, there are as many saunas as there are people and even in the Baltics and Nordic countries, you can pretty much get access to sauna very easily. In the Western countries, however, they're more likely to use the infrared saunas that also have very similar health benefits. When traditional saunas warm up your body from the outside in, then infrared saunas heat the body directly sauna come from your elevated body temperature or hyperthermia. So it doesn't really matter how you elevate your body temperature. The key aspect though is that their body temperature will rise. Usually, the infrared saunas stay at a lower temperature than traditional saunas but that's not a problem because infrared saunas will still elevate your body temperature a lot more at a lower temperature of the room because the infrared wavelengths penetrate your body and they will heat up the body from the inside out. So you will still experience the benefits of hyperthermia with the infrared sauna. So it doesn't matter if you use a regular traditional sauna or infrared sauna or the temperature doesn't matter in that case. What matters more is that your body temperature will still rise. This brings me to the second hack, which is the far infrared saunas. Infrared radiation is a form of electromagnetic energy that's invisible to the naked eye. Naturally, you get exposed to infrared radiation from the sun. Infrared radiation is categorized in to near infrared, mid infrared, and far infrared light. Different infrared sauna brands use either near infrared light or far infrared light or both together. Here are some of the research benefits of far infrared light therapy. It can accelerate wound healing through increased microcirculation, improve vascular function and blood flow, reduce markers of oxidative stress and vascular endothelial inflammation, reduce stress levels, improve muscle stiffness, and increase cerebral blood flow. Japan has developed their own infrared therapy in the late nineteen eighties called Weiyon therapy, which literally means soothing warm therapy. It involves 60 degrees of far infrared ray sauna for fifteen minutes, followed by being under warm blankets in bed for thirty minutes once a day. In a study on forty nine chronic heart failure patients, Weyant therapy significantly improved quality of life as well as cardiac function and exercise capacity. The same treatment protocol has been seen to improve vascular endothelial function and cardiac function in twenty chronic heart failure patients. Weyant therapy can improve prognosis of chronic heart failure and reduce cardiac events in patients with chronic heart failure. A 2018 systematic review and meta analysis on seven studies found that infrared sauna at 60 degrees Celsius for fifteen minutes followed by thirty minutes of rest in a warm environment was linked to improvements in cardiac function. So far infrared saunas do apparently have some benefits for cardiac function and they may also mimic some aspects of regular sauna use. So in my opinion, you can do either the traditional sauna or the infrared sauna. Both have similar benefits. Now a very common question I get asked about is the infrared blankets. Blankets where you're wrapped inside a blanket that emanates infrared light. It can reach the optimal therapeutic temperature quite fast. So you just lay there for up to like fifteen, twenty minutes and you can get the very similar benefits in terms of elevating your body temperature causing these other beneficial adaptations that you would otherwise get from a regular traditional infrared sauna. Like I said, Bond Charge has the best infrared blankets because they're low emf and they have the specific therapeutic wavelengths related to far infrared therapy and they can also reach the optimal therapeutic temperature of 70 to 80 degrees Celsius that you see in the traditional Finnish sauna studies. You can check it out at 1charge.com and use the code SIM for a 15% discount. The third strategy is early time restricted eating. Over the past few years, intermittent fasting as well as time restricted eating have had their ups and downs. Like they have become quite popular, they've lost popularity, etcetera. And there have been some studies that find there is no significant difference in terms of body composition as well as metabolic health between a time restricted eating window and a non time restricted eating window if the calorie intake is the same. But regardless, from an optimal antiaging and longevity perspective, then you would still want to practice some aspect of earlier time restricted eating. What I mean by that is that you don't really want to go to bed on a full stomach and you don't want to have like a massive dinner before bed. The reason has to do with your melatonin production. Your melatonin increases before bed, which is the sleep hormone, but melatonin also has many antioxidant and anti inflammatory benefits. Melatonin is generally produced in the absence of artificial light. So blue and green light from technology suppresses melatonin production. But your gut also produces a significant amount of melatonin. And it's been seen that calorie restriction and being in a faster state increases melatonin production in the gut by up to 400%. So the key here is that going to bed on a slightly emptier stomach, meaning that you stop eating sooner in the day rather than having like a very late dinner, that's going to increase your gastrointestinal melatonin production which will then have some other systemic benefits in terms of the antioxidant and and anti inflammatory effects in the gut and throughout the body because of increased melatonin levels. As a general rule of thumb, I would say that you want to stop eating at least three to four hours of bed to give yourself time to digest the food and to also not be as full when right before going to bed. Just don't have like a massive amount of calories immediately before going to bed. Like I said, exercise is the most powerful antiaging strategy, but there are some additional lifestyle habits that I just mentioned that have many complementary effects on the benefits of exercise and just antiaging and longevity as a whole. Do you want to slow down aging and eat longer? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@simlun.com and I'll send you the details. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is sim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.