What kind of supplements should you take when you're 70 years old? How much strength training is too much? These are some of the topics we're gonna discuss in this Q and A episode. If you want to ask me a question in the future, then make sure you follow me on Instagram where I do those Q and A's regularly. Alright. The first question is best supplements for a 70 year old, NMN, creatine, glycine, fish oil, anything else crucially beneficial? So, you did hit a few of the supplements that I would certainly take if I were to be 70 years old and they are, let's say, you know, NMN is something for sure because your, let's say, natural NAD levels do start to decline already in your like forties and I would personally think that even like, yeah, starting you in your forties you could could start to take NMN or nicotinamide riboside. It doesn't really matter, pretty much on a daily basis to support the NAD, like increasing the NAD levels and maintaining them. Of course, if you're younger than that, then you could also already take NMN on and off. I think that it's not needed at that age yet. You know, you can take niacinamide, which is much cheaper and another pathway for recycling NAD. So you can take niacinamide for that sake and, you know but in your seventies, let's say, your natural energy levels were already pretty low and it might not be enough to support that with only, like, the recycling pathway. So in that sense, you couldn't take, like, one thousand milligrams of NMN on a daily basis. Now the issue with the taking NMN is that it does deplete your methyl donors as well. So if you are taking any of these NAD boosters, then you wanna counteract some of the methyl donor loss with taking TMG. So trimethylglycine is kind of the best methyl donor for that and one thousand milligrams of trimethylglycine. First of all, it's also going to reduce your homocysteine levels and it might have some athletic performance benefits as well for muscle strength but the, you know, if you're taking NMN then you certainly would need to take one thousand milligrams of trimethylglycine as well. The second supplement that you mentioned, the creatine, yes. I think creatine is very beneficial for antiaging especially with regard to the fact that your muscle strength and muscle mass, especially muscle power decrease with age as well. So, you know, from a physical side you lose muscle strength, muscle mass, yes, and you become like slower overall, but the biggest and the most significant loss happens with muscle power. So you're less able like how many 70 year olds have you seen that are able to do like a vertical jump? Like I've I've never seen like a 70 year old who's able to jump off the ground and that's a huge issue because, yeah, like the biggest loss with aging occurs in your fast twitch muscle fibers. So being able to grab things, being able to catch yourself if you fall, and being able to, yeah, like jump or whatever, that's a pretty crucial skill and ability for longevity. And, you know, usually or in a lot of cases, you know, you don't die necessarily to a lack of muscle mass. You die because you fall off the stairs or you break a hip or something else because you weren't able you weren't quick enough to catch yourself. So maintaining fast twitch muscle fibers is much more important than muscle mass and muscle strength even as well in a lot of ways because, yeah, the ability to react and ability to be quick, being able to be fast is much more important in a lot of scenarios and, you know, like life or death scenario, that's gonna pretty much save your life in other ways. So you do need to train your fast twitch muscle fibers for the anti aging benefits and the older you get the more important it is. And with the young then you do need to train your fast twitch muscle fibers, like do like plyometrics, do weightlifting, Olympic weightlifting, do sprints and those kind of things many people neglect it. Like if you're just building mass and strength then, it's not enough. You need to do like specific speed work and, plyometric explosive work, you definitely need to do that as well. And creatine is actually the biggest benefit of creatine isn't the muscle mass. Like, creatine doesn't really make you build muscle tissue, like, you hold on to water and that increases the, like, lean tissue, like, water inside the lean tissue. But, yeah, like, the muscle strength and the muscle power is the biggest benefit of creatine. So that's why, yes, creatinine is a massive antiaging supplement. And, besides that, creatinine also has cognitive benefits. So it slows down brain aging. It helps the brain energy production and it also, like, supports methylation. It even bone density is there's some data about that. So, yeah, creatinine is a longevity supplement. And even then, besides that, creatinine also reduces your sleep demand because of the brain benefits for and, yeah, I I think, like, everyone, pretty much of all ages would benefit from taking creatinine but especially if you're 70 years old. So that's something to definitely I would add to my stack. Glycine and NEC, I would put there as well because the glyniac combo has been repeatedly shown in human clinical trials in the elderly people especially that it reduces the hallmarks of aging and improves muscle, let's say function, brain function, reduces inflammation, oxidative stress and boosts glutathione levels. So with age you see a decrease in glutathione levels and the glynaq combo glycine plus NAC is perfect, for counteracting that. And, you know, there's I don't know necessarily if the glynaq is needed if you're younger, but, it certainly is very powerful if you're 70 or even like 50, 40. I I take glycine and NAC regularly. I think there are benefits even if you're younger, but especially there's a lot like the studies showing the longevity benefits of glynaq are usually done in the elderly people, who benefited from the most. Next supplement, fish oil. I think that fish oil, you know, fish oil is a bit controversial. On the one hand, there's a lot of data about omega threes and fish oil that it is very, like, you know, it's associated with reduced cardiovascular disease and reduced mortality and reduced Alzheimer's and things of that because of the EPA and DHA. And on the other hand, most of the fish oil out there is just garbage, and it's, like, bad quality and oxidized and, rancid, which can, like, raise inflammation. But I think we have to, like, yeah, look at the totality of evidence if there is just so much data showing that even even if there even for the fish oil out there is, like, bad quality and inflammatory, even then it appears that the benefits of fish oil outweigh the potential harm. So I'm not taking fish oil but based on the data, it appears that it's a net positive that all the benefits that you get from fish oil and the omega threes appear to outweigh the potential downside. Now I don't think that the fish oil is the best option. There are some safer alternatives that you can get all the benefits without or less of the side effects so it's less potentially inflammatory and rancid. So like krill oil is a good one for that or cord liver oil. And you always want to choose a product that comes in a dark bottle and, it's not, like, see through because if it is exposed to heat and sunlight or oxygen, then it is gonna, like, oxidize quite rapidly. And that's why, like, the krill oil generally is a bit like like more protected against that because of the it has, like, more of this astaxanthin in it that is protecting against the oxidation. So, yeah, I think some omega three supplement is worthwhile. Generally, I think that, yeah, fish is kind of the best source, but, you want to, like, use something to additionally, if you don't eat a lot of fish, for example, then you definitely would maybe benefit from, like, cord liver oil or krill oil. And there are, like, some specific, like, non oil based omega three supplements as well that you could use, to, get the omega threes and, especially DHEA and EPA. This episode is brought to you by alitura naturals. Alitura brings you the best natural skin care products for radiating skin and antiaging. Regular skin care products are full of ingredients and fillers that actually cause more harm than good. Alitura uses only active ingredients sourced and handcrafted in Hawaii. Their products contain zero fillers. The Alitura night cream received the 2021 Clean Cirt beauty awards for best face cream. Alitura also has skin moisturizers, clay mask, serums and cleansers. Head over to alitura.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 20% discount. What are some other supplements that I would add in there if I were the 70 year olds? I think melatonin is something that you should also take pretty much regularly starting around like 60 or 70 for sure because natural melatonin production decreases with age and, the issue with that is that you, yes, you're gonna sleep a bit worse, you're You're gonna sleep shorter like the elderly is a pretty common trend for older people to sleep shorter, which is isn't not isn't it has nothing to do with the fact that they're older. It just has to do with the fact that with age your melatonin production decreases and it's not a good thing. It's actually a very bad thing that you sleep shorter and, it's going to also compound, it's gonna accelerate the aging if you're sleeping shorter and you're not producing that much melatonin Because the quality of sleep is very much linked to the amount of melatonin you produce at night, especially in terms of the anti aging benefits of melatonin. So melatonin is a huge antioxidant, it has many anti inflammatory benefits, it helps with the immune system, autophagy and it pretty much regulates all the longevity pathways inside your body in your sleep as well and if you're not producing enough melatonin because of age or because of sleeping under artificial lights, for example, then, yeah, the quality of sleep or the anti aging benefits of your sleep are gonna be much smaller. But if you're older, it doesn't matter if you sleep in a pitch black darkness, you're still going to produce a bit less melatonin because of damage to the circadian cox and the pineal gland in your brain, which will make you produce less melatonin. And, there's also, like, damage to the retina that happens with age that, will also, like, blunt some of the circadian signaling that, is vital for NAD production as well as melatonin production. So supplementing some melatonin, you know, is definitely worthwhile in your seventies and, you take it like pretty much every day. That's what I'm gonna do if I get to 70s. You know, naturally you want to maybe take if you're younger you want to take like zero point one to zero point three milligrams of melatonin, a smaller dose, but if you're 70 or above then I would take yeah one to three milligrams because you know, you need something to counteract some of the loss of a natural melatonin production. Are there any other supplements that I would add for someone who is 70 years old? Yes, there are pretty much a whole lot of supplements that you could take like collagen peptides for the skin health reduction in skin aging and also there was a recent 2023 study that showed collagen peptides also improve cardiovascular disease risk, the markers for cardiovascular disease. So it is longevity supplement in a lot of ways and of course the bone health, the joint health, like collagen is going to be beneficial for a lot of things that happen with aging and glucosamine the same way it gonna pretty much support the cartilage and, you know, can mitigate some of the, like pain that you could experience if you are someone who's older. Alright. Next question. At what level of strength do you think weights do more harm than good to the joints? So I think, you know, that depends a lot when you start to feel the pain. Like, you know, chances are or if you're if you're someone who does exercise properly, you don't get injured, you don't unnecessarily push yourself too far, and you you practice good form, then I think the the ceiling is quite high. Like, I personally have worked out for, yeah, ten years or something like that. I've never injured myself. I've never had any chronic, like, I've never even, like, tweaked the back or anything like that. Of course, I do experience soreness and stuff like that, but, it's very short term. It's because of training hard. But I've never, like, literally injured myself and still I'm pretty strong. I'm like like I'm not like an elite power lifter or anything like that. If you look at, like, the strength standards, then I mean, like, the advanced range. I'm not an elite lifter, but I'm certainly, like, advanced and, I'm still able to keep going. Like, there's no reason for me to stop, because, like, why would I stop if I don't have any injuries? Like, the the benefits of strength training compound the longer you do it and, of course, the most important variable is being able to do it for as long as possible. If you look at people who are in their seventies and eighties and they have done lifelong strength training then they're almost like a different species compared to a 70 year old who hasn't trained at all. Like the 70 year old who hasn't trained at all, they're already sarcopenic, they're already frail, they're already very slow with their movement and, you know, they're dysfunctional in a lot of ways. They're not able to, you know, act independently with their movements. They're not able to, you know, roam around the world independently because of lacking the muscle strength, the muscle mass, and muscle speed. And, of course, the bone density is also, like, they become more frail and if they fall then they might break a hip and actually die quite fast. Whereas someone who has done strength training all their life, then, they're like a different species in a lot of ways. They're they're mobile. They're able to walk around very fast. They're able even if they fall because their bone density is so high, they will probably just, you know, shrug it off. They're not gonna even potentially break a hip or anything. So there's a huge difference between lifelong strength training and someone who doesn't train at all. So you wanna make sure that you are able to maintain the strength training for as long as possible. So you don't necessarily need to reach, obviously, you don't need to reach this elite level with your strength or something like that but you do want to just maintain it consistently and depends on your goals. If you don't want to become like a lead powerlifter then you don't need to, like aspire towards it either. You just want to maintain a relatively, like, intermediate strength standards. Like, I think intermediate levels, you can look it up online, intermediate strength standards are already you're gonna be pretty much maxing out all the health benefits that you get from lifting weights. Will you get additional benefits if you're, like, becoming advanced or elite? Maybe. But the issue is that if you become elite level with your strength standards, then the the risk of getting injured could increase as well. But, again, if you're doing it, like, properly, if you're training properly, you always practice good form, you recover properly, then even then, I don't think that it's going to have any, like, negative side effects. So the key here is getting injured. I mean, if in the gym, the regular person, they're gonna get injured already at the beginner level. If they practice poor form, they just do, like, bad exercises or they just, like, overly enthusiastic. They load the bar with too much weight. They're gonna get injured and, they're gonna stop lifting already at the beginner level. So in that scenario, it's already too much for them and it's harmful. So the key is, yeah, you first have to just learn the techniques, practice good form, stay consistent, follow a good workout routine. You don't need to go all out all days of the week. You don't need to go out even the entire year. Like, structuring your workout program goes through, like, different periods of higher intensity, lower intensity, heavier weights, lighter weights. So if you have a good workout plan that you can follow throughout the entire year, then you're never gonna get injured. You're always going to keep making progress, You know, of course, the progress slows down, the more advanced you get. But, yeah, like, there's literally no, like, I don't think there's a threshold, that, yeah. Maybe, like, elite level is something that is probably a bit too much because it just takes a lot of effort to get to the elite level and a lot of like focus and dedication. But if you are able to stay in the elite level and kind of maintain it without getting injured then I think you're even gonna be better off. Like the elite lifter who doesn't get injured will certainly be healthier and better off than the beginner who gets injured, if that makes sense. So the how much you lift or how strong you are is subjective or it doesn't matter. What matters more is whether you get injured or not. Next question, how to compensate for poor sleep when building muscle and working until midnight? So, yes, like not being able to sleep well or sleeping too short will certainly slow down your gains. You're gonna build less muscle, you're gonna recover worse, you're gonna be less stronger, you're gonna be weaker, you're gonna be more tired. And, yeah, the progress in building muscle and strength is gonna be much harder if you don't have a proper sleep schedule and you don't sleep long enough. And the issue is also that you actually start to, like, it's much easier to maintain the fat and lose muscle tissue. So if you are, let's say, sleep five hours, then you burn substantially more muscle tissue and less fat compared to sleeping eight hours. And if you sleep eight hours, then yeah, you're gonna maintain most of the muscle and burn the fat. So you want to make sure that you get at least seven to eight hours even if you're like pushing it really hard, you can even aim for like nine hours of sleep, per night on some of like the harder training days and it's gonna actually improve your recovery and the gains that you get. If you are working until midnight, I mean like working until midnight isn't that bad. Like optimally, you want to be in bed and sleep before midnight for the circadian rhythm benefits, but, like, midnight isn't that bad. And, you can easily make up for it by, like, maybe, you know, taking a nap in the afternoon or something like that to practice some siesta sleep that, you catch up on some of the lost sleep and you still maintain some of the, like, vigilance and recovery side with a short nap, like a thirty minute nap in the afternoon is pretty good. What I do recommend is that in the morning you still get exposed to, like, the natural sunlight and try to wake up still relatively early. So even if you go to bed at, like, 2AM, then you want to wake up, you know, still around 8AM or 9AM. You don't want to sleep until, like, 10AM or something because the morning sunlight is gonna be quite crucial for actually making sure that you sleep at night. So it's kind of a vicious cycle. If you go to bed too late, then you wake up too late, and then you you're not tired enough to fall asleep at night and the vicious cycle kind of continues. And at some point, you're gonna find yourself in a situation where you'll go to bed at 4AM, which isn't certainly optimal. So you do want to, you know, even if you do, like, go to bed too late, then you want to wake up relatively early the next day. And, you know, you're gonna be tired, yes, for the entire day. You could take a short nap but you don't wanna be, like, you don't wanna be, like, you still want to get tired before you go to bed at the right time the next day. Some other supplements that you can do or take, to counteract some of the c plus is creatine. So creatine is actually very beneficial for mitigating some of the, you know, harmful effects on the brain and you're gonna still maintain, like, some aspects of higher vigilance and creatine, yeah, that does, like, reduce the sleep demand as well. There are other supplements like NMN and these NAD boosters that are very beneficial for the circadian rhythm optimization and also reducing the sleep demand. I've noticed if I take NMN then I just feel more energized and I don't need that much sleep. Of course, all these different kinds of anti inflammatory supplements like turmeric, vitamin c, even like even like resveratrol or, I mean, like a microdose aspirin can also be pretty good. It depends on depends on, yeah, like how worn out you feel. If you're like completely trashed, you've got only two hours of sleep, then I would take like the aspirin and turmeric and vitamin c and those kind of, like, larger dose of ant anti inflammatories. If you only slept, like, six hours, then you don't need, like, some larger anti inflammatories. Maybe even, like, a cold shower could do for it and then you take a nap afterwards and that should fix it. So, yeah, that's that's generally the the advice. And, from a diet side then if you are ever experiencing sleep loss, then it's better to stay lower carb for the next day because your insulin sensitivity is decreased after a bad night's sleep and you're slightly more insulin resistant. So, it doesn't it's not recommended to eat like a massive carb meal after a bad night's sleep. You wanna keep the glycemic control, or you wanna control your glycemia a bit more after a bad night's sleep. Next question, how much glucosamine to take daily and should the doses be split? So glucosamine, yeah, I mentioned it previously. It's supplement that is beneficial for the cartilage and joints, and it does appear to improve symptoms of, osteoarthritis and pain. So if you don't have the pain, then I think it's still worthwhile to take glucosamine as, like, a preventive supplement. I take glucosamine every day because, yeah, it does improve the cartilage and the joint function and there's even studies finding that the glucosamine use is associated with reduced mortality. And glucosamine is an anti inflammatory, it's an autophagy regulator. So I think even if you don't have any joint pain and if you're even if you're young in your twenties, I think it's still worthwhile to take glucosamine. That's what I do. At the dosage, the dosage, appears that the larger dosage is better so up to like three grams is what I take. And, the yeah. Like, a lot of the benefits you start to see in the larger doses. So at least one point five to three grams is what you need as a minimum. Should you take multiple doses, I take only once a day, three grams. If you do have, let's say, some if you're older and you have already existing pain, then, you could take, like, three grams twice a day, but I don't think that, any more than that is needed. So, like, you don't need to split it into, like, five hundred milligram doses. You can just take one to five to three grams once or twice a day depending on like your symptoms. I take it just once a day in the morning. Next question, how to raise constantly too low body temperature? That's an interesting question. Like in the longevity space there's some contradicting opinions about this. On the one hand people say that lower body temperature is beneficial for longevity because you're pretty much like wearing your system out less. Like if you have a too high metabolic rate, your heart is racing all the time. Your, you know, faster body temperature means that your metabolic rate is faster, your heart is beating faster as well. So that can, like, cause more oxidative stress to the mitochondria and wear you out quote unquote and accelerate aging. On the other hand, keeping your body temperature lower can be beneficial for longevity because you're, like, slower, like hibernating almost and your metabolism is slower which then means that, you know, you cause less oxidative stress over your course of your entire lifetime. I think that, you know, there's issues with the low metabolic rate for sure. Like, if you have too low metabolic rate and your body temperature is too low all the time, then that can predispose you to a lot of the negative side effects of having a low metabolic rate such as weight gain, low thyroid. And if you have low thyroid then your cholesterol is gonna increase and your oxygenation decreases so you may get like this slight aspects of neuropathy like in your hands and fingers, like your hands and fingers are cold all the time and, you feel like frail, your skin is gonna, you know, scrub off and stuff like that. You're gonna get hair loss. So if you have chronically low metabolic rate and low temperature then, over time, yeah, you might gain weight and raise your cholesterol levels, which can be somewhat, bad. Like, for sure, like, even just the weight loss or the weight gain can be problematic. You're gonna have, like, this stubborn, weight loss, stubborn weight that you can't seem to lose. So for sure you want to, like, raise your metabolic rate at least to, like, a normal range, at least, like, most of the time and carbohydrates, I mean, the biggest most effective way to raise your thyroid and your metabolic rate is to just eat carbohydrates. I know carbohydrates get a lot of, like, bad repetition but carbohydrates certainly have a huge boost on your leptin levels, your metabolic rate, your thyroid function, and, yeah. I mean, if you don't have diabetes then you don't need to be afraid of carbohydrates. And, of course, if you, let's say, have too high metabolic rate, then you can also experience some symptoms of, like, negative side effects from that. Like, some autoimmune issues can, like, rise up from that. So you need to be just paying attention to your, like, symptoms. But if you have the low thyroid, you have low body temperature all the time, you're cold all the time, then eating more carbohydrates, eating more calories is gonna be the biggest, like, boost for that. Fats, like, fat has a very low thermic effect and fat also fat also has a very low effect on your leptin. The carbohydrates and insulin spiking your insulin is actually the biggest thing that's just gonna raise your t three, the thyroid hormone, and just having more carbohydrates, maybe doing less time restricted eating and certainly having carbohydrates with every meal, like whole whole food carbohydrates and fruits, that's just going to raise your metabolic rate and have some protein with that as well and it's gonna just heat up your body like nothing else. Just to have some, like, protein with, whole food carbohydrates and some fruits and that should, like, over time, of course, over the course of multiple weeks, that's going to raise your body temperature and thyroid function as well and what you actually notice is that because of the higher metabolic rate and because of the higher thyroid function, weight loss becomes much easier. Like that's what I've noticed in the past. I did more slightly more lower carb intake but over the past two or three years, maybe two years, I've just eaten like a lot more carbohydrates and I'm actually leaner and I'm actually, yeah. I just have better metabolism and better body composition as well. So if you think that carbohydrates make you fat then, it's not really the case granted that you don't overeat the calories. The the boost in your metabolic rate is gonna be making up for even if you eat, like, a little bit more calories from the carbohydrates. Just the higher metabolic rate that you experience will make you still burn through a lot of those calories. Next question, what brand of collagen do you recommend? So the collagen I'm using is, do not age because it's, collagen peptides, hydrolyzed collagen peptides and low molecular weight. So this is the one that is on based on the studies that does improve at least the skin wrinkles and skin elasticity and the skin thickness. So, yeah, you if you are choosing it doesn't have to be doing that age but make sure that it's hydrolyzed collagen peptides, collagen peptides being the smaller molecules that able to reach tissues and more more absorbed more easily and the low molecular weight appears to also be kind of, important for that. Now, Dunant age doesn't have, like, vitamin c in their collagen supplement which, of course, optimally you would want to take some, like, fifty milligrams of vitamin c or one hundred milligrams of vitamin c with your collagen peptides as well because the vitamin c is what, like, the catalyst for the, collagen synthesis and activating the collagen synthesis. So you get the collagen peptides as a precursor and vitamin c is something that, is like needed to also, like, activate activate the synthesis. But the reason it's fine in my opinion is that you get vitamin c from pretty much almost all the foods and you don't necessarily need to, like, supplement extra vitamin c. But, yeah, there are different supplements out there that also have the vitamin c inside the collagen peptides. So that would be maybe, like, the best option. And the last question of the q and a is TRT in longevity aspect. So TRT, testosterone replacement therapy, I think that, for sure it has a massive benefit for health span, which means being healthy for longer and maintaining functionality. So being independent, something something similar that we talked about in the beginning of the episode that, you know, being able to walk around and catch yourself. So if you have high testosterone levels, chances are you have a bit higher muscle mass, muscle strength as well, especially if you combine it with resistance training. Now when should you start TRT? I think I mean, like, naturally the male's testosterone levels start to decline at 40 years of age. That's where you start to see, like, the first significant, like, natural declines. But I think that if you could wait until like 45 or so, 50 maybe, I personally would maybe consider starting the TRT maybe if I'm 50 years old. I don't think I don't I don't see a reason why you would need to take it beforehand because, you know, once you start, you pretty much need to continue on otherwise. Because the issue is, like, when you start taking TRT, you inject it artificially, then your natural testosterone production will decrease. So you're kind of dependent of the injection to maintain the testosterone levels that you have. If you take TRT and then you stop, then you end up in a situation where you, find yourself at a very low testosterone level because your body has to reboot its natural testosterone production and it takes a bit of time for that rebooting to happen. If you've taken like anabolic steroids, like a bodybuilder or something, then, it takes even like a lot longer time and it might be in the situation that you you might not even resume the normal production of testosterone because you took so so large doses as, you abused the larger doses. So it might not you might not even able to return to, like, a normal testosterone level and then you're forced to start TRT. But, if you're just taking smaller doses like in the therapeutic ranges with the TRT, then, yeah, there is still some decrease in the natural testosterone production. So, once you start, you pretty much need to commit to it for a long time. So that's why I don't think that it's kind of worthwhile to start any sooner than your forties. I think I'll start maybe like 45 or fifties because I do want to maintain, like, quality of life from a like lifespan side. There's no reason to think that, moderate therapeutic doses of testosterone will shorten your lifespan, because the other alternative is being low testosterone, which does increase your, you know, risk of cardiovascular disease, risk of diabetes, and risk of Alzheimer's, and risk of obesity. If you have low testosterone, then, yeah, you you might just get some of the chronic diseases. So, it's it's net positive to take the TRT even if it maybe cuts your life maybe five or ten years. It's still a net positive in terms of the quality of life and making sure that you don't get any of the chronic diseases that many of the natural men, regular men get in their 70s or 80s. If you are someone who is in their 30s or 20s even and you have low testosterone, so you're, like, literally hypogonadal, your doctor says you're so low in testosterone that we should start with TRT, then, yeah, it depends on why you have. That I would first obviously look at the lifestyle. Are you sleeping enough? What's your diet? Are you too low body fat? Is there something else that is reducing your natural testosterone levels? Some people have, like, yeah, just genetic issues that keep them very low testosterone. So, yeah, you could even start, yeah, like in your thirties or twenties if your doctor says so. Like, I wouldn't start injecting yourself with TRT, without, like, a doctor because, yeah, like, you make sure that you get the quality ingredients, quality injections, and making sure that you first, like, cover all the loopholes, the potent potential loopholes of why you might have low testosterone. But naturally, I think, yeah, every man should start to consider maybe some hormone replacement therapy or TRT in their forties, and, you know, ideally in your fifties if you're, like, super healthy. Like, if you're super healthy and fit, then you might not need TRT until you're 50 years old. So there you have it. This is the q and a. If you want to ask me a question in the future, then follow me on Instagram. It's at simlund. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is sim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.