Collagen has been found to have many benefits for skin aging and overall longevity in different, ways. But in this video, I'm gonna tell you all of the top five best foods for getting collagen into your diet and you may be surprised that bone broth is not enough. Do it. So obviously, there are different ways to get collagen. There's the collagen supplements. There's also a very common method of getting just regular beef gelatin. Collagen rich foods are the bones, cartilage, and gelatinous parts of animal protein, such as fish skin, fishbone, poultry skin, poultry bones, beef bones, tendons, ribs, etcetera. Collagen and gelatin are comprised of multiple amino acids, primarily glycine, about 22 to 34%, hydroxyproline, seven to 15%, and proline, 10 to 18%. They also contain other amino acids like alanine, arginine, aspartic acid, and glutamic acid. Gelatin is a cooked form of collagen that's slightly different, although with a very similar amino acid profile. Bone broth that forms this gelatin on top after refrigeration does have precursor for collagen synthesis, especially glycine, proline and hydroxyproline. Unfortunately, the quantities of these amino acids in many bone broths are quite low and therefore is not like a very reliable source of, getting all the collagen that you need. I think that is a very good idea to, you know, add some bone broth into your diet because, you know, obviously, you would just waste away the bones and the the ligaments and they do give you a lot of these amino acids that you need for collagen synthesis. It's just that if you solely rely on that, then you're just not getting enough of glycine hydroxyproline and proline from just bone broth. You would have to, like, drink an entire pot of bone broth to actually get all the, required amounts of the collagen and the glycine. So by all means, like, keep adding bone broth into your diet in moderate amounts, but, you also want to eat the other foods that contain these precursors. Dry gelatin powder has the highest amount of, glycine per 100 grams with about 19 grams of, glycine. Gelatin desserts, especially the sugar free ones, are also actually quite high at around 13.8 grams. Pork skin, both the pork skin snacks or pork ears that you can cook are relatively high as well, although slightly less than dry gelatin powder, around 11.9 grams up to four grams. White fish, just the fish especially with the skin is, much lower than gelatin and pork skin but it's still quite higher in, glycine than other meat sources. Like white fish has around 4.3 grams of glycine per 100 grams. Chicken skin that you generally eat with, drumsticks and stuff has like 3.3 grams and spirulina, dried, has three grams as well. When it comes to proline and hydroxyproline then, you get that from other amino acid sources as well. Gelatin powder is also still a very high source of proline at around 12 grams per 100 grams of proline. Gelatin desserts, again, are very high in proline as well, 8.9 grams. And pork skin is at around seven grams. Parmesan cheese and goat cheese are actually quite high in proline, much higher than other meat sources. So they have five and three point seven grams of, proline. The highest source of hydroxyproline is poultry, especially with the skin. So turkey skin, chicken skin, chicken wing, chicken drumsticks. They have around one gram of, hydroxyproline. If you do choose to make some bone broth, then here is how to do it. It takes about eight hours of low simmer cooking to cook out 20% of the collagen in bones. Longer cooking times, even up to seventy two hours, result in higher concentrations of amino acids in the broth. You can also speed up this process and get more of these amino acids by breaking up the bones that you're about to cook. You can cut the bones or chop the bones with some ax or a big knife, but just be careful that the small bones don't fly off. You can add some vinegar that also helps with the assimilation of nutrients from the bones. Overall, you wanna get around ten to twenty grams of collagen per day, and it's very unlikely that you get it solely from bone broth. So you also have to add the other foods. The optimal amount of glycine per day is around ten to fifteen up to 20 even and, it's quite hard to get it solely from diet. So I think most people would benefit from adding, like, at least ten grams of glycine as a supplement into their diet. So in conclusion, the best foods for getting the precursors for collagen are bone broth, although it's not, like, solely enough. You also wanna eat fish with the skin, chicken with the skin, gelatin powder, gelatin desserts, and pork skin snacks. Those kind of things you can cook like. You know, the pork that has the skin on, that's kind of the best source of the highest amounts of glycine, hydroxyproline and proline. However, you also want to get to the other precursors that are needed for collagen synthesis especially vitamin c and copper. Vitamin c is the critical step in actually synthesizing collagen and, scurvy which is considered to be vitamin c deficiency is actually a vitamin c induced collagen deficiency. That's what causes the bleeding of the gums. So you don't you don't synthesize enough, collagen in the gums that results in bleeding. And the reason for that is lack of vitamin c. For that, obviously, you need to eat some different kinds of, fruits and vegetables and berries to get the vitamin c. But you also wanna get copper that you get in large amounts from liver, dark chocolate, and beans. If you want to learn more about the benefits of collagen and glycine, then check out my new book with doctor James D'Nico Antoniou called The Collagen Cure. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.