Welcome back to the channel. My name is Siim Lund and in this video I'm going to give you the full guide to doing intermittent fasting in 2023. So intermittent fasting is not going anywhere and this is gonna be a full breakdown of what is fasting, how to do it and what are the newest and most accurate research about doing it. If you're new to the channel, if you haven't heard about me before then I'll briefly introduce myself. My name is Sim Lund. I'm from Estonia. Multiple best selling author. I've written by now, yeah, like seven books that many of them have been co authored with Doctor James de Nicolantonio. I'm also an anthropologist, I'm a keynote speaker. I consider myself like a biographer or yeah, like that's what I do. And but, yeah. Like, everything involved around health, fitness, performance, and just overall, well-being and a lot of it longevity wise as well. So let's start with some of the basics. What is intermittent fasting? Well, essentially fasting is just like not eating and intermittent fasting refers to doing that intermittently. No, not many people, you know, when they say intermittent fasting, then they mean like the sixteen and eight method where they fast sixteen hours and eat within eight hours. So that's a form of intermittent fasting by definition, or by definition is more like a time restricted eating because you're confining your daily eating window in a certain time frame. Intermittent fasting actually is usually, you know, that you're eating on one day, you're not eating another day and you're kind of like, swapping between periods of eating and fasting. But for the sake of simplicity and, you know, for the sake of just making keeping it simple, we'll just stick to the same term of intermittent fasting throughout the video to describe this general way of eating where you are just, you know, confining or daily eating with in a certain timeframe. And in that timeframe, generally, you're not allowed to consume calories that would, you know, generally stop the fastest state. And, you're just staying in the fastest state, which refers to pretty much allowing your body to run on its own, backup energy stores. And, yeah, when you are in a fasted state, then you go through different physiological processes. So that doesn't occur generally when you are eating regularly. So most people, they just eat multiple meals per day that, when they eat, then they obviously raise blood sugar, they raise insulin, and they also keep their body in a fed state, which is different from being in a fasted state. And, the biggest differences have to do with the different pathways that get turned on inside a body when you're eating versus when you're fasting. And, when you're fasting, for example, then you start to burn more fat, your fat oxidation increases. Eventually, they're gonna go into ketosis. You're gonna suppress the growth pathways in the body that, actually have some longevity benefits. And, you conduct this kind of, you know, self cleaning, for lack of a better word, that, you're removing dysfunctional cell components with the process of autologie. And, yeah, you're just pretty much allowing your body to rest and, not digest food that happens if you're just eating multiple times per day. And, when it comes to these pathways, the, fasted and fit pathways, then, there's pretty much like two main ones that, exist or the two like umbrella pathways. And when you're feeding, when you're eating, you have consumed calories, then generally you, are in an anabolic and fat state, which, activates this complex in the body called mTOR, mammalian target of, rapamycin, which then, helps with protein synthesis, muscle growth, cell replication, survival and, that kind of thing. In excess, the mTOR complex has been, you know, considered to accelerate aging and, be linked to some cancers and malignancies. But obviously it's very kind of nuanced and it not necessarily applies to humans all the time. But, in my opinion, you know, exosmptor still has like some negative side effects. It can speed up immunosenescence. It can weaken your immune system over time. And, I think it would also have like, a downstream effect on aging overall if you're, like, eating around the clock without any time restrictions. So that's why doing some form of time restricted and transfigured eating or intermittent fasting may have, yeah, like just, some of these benefits that you don't get if you're just eating all the time. And a lot of those benefits are mediated by the kind of the fasting complex or the, kind of calorie restriction complex called AMPK, amp activated protein kinase, which is more of like a this catabolic pathway in the body that, regulates autology. It regulates NAD recycling, which, helps with energy production, helps to pretty much maintain better metabolic health over the long term and to slow down aging. And, yeah, this AMPK is more of like a survival, complex survival, pathway that, gets activated under these kinds of energy stressors, like fasting, calorie restriction, or exercise. So these are the main differences between being fed and fasted. If you're fasting, then over time, you activate AMPK and you suppress mTOR. When you're fed, you turn off AMPK and you activate the mTOR, the growth pathway. And these, like sensors or complexes create this triad that regulate your body's energy homeostasis or energy balance. And, like we talked about mTOR is the one that promotes protein synthesis and cell growth. And this one gets turned on when primarily amino acids. Like the amino acids and protein are the main trigger for mTOR, but carbohydrates do that as well. But generally, like any amount of calories, even if it's fat, it doesn't raise insulin, but it still turns on mTOR eventually in larger quantities. The AMPK is, activated mostly by nutrient deficiency and, energy restriction. So when you are fasting on calorie restriction, or using a lot of energy as well, like doing exercise, which then helps to initiate the process of autologie that regulates cell recycling, cell cleaning, and, just, you know, maintenance work. Autology is mostly regulated by amino acid deficiency that, you need to be on a lower, like, amino acid, let's say, state or have less amino acids in your bloodstream for autologous to initiate because mTOR is a direct inhibitor of autologous. And, when you are eating protein and amino acids, then you don't really go into autologous because the mTOR is blocking the formation of these autologousomes that, do these cell recycling and eliminate these dysfunctional components of the cell. And, you know, these pathways obviously are balancing each other all the time. They can't coexist simultaneously. You can't have autologin mTOR activated at the same time. You can only cycle between them. You can only be in a state of growth for one period of a time and then switch over to a faster state and vice versa. So you can't exist. You can't get best of both worlds all the time. You need to have periods of, you know, cycling. And that's where this interval fasting concept is so, like, powerful that, you're not really like, you don't need to restrict anything. You don't need to restrict protein. You don't need to restrict carbohydrates in terms of being on a low protein diet for the rest of your life or being on a low carb diet for the rest of your life. The main tenant, the main idea is to cycle between periods of eating and fasting that then automatically pretty much activates these pathways in the right amounts and prevents them from becoming, you know, excess excess emptor is bad, but excess autohagy and excess AMPK activation is also bad. So, like, the feeding is almost as important as the fasting when it comes to inward fasting in my opinion. Because that's when you achieve the best body composition, that's where you achieve the best metabolic health, and that's where you achieve also best energy levels, best sleep, and the best, you know, fitness, best well-being, how you feel on a daily basis. That's achieved only through the cycling component, not being in one state for too long. And, yeah, like we talked about, these pathways balance each other, things that turn on these longevity pathways and survival pathways through AMPK or, you know, calorie restriction, exercise, fasting, and different kinds of hormetic stressors, when it comes to, you know, the sedentary lifestyle behavior and the unhealthy lifestyle behavior, then obviously that has like a negative side effect or negative effect on these, processes. And if you achieve that, then, achieve that balance and achieve the activation of these pathways, then you're gonna pretty much, yeah, have a positive effect on longevity overall, which includes DNA repair, mitochondrial biogenesis, stress resistance, autologous, reducing inflammation, telomere maintenance, etcetera. And, as a result, you postpone the development of these chronic diseases and, have a positive effect on longevity overall. So let's move on with the effects of fasting. What are the actual studies showing? How does fasting and time restricted eating affect our bodies and health? You know, there are actually quite a lot of studies by now showing that the general interval fasting has some positive effects on the body. Whether or not it's superior to calorie restriction is up for debate. I think that obviously you can't eat as many calories as you want when you're doing intermittent fasting. You still need to, like, find some restriction in that because otherwise you'll just, gain weight or you'll just mess up your bio biomarkers by doing that. So fasting isn't like a free pass. You still have to be on a, like a good diet and you still have to be kind of, optimal with your calorie intake. But, some of the effects of fasting, are like something that, happen also in spite of the calorie restriction. So many people who do intermittent fasting, then they end up eating less calories automatically. But there are also other effects that happen in the fasted state, such as, you know, reduction in inflammation and, increased tautology, etcetera, etcetera, which aren't not necessarily only because of the calorie restriction. Which doesn't mean that you can't activate these things with calorie restriction. But, you know, the health benefits of fasting don't always come from the weight loss. Like, the benefits of fasting can also come from just being in the fastest state. So one of the long term effects of intermittent fasting, you know, most of it has to do with your better metabolic health and, better biomarkers. You'll have generally, like, better blood sugar levels, better, blood pressure, better triglycerides and, better insulin sensitivity and those kind of things. You also become more keto adapted, which means that, you'll be able to burn more fat more easily and tap into ketosis faster, which, then enables you to, like, you know, swap between different fuel sources. You You'll be less hungry when you're fasting. And, you know, the key part is to also eat carbohydrates every once in a while to maintain the insulin sensitivity. If you're prolonging this fasted state for too long or being in ketosis for too long, too often, then, your insulin sensitivity will suffer slightly. So again, the cycling component is where the magic happens generally. And swapping between these different pathways between fat burning and burning carbohydrates, that's what trains your metabolism, that what kind of teaches your metabolism to be more flexible and to, to achieve like more optimal, functioning in the process. And if you don't do that, you know, you're always hitting carbohydrates again, then you know, you're not really achieving that metabolic flexibility either. You're not able to burn fat and you're pretty much, you know, shooting yourself in the foot in terms of the optimal, you know, functioning of the cell. That's how it that's how humans are supposed to kinda function. We are supposed to be in ketosis for some periods of the time, but at other periods of the time, we also have to kind of, you know, do the opposite and, change things up. That's kind of makes your cells more resistant or resilient and, make your health more robust overall as well. So calorie restriction, as well as endo fasting and physical exercise, they're all forms of hormesis that, do, you know, cause stress to your body, but that stress actually makes you stronger. The that's the concept of stronger by stress or hormesis that over time your body becomes more resilient and, increases resistance to stressors, increases or improves your immune system function, improves your metabolic health, and that just has like a positive effect on your overall health. And hormesis is a dose specific response, not like it's not like a linear response that the more you do it, the better it is. Like with everything, moderation is the key. If you exercise too much then that will eventually harm your health. Likewise with fasting, if you do too much fasting, it's gonna harm your health. If you do too much calorie restriction for too long, that's gonna harm your health. And yet pretty much everything has this bell curve or the optimal amount that is, giving the benefits. If you don't do any of exercise, then that's harmful because you, you know, obviously lose fitness and you start to gain weight. If you do too much exercise, then that can cause over training and, weaken your immune system. So the benefit, the most optimal amount is somewhere in the middle. Like the exact amount depends on the individual, depends on the situation, but you wanna have this bell curve effect for pretty much all these stressors. Not enough is not optimal and too much can also be harmful. And, hormesis is also like an example of antifragility. Or much rather, antifragility is based on the concept of hormesis, which means that some stressors can make you stronger and, they can actually make you more resilient, which almost describes the mythological creature hydra. So the hydra, it had like multiple heads. If you cut one head off, then it grows two heads instead. So it becomes stronger from the small stress. And that applies to like exercise. If you do exercise in the immediate short term you get slightly weaker, but over the long term you're much fitter and much stronger overall. And fasting is a similar example. Like, you wanna start, you know, where you're at. You don't wanna immediately go into like the most hardcore of fasting. You wanna step by step gradually get better at it. And over time, your resilience will increase and, you will, you know, get healthier and more robust overall. If you're like not doing any of these hormetic stressors, you're not exercising, you're not doing any like saunas or you're not doing any, you know, fasting, then that generally leads to more fragility and frailty. Like, your immune system will weaken, your because our bodies need this kind of small hermetic stress and we need this small kind of exercise to maintain most optimal, functioning. And in the modern world, we're not like it's not mandatory to fast, it's not mandatory to exercise, we can get away with being sedentary and just sitting on a couch and overeating. But obviously that will just, you know, that's why we have such a problem with health. Many people just suffer from poor health and obesity because they're not doing any of the difficult things. They're not doing any of the stressors voluntarily. They're just, choosing the easy way out. So as individuals who want to achieve optimal health, we just have to impose this hormetic stress on ourselves, which includes, you know, voluntary regular exercise and some aspects of time restricted eating and intermittent fasting. Calorie restriction is, one of the most known, like, ways to extend lifespan in other species, and it has been found to have positive effects in humans as well. So in this human study, they did find that calorie restriction for a few weeks, had like these positive effects in increasing otology, increasing DNA repair, apoptosis or programmed cell death, increasing antioxidant defense, activating these different longevity pathways like sirtuins and AMPK, suppressing mTOR and, promoting mitochondrial biogenesis as well as reducing inflammation. So calorie restriction, yeah, does a lot of the same things as intermittent fasting. That, it has a similar positive effect on the, longevity and lifespan. And in, like, primate and monkey studies, they find that, the calorie restriction also extends lifespan. So, yeah, like eating less calories generally has somewhat of a positive effect on longevity because of these different processes that get turned on while being under that state. So this small hormetic stress, is what, yields those benefits. In humans, you know, calorie restriction definitely will have some benefits, but you can't do it for long because you also need to obviously have some aspects of fitness. You need to have muscle strength and muscle mass, which are also linked to longevity. If you're under calorie restriction for too long all the time, then that could lead to like frailty, sarcopenia, osteoporosis, and those kind of things. So, you know, there needs to be a balance between eating enough calories while still getting the benefits of calorie restriction, which, intermittent fasting can actually mimic those effects. And, calorie restriction is quite hard to do over the long term. Whereas if you confine your eating, you know, in a certain timeframe, then that is what, most people generally can find a bit more easier to do. So, yeah, like David Sinclair, who's a lot of renowned, like, longevity researcher. He has also said that, yeah, it's, quite hard to be hungry all the time if you're doing calorie restriction. And, this is where, like, you know, the fasting can help to mimic a lot of the benefits of calorie restriction without necessarily being on a very low calorie diet. Because to calorie restriction to work, you need to be, yeah, under quite a severe calorie restriction. You need at least like 30% of calorie restriction to, pretty much have those, effects. But with intermittent fasting, you can pretty much turn on the same pathways. You can see similar effects by just confining the eating window, which again doesn't mean that you can eat unlimited amount of calories, but it does mean that you can eat a bit more calories than you normally would have to do when you're doing this, severe calorie restriction. At least that's what most of the, you know, researchers have concluded by now. That, yeah, you know, fasting, it's not magic, but it can help to mimic some aspects of calorie restriction. When it comes to weight loss, then, yeah, you still need to be in a calorie restriction. But, when it comes to these longevity pathways and these other processes, metabolic processes that happen underneath, then intermittent fasting is a great way to, like, mimic those effects and, get away with less calorie restriction. Alright, so let's move on with time restricted eating, which is a component of the circadian rhythms or concept of circadian biology. And, what it essentially means is just intermittent fasting or confining a reading in a certain time frame. There are types of it like early time machine reading and late time machine reading And studies on both of them, have found that, yeah, the time restricted eating has health benefits compared to the standard way of eating. Like, it's gonna be better for your metabolic profile and blood pressure. But obviously many of those effects can come from just eating less calories in that time frame. If you say to people that, hey, eat only between 8AM and 2PM, then they will automatically start eating less calories generally. Whereas if you eat around the clock without any restrictions, then there's gonna be more, like, possibilities and opportunities to eat. Which is why the tantric eating can have, like, this good, like, adherence, effect for most people. When it comes to eating early versus late, then, the studies find that, yeah, the early times you're eating has a little bit of a better effect when it comes to, like, the weight loss is the same, but when it comes to the metabolic profile, then early timesheet eating, has been found to have a small improvement compared to late timesheet eating. But the difference whether or not it's significant depends on the other aspects. Like, it depends on when you exercise, how well you sleep, how many calories you're eating in a time window and etcetera. But, overall, yeah, like the pretty much there have been, like, multiple studies in 2022, even, going through early time sheathing versus late time sheathing. And they they see they see pretty much all the time that, early time sheathing has somewhat of a better effect in, like, the blood pressure, the fasting glucose levels, fasting insulin, insulin resistance, and, metabolic health overall. Both of them help with weight loss, but, early times eating has, like, a somewhat of a better effect. And, yeah, as you can see from this graph, from that study that, yeah, they eat very similarly in terms of calories. But, you know, in this study, the early time restricted eating group actually ate a little bit less, on average. But, yeah, their results are also somewhat better compared to, like late time feeding. But the good thing about it is that both of these groups do better than the controls generally. Like, both of the time feeding groups, whether they are early or late, do slight slightly better than control groups, where they eat, you know, around the clock without any restrictions. And, yeah. Both of them can help with weight loss compared to controls. Both of them have less fat mass. And interestingly, early times eating group actually loses a bit more muscle mass, which is, interesting, probably because you're most anabolic when you're sleeping. And if you're going into a bed with like very empty stomach and without any amino acids in your bloodstream, then, chances are, yeah, you're gonna be more catabolic or, you know, you're gonna be more prone to losing muscle compared to eating somewhat later. So what I take away from this in my own life is that, yeah, I don't want to eat immediately before bed. I don't wanna eat very late. I do want to, you know, have, like, early dinner, but I don't I don't need to necessarily eat in the morning all my calories. Like, I don't think that's the kind of main message. The main message should be that, don't eat immediately before bed. Stop eating, you know, optimally like four hours, before bed or something like that. And that's that's where you're gonna get, like, the best of both worlds. And most people, I don't think that they're able to do early times of eating because, you know, dinners are the most sociable, event of the day for most people. That's where the families eat dinner together. That's where you go out with friends or whatever. So it's very hard to, like, you know, skip dinner in most cases. But you what you should do still is to, like, not have the dinner, too late, in my opinion. And, yeah. Again, kinda similar results that the early time reading group generally does a bit better, but both of them do better than the, control group in most cases. So time restricted eating is a concept of, circadian rhythms. And, for optimal health, you also want to maintain circadian rhythm alignment. Food is a huge, regulator of the circadian rhythms and, the circadian clocks in your body. If you're just eating around the clock, then you can mess up the clocks. And if you eat too late, you can also mess up the clocks and cause circadian disruption. So, humans are diurnal creatures. We're supposed to be awake during daytime. We're supposed to be active during daytime, and we're supposed to sleep at night. So in the morning, the cortisol rises. That's where you start to burn fat. That's where you increase your energy, peaks at 9AM, and drops down for the rest of the day. Melatonin, the sleep hormone, rises before bed and, reaches its peak at midnight and then drops drops down. Melatonin, what it does is actually makes you somewhat insulin resistant. So, that's why you don't wanna eat at night. You don't wanna eat immediately before bed because your glucose disposal would be, worse. So, and you'll have, like, worse fasting blood sugar levels in the morning as well. Whereas cortisol can also make you somewhat insulin resistant. So you don't wanna eat, like, immediately before or immediately after waking up either. So, you know, what I like to do is to just wait a few hours after waking up and definitely stop eating like four hours before bed. Something like that. Autology, which is the cell recycling process, and that also actually has a circadian rhythm and, autology, you know, starts to process mostly during the night. It's not really active during the daytime and it peaks actually in the early morning, similar to like the cortisol rise. So, yeah. Another reason why not to eat immediately before bed and not to eat immediately after waking up. You wanna have, like, you know, a buffer from both ends. You wanna have a few hours after waking up until you eat, and a few hours before bed when you stop eating. So, in the morning, your cortisol levels are at its highest. That makes you somewhat insulin resistant. It's not the best time to eat at that point. And ghrelin, the hunger hormone, generally rises immediately after waking up, if you have healthy metabolism. But it drops down for the rest of the day, as well if you if you don't, like, immediately eat. So ghrelin actually has some health benefits as well, like it increase, growth hormone and, it can, like, promote some of the activation of APK and, these other, like, survival pathways. But, obviously, if you have high amounts of ghrelin all the time, then you can just overeat whenever you do have the opportunity to eat. But, like there is no, like this progressive increase in hunger, when you, fast. You don't you're not hungrier at fasting sixteen hours versus fasting for twelve hours, or three days even. Like, generally the hunger plateaus and it comes and goes in waves to just, you know, what to expect and growth hormone, rises as well a few hours after waking up, which again helps with the fat burning helps with muscle maintenance and has like some longevity benefits as well. So again, you know, a few hours after waking up is what is when you wanna have your first meal. If you do choose to have like, like, multiple meals. And, the reason for that is, yeah, this, rising cortisol, rising growth hormone, that, wouldn't happen. The growth hormone wouldn't rise if you eat like a bowl of cereal immediately after waking up. So you need to wait a few hours for this to kick in. And if I were to put together some sort of food clock or, like, the time frame in which to eat, then I would say that the most optimal time frame to eat in is between, like, 10AM and six or 7PM. Because, yeah, like, in the morning, it's the cortisol rice that is not recommended to eat. And in the evening or at nighttime, it's the melatonin that, should stop you from eating or prevent you from, eating. And, your most insulin sensitive at daytime between, you know, ten and twelve. And, you also have, you know, best physical performance in the afternoon. So this is the best time to kind of eat in my opinion. Alright. So let's move on with the types of fasting. What are the different types of doing that? So, the three main categories in my opinion are the sixteen and eight method, which, is just, like skipping breakfast and eating lunch and dinner or whatever form of doing it. But the main idea is to just, fast for sixteen hours and eat within eight hours. That is very simple. I think most people can do it. It's actually pretty good for being able to progress at the gym and make gains. And you don't really, yeah, like, need to ever change it. It's if there's one fasting window that you could do for the rest of your life, then, that's it. That's the kind of the most, easiest thing to do. There's also one meal a day, OMAD, which is, yeah, just eat one meal a day or within a certain time frame. In my opinion, that's not, the most, like, suitable for beginners and it can definitely be harder, a lot harder than the 1,608. It's, not the best for muscle growth. It's actually very hard to build muscle with and it requires more adaptation. The negative side effects of omad can be that, you can slow down your thyroid function, you can cause this metabolic adaptation And, definitely for women, it's not suitable in my opinion either. Whereas men can get away with OMAD, but if they do it too much or if they combine it with a lot of the other stressors, then they can again suffer from low thyroid or reduce testosterone levels. There is also alternative fasting ADF, which means that you fast one day and eat the next day. So this is actually quite effective for weight loss and it has a lot of research showing that it helps with diabetes and just metabolic syndrome and other things like that. Alternative fasting is very well researched. It, has been found to work and it, pretty much is quite, you know, adherable as well. It's somewhat harder again than the sixteen and eight obviously, But, again, it's easier than like a multi day three day fast or something like that. I personally don't think that it's worthwhile to do a lot of alternative fasting, or at least like you don't wanna do alternative fasting indefinitely. You can do it a few times a month, one cycle, but if you do it back to back all the time for the rest of your life, then I don't think that's generally not suitable for most people. Obviously some people can pull it off, but the general public or the average person don't need to do it in the first place. And, yeah, it's not inherently necessary or recommended. When it comes to eating frequency, then there was actually '1 2022 study that looked at three meals a day versus one meal a day and they found some interesting things from that. The one meal a day group lost more weight because they ate also a bit less calories, but they also lost a bit more muscle tissue, but they also lost, you know, more fat tissue than the three meals a day. So, yeah, I guess the one meal a day group will lose more weight, but there's will but there's gonna be a bit more, lean tissue loss as well. So, again, one minute a day can work for a lot of people. I myself do it, yeah, I've done it for multiple years, but it has the potential downside that it could lead to some additional muscle loss as well. But the other biomarkers improve with both of them, granted that you're in a calorie restriction. And when it comes to the glucose levels, the twenty four hour glucose levels, then, yeah, when you're eating one meal a day, then your average blood sugar levels during the daytime when you're fasting are lower than the three meals a day. But they rise to kind of normal regular levels when you do eat eventually. When the one meal a day group, or three meals a day group, they eat, Obviously the blood sugar levels will be higher overall on average because they're just eating multiple meals. Alright, so let's move on with what breaks a fast, because that's a very common question pretty much everyone has all the time. Here's a list of the things that don't break a fast, that don't inhibit the adaptations that occur in the fastest state or the pathways that get activated in the fastest state. So anything that is zero calories, like water, mineral water, are fine. Coffees and teas are fine. They don't have any calories. I mean, they do have like two calories or something like that, but, it's so small that it doesn't, have any effect. And in fact, coffee and teas both actually increase autophagy. So it's very, shown that both the caffeine as well as the polyphenols in coffees and teas, promote autophagy. So in in in some cases or in some sense, the coffee and tea actually enhance the benefits of fasting. Or they speed up the benefits of fasting. You get the benefits faster. And, or they mimic fasting physiology and they mimic calorie restriction by activating these pathways. Apple cider vinegar does a similar response that it activates AMPK, helps with fat burning and ketosis, lowers blood sugar. Diet soda, you know, obviously is very controversial. People say that you shouldn't drink that soda. Whatever. I'm not telling you if you should drink it or not. But the point is that diet soda, there's nothing about diet soda that would actually stop a faster state in my opinion. There hasn't been anything that would indicate that the amount of calories is very small. It has like five calories and, it's not enough to pretty much kick you out of a faster state. There's also the argument that it raises insulin, which, or raises blood sugar. I mean, I tried with the CGM. I had a GGM, I drank the diet coke and my blood sugar actually dropped down. Which you could say that, yeah, my insulin raised, which lowered my blood sugar. But, I don't think that it matters. Like, I mean, there's many things that raise that. Like, you can exercise and exercise could also then kick you out of a fast state based on that argument. But, yeah. In my opinion, it's just not there's nothing about it that would indicate that it could, like, you know, break a fast or something. Like I said, I'm not saying that you that it's a healthy drink. I'm not saying that you should drink it or something. But, I'm just looking at the facts and looking at the effects, the physiology of what happens. From the microbiome side, then, there's also nothing there that could, like, say that it breaks a fast or something like that. Supplements, most of the supplements are also not going to break fast. Like, even if it has fish oil or vitamin D that's inside some sort of oil, the amount is so small that it's not gonna break fast. And, like magnesium is not gonna break fast. Some of the mineral supplements, some vitamin supplements, they're not gonna break fast. And they're kind of, you know Whether or not you should take them in a fast state is different. Some of the supplements are fat soluble. You wanna take them with food or with some fats, but, at least they're not gonna break fast. Maybe you're wasting them if you're taking a fast state, but you're not, like, stopping the fast state, if that makes sense. MCT oil, so, mainly like olive oil as well, and pure fat, is not going to inherently break a fast in smaller amounts because it doesn't raise insulin, it doesn't affect your blood sugar. And, the ketones that rise from the MCT oil actually can help with some of the facet. Physiology and fat burning. And exogenous ketones, the same, they don't, like obviously, they don't have calories in large amounts that would break a fast. In large amounts, they can still activate mTOR and insulin the same way with fats. So like super large amounts of MCT oil, like in bulletproof coffee, that would also still inhibit the fast. But like a 100 calories of MCT oil is not gonna do it. But a thousand calories, probably will. Electrode powders, so like LMT or these other just electrolyte drinks, even if they have some sweeteners like stevia, they're not gonna break the fast. Chewing gum is, also with like maybe two calories, but, it's not gonna break the fast. And it's not gonna have any effect, even if it has like some sort of sweetener, or something like that. Here are the things that do break a fast. So sugar sweetened beverages, so, regular Coke, regular, electrolytes with, like, Gatorade or something like that. That's gonna break a fast. Juices, everything that has sugar is a very direct inhibitor of autologie And the fastest state milk in your coffee, you know, that's, you know, the amounts matter like one tablespoon of milk or something, like a 100 calories of milk probably is fine. But, technically it still breaks the fast. But I wouldn't worry about it that much. If you like to have milk in your coffee and it helps you to get through the fast, then why not? I don't see an issue with that. You don't need to be micromanaging with it that much. Protein shakes and amino acids, because they contain amino acids that inhibit autophagy, and just anything that has food and calories, technically speaking, yes they do break a fast. But whether or not they have any meaningful impact on the fasted physiology and the pathways that get activated in that fasted state is a different question. Like, yeah, it may not inherently stop AMPK and it may not inherently stop pathology if it has calories. How to break a fast? So when you're pretty much done fasting, what I like to do is drink coffee and some electrolyte powders and things like that in the fasted state. If I'm about to break fast and it's like actual food, then I would, start with something that is, easy to digest. So, getting some bone broth or some soup liquids is good, especially after a long fast, like a multi day fast. That's what you wanna do. You don't wanna start with high glycemic foods, because that can cause some aspects of refeeding syndrome, which means that you get actually super hypoglycemic and, you can get some adverse reactions from that. To prevent that, you wanna have adequate amount of sodium and other electrolytes in your bloodstream before you break the fast. And, that's why mineral waters are great, and some of like electrolyte powders, even like regular salt in your water is a good way to prevent the refeeding syndrome. And it's actually quite important. But still when you are breaking a fast, I would start with something easy to digest and something that has like liquid and salt in it, like bone broth. The first food should still be somewhat low glycemic. You don't wanna spike your insulin because, again, refeeding syndrome and, can actually cause you hypoglycemia. So what you wanna eat instead is some like protein and vegetables, something, that just, you know, gets your digestion going. Apple cider vinegar is great while breaking the fast to also help with the digestion. And then the second meal can be somewhat higher glycemic. You can eat some carbohydrates or something like that. But you wanna, or if you eat like one meal a day, then I will start with protein and vegetables first and then have some of the carbohydrates, later. And the overall, you know, kind of theme is to still eat somewhat, you know, normally. Don't, be so ravenous and so, like, gorging yourself because that can just be, you know, obviously defeats a lot of the purpose of the fast and, can have like some negative side effects on your health as well, or sleep or something like that. So I'd much rather just eat slow, eat steady, chew it properly, be mindful of your food and, yeah, try to, you know, not overeat. Which I think is still hard. Like most people, they find it hard to overeat if they're doing inward fasting. So here's how to do intermittent fasting. We're kind of reaching the end of the video as well. Some of the foods to eat while fasting. Here's a list of kind of the main, like whole foods, I think, are the healthiest option, obviously. You don't you could get away with eating junk food when you're doing intermittent fasting. There are actually studies in mice at least that show that if they eat like a bad diet, high fat diet, but they're doing intermittent fasting, then they're still healthy compared to those mice who eat the same bad, like a high fat unhealthy diet, but they're not doing intermittent fasting, then they're they get sick and obese. So, yeah, intermittent fasting in some ways can, like, protect your body against, the kind of harmful effects of eating ultra processed food or eating somewhat excessive amount of calories. But, like, you know, the vast majority of the time you should still choose whole foods. Here's a list of the ones that I think are the best. So like for protein: beef, chicken, fish, eggs, liver, beans, legumes, cottage cheese, vegetables, broccoli, cauliflower, carrots, turnips, cucumber, tomatoes, spinach, etcetera. Carbs, potatoes, rice, bananas, apples, pears, pineapple, berries, quinoa, buckwheat, oats. And for fats, like olive oil, fish, egg yolks, cheese, chicken skin, pork skin is actually good for collagen and glycine, which is good for the, you know, the health benefits of for the tendons and joints as well as the skin, and some like nuts and seeds for some other additional fat sources. But that's pretty much it. There's a whole list of more you could eat. I'm not going into the specific details of what type of meat, what type of vegetables, but whole foods, meat, protein, fish, vegetables, carbs, some healthy fats. I think that's kind of the main guideline. When it comes to the macronutrient ratios, then I do think that it's important to opt for somewhat of a higher protein intake, because that helps with muscle maintenance. And, when you are fasting, then you do require still protein. If you are on low protein diet plus fasting, then chances are you're gonna lose muscle and become more frail. But, at least 25 to 30% of your calories should come from protein. If you're under higher calorie restriction, then the protein quantity should increase slightly because the protein helps to protect against the muscle loss that could have happened in the calorie restriction. So yeah, like 35 up to 40% even, when you're in a severe calorie restriction. But the rest of the calories, carbs or fats, should come from like 70% or should contribute up to 70% or 65, 60%, depending on the, the type of diet you follow. I don't think that you need to be on a low carb diet. I don't think you need to be on a low fat diet, but, yeah, just the combined energy is what you get from them. So here's the conclusion of the video. Daily, what you want to aim for is about like fourteen to sixteen hours fasted at least. That's what you achieve by waiting a few hours after waking up and you stop eating a few hours before bed. In my opinion, the minimum you should wait is like three to four hours before bed. I would recommend eating like one hour before bed or something like that. Three to four hours is kind of, good if you wanna take it a bit further than five to six hours, but, some people do worse with this early times of eating. They can't sleep that well and again, they could lose muscle as well if they're not eating enough protein. Exercise and sleep well, obviously, is also very important. Exercise should be a part of intermittent fasting and you should do it regularly and at the same time you should also sleep. If intermittent fasting starts to interfere with exercise and interferes with your sleep, then I think it's not worth it. Like it's more important to exercise and it's more important to sleep, than to do intermittent fasting. But, chances are you can do all of them. And I think you should do all of them. When it comes to breaking a fast, then do it slowly. Don't, again, over gorge and don't overeat. And, eat whole foods, protein, carbs, vegetables and fibers. That's, yeah, just the basic things. Again, if you want to master in fasting and learn more details, more the science, then check out my innovative fasting video course. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.