Hey. Welcome back to the channel. My name is Seem Lund, and this is my wife, Inka. And, in this video, we're gonna talk about the three habits that can promote longevity and, lifespan. This is part two. Part one, we did on Inka's channel. So if you want to learn about the other three habits that can increase your longevity, then, check out that video on Inka's channel in the description. Do it. So technically, habit number four or habit number one in this video is gonna be, walking. So, walking is, I think, one of the most underrated forms of, exercise or movement. It's not deliberate like exercise, but it definitely has a lot of very similar benefits to your health and longevity like exercise does. And obviously, you know, main mechanism has to do with just better, like, cardiovascular disease risk factors, better blood sugar regulation, better blood pressure. So there's many things that you can achieve with just regular walking. And '1 2020 study did show that the lowest risk of, mortality was among people who walked around 10 to 12 to even 14,000 steps a day. And, people who walk less than 8,000 steps a day, they have a significantly higher risk of mortality. And people who walk more than that, like sixteen, twenty thousand steps, they didn't they don't see, like, any additional reduction in mortality. So I think for most people, they're gonna good aim to get for day for the entire day is gonna be around, like, 12,000 steps a day or something like that. There was even one study. I don't remember the specifics. So I'm, like, we need to check that, but there was actually this, like, inverse curve at some point in young young people, if I recall correctly. So, like, after 16,000 step, it started to be associated with, like, more overall. Still less, you know, risk for mortality, but it wasn't that high anymore as what in ten thousand steps, for example. Yeah. For sure. Like, I think you can even get away with slightly less, like, maybe eight to 10,000 is already good enough if you do, like, some other form of exercise. Do you like more intense exercise you do then then the less actual steps you need to take. So if you don't do any exercise at all, then the best step count is gonna be like 12,000. But if you, let's say, lift weights or something on that day, then you can get away with maybe 8,000. But, yeah, even on the days that you do exercise a lot, I think it's still good to aim for at least, you know, eight to 10. And, if you really want to optimize it, then 12,000 steps. No. Alright. Habit number two is gonna be regular sona use. And, this is something that we've already talked about in one of our previous, videos, and you can check it out as well. Generally, sona use is associated with many health benefits like reduction in cardiovascular disease mortality, reduction in blood pressure, reduction in Alzheimer's. And, when it comes to longevity overall, taking a sauna four or more times a week is associated with forty percent reduction in all cause mortality. Yeah. Sixty five percent risk reduction in the risk of Alzheimer's. But this is also applies to doing once a week. So if you, you know, any any amount of sauna is, generally healthy and it's gonna improve your health and longevity in my opinion. But best and the biggest reductions come when you do it, four or more times a week. If you do it zero times, then that's probably not very good. And, at least once is, I mean, better than nothing, but optimally four times a week. And habit number three, the last one is going to be time restricted eating or, you know, restricting your calories in some shape or form. And there is no, like, like, direct evidence to suggest that this form of intermittent fasting would extend lifespan yet because it's relatively new concept. There is, some links between this any form of time restricted eating with, improvements in, like, the biomarkers linked to cardiovascular disease, hypertension, or just overall, you know, aging as well. So time restricted eating can improve many aspects of your health and longevity, like reduction in blood pressure, better incidences due to, and, blood sugar regulation. And And when it comes to weight loss, then regular calorie restriction, obviously, is pretty much the same in terms of, like, you you can't, like, get away with eating unlimited amount of calories if you're doing times you're eating. But it does have, like, you know, similar effects in a lot of ways. And calorie restriction is by far the, like, only, like, actual real ways we know that does extend the lifespan. But time restricted eating can have many aspects or positive effects on the health span and just overall metabolic health in the long term. Which one do you think is better if if you were only to do one time restricted eating or calorie restriction? Well, I personally would you know, let's say for the average person who doesn't know anything about food or health, then if you just tell them, okay, eat only within these hours, like skip breakfast or eat it a bit later and eat early dinner, I think just by doing that, they would see an improvement in their health and longevity because they're not gonna counter calories and they're not gonna, like, really care that much about what they eat. But if you, you know, just tell them this, then, if it didn't change anything else, then they probably would see some improvements in their health. Like, they would lose some weight because the time restriction gives them this, let's say, restriction and confinement. And just by doing that, they would see an improvement in their health and longevity. But from if you control all the variables, then obviously calorie restriction is still more important. Like, if you are in a, like, metabolic ward and you you control all the calories, then, I think that, calorie restriction is, like, the more important factor in regulating the longevity. But if you combine, you know, you eat the same amount of calories, but one of the, let's say, options is to do it also in a smaller time frame slightly, then in that case, I think it's better than just calorie restriction without time restricted eating. Because they're in like, in some mice studies, they do find that, doing color restriction plus doing it in a smaller time frame extends lifespan significantly more than just color restriction. So in that in that study, they did just color restriction extended the lifespan of mice by 10%, but time time restricted eating plus the same color restriction extended their life by 35%. So, like, three times longer than just color restriction. So I think that, yeah, like the, you know, circadian component and time restricted eating can provide, like, some unique effects because, like, when you are in a longer period of fasting, then you are mimicking color restriction even more. And you probably, like, activate this different longevity pathways a bit a bit more than with regular color restriction, but, yeah, like, color restriction is the bigger lever, the more important factor than time shooting. Alright. That's it for these three habits. If you want to know about the other three habits that we talked about in Inka's channel, then, check out the video in the description. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Sim. And I'm Inka. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.