Know that exercise and fasting generally have some benefits for longevity, but which one is more effective? Well, in this video, I'm gonna talk about this new study that compared the effects of fasting on BDNF, and I'll also mention the differences between the amount of autophagy you get from exercise and fasting. Doing. So this is a study, fasting for twenty hours doesn't affect exercise induced increases in circulating BDNF in humans, January 2023. So basically, they looked at the difference between regular fasting and exercise on circulating levels of BDNF in humans. So one group was twenty hours of fasting, second one was ninety minutes of light exercise, and the third one was high intensity exercise for just even a few minutes. They found that fasting for twenty hours decreased glucose and increased ketones, which makes sense, but it had no effect on BDNF levels. So if you don't know BDNF, it's a brain derived neurotrophic factor. It's kinda called the fertilizer for the brain. It helps with neurogenesis, helps to grow brain cells, and fasting generally does increase speed and effort and exercise as well. But apparently, twenty hours of fasting didn't do that. It wasn't enough to raise speed and depth levels in these 12 healthy volunteers. Disappointed. Light cycling at 25% of peak oxygen uptake increased serum BDNF by six plus or minus 8%. So, 25% of light cycling, that's, yeah, like that's like jogging on a bike pretty much, and was mediated by a seven plus and minus 6% increase in platelets, six forty second intervals at 100% of VO2 max, increased plasma and serum BDNF, as well as the BDNF per platelet ratio four to five folds more than light exercise did. So, this very short or even forty second intervals at max speed, which takes only, you know, a few minutes to finish, that raised the BDNF to plate ratio four to five times above the light exercise. So as you can see, the increase in BDNF was up to 250% in the, high intensity group. Fasting for twenty hours caused a ninefold increase in ketone body delivered to the brain, but it had no effect on any metric of BDNF in peripheral circulation at rest. Prolonged ninety minute light cycling exercise increased plasma and serum derived BDNF, irrespective of being fed or fasted and seemed to be independent of changes in cerebral shear stress. So in the light exercise, it didn't matter if you were fed or fasted. Ninety minutes of light exercise increased BNF by about six to 8%. Six minutes of high intensity cycling intervals increased every metric of circulating BNF by four to five times more than prolonged low intensity cycling. The increase in plasma derived BNF was correlated with sixfold increase in circulating lactate irrespective of feeding or fasting. So again, the, high intensity exercise, it didn't matter if you did it fade or fasted, it increased BDNF. So, yeah, it outperformed fasting, just fasting, and it outperformed the, regular light exercise as well. You son of a So when it comes to BDNF production, then high intensity exercise is outperforms everything. Like, it's the most powerful and most effective way of raising BDNF and pretty much boosting your mood, increasing neurotransmitters, increasing neurogenesis. And, it doesn't matter that fasting wouldn't have an effect. It's just that twenty hours of fasting apparently isn't enough to see those effects. Whereas you can do six minutes of high intensity exercise irrespective of being fasted or fed, and you will see this 250% increase in BDNF automatically. It doesn't matter if you had fed or not. And we can see some of similar findings in the increase of autophagy. So autophagy increases when you are fasting, increases when you're exercising as well. But, generally, it takes, at least in humans, it takes at least sixteen hours to see, a raise in the basal level of autologie. And in, mice compared to, like, twenty four hours of fasting, then forty eight hours of fasting raises autologie a lot more than twenty four hours of fasting. So there is some dose specific response in how much autologie you, like, elevate when you are fasting for longer. But when it comes to exercise, then even thirty minutes of exercise has been found to activate autophagy. So here again, exercise also pretty much ramps up the benefit of fasting, one of the benefits of fasting, which is autophagy significantly faster. In these mice, we found that in both skeletal and cardiac muscle, thirty minutes of exercise was sufficient to induce autophagosome formation, which, reached a plateau after eighteen minutes. Now we don't know how much what's the threshold for autologie in fasting, but we do know that you can at least see the activation or the elevation of autologie significantly faster even in thirty minutes, with exercise, which doesn't mean that, you know, that one is better or worse. We just know that, elevation of autologie happens faster with exercise. Some of the maybe benefits of exercise can also have some additional, like, health benefits, of course, and vice versa. Fasting can also have some other health benefits that you don't get from exercise. I personally think that you should do both. But when it comes to, you know, for first the BDNF, then autophagy, then exercise, you know, outperforms. You can get to those benefits even within a few minutes of, exercising. And if you're not exercising regularly, then, yeah, you just you just have to, like, fast so much longer that I don't think that it's, you know, that productive. It's much more productive to exercise regularly and get those benefits more frequently as well. If you're exercising a few times a week, then you will have a higher baseline of autologie and BDNF all the time because you pretty much activate them every day almost. And finally, we can talk about senescent sales as well because there was another recent study, January 2023, that compared the effects of high intensity interval exercise and regular cardio for the clearance of, senescent cells, so these zombie cells that are actually one of the hallmarks of aging. And in this study, they defined that the high intensity exercise was able to help to clear the senescent cells, but low intensity cardio wasn't enough. And autophagy is also involved in the clearance of senescent cells. So, exercise increases autophagy and it also helps with the clearance of senescent cells. And you can do it much faster. If you do, like, a thirty minute exercise session or a HIIT session for even a few minutes, then you will first of all, you will activate autophagy, you will increase BDNF, and you'll also help to clear the senescent cells. Whereas we don't know precisely how long you need to fast to see those effects, especially in terms of clearing the senescent cells. So in conclusion, I think that both exercise and time restricted eating or, you know, fasting, both are one of the best things for your health and longevity in many ways because they help to maintain a good body composition. They help to activate these different longevity pathways. They help to improve your biomarkers, all of them. And, I think they're you should do both. Like, the studies do suggest that exercise is one of the, like, biggest predictors of longevity and one of the most powerful things that reduces your risk of mortality. But, fasting can also have some amazing health benefits, especially in terms of adhering to a calorie, restricted diet. But when it comes to the activation of these longevity pathways, then exercise clearly outperforms fasting and it outperforms calorie restriction as well because of the intensity of the stress. So exercise is a hermetic stress like fasting, but the amount of this positive stress you get from exercise is significantly greater than fasting because you need to fast for, you know, at least twenty or even forty eight hours or more to see, like, a very significant increase in a lot of these pathways. In humans, you know, the minimum that we know that you can get away with fasting is like sixteen hours to see an elevation of autologia. But with exercise, you can do that even within thirty minutes. If you want to slow down aging and live longer, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to infosimlan dot com, and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like and subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized, stay empowered.