If you eat butter then your health might be in danger. Hey, my name is Sim Land and today we're gonna talk about this news that showed how Kerrygold, the one of the most famous butters in the world, they're implicated in some class action because their foil packaging contains these plastics and the forever chemicals. So this is the news that I came across. Kerrygold, pure Irish butter contains forever chemicals, class action alleges. So 02/14/2023 Kerrygold butter faces a a proposed class action that alleges the pure Irish butter products foil packaging that it contains synthetic forever chemicals. And, if you don't know then yeah, like the packaging itself looks like this. It's this, looks like foil and, apparently this contains these, forever chemicals. The 35 page complaint says, kirigal butter sought after for its rich flavor and creamy texture attributed to grass fed cows is falsely advertised as pure Irish butter given that the sticks contain pure and polyfluoroalkyl substances, PFAS. And they're known as these fur chemicals because they're, you know, thought to accumulate in the body these different kinds of xenoestrogens and they stick around, they can cause different kinds of, you know, hormonal disruptions and health problems. Kerrygold butter was recently pulled from store shelves in New York and California due to the presence of PPAS in the butter's packaging, the lawsuit shares. Both states have rules prohibiting food packaging from containing PFAS and, yeah this, PFAS actually is something that many of even like mainstream and, you know, commercial, let's say retailers and authorities begin to realize that these things can be actually quite harmful to your health and they do stick around in your body for a long time. Stick around. However, fortunately, there are ways to actually detoxify these, forever chemicals as they're called. So So they're not really forever chemicals. They do have some negative effects on your health. They can cause hormonal disruption. And if you, yeah, like pretty much are exposed to them in very large quantities, especially direct exposure from these, factories that are producing these chemicals and plastics etcetera, then, yeah, your health is probably in a lot of danger. But if you're, like, half exposed to them from exposure to, like, these, you know, butter packaging, foil packaging or you touch a receipt, then, yeah, I mean they do contribute to your body's burden of these, forever chemicals and the eczemaestrogens. But they're, as I said, like they're not forever. You can definitely detoxify them and one of the main ways to actually detoxify them is through sweat. So sweating is the main like detoxification pathway in the body and you can eliminate pretty much, you know, all heavy metals, different kinds of plastics, chemicals and pesticides even from your sweat. There's also different kinds of binders and compounds that also bind to these chemicals and toxins. So chlorella, you can find it from algae. That's a very potent of many compounds including iron but it also binds to obviously these toxins and So definitely consuming some of these binders around the sauna session especially can be one of the, you know, most potent timing, most potent time to do so. Let's continue with the lawsuit. Insofar as PPA has made its way into defendant's products on purpose, it should have been listed on the product's label link. The complaint reads, in so far as it made its way into products by accident, it follows that it was due to poor manufacturing process by either defendant and or their agents. The law should say that diet is a major avenue for exposure to PFAS. So yeah, like this kind of PFAS, these forever chemicals are in all, pretty much all this food packaging including, coffee cups. They all contain also these kind of chemicals and, yeah, food packaging. All of it, pretty much all or most of the food, especially if you heat it up, is gonna contain forever chemicals. PPAs have been associated with myriad negative health effects including reproductive issues, developmental concerns in children at an increased risk of some cancers. Reasonable consumers would not have bought the product had they known it contained synthetic chemicals that could harm their health, Which I agree, you know most people don't really care or they're not aware even of the four hour chemical. So the average normie, like the average normal person probably would have still bought the same butter if they knew it. But let's say a more health conscious person, especially someone who watches this channel, probably would have avoided buying these kinds of products. Iriscentral.com reported in January that Kerrygold butter would soon be returning to US store shelves after the company made some changes to its packaging due to New York and California regulatory requirements that went into effect on 12/31/2022 and 01/01/2023. Now personally, I don't eat, pretty much any butter. I get all the other vitamins and minerals that you would get from butter from other sources. Like, I prefer to get the fats as well as the micronutrients from whole foods. But I know that many people who watch this channel do consume butter especially Kerrygold butter which is considered to be one of the healthiest butters because it's grass fed but turns out it's actually contains these forever chemicals. So in conclusion, yes most processed foods, pretty much all packaging, especially if you heat it up contains these, xenometriens and plastics and, forever chemicals but you can definitely eliminate them through sweat primarily. You can sweat in a sauna, you can sweat while exercising and you can also take some of these binders that can pretty much help to bolster your antioxidant defense as well as bind to some of these toxins. Do you want to slow down aging? If you do I'm looking for a few more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested then send me an email to info@seamlondon.com and I'll send you all the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized, stay empowered.