Taurine is a non essential amino acid that is most commonly used in sports drinks and energy drinks, but we have a brand new 2023 study showing how taurine might actually have some longevity benefits. So in this video, we're gonna take a look at the study and discuss whether or not taurine is something that you should add to your longevity stack. But do you want to slow down aging and live longer? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@simlahn.com and I'll send you the details. So the study is called taurine deficiency as a driver of aging and it got a lot of attention even in mainstream news like in Time magazine etcetera talking about this study and the complications of whether or not it can have some longevity benefits in humans as well. So basically, they found that, supplementing taurine in mice increased the median lifespan by ten to twelve percent and life expectancy at 28 increased by about eighteen to twenty five percent. Those that we have used in mice, it is a thousand milligram per kg body weight. And, when you translate or do the multiplication factor for the human equivalent dose would be six gram per kg sorry, six gram for a for a human. And half of that dose, that is three gram, was also effective in mice and other studies. And the authors of the study point out that, taurine has those effects mostly through affecting all of the hallmarks of aging or at least a lot of them. So taurine apparently has some senolytic properties that it inhibits senescent cells. It even protects against telomere shortening. It maintains genomic stability. It protects against loss of proteostasis or protein clearance like AdSavage. It maintains mon mitochondrial function and protects against stem cell exhaustion while at the same time promoting intracellular communication, nutrient sensing, and epigenetic changes. Whatever we checked, taurine supplemented mice were healthier and appeared younger than the control mice. They were leaner, had an increased energy expenditure, increased bone density, improved muscle strength, reduced depression like and anxious behaviors, improved memory, reduced insulin resistance, and had a younger looking immune system among other benefits. You do see that, with age, your taurine levels decrease. So in mice, monkeys, as well as humans, the taurine levels apparently decrease with age similar to like other kinds of metabolites like NAD or muscle mass or muscle strength or testosterone or whatever. So with age, naturally you see decrease in taurine as well. So taurine deficiency is associated with also poorer health like diabetes, obesity, liver disease, abdominal obesity, inflammation, hypertension, high glucose and a higher BMI. Now, although the results of this study are quite promising and of course very interesting, the problem is that it's a mouse study and we don't have any like human clinical trials connecting taurine with increased longevity or increased lifespan at least supplemental taurine. And of course, there are like a few clinical trials in humans showing that taurine might have some benefits for diabetes management and even in older women, taurine supplementation boosts their antioxidant events. But right now, we don't have enough human clinical trials to suggest that yes, taurine supplementation will definitely like increase longevity and increase life expectancy in humans. Wait a minute. But we do have another interesting lead connecting taurine with the greater life expectancy of the Japanese. So Japanese, have one of the highest life expectancies in the world and this 2009 study at least claimed that taurine might be one of the nutritional factors that, describes some of the longevity of the Japanese. So, why is that so? Like, where do these Japanese get taurine? They're obviously not supplementing taurine. I don't think that it's part of Japanese culture to take taurine supplements every day. Where do those Japanese get the taurine? Well, the Japanese get the taurine from seafood. You see, seafood is the highest nutritional sources of taurine and things like scallops, tuna and seaweeds are the highest food sources of taurine. Based on the mouse study that we just talked about, the required dose, the human equivalent dose to see those longevity benefits that you saw in the mice would be at least three to six grams of taurine per day. You get around eight hundred and twenty milligrams of taurine from a 100 grams of scallops. From tuna, you get nine hundred and sixty milligrams of taurine per 100 grams. And from seaweed like nori, you get thirteen hundred milligrams of taurine per hundred grams. So the Japanese are easily getting three to six grams of taurine per day from their diet. And they eat a lot of seafood and they eat a lot of seaweeds as well which is the highest source of taurine. When it comes to other protein sources like chicken or turkey then they're significantly lower in taurine than seafood. From turkey you get three hundred milligrams of taurine per 100 grams and a hundred and seventy milligrams of taurine per 100 grams of chicken. So unless you're eating a lot of seafood then chances are you're not really getting the three to six grams of taurine from your dietary sources. This raises the question whether or not you should add a taurine supplement into your routine. Well, I think that the longevity benefits of taurine probably are more significant the older you get and the worse your health is because, like based on the study as well, your taurine levels decline and with age when you're young, you do have plenty of taurine in your system already and don't like experience a lot of the chronic diseases yet. With age, you see the drop in taurine and that's where you see the increase of the chronic diseases. So taurine supplementation is probably more beneficial in the elderly and individuals who have poor metabolic health. One interesting thing is that exercise also increases your taurine levels so any kind of exercise will do so. So if you maintain a physically active lifestyle, then that obviously postpones aging and increases your longevity but, it also raises your taurine levels which is like a double whammy in terms of getting the benefits of exercise and taurine. So traditionally, taurine is actually used for boosting performance as well like in different kinds of sports drinks and energy drinks. You can have a taurine in it and that taurine has been shown to have benefits for endurance and heart function. So if you are interested in boosting your gym performance and endurance then taking taurine makes sense as well. Guys, it's a chopper. It's too early to say whether or not the taurine supplements has any human longevity benefits, but you certainly would want to make sure that you get around three grams of taurine per day from dietary sources or supplemental sources that, you eat the foods that have the highest amount of taurine and, if you need to supplement then, you would benefit from supplementing as well probably. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.