Alright. Another q and a. If you want to ask me a question, then make sure you follow me on Instagram at simlund, where I do those q and a's there regularly. The first question is, which supplement do you swear by? Well, I don't swear by about, like, any supplements. Obviously, I'm not gonna mention glycine right now because many people will just comment, hey, you're just talking about glycine again. I'm also not going to, let's say, I'm gonna give you, like, two categories or let's say, a few examples of some supplements that I, like, swear by in some sense. And based on, like, the research and obviously the the one supplement that I do think that, is, you know, definitely proven to have a lot of health benefits and, you know, proven to be, like, an actual longevity supplement, then based on the current, like, let's say, clinical trials, I would say it's a glynaq, so glycine and NEC. I'm not gonna go into, like, full details about the reason so. Like, you know, it's gonna be mostly because it has been shown to reverse hallmarks of aging in humans and improve, like, other functional outcomes. And, it, also, like, you know, targets one specific, you know, problem that goes wrong with aging, which is the increased toxic distress and inflammation because of decreased gluethon. But the issue is that, the glyniac supplementation probably works only in, like, the older people. So, you know, something like sixties, seventies, eighties is some is is the age where I would pretty much take GLINAC every day. And you see that after 45, you will see that a Googleathon levels are starting to decrease. So I don't see a real, you know, reason why you would, like, benefit massively from taking Glynak when you're younger than that. But, certainly, when you're, you know, seventies or eighties, it will be something that I would take pretty much every day. But I'm not going to swear by it, in this video because, yeah, it hasn't given me some sort of a transformational experience myself. Like, I haven't noticed a massive difference by taking glycine and AC. Like, I have noticed benefits from taking glycine alone, but not in AC because my gluethon levels are already, you know, pretty optimized and I'm healthy overall. I don't have oxidative stress or inflammation. So that's why I can't swear by it myself. I can't swear by it based on the research. What supplement I can swear by personally for my own personal use is gonna be somewhat controversial or interesting. It's gonna be I'll name, like, two of them, but number one is gonna be HMB. So this, is a byproduct of leucine and the amino acid. And, what the HMB usually in studies has been shown in the elderly people again is that it helps with sarcopenia and muscle, loss. So it helps to reduce muscle breakdown and reduces muscle loss in the elderly people. Now, again, I'm not an older person. I'm not experiencing any, like, sarcopenia or muscle loss, but I do have noticed that pretty consistently over the course of two years, two to three years since I've been taking HMB on and off, every time I take it, I noticed that, just I maintain slightly more lean muscle mass. I haven't done, like, a, like, a split test with it, like, I measure my DXA scan or something like that that precisely. But, just based on my own subjective experience that every time I am taking HMB, then I'm just a little bit stronger, a little bit more, let's say, muscular. When you look at the studies, then HIV doesn't work with muscle growth. So, it's not like a anabolic agent. But, at least in the elderly people, it does reduce muscle breakdown. So I think that what is happening in my experience is because that because I am doing very prolonged eating a bit of fasting every day. So I eat only, like, two protein meals a day. Like, one before working out, I'll have, like, a protein shake for some 30 or 40 grams protein, and then in the evening, I'll have dinner. So because my eating window is somewhat narrow and I only spike protein synthesis twice a day, having that a HMB in the morning in a fasted state reduces my muscle protein breakdown, and it makes me less catabolic. So it you know, I'm not sarcopenic by that definition, and I'm I don't know. I'm not skinny either. I have even plenty of muscle and, muscle tissue even if I'm not taking HMB. But it's just that what I noticed is that when I'm taking HMB, then I maintain it slightly more. Obviously, that's very subjective but, based on my own experience. And, it's not obviously that's why I said that based like, I can swear by the clinical trials, the glynac, but based on my own experience, I can swear by HMB that, yes, I noticed that it works at least when I'm taking it while fasted and at least when I'm doing this form of intermittent fasting that I'm doing right now. If I were to eat three or four meals a day, then probably this wouldn't work or I wouldn't notice any difference. But, in my own example right now, this apparently, like, works. This episode is brought to you by Boncharge, my favorite company for blue blocking glasses, red light therapy devices, and red light light bulbs. These items are essential for keeping your circadian rhythms aligned in a world that tries to mess them up. Instead of looking at your phone before bed and letting letting the blue light disrupt your melatonin production, why not wear blue blockers instead that prevent that from happening? Instead of having your bedroom lit up with bright lights, choose the more sleep friendly alternative by opting for flicker free red light light bulbs that don't disrupt your sleep. Bond Charge also has amazing infrared sauna blankets that can give you the same health benefits of the sauna. You also get the unique benefits of infrared light that improve joint and skin health. Head over to bondcharge.com/simlond and use the code sim, s I I m, for a 15% discount. The other example is also berberine. Now, berberine is like a herb that helps with blood sugar regulation. It helps with lipids, cholesterol, and those kind of things. It's obviously not as powerful as metformin for someone who has diabetes. I don't have diabetes. There's no reason for me to take metformin, but I do take berberine just for, like, improving blood sugar levels every once in a while because I do think it's better to avoid these massive spikes in blood sugar levels. And sometimes if you were to be eating, like, a larger meal or just a meal that has a bit more carbohydrates, then, the berberine can help to blunt that response. And berberine also has some other interesting properties that, is also like this AMPK activator, which, is got this this pathway or sensor that also activates autophagy. So I use it as a calorie restriction mimetic, first and foremost. I don't really, you know, have any blood sugar swings either. My blood sugar levels are very normal when I'm using the CGM, the continuous glucose monitor. But, with the berberine, I'm using it as a calorie restriction mimetic to drive or to activate more of the fasting pathways that, would otherwise be activated only if you're doing, like, extended fasting or if you're in a severe calorie deficit. So I use berberine to pretty much magnify those effects in as a, like, a longevity tool or hack. Now there's not a lot of, like, evidence about that strategy having any actual outcomes for longevity, but I can swear by it because when I'm taking berberine and, I've been trying that out for the last few months. When I'm taking berberine, then I noticed that it's actually somewhat easier to lose weight. Like, if I take, like, a larger dose of berberine, like, one gram of berberine for dinner and, trying to lose weight, then, the weight loss is actually quite fast. Like, or it's it's it's very powerful for weight loss as well, at least based on my own personal experience. And, using the CGM, the continuous glucose monitor, I also just see that taking the berberine keeps the blood sugar very stable even if I'm eating a very high carb meal, if that makes sense. So these, because the berberine isn't like an actual pharmaceutical. It's a herb that just has these, anti glycated and anti blood sugar or anti diabetic kind of effects that it lowers the blood sugar levels and obviously has benefits for the lipids as well. There was some recent study that berberine will hit was helpful for atherosclerosis and reading the plaque in the arteries. That's a it's just one study as of now and it has had some flaws as well in that study. But, yeah, just berberine as a herb has pretty long track record of medicinal properties. And based on my own experience, it helps with blood sugar levels and weight loss as well without actually jeopardizing muscle growth or muscle mass, if if that makes sense. So these are the kind of supplements that I personally swear by. From my own personal experience, HMB and berberine and from the clinical trials, then Gwinac appears to be yeah. It really works. It appears to be one of those supplements, at least in the elderly people. Next question is somewhat relevant. What's the best way to control glucose spike when eating carbs? So first of all, it's normal for your blood sugar levels to rise after eating, like, you know, it pretty much happens to everyone unless you're eating literally like a zero carb diet or if you're, somehow taking large amounts of, let's say, fiber or large amounts of fat that will blunt the response. But in most cases, most people will see somewhat of a small rise in blood sugar levels that's perfectly normal. What's the problem is that if the blood sugar level stays elevated for too long, so the blood sugar rises after eating and it stays elevated for, you know, six, eight, seven, eight hours. That's, what happens in diabetes. Your body isn't producing insulin to lower the blood sugar levels and that's why the blood sugar level stays elevated for a lot longer. For normal people who produce insulin, who aren't diabetic, then, they will, be able to lower the blood sugar response. But I I still think that it's, you know, somewhat healthier to not have, like, a massive spike. Like, if your blood sugar levels go above a 160, a 180 milligrams per deciliter after eating, then you probably just ate some sort of junk carbs or some simple sugars that spike the blood sugar that high. If you're eating, like, a whole food carbs, potatoes, buckwheat, rice, quinoa, even fruit, then the blood sugar level shouldn't really spike above a 140 milligrams per deciliter. So, you know, it depends on the type of foods you're eating. But let's say in this scenario, you're eating junk carbs, you're eating birthday cake, it's Christmas, whatever, you're eating some sort of, junk food carbs that spike your blood sugar very high, you want to first minimize the the, the the ceiling. You don't want it to go that high and you also want to make sure that it it doesn't stay elevated for that long. So what do you do? Number one, exercise. If you exercise before eating any food, you become super insulin sensitive because, these muscle contractions activate these glucose disposal, let's say, transporters like GLUT4 that pretty much help to shuttle the glucose into the muscle cells a lot faster. And the the GLUT4 works without insulin, so even if you're diabetic, you're able to lower your blood sugar response significantly by exercising before eating. And if you're not diabetic, then the better it is because then you'll be able to shuttle the glucose into the muscle cells that much faster and much more efficiently as well. And, there's the other part of it that is also that if you deplete your muscle glycogen, then there's gonna be a massive sink for the carbohydrates to go. And if your muscle glycogen is already full, you're sedentary, you haven't exercised, then the the more likely it is that it's gonna be over spilled or it can stay elevated for that long because the muscle glycogen is already full. But if you exercise specifically resistance training, so you deplete muscle glycogen, then it's gonna be like a sink, like, almost like a butt on the sink. You can store up to 400 grams of glucose as glycogen in muscle, so you can pretty much, yeah, you know, have, like, a massive advantage in terms of your glucose disposal if you exercise before. Of course, it's very hard to fully deplete your muscle glycogen. It's almost impossible. You would have to do, like, some sort of a marathon or something or, just have, like, a several hours of weightlifting to deplete the muscle glycogen fully. So it's very, difficult to achieve in the first place. But even if you just deplete your muscle glycogen by a 100 to 200 grams, then that's already like more than enough in a lot of ways. Second of all, if you also have lower liver glycogen which does deplete with exercise but if you eat low carb before eating the carbohydrates then your liver glycogen stores are gonna be somewhat lower and that also provides like a smaller buffer. Liver glycogen is significantly smaller than muscle glycogen, so there's like a 100 to 150 grams of glycogen in the liver. So, it's easier to overspill, but it's again like another ability to store the glucose more easily. Or not store, but, you know, yeah, store as glycogen and not store as fat or to overspill. When it comes to actual, let's see, meal strategies, then, of course, eating protein and fiber before eating the carbohydrates also has has been shown to result in a lower blood sugar response or the postprandial glucose response after the meal. So you eat fiber and some proteins before you eat the actual carbohydrates. So start with the vegetables and protein sources and then move on with the carbohydrates. And, you know, that's why they kinda don't eat dessert first because if you eat dessert, before the actual fibers and stuff like that, then you're gonna have a very large glucose spike. So if you ever, you know, drink juice or a smoothie or something that has a lot of sugar on an empty stomach while fasted, then your blood sugar levels are gonna rise super high and, it's also gonna come come crashing down quite rapidly. So you don't wanna be taking in large amounts of sugar and carbohydrates, especially simple carbohydrates, on an empty stomach. You wanna pretty much introduce the fiber and protein first. Apple cider vinegar is another very common and easy, let's say, food additive that you can use to lower the blood sugar response. And, especially when it comes to simple carbs, it's been shown that the apple cider vinegar on top of the meal, pretty much lowers the blood sugar response up to, like, 40 to 50%. So that's a very good, you know, simple addition to any meal. You can either, yeah, mix it in some water, drink it like a shot, or put it over the vegetables or salad, whichever whichever you choose. I prefer to just use it as a salad dressing. And olive oil in the salad dressing also has been shown to lower the blood sugar response because it's because of the fats and, it also helps to lower the lipid response, the postprandial, lipidemia. So that's like a very simple addition to any meal. What you do after the meal is also quite relevant. Of of course, you can also take like berberine before the before the meal. That's gonna lower the blood sugar response. You can take chromium. You can take vanadium, cinnamon. So there's many of these glucose disposal agents that can work. Berberine is probably the most effective one out of over the counter supplements and chromium is the second best in my opinion because chromium, it enhances insulin action. So it it pretty much enables more glucose to be shuttled into the shell in into the cell, together with, insulin. And what you do after the meal is also quite important because if you sit on a couch and you do you do not you you do nothing, then, you're pretty much guaranteed to have this, like, the slower elevation of the blood sugar after eating. So what you wanna do is just go for a short walk, ten to fifteen minute walk that can it can pretty much bring your blood sugar levels back to normal within, yeah, a fifteen minute walk. So, it because it just helps to, again, shuttle the glucose into the cells, but also lowers the blood sugar. Like, when you burn some of the blood sugar in the bloodstream for energy, so it's another simple simple strategy that you can, use. You don't wanna do, like, heavy exercise because that, you know, can lead to some digestion issues, but just a simple fifteen minute walk after eating is, quite quite beneficial. Next question, is it okay to put n a c into hot coffee like lysine? That's an interesting question because if you've ever tasted n a c powder, then it's disgusting. It's very sour. It's not, you know, it's not sweet like lysine. It doesn't have any, like, taste, or, like, any good taste to it, so I don't know why you would want to put NAC powder into your coffee. Maybe you have some sort of other NAC, but all the NACs that I've tried, the powder ones, they taste like sour and not really, good. Could you do it? Yes. You technically could, but, you know, I would be always very careful with consuming any supplement around coffee or with coffee because, you know, coffee tends to bind to minerals. It can make you excrete some, minerals as well and some other nutrients. So I don't I would I would not say that taking supplements with coffee is the most optimal way to absorb them because you're probably, like, excreting some of them due to the caffeine and the the the coffee. So I would be much safer to take the supplements away from coffee. You know, you could still put glycine into the coffee because of the sweet taste. And, if you're taking glycine multiple times a day, then it doesn't really matter. And, if you're taking sufficient amounts of glycine, then, you know, it doesn't matter if you lose some of the glycine. But at least the glycine tastes sweet, whereas n a c is definitely not very, sweet. It's actually very sour. Next question. How did you increase your VO two max? I will do a separate video about this, but if you, heard about it before then I did a VO two max test. Like, four to five months ago. It got a result of 53 milliliters per kilogram per minute, which is, very good. It's in the highest, let's say, or the lowest risk for mortality category. But, now a few weeks ago, I did, another year two max test, like, other result of sixty six milliliters per kilogram per minute, which is a massive improvement. Now the biggest reason for that is because I didn't do a lot that much cardio optimize my routine for cardio gains and VO2 max gains, at that point. So my body was very sensitive to the new stimulus. So whenever you are doing any kind of a new exercise or a new type of exercise, the first few weeks are gonna give you a lot of improvements and then and then the more advanced you get, the slower the progress is. So, you know, when you go to the gym for the first time in your life, you're gonna see massive gains in the first few months. But if if you've been lifting for ten years, like I am right now, then the then the improvements are gonna be, like, you know, 0.5% per month or 0.5% per, year. It depends on your level of, of your, like, prestige with the gym. So, you know, the more advanced you are, then the harder it is. But because I didn't do that much cardio and VO2 max training before the first test, then my body was just, okay. This is new adaptation, and we have, like, a a lot of room for improvement, if that makes sense. The second reason how or the the second reason I did improve it that much was that I did a lot of cardio. So for the last three to four months, I was doing, you know, pretty much three zone two cardio sessions per week, forty five to fifty five minutes each session, and one hit cardio session per week. So which involved included four minutes of high intensity, like, max out effort followed by four minutes of rest between zone one and zone two, and then another sprint repeated for four times. So in total, that was gonna be, like, around thirty two minute workout with warm up and cool down included. So, that's, the only, like, high intensity interval workout I did, but I did once a week. And the other times, I did zone two, three three times per week. So, yeah, that's the biggest the most effective way to increase your VO2 max is to do more cardio, all types of cardio, whether that be zone two or the interval training as well. And I do think that it's better to do either zone two or just the max out intervals. Like somewhere in the middle like zone three or zone four where you're running somewhat fast but you're not really max out sprinting and you're not really running that slow that you could breathe through the nose, then you're somewhere in the middle and you're not really training the VO2 max specifically. The reason you wanna do zone two is because it lays the ground ground, groundwork or the basement foundation to your car, there is between fitness and your aerobic capacity. So your slow twitch muscle fibers are trained with zone two. And, having a lot of zone two, having a lot of slow twitch muscle fibers pretty much builds a good foundation and, like a baseline to increase your VO two max. And then, yes, the interval training is the one that actually pushes the ceiling above for your VO two max. But if you don't have a good foundation, if you have poor zone two, then, yeah, you know, you need to do both pretty much. And the more you do, then the higher the VO two max generally is gonna be. You know, if you do, like, hours and hours of cardio every week, then there's no way your VO two max isn't gonna increase, if that makes sense. Next question, which country is your next retreat being hosted at? It's, still gonna be the same, India. I'm gonna be at the same clinic, Iowa, in Chennai, India, and it's gonna be a seven day program. You get comprehensive overview of your health and your body. We do a 180 biomarkers. You can do, like, a VO2 max test, DEXA scan to look at your bone density, muscle mass, body fat, full body MRI if you want. We have ultrasound, echocardiogram, CT scan, whatever kind of tests, medical grade tests, that you want even like, facial skin analysis, hydro facial treatments, you know, a lot of different kinds of spa therapies, massage therapies, dental work, eye health, like pretty much you can do any kind of test that you want at the Ivo Clinic and they have, you know, a 130 medical professionals working there and there's a seven, eight retreat being held at, the, five star hotel, Dalela Palace in Chennai. So, yeah, that's the one I'm gonna be doing in next year and probably the years after that as well. So I'm, like, a long term partner with the clinic and, you know, it's very, like, it's very in terms of the price to benefit ratio, it's massive. Like, the things you get for the price are just, you know, it's it's like the best experience ever in terms of, like, a biohacking retreat. Like, you know, usually the regular retreats, they don't offer anything like that. They might have lectures. They might have some workshops. They might have some workout plans and stuff like that. But, you know, this retreat is unique in the sense that you actually do all the tests and you get the results and you get consultations from the doctors based on your results. And, they can help you to put together your action plan, supplementation, foods, workout plan, etcetera, things like that. So if you are interested, yeah, in joining me on my next retreat, then head over to iowa.com/pageshealthoccasion or you can also check the link in the description for more information about this. Alright. Next question. Best workout routine before I go into military service? So this is something that I can just say from my own experience. I went to the military when I was 18 and, before that I did train a lot because, yeah, I wanted to get fit for that and I wanted to, like, get the max scores in the, NATO prepare physical preparedness test as well. So, I didn't get the max points for that, but I did get max points for push ups and sit ups and I missed I got like ninety ninety points, so like 10 points short from the run, two mile run. So I did excellent. I did it like very good for the test. I didn't get the max points at that point, but funny enough, last year, there was the reserve, event. So, like, I went back to the army for two weeks last year and, then I did get the max points. So I have, you know, improved over the last ten years since I was in the military. I have, you know, know, got the max points for the NATO physical preparedness test. But, regardless, what did I do? So the first time I went, I did a lot of calisthenics. You know, in the in the military, you don't need to be bulky. You don't you don't actually wanna be bulky. You don't wanna be massive, like a super massive meat muscle. You wanna be somewhat of a leaner and be have a lot of endurance. Like endurance is a lot more important in the military rather than pure muscle strength. You do want to be strong enough, but you don't wanna be maximizing your strength. Like the biggest power lifters and strong men, they're not gonna do that well in in the military training. So you wanna be somewhat of like a, you know, either like a CrossFit CrossFit type of training or calisthenics. So a lot of push ups, pull ups, sit ups, and running. So a lot of running as well and, both extreme long endurance running as well as some sort of like a shorter, you know, five to seven kilometer run, something like that. So you wanna do a lot of different types of endurance work plus a ton of calisthenics. And what I did when I was preparing for the first time of going to the military So in the morning, when I woke up, I think yeah. I I I ate, like, breakfast, but, like, two hours after breakfast, I did a calisthenics workout. So I did pull ups and push ups pretty much to failure every time. Because with calisthenics, you can go to failure and recover from it quite fast. It's not as intense as going to failure with, like, weightlifting, for example. So I did went to failure with push ups and pull ups, then, I rested. I had, like, lunch and stuff like that. In the afternoon, I did some sit ups also to failure pretty much for a few sets and then went for a run. I did, like, a two mile run every day. On some days, I went for a bit longer, five to 10 kilometers, but a two mile, which is, like, 3.2 kilometers at minimum. And, then on the next day, I repeated it. So pretty much the same workout every day. Like, in the morning, a lot of push ups and pull ups. In the afternoon, a run. In the military, what they do is that at least when you're in the barracks, they will do the morning gymnastics, which is just you go outside with everyone and then you do like a workout with push ups and, sit ups and those kind of things. Some on some days you do the run but they kind of rotate between one day is calisthenics, the other day is the run. But you wanna do again, like both of them. When you're out in actual field, like in the forest and stuff like that, when you're training, then at that time you don't need to do a lot of like calisthenics. It's mostly gonna be rocking. So having like a weighted back that's gonna weigh some something between 20 to 40 kilos. So it can vary depending on the situation and how many stuff you have with you. But it's gonna be a pretty heavy backpack and you need to like, yeah, learn how to carry that for, you know, some at some times it's gonna be 30 to 40 kilometers and you have to just get used to carrying a super heavy bag for a long time, you know, pretty much the entire day. So, you know, you know, for training for that, you could use, like, a weighted vest at home as well. I recently got a weighted vest, which is very nice, 30 kilo weight weighted vest. I went for walks with it. It's actually very good if, you can't do actual cardio because it's, like, snowy or whatever the other reason it is or if you don't want to put too much pressure on the joints, then the weighted vest can be very good for getting some cardiovascular benefits but also just, you know, burning extra calories because the, the the vest is heavier than you would normally be be walking with. So if you're walking with a vest, then you're gonna burn more calories than compared to just, walking without any weights, if that makes sense. So, yeah, do a lot of calisthenics, a lot of endurance, and, like some sort of a weighted walking with either a vest or a heavy backpack. These are pretty much the only things you really need in the military in terms of, like, a fitness side. Next question. Thoughts on olive oil? Well, generally, I think that olive oil is, in my opinion, the healthiest oil in the world. It's been shown to have benefits for the heart, benefits for the brain, benefits for blood sugar, inflammation and, like, blood pressure as well. So it's yeah. If you have good quality olive oil, then it's can be it can be one of the healthiest things that you ever consume. So the problem is that most commercial oil oils, they tend to be mixed with canola oils or some other cheaper oils which isn't that good for you or the the olive oil itself could be rancid or oxidized because it's been sitting on the shelf for months upon end or it's been exposed to some sort of sunlight or oxygen or whatever else during transportation, for example. So if you have good quality olive oil, then, it can be one of the healthiest things for you. You know, to determine to determine, like, if it is good quality olive oil, then number one, you can check the bottle for, okay, what are the ingredients? If it's if it's not mixed with any other oil, then that's good. If it is mixed, then it will probably say it and, yes, it's not gonna be a good option. You you need to choose a one that has only the olive oil. And extra virgin olive oil is generally better and has higher polyphenols and more stable or less likely to be oxidized. Dark bottle is also important. So the dark green or black bottle is gonna be just preventing it from oxidation from sunlight and just light in general. The the next thing is gonna be the date of production. You wanna getting you wanna be getting the olive oil that is as fresh as possible. So, you know, anything that is older than six months is probably not gonna be the most ideal option because it has due to the age of the oil, it has already gone rancid to a certain extent. So as fresh as possible and, not, you know, been sitting on the shelf for for months upon end. You could also be like if you wanna really dig deep into, okay, is this oil good? You can check the brand. Where did they source their stuff from? They probably have a website and, quality tests on their website, for example. You can check those out as well. But the one actually very useful tip and very safe alternative to olive oil is also just eating olives, regular olives. So the green olives, you know, is the same fruit as in the oil. So obviously, you're not getting as concentrated amount of the oil, but you're still getting some of the polyphenols and some of the other healthy fats from the olives itself. The problem is that you probably have to eat like a lot of olives to get the same effect as from olive oil. But as a safer alternative, regular green olives are also very good option. You don't really or I wouldn't recommend eating the black olives or any other colored olives because their food dyes and the black olives are just, they have food coloring. So I wouldn't, like, recommend choosing those ones. But the regular green olives, they're they're pretty good. Alright. That's it for this video. If you want to ask me a question in the future, then make sure you click the like and subscribe and follow me on Instagram at ciemland where I do those q and a's there regularly. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. My name's ciem. Stay optimized, stay empowered.