Fasting is considered to be very beneficial for longevity, and many people actually think that it's going to extend your lifespan. In fact, they think that it's the most powerful thing to do if you want to live longer. Well, in this video, I'm gonna talk about this new particular study done by doctor Sachin Panda about how fasting and time restricted eating can be beneficial for extending lifespan. Do it. So, yeah, the highlights of the study is that 80% of genes are differentially expressed or rhythmic under time restricted feeding in at least one tissue. Time restricted feeding decreases genes involved in inflammatory signaling and glycerolipid metabolism. Time restricted feeding increases genes involved in RNA processing, protein folding, and autophagy. And lastly, time restricted feeding causes multi tissue rewiring of BCA, glucose, and lipid metabolism. So it basically is a mouse study where they had, two groups of mice. One of them was, like, on a they both of them say ate the same amount of calories. It's just one ate in a certain time frame, which is the active phase of the, mice. For them, it's nighttime. And, the other group pretty much ate around the clock or they didn't have any restrictions. What they did find the is that the time restricted feeding profoundly impacted gene expression, so it affected these inflammatory autophagy and other, like, lipid metabolism genes. And nearly 80% of all genes, they show a differential expression of rhythmicity under time restricted feeding in at least one tissue. So all of these, you know, let's say, genes and processes that, that you mentioned have some aspects of circadian rhythm and they, yeah, fluctuate throughout the day based on the circadian rhythm. And feeding at the right time for the active phase of these mice pretty much enhances the expression of these longevity genes and downregulates, like, inflammatory genes, downregulates, you know, lipid genes and those kind of things. You can also see the graphical abstract of the study. Pretty much, the coordination of the tissue improved or the, like, coordination between organs and different tissues of the body was with a bigger amplitude and rhythmicity, which is actually very important even, like, you can see that also in, like, human aging. So with age, humans, they have less fluctuations in their circadian, diurnal rhythms. So they produce less melatonin at night, they produce less cortisol in the morning, and, they down regulate nutrient sensing, which are all linked to the circadian rhythms and, like, these big fluctuations in these rhythms. So eating all the time causes the circadian disruption that can increase inflammation, increases oxidative stress, and, prevents the activation of autophagy, limits autophagy or, like, mitochondrial functions, and also flattens out the amplitude between the circadian rhythms that pretty much, yeah, keeps the body in a, let's say, state of dysfunction and chronic low grade inflammation. Whereas if you do time restricted eating, do you, kind of amplitude or do you you enhance this, amplitude, you have bigger swings at the right time. Like, you have a bigger swing than cortisol in the morning, you have bigger swing of melatonin at night, which then maintains the circadian alignment. And as a result, also downregulates inflammation, downregulates oxidative stress, enhances otology, enhances cell cycle regulation, much condyle function. So, yeah, like, your body works better and more optimally if you maintain the circadian rhythm alignment. And, the feeding aspect is probably, you know, yeah, light is the biggest regulator of circadian rhythms, but feeding and eating at the right time is, it could be actually even more impactful from, like, a gene expression side. Sachin Panda has actually also recently published a human study, so, you know, we don't want to just look at my studies. But, in October 2022, so, like, a few months ago, they actually also released a study on shift workers. So twenty four hour shift workers, and they assessed the time machine eating in those. So ten hour time machine eating is feasible for shift workers on a twenty four hour schedule. Time restricted eating improved the very low density lipoprotein size and quality of life measures. Time restricted eating decreased hemoglobin a one c and blood pressure for participants with cardiometabolic risk, and a consistent ten hour reading window where you fast like fourteen hours had no adverse effects. Nice. Now when it comes to weight loss and just improving metabolic health, then, yes. There it can be also achieved with just some aspects of calorie restriction. And there are, you know, a few studies that do compare the effects of intermittent fasting and calorie restriction and they don't find, like, any, like, very big significant differences. And I absolutely do think that you wouldn't see, like, these health effects if you ate, like, excess amounts of calories even when you are doing, you know, timesheet eating. Maybe you can maintain the same effects without, like, severe calorie restriction. You can maybe restrict your calories a bit less if you do intermittent fasting. But, yeah, you do still need to maintain some aspects of, like, at least calorie moderation and, like, a small deficit. And intermittent fasting and times you eat eating is a great way to just achieve that. If you have a smaller time frame, then you will achieve the calorie restriction much more easily, which, is still like pretty much the main mechanism and the main reason why these diets and eating patterns have a longevity effect. However, there is actually one very interesting study that compared calorie restriction and this time treated eating in mice and how it affected their longevity, May in 2022. And, they pretty much, you know, had the mice in a calorie restriction and, they found that a 30% calorie restriction was sufficient to extend the lifespan by 10% in these mice. However, a daily fasting interval and circadian alignment of feeding acted together to extend lifespan by 35% in male mice. So they pretty much show that, you know, the mice were on calorie restriction. They lived 10%, like, longer under 30% calorie restriction. But if they combined this calorie restriction with the circadian rhythm alignment, they also, you know, lived up to 35% longer. So that's, you know, you know, three times longer than the just regular calorie restriction without the circadian alignment and without the intermittent fasting. So all the benefits of intermittent fasting still have to act together with the circadian rhythms. If you're doing timesheet eating but your circadian rhythms are misaligned, you have shift work, you're you're like you're eating at night and, you eat too late, then you're probably missing out on a lot of the benefits or, you know, you're not getting the full benefits of doing time restricted eating. So, yeah, humans are, you know, diurnal creatures. We're not mice. For mice, the active phase is at night. So they need to eat at night. That's the healthiest way for them to do and they sleep at daytime. For humans, it's the opposite. We need to eat at the daytime and sleep at night and also eat, you know, during the daytime when it's the light, not when it's dark outside. And when it comes to the, you know, longevity benefits you see from time restricted feeding, a lot of it is also regulated, yeah, by these other circadian hormones and process that happen alongside the circadian rhythm alignment. So autophagy has a circadian rhythm and, yeah, it actually mediates a lot of these longevity effects that you see from times you're eating, which again means that, yeah, you shouldn't pretty much eat too late because a lot of the process of autophagy happens in the evening when you're sleeping and in the early morning. So you shouldn't eat, like, immediately after waking up and you shouldn't eat immediately before bed as well. What I like to think is that, yeah, you wait, like, you know, at least three hours or so after waking up before eating and, you have to stop eating optimally, like, four to five hours before bed. If you are interested in starting intermittent fasting and time restricted eating with the right methods, then check out my intermittent fasting video course. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click like, subscribe, notification bell as well as my name is Siim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.