Hey. So I decided to do something new this time. Instead of having a regular q and a, I decided to do the q and a while I'm working out. So I'll just work out and add some commentary to what I'm doing and answer some questions in the meanwhile. The first question is, what am I doing in India? So, yes, I am in India, Chennai right now doing a retreat with, some other people who join me here. And, it's a seven day biohacking retreat where we do different kinds of tests, a 180 biomarkers, v o two max tests, DEXA scan, calcium scan, MRI. You can, yeah, do a lot of different kinds of tests to see, okay, what is my current state of health and this is what I've been doing for the last few days. It's one of my last days here. And, you can check out a future video about more in the in detail about what I did here and, how you can join in the future as well. But before I answer the next question, I'll just start and doing some lifting as well. Usually, when I am, doing resistance training, then my main goal primarily or primarily right now is to do strength based movements and that this is going to just help me, you know, to maintain muscle tissue, muscle strength, and bone density. I did the DXA scan. My bone density is, like, super high. My muscle mass is also very high, and my main goal for body composition and training is strength. So I'm kind of doing, like, a more power lifting style of training. And when I am doing resistance training, then I'm focusing mostly on these compound movements, like bench press, squats, dead lift. Those are the biggest, most effective ways to increase muscle strength. And in this gym, you know, it's a hotel gym, but it's a very nice hotel gym. It's much better than average hotel gyms. We don't have a, like, a regular bench press here, but we have this this, Smith machine. But I'm gonna just still use it to do a bench workout. So the first set of the workout is just warm up. I'm just putting here so the bar is slightly lighter than the 20 kilo bar Olympic bar. So it's maybe like 10 kilos. So on this both sides, we have 50 kilos in total right now. So this is just a regular warm up. I'm gonna do a few, like, you know, 10 reps or something to just warm up lightly. There is more warming up the muscles. And the way I structure my workouts is to do reverse pyramid training. So I do very little sets up until my working set. So, like, the warm up sets are very few reps just to not exhaust the muscle. And then when I'm reaching the top working weight, which I guess today, I'll try to get, like, a hundred and thirty kilos and, yeah, I'll just progressively increase the weights loaded. Before we add some weight, let's answer some questions. The, first question is how many weekly sets do you do per body part? So per per body part, let's say legs or chest or shoulders or back. I usually do one workout per muscle group per week. So I do, like, chest once a week, legs once a week, back once a week. And how many sets do I do per body part? It's gonna be, like, five to six sets, per body part. So, like, today when I'm doing the bench press, then I'll have five working sets and the reps are gonna be around three to six reps. For me, I like to do, like, lighter reps and, heavier loads. But sometimes I'll just do, like, eight reps as well. Let's add a bit of weight. So these are 20 kilo plates again. It's gonna increase the weight of the bar to 90 kilos if I'm not mistaken. And, yeah, we're gonna just do a few few reps again. Okay. So that was four reps. Before adding the next 20 kilos, I'll just add some lighter weight for now, 10 kilos. So that's gonna be a 110 kilos in total. Underbar. Next question. Next question, benefits of carb cycling. So I think carb cycling as a baseline default is very useful for making it easy to lose weight and also improving blood sugar levels and other biomarkers. So the way I do it is that my default food is gonna be, like, vegetables, some and some protein. But, based on my physical activity, I'll increase the carbohydrate intake. So today, after my workout, I'll probably have some more higher carbohydrates like potatoes, rice, or fruits, and stuff like that. And on the other days, when I haven't worked out, then I'll try to reduce the carbohydrate intake and I'll stick most into vegetables and, proteins. I think that's, you know, especially for the a person who isn't super physically active, then the carb cycling makes more sense. Whereas if you're already, like, athletic and very lean and healthy, then, you know, you have less to gain from carbohydrate cycling, but it can still be useful strategy to, like, lose weight and make it easy to maintain lean body composition. Okay. Another set. These are these are all still, like, warm up sets. I'm just warming up to the working weight, and my goal isn't to, like, exhaust the muscle here. The goal is to just warm up and get used to some of the lighter or heavier weights. Okay. So this was a hundred and ten kilos. How do you keep your CRP so low? So CRP, c reactive protein is usually used to assess inflammation status and high sensitivity CRP. If it's high, then that is associated with many chronic diseases as well as increased risk of mortality. So with CRP, the lower the better. And in different studies, they see that the lower the CRP, the lower the risk of mortality. So you wanna keep your CRP pretty much close to zero and as low as possible. The problem with a lot of the labs is that they don't go specific enough. So sometimes they'll cut off their CRP at 0.5. So they'll say 0.5 or less than 0.5, which, you know, might mean that your CRP can actually be lower. So it's just the test doesn't go specific enough. And some of them are 0.3, some of them are 0.1. So if it's 0.1, then it starts, you know, pretty much close to zero. And you wanna find a lab that measures the CRP as sensitively as possible. So, like, you know, trying to get as close to zero as you can. But if your CRP is, you know, 1.5, then it doesn't matter the specific specificity of the test that much, because your CRP is already above what the test detects. So how do you lower that? You know, it mostly comes down to some of the basics and fundamentals, regular exercise, good sleep, anti inflammatory diet that isn't high in ultra processed foods and high amounts of sugar and high amounts of, fats. That is quite quite important, but what matters more most, I think, is just maintaining a good body composition. So if you're lean, you don't have a lot of body fat, then your CRP and inflammation levels are gonna be also lower. So excess adiposity, especially visceral adiposity, the fat around the organs is, like, constantly secreting these pro inflammatory cytokines into your bloodstream that can cause immune problems, cause metabolic problems, cause insulin resistance, and cause other, you know, health ailments. So maintaining a leaner body composition with less visceral fat specifically is, important. And but even, like, general, the subcutaneous fat around the skin, that is also still going to be more pro inflammatory than anti inflammatory. And muscle tissue with, you know, over the past few years, we've, discovered that muscle tissue is more like an organ and does have immunomodulatory effects as well. So muscle tissue releases these anti inflammatory myokines, whereas adipose tissue releases these pro inflammatory cytokines. So less fat, more muscle is key. Exercise regularly, make sure you don't sleep deprive yourself, getting enough of, like, sunlight exposure, maintaining good vitamin d levels, maintaining other biomarkers as well, making sure you don't have nutrient deficiencies. So some of the nutrient deficiencies could also raise your CRP. So for example, if you're not getting enough methyl donors, b vitamins, as well as trimethoglycine, then, your inflammation, especially homocysteine, which is another inflammatory marker that can also raise. So, yeah, I guess that's the answer. Like, you know, besides there's no, like, specific supplement that could lower your CRP directly aside from maybe supporting methylation or, you know, there is some evidence that curcumin could also have, like, mild anti inflammatory effects but not it's not going to be, like, the game changer. Like, the biggest game changer is gonna be the body composition and, like, a cleaner diet, making sure that the diet isn't, very ultra processed, if that makes sense. Okay. So this is the first I don't know. I haven't lifted this weight in a long time. So let's see how many reps can I even get? Maybe, like, one or two. But if we're if we're gonna do good, then we might get even a little bit more. But let's see. I've been I've been dieting a lot recently, so my strength isn't as high as before. Okay. We got two reps. That's good. So, yeah, like, not as strong as I used to be because of the calorie restriction. So we're gonna reduce some of the weight to get more reps and make it more effective for the stimulus. Like, I could do two reps with a 130 kilos all the time, but then I would have to do, like, eight sets or something. So I don't have that much time. So instead, I'm gonna lighter the load, do more reps per set. So I'm gonna aim for, like, five reps with a 110 kilos, and that's going to still be more time efficient to get the same muscle growth signal. Next question, can whey protein be inflammatory? So whey protein is, I think, the most bioavailable form of protein and is certainly the most effective for absorption. It has, like, all the amino acids, essential amino acids. Is it inflammatory? Well, it depends on your immune system and your allergies. So if you are allergic to dairy specifically, then yes, it can, you know, cause some inflammation for some people. Dairy is also some of those foods that if you have acne or if you have skin problems or you're predisposed to getting acne, then dairy can be one of those big triggers for getting acne. But whey protein in healthy individuals generally is actually not inflammatory. It's specifically even like whey protein has these, immunoglobulins. So these are these very, let's say, beneficial molecules for the immune system that help to regulate the immune system, and, it actually raises those immunoglobulins. So Whey protein itself isn't anti inflammatory. For some people who are sensitive to dairy or allergic to dairy, then, yes, then it can be inflammatory. Alright. Now that's it. Let's then try to get more reps in with a hundred and ten kilos, I guess. Might be a 115 even. I don't know. I don't know how much the bar weighs. Okay. We even got six. That's great. I always want to leave, like, one or two reps in the tank. So I might have gotten another one if I went for it, but I don't think it's worthwhile to go to like complete failure all the time. Just leaving like one last rep in the tank before you fail, I think is good enough. Your body will still adapt even if you, you know, go to, like, 80%. You don't need to go to a 100%. Next question, if calorie restriction is the key for longevity, how to not lose too much weight? That's a good question. So I've often talked on the channel that animal studies, calorie restriction extends lifespan. The, like, evidence for humans is obviously much more limited. We don't have lifespan studies in humans, especially with something so complicated as calorie restriction and food intake. What we do know from some, human trials is that calorie restriction is very effective for improving risk factors for many chronic diseases like heart disease and diabetes and obesity. So if calorie restriction is, you know, helping you to maintain good body composition, preventing you from becoming too overweight and preventing you from from having, like, poor biomarkers, then it does have, obviously, like, a beneficial effects for longevity. So how much, you know, calorie restriction do you need? I don't think based on the current evidence, you don't need to be in a specific calorie intake for longevity. What matters more is are you in good body composition and how are your biomarkers? So if you're overweight and you have some poor biomarkers, then it's obviously, you know, you need to lose some of the weight. And, the only way to do that is to be in a calorie deficit, whether by increasing exercise or eating less, calories. So just the calorie restriction by virtue of making you lose weight is going to improve your longevity. If you're already lean and muscular and physically active, then how much calories you should eat, you know, it, comes down to, okay, what are the calories that maintain your current body composition? So you wanna just eat that many calories that maintain your current, let's say, body composition and, prevent you from becoming too overweight. And you don't obviously wanna be too calorie restricted because if you are, in calorie restriction for the rest of your life, then inevitably you will become frail. So you don't wanna be in too low calorie intake, either. So it comes down to just adjusting your calorie intake based on, okay, are you overweight, and do you need to improve some biomarkers? Because if you are are doing calorie restriction, then virtually all the biomarkers will generally improve. The the fasting blood sugar, the hemoglobin a one c, the fasting insulin, blood pressure, lipids, triglycerides, and, some of the other biomarkers will improve generally if you are doing some form of, calorie restriction. And a lot of those benefits come from the weight loss. So calorie restriction is just the way to achieve better body composition and, and weight loss. Next question, what is your a one c? So the hemoglobin a one c, it measures your average blood sugar levels over the past few weeks. I did measure it here with the iWo a hundred and eighty, like blood panel test. It measures 180 different biomarkers and, based on that test recently it was a 5.2% which is very normal and, good healthy range. Anything above 5.5 is gonna be problematic, but below 5.5% is very good. Now there is, you know, some maybe pre preconceived conception or notions that that having a c, of a one c is like 4.5 or below five is somehow better than 5.3 or 5.4. Based on the evidence, that's not the case. Like, you don't need to have your blood sugar levels super low. In some of these studies, they actually find that too low blood sugar levels are associated with increased mortality. I personally think that it's probably because of if you have very low blood sugar levels, then you might have some chronic disease or you're malnourished, so you have just poor nutrition overall. So it's not that the low blood sugar level is inherently bad, but it's not superior either. And, based on the evidence then, you know, if your hemoglobin a one c is between around five, then that's already very good. So like 4.8 to 5.2, that's already very normal. If it's above 5.5, then that's, problematic and you wanna, like, curb curb that blood sugar levels. Alright. Let's stop talking and do some more lifting in the meanwhile. Okay. This is the I guess you can count it as a third working set. Alright. Another six. That's a good six is good. I like six six reps. It's like a good balance between muscle hypertrophy and muscle strength. Next question, does green tea inhibit the absorption of nicotinamide riboside and NMN? So green tea, including coffee, generally does, inhibit the absorption of certain nutrients. So it can reduce the absorption of thiamine, vitamin b one, and it can probably reduce the absorption of some other supplements that you're taking. So I would never, like, take supplements with coffee or with green tea either. Like, I would take it with regular water and ideally have the green tea, you know, one hour after you've taken the supplements for to let them to be absorbed before you consume those, compounds. This is gonna be the final set for this exercise. I'm gonna go for as many rips as I can. Well, at least this is the final working set then although some cool down sets. Okay. Alright. It's gonna be the final. I'm also gonna do one cool down set with this. And, usually, my workouts are comprised of only, like, two to three exercises. So I usually work out for, like, forty five minutes with resistance training, and I do only, like, two to three exercises. One of them being, like, a main compound lift, like, squat bench or deadlift, and then either another compound or some accessories. So I don't think that is needed to spend, like, hours at the gym and you don't need to do, like, three different variations of different exercises. So you don't need to do three variations for the chest, like a chest press and chest flies or whatever other kind of form or close grip branch. Like, for most people, they don't need to do that many different kinds of variations and it's just, like, a waste of time in most cases. Like, you just do one of the main compound exercises, you're getting 80% of the results. Next question, what are the most recommended blood tests and how often to schedule them and what are optimal levels? I would probably have to do, like, a whole separate video. I'm gonna actually make a video about my blood work results with the iVo, panel. You You can check it out. Like, the iivo panel measured, like, a 180 different biomarkers. You don't need to do all of them. It's, certainly not necessary to know all the specific details. I I'll give you, like, a few of the top ones that I think are worthwhile. You know, I would certainly measure my fasting blood sugar, hemoglobin a one c, fasting insulin. Those three are gonna be important for your metabolic health in terms of blood sugar regulation. If your hemoglobin a one c or fasting insulin are high, then that can be a sign of, you know, either prediabetes or heading towards there. Then from the lipid panel, I would look at triglycerides, LDL cholesterol, total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, VLDL, and, you know, the reason why. So with cholesterol, it's not as important as the lipoproteins. Like, the lipoproteins are more associated with heart disease than just LDL. So APOB and lipoprotein a are more relevant for atherosclerosis. But the reason why the doctors use cholesterol, LDL, and total cholesterol is because it's also a good surrogate or it's a good estimate of your APOB levels. So if you have high cholesterol, then chances are or it's very likely that your APOB and lipoprotein a are also elevated. So the reason your doctor just looks at the cholesterol is because the cholesterol is cheaper, and it's a semi good estimate of your APO b levels as well. There are, like, some cases around twenty percent of cases where there the two doesn't match. So, like, imagine a situation where you have high LDL but low APOB. So that's around twenty percent of cases in normal people. If you have diabetes, then it's it's up to, like, seventy to eighty percent of difference or a discordance between those two. So if you have diabetes, then it could be that the Apo b and LDL don't match. But if you are in a general population, then it's only twenty percent of people or twenty percent of cases. So LDL and total cholesterol can be a good estimate of your Apo b levels if you don't wanna measure them or if you, can't measure them for some reason, financial reasons, or if the doctor doesn't measure that. If your LDL or total cholesterol is high, then it's very likely that your Apo b is also high. But if you can, then I will certainly measure APOB and lipoprotein a as well. Those are gonna be just more accurate or more relevant biomarkers for atherosclerosis. Besides that, CRP, like we talked about, keeping that as low as possible is beneficial for all cause mortality risk and heart disease. So a CRP of, like, 0.1 is generally gonna be the best. But, again, some labs don't go that specific. Some labs cap out at 0.5 or or even one point zero. But if you can find a lab that measures it all the way to 0.1, then that's a more accurate. And you wanna keep it pretty much below 0.1 as much as possible. For general health and immune system function, then you obviously wanna measure also vitamin d three and your, like, white blood cells, neutrophils, those kind of things. So white blood cells are generally good to assess your immune system function. If your white blood cells are low, then you either had an infection recently or you could also have a weaker immune system. So it's just a, you know, a good measurement to look at. Liver function, so GGT and ALT and those kind of things are also good to look at. And then lastly, maybe kidney function, EGFR, creatinine, and bun. Those kind of things, are gonna be relevant for the kidneys. Now how often do you need to get, like, a full complete panel? I think most people who are interested in health and longevity, then, like, once a year is good enough to get, like, a pretty comprehensive panel that's going to look at, you know, like, the 180 blood panel tests that can be pretty good once a year for the more enthusiastic biohacker or a person into longevity. The average person, the general population, they can just look at some of the main ones like the glucose, kidney function, liver function, cholesterol, lipids, and lipoproteins, and they can cap it out that there. And lastly, I think, for men, especially looking at your testosterone, treat testosterone, it also works well. You know, low testosterone levels are pretty prevalent nowadays, and the average testosterone is lower than it was a few decades ago. So if you are, let's say, experiencing signs of fatigue, tiredness, weight gain, and mood issues, and those things, sleep issues, then that can be from low testosterone as well. And, you know, the only way to actually know is to look at your blood work and, testosterone and free testosterone, specifically. And from there, you know, you have to, you know, consult with your doctor about the options. You know, the first things are again, like, some are very basic things, exercise, losing weight, sleep, good diet, sunlight. If you're like you know, there's connection between different biomarkers. Like, there's a connection between testosterone levels and some minerals like boron, but but, like, vitamin d levels as well are very linked to testosterone levels. So, you know, it's an entire package. You need to, you know, besides measuring them, you have to also know how to interpret the blood work and, you know, the doctor can generally help with, a lot of those things that, okay, this is what this is what's too high for you, this is for too low for you. These are some of the recommendations that you need to, follow. And let's this is like this is like what I call a cool down set. So this is a 100 kilos and I'm gonna go for, like, you know, 10 reps or something like that to just finish finish the exercise. Okay. I got 15 reps, which is good. And, yeah, I'm gonna finish with the bench press right now, and we'll finish the workout with with some accessories. I like to actually do forearms as well when I'm doing any upper body because I think they're good, you know, good for the grip strength and I just I think they're more, like, functional. And I don't do, like, that specific workouts for my forearms, so I'll just use them all as a finisher in my upper body workouts. And one of the kind of easiest One easier exercise for the war forearms and grip is just gonna be the Hammersmith or hammer curls. Sorry. It's just biceps curls, but this way. And I'll try to do, like, 10 reps per arm, but I think the weight is a bit lighter. So I need to change it up. Next question, is TMG good if you don't take NMN or nicotinamide riboside? So TMG, trimethoglycine, usually people take it with NMN to prevent the loss of methyl donors. That might might happen with NMN. Certainly depends on the dose if you need to take it and what's your general methylation status. Is TMG good to take alone? Yes. Because TMG is, still a very good like metal donor in of itself. TMG has like some very beneficial effects for homocysteine. So if your homocysteine are high, then, TMG can help to lower that. That is that is that's one of the metal donors that can do that. There's also some interesting research about TMG and exercise performance. So people who take TMG, they might even notice some increased strength and endurance. So, yeah, I think, especially if you have, like, poor methylation genes, then TMGs are very, very good. Okay. Okay. I've been actually working out for around thirty five minutes or something, I think. And I'm already starting to finish. So I, you know, as you can see, it doesn't have to take a long time. Next question, how do you double or triple testosterone for men? So how whether or not you can double or triple it depends where you're starting from. If your testosterone is, like, a 100 nanograms, then, of course, yeah, you could triple, you could even quadruple it with TRT or something like that. And but if your testosterone is already, like, 800, then it's very unlikely that you're going to double it even with steroids or testosterone replacement therapy. Some easy ways to at least see a significant increase in your testosterone or at least like a, you know, worthwhile increase besides, again, some of the fundamentals. You know, losing some weight, sleeping more, doing heavier compound lifts. So, like, what you find is that heavier compound lifts with the barbell and free weights, that yields a significantly greater testosterone and growth hormone response than machines. So if you're working out with machines, changing to the compound lifts with free weights, I would predict that would, like, at least in the short term, see a change in your testosterone levels. The same applies to sleep. If you're only sleeping six hours per night, especially sleep, like, sleep quality. If your sleep quality is bad and you still sleep seven to eight hours, then fixing the sleep quality can result in some dramatic improvements in testosterone levels. Like you might have sleep apnea maybe, you can't breathe through the nose, like at night, so that can reduce your sleep quality, lower your testosterone levels, and cause some other health problems. So if you fix the sleep apnea, you get more sleep. Like, if you sleep only six hours, try to get eight hours and you will see your testosterone levels are rising. The same applies to vitamin d levels. If your, you know, vitamin d levels are in a deficiency range, then getting more sunlight or taking vitamin d supplement supplement, then that can also improve the the testosterone levels. And lastly, one one study did they did find that boron supplementation. So boron is a mineral, many people aren't getting enough of. It has a role in regulating testosterone and estrogen levels. So men and women who were deficient in boron, then boron supplementation even within a few weeks, resulted in doubling the testosterone levels. Now granted those individuals didn't have super high testosterone levels either, but it's, goes to show that some of the, you know, nutrient deficiency even can dramatically affect your testosterone levels or estrogen levels in women as well because boron is also beneficial for women for their estrogen levels. So, yeah, I think many people aren't getting enough boron. And from all the supplements, then I think boron is one of the most effective supplements for testosterone, so, like, natural supplements. And as a last final exercise, I'm gonna do some dumbbell flyes, so side lateral raises. This is for the shoulders and delts, and this is mostly like just an aesthetic exercise. It's, not that, you know, it's not going to improve my bench press that much, but it can increase the hypertrophy in the shoulders and the delts, which is more like, yeah, you look cooler in terms of the body aesthetics. And, you know, it's a nice exercise as well for a finisher. I'm not really trying to lift the heavier weights, just aiming for higher reps. So, like, twelve, fifteen reps. Alright. That's it. This is the end of my workout. This is the end of the q and a. If you want to ask me a question, then make sure you follow me on Instagram at c nand, where I do those q and a's there regularly. If you also want to join me the next time I am in India to do the entire iWo retreat, getting all your 180 biomarkers tested, your VO2 max test, your DEXA scan, your MRI, your CT scan, the entire, you know, full body pretty much analysis, You can stay tuned for the next announcement of the Iowa retreat by subscribing to my email list or following me on Instagram. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.