What's the difference between extended fasting and short term fasting? Which one is healthier? In this video, we're gonna talk about a new study that compared the effects of long term fasting and short term fasting on insulin resistance. Do it. So the title of the study is prolonged fasting outperforms short term fasting in terms of glucose tolerance and insulin release. So that's a spoiler. The prolonged fasting did better in terms of maintaining glucose tolerance and incidence and nativity. The catch is though that this prolonged fasting is six days of fasting and the short term fasting is only two days of fasting, which I think most people will actually still consider two day fasting also a form of extended fasting. And short term fasting would something be like you know within twenty four hours, like fasting for sixteen hours or eight hours. But you know, regardless this study compared the fasting between of two days and six days. So they took healthy individuals, healthy meals and, yeah, they just made them fast for either two days or six days. And they compared things like rectal temperature, ketone production, catecholamine concentrations, glucose tolerance and insulin release in response to an oral glucose tolerance test. So the oral glucose tolerance test is that you know, you drink like a 100 grams of glucose or something like that and then they measure your insulin response and the glucose response. If you have like a huge massive spike and it stays elevated for a long time, which generally is referred to as the glucose area under the curve AOC, then that's you know indicator of some bad, let's say, glucose tolerance and some aspects of insulin resistance. If you have like a worse score and you're very high, you know, the insulin response or glucose response to this glucose tolerance test, then that is a sign of some aspects of insulin resistance. And one of the reasons why these or these researchers conducted this study was to actually look at, you know, whether or not this extended fasting would induce some aspects of insulin resistance. Because it is true, there are multiple studies already previously having shown that prolonged periods of fasting can create the short term, insulin resistance or, you know, it's much rather that there's a longer fasting period will make your glucose spike a lot higher than normally if you do the oral glucose tolerance test, which isn't necessarily it doesn't necessarily mean that you have insulin resistance. It's just that if you come from a like a longer fast, then your body is producing ketones. It's not that used to burning glucose as well. And as a result of that, you lose some of that insulin sensitivity and you score worse on the oral glucose tolerance test. But when you resume to a normal way of eating then, you know, it goes back to normal. So it's a short term insulin resistance, more like physiological insulin resistance, that is actually also been found to happen if you're in ketosis. So like long term ketosis also mimics this, insulin resistance by making your body less able to tolerate to that, oral glucose tolerance test. But you know, again, if you return to a normal way of eating then it goes back to normal. So it's not like necessarily pathological and, it's just that in the short term, it's not recommended to like break your fast with like a large amounts of carbohydrates. And like with the oral glucose tolerance test, doing that with like a 100 grams of carbs after having fasted for like, you know, six days is definitely I don't think that is very reasonable. And it's not like a smart thing to do, you know, even to prove a point. There's no like reason, to do it. Much rather, you would just, you know, return to like you break a fast with like some normal meals and eat some actual food and then maybe eat some carbohydrates later. That's kind of more, you know, in the real world, that's how you would do it. And, in the real world, you would also avoid this, insulin resistance that would occur in the short term. But regardless, the study found that both fasting trials, the six and the two day fasting increased the glucose area under the curve, but the AUC remained higher than the baseline value after participants returned to their usual diet in the two day fast group. Neither fasting had an immediate effect on the insulin AUC, although it increased after return to their usual diet in the six day fast group. These data suggest that the two day fast elicited residual impaired glucose tolerance which may be linked to greater perceived stress during short term fasting as shown by the epinephrine or adrenaline response and change in core temperature. By contrast, prolonged fasting seem to evoke an adaptive residual mechanism that is related to improve insulin release and maintain glucose tolerance. So that is interesting that the six day fast actually in the short term did, you know, better with the AUC score and, and, also maintain better incidence and sensitivity compared to the two day fast. And some of the, like, hypothesized these researchers say is that it could be because of the, you know, two day fast is stressful. It does, like, make your body somewhat insulin resistant. In short term, the same applies to the six day fast. But after the six day fast or by the time you have fasted for six days, then your body has kind of somewhat gotten used to, that stressor and it doesn't cause that much, let's say, insulin resistance as well or at least you, like, just improve the, insensitivity or you just burn through the glucose much faster after a six day fast if you do take the oral glucose tolerance test. The two day fast had a residual negative effect on glucose tolerance, e. G. Higher glucose area under the curve. So higher blood sugar levels pretty much for longer. After the recovery period following the six day fast, glucose tolerance returned to the baseline level which suggests that the prolonged fast evoked an adaptive mechanism such as greater insulin release as shown by the higher insulin AUC. So, yeah, the six day fast made you, like, release more insulin pretty much, whereas the two day fast, resulted in longer or higher glucose levels. And probably that's, you know, the reason why your glucose levels generally stay elevated for longer is because of insulin resistance and not producing that insulin or not letting the insulin unlock the cells to let the glucose into the cells. So, whereas the six day fast, actually enabled that to happen. So there you have it. This is a very short summary of this study that looked at the difference between two day fast and a six day fast. Six day fast was better for the, you know, incident sensitivity and incident resistance aspects. Although, you know, in the case case of both of them, this incident resistance will resume to normal after you return to a normal way of eating and, you know, these individuals who are healthy as well. So for them, it's not an issue for for their insulin sensitivity to normalize after after a few days or after a few meals even. What the takeaway for you could be that, yeah, if you do longer extended fasting, then don't break it with the oral glucose tolerance test or don't eat, like, a 100 grams of carbs or something like that immediately. You want to slowly reintroduce the carbohydrates and foods that would, reestablish your insulin sensitivity. And first of all or, you know, after all, you don't really even need to fast for maybe two or six days. We don't know. We don't necessarily have evidence that this is exactly how you how long you need to fast to see health benefits. Like, there have been many studies that showing already fasting within sixteen hours improves health, improves insensitivity and without causing any of these negative side effects of insulin resistance. So there's no real evidence to suggest that you need to fast two or six days to see improvements in insulin sensitivity, and you can already see that within sixteen hours of fasting. And I think personally, you know, over the long term, it's much more sustainable and potentially causes fewer negative side effects. If you do want to optimize intermittent fasting and even other types of fasting, then check out my intermittent fasting video course. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.