There are many health supplements that I take every day. They're very safe and they have benefits when you are taking them daily, such as glycine. But there are some health supplements that you shouldn't take every day. And in this video, I'm gonna give it a top five that you shouldn't take daily. Do it. The first supplement is gonna be NAC. Now this might be interesting because in one of my previous videos, I did talk about that glycine NAC combo is actually one of the best longevity supplement stacks that you can take because together they boost glutathione levels. And NAC also has other health benefits specifically related to the immune system and detoxification. But while you can take glycine every day with no side effects, then taking NAC every day might have some adverse side effects. The first and one of the biggest ones is the fact that NEC and these antioxidant supplements, they can pretty much just inhibit muscle growth and have a negative effect on the adaptations that you get from resistance training specifically. The way it does so is just attenuating inflammation and the inflammatory response that you get in response to training. NEC attenuated the elevation of inflammatory markers of muscle damage. So that is actually like a, you know, short term setting. If you're an athlete, you need to compete very fast or you're just overtraining a lot, then, yes, NEC and antioxidant supplements, even a cold exposure after training is great because it speeds up the recovery. But the way it speeds up the recovery is by shutting down the inflammatory response, and that inflammatory response is actually necessary. It's needed to build muscle. It's a signal for muscle growth and to mediate the other strength training related adaptations as well. In some more professional athletes, the NAC supplementation does reduce muscle soreness in the short term. NAC had a likely protective effect on subjective muscle soreness during days of one to four of supplementation, but it had a very likely harmful effect on days five and six of supplementation. So NAC in the short term reduces muscle soreness but it can actually have, like, a increase in soreness in, the, like, long term effect use if you take them chronically every day and especially following the second bout of intense exercise. Wait a minute. But NAC is still very beneficial for the other health benefits that it has. The key is to just not use it around exercise. You definitely don't wanna take NAC after you've done resistance training and you don't wanna take NAC before a high intensity exercise session. The best time to take NAC is on the days that you're not really working out, especially with high intensities. It's fine to take NAC after a cardio workout because that can actually, like, lower the soreness, but you don't wanna take it, like, chronically every day. I usually take NAC maybe two, three or, four times at maximum per week before bed, for example, or in the morning where I haven't been exercising where I haven't done any high intensity exercise or I haven't lifted weights around that time. NEC also reduces dao enzyme which is the one that breaks down histamine. So, if you are someone who is very, you know, sensitive to histamine and histamine reactions then you might not want to take NAC, yeah, like that often either. The next supplement on the list is berberine. So berberine is this traditional herb that has been used for centuries in different kinds of medicinal practices. It has a lot of benefits for specifically diabetes management and cholesterol levels and the way berberine does decrease glucose is through inhibiting mTOR pathway as well as inhibiting, like insulin and IGF-one levels. And in mice at least the berberine does inhibit muscle protein synthesis which, you know, isn't always a bad thing. Like, it's fine to inhibit muscle protein synthesis. It has, like, some longevity effects as well by increasing AMPK, autophagy and, you know, yeah, like slowing down aging in that sense. But chronic inhibition of mTOR, chronic inhibition of protein synthesis is definitely not something that you would want to do on a daily basis at least because, yeah, muscle is also very vital for longevity and if you're chronically in this catabolic state of breakdown then, yeah, you're gonna experience sarcopenia and accelerated aging from that side. So you need to balance the mTOR with the catabolism, so to say, and berberine is one of those supplements that you should only take, let's say, on the rest days again, or, you know, when you haven't done resistance training. Big mistake. Next supplement on the list is gonna be senolytics like fisetin and quercetin. So senescent cells are considered one of the hallmarks of aging. With age, you see this accumulation of these zombie cells that spread inflammation and don't really contribute to health in any ways. And, yeah, the accumulation of zombie cells, senescent cells, is something that could be like a potential therapeutic target for aging. And fisetin and quercetin are one of the most known and most easily accessible senolytic supplements that do inhibit the senescent cells and have other, like, anti inflammatory benefits. The issue is that not all senescent cells are bad or that the senescent cells, they don't always have, like, a harmful effect on your health and in many ways the senescent cells actually also mediate some beneficial things like wound healing and, obviously, you know, there's no way to differentiate between healthy senescent cells and pathological senescent cells. So with the supplement, you're just, you know, going carpet bombing on the cells and you are, you know, you there can also be, like, some collateral damage in terms of the destruction of healthy cells, apoptosis of healthy cells. So, yeah. It's you know, with senolytics, you don't need to and you shouldn't try to kill zombie cells every day of the week for the rest of your life because, you know, yeah, you do accumulate zombie cells with each. It's inevitable but, trying to carpet bomb the zombie cells all the time can have, like, some negative side effects especially when it comes to wound healing. Next supplement on the list is melatonin. So melatonin as a hormone is quite an important hormone for anti aging and longevity because most of the antioxidant repair systems they, work together with melatonin in your sleep and that's why melatonin is such a powerful hormone and, that's why it's also important to make sure that you do produce enough melatonin when you are sleeping. Now, melatonin supplementation isn't inherently mandatory but there are studies that, melatonin supplementation does improve the biomarkers. It improves lipid profile and blood sugar levels as well so it might have, like, some health benefits even if you necessarily don't have, like, sleeping issues. It's a powerful antioxidant in in that sense. And the reason why you shouldn't take melatonin every night has nothing to do with the fear of taking a melatonin supplement that it would inhibit your natural melatonin production. That's not really true. That's actually like a myth. In the studies where they take even fifty milligrams of melatonin they see no changes in natural melatonin production. So taking a melatonin supplement is safe. So you could theoretically take it every day without any like adverse, like, negative feedback loop, your body will still produce melatonin. It's just that boosting your melatonin with a supplement may have this additional antioxidant benefits. The reason why you shouldn't take melatonin every day is because melatonin is actually a contraceptive. It has contraceptive effects in very large doses. So seventy five milligram doses it has been found to have contraceptive effects which, you know, reduces fertility. Children who are before puberty they have produced a lot of melatonin which the reason why they haven't, you know, developed into puberty yet because of the high melatonin levels. After puberty their melatonin levels drop down and then they go through, you know, the puberty and they develop these sex specific features. So we don't know what are the long term effects of taking melatonin every night, especially in large doses on aspects of fertility and, sex hormones. It might, like, reduce testosterone. It might, you know, reduce estrogen or something like that. So we don't necessarily know what are the long term effects and, as long as you're not taking, like, very large doses then you're probably safe. If you take, like, one milligram, maybe even five milligrams at most, it's probably gonna be safe. But it's still better to stick to either, like, a very small dose, zero point one to one milligram, or to like cycle it between the days and not take it every day. I'm pregnant. And the last supplement is GABA. GABA is the main inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain and it has relaxing and calming effects and many people use GABA to improve sleep, reduce stress and fall asleep better. The problem is that excess GABA can actually be converted into glutamate and glutamate is the excitatory neurotransmitter which does the opposite. It makes you more anxious, it makes you more aroused and many people who do take GABA then the next day they might feel more anxious and more aroused which kind of defeats the purpose. So in that sense if you take the GABA supplement then you're facilitating the requirement for taking GABA the next day as well to calm yourself down. But it's a vicious feedback loop. You take GABA, it converts into glutamate, the higher glutamate makes you think that you need to take more GABA and, you know, the cycle continues. Like with any other neurotransmitter, if you have too much dopamine from whatever source the dopamine will convert into noradrenaline and you get the, you know, stress response and over aroused response. So neurotransmitters work in very fine balance. You don't wanna boost a certain neurotransmitter very high because it's gonna be converted into something else. So you don't wanna take GABA every night and especially not in large doses. If you do take GABA then maybe like a very smaller dose, a few hundred milligrams, definitely not more than four hundred milligrams and do it like maybe like only a few times a week if you need it. But if you don't need it then I would much rather, yeah, stay stay away from taking Agaba. But do you want to slow down aging? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@simlan.com, and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is sim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.