You've probably heard about many different longevity supplements that you could take, but there is one specific supplement that I think everyone should take for the sake of slowing down aging and helping to promote longevity. The supplement that I'm talking about is collagen peptides. And in this video, we're gonna talk about why you need to take it and how much butt do you want to store down aging and live longer. If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to extend their health span. If you're interested, then email me the word healthtoinfo@seamland.com, and I'll send you the details. Do it. Collagen is mostly associated with reducing wrinkles and improving skin health. That is definitely one of the benefits. By now, we have up to, like, a dozen human clinical trials showing the benefits of collagen peptides on skin health, reducing skin wrinkles and improving skin elasticity. So if you are interested in the aesthetic side of antiaging, which means preserving your youthfulness for longer and reducing the signs of wrinkles and skin aging, then collagen peptides should definitely be, like, a fundamental staple in your supplementation routine for antiaging. But this is not something that only, like, older people or middle aged people need to worry about. I think that virtually every adult would already benefit from supplementing collagen peptides. Unfortunately, you start losing collagen already in your twenties. You lose just under 10% of your skin's collagen content every decade. So by the time you're 75 years old, you would have lost nearly 50% of your skin's collagen content. The density of collagen in your skin also drops starting at the age of 20 by about 8% per decade. Now losing your skin collagen and the collagen density everywhere is a natural byproduct of aging. But it doesn't have to happen at a rapid rate, and you can definitely mitigate and slow down this process by providing your body enough of the nutrients needed to trigger collagen synthesis and to consume enough of collagen peptides. Feel how soft my skin is. Collagen is also vital for your arteries, your tendons, your ligaments, your joints, your hair, your nails and all different kinds of organs. So even if you're not interested in the aesthetic side of antiaging and you don't care about wrinkles, then you would still want to optimize your collagen intake for the sake of your physical function. Collagen makes up your cartilage, which is what protects your joints by preventing bone rubbing against bone. Thus, joint pain and osteoarthritis can be caused by a deficiency in collagen. Also, half half of your bone is made of protein with most of that protein being composed of collagen. So a deficiency in collagen can lead to weaker bones. Now on this channel, we talk a lot about the importance of strength training and just overall fitness for antiaging and longevity. Muscle mass and muscle strength are very correlated with living longer and reduced mortality, especially increasing health span. But one of the biggest things that stops people from exercising, especially in their later years, ease different kinds of chronic pain. And if you can't train because of pain then that will lead to a downward spiral in your health as well because if you can't move, if you can't do exercises that keep you young and healthy then it's gonna be a very rapid decline in your health span. We have this 2,018 meta analysis of randomized placebo controlled trials and they found that collagen is effective in improving osteoarthritis symptoms. And this 2008 study found that twenty four weeks of using collagen hydrolysate improved joint pain in athletes. So it doesn't really matter what your age is, you will benefit from collagen as a compound. And making sure that you get adequate amounts of collagen throughout your entire lifetime is one of the best insurance policies in terms of the aesthetic side of antiaging that you preserve your skin collagen content that will reduce the development of wrinkles and also improves skin aging and at the other hand, maintains also the functionality chronic injuries. But why do we lose so much collagen as we age? Part of the reason has to do with not getting enough glycine which is one of the main amino acids making up collagen. About 30% of collagen is glycine. Your daily collagen turnover requires around 12 grams of glycine, but your body makes only three grams endogenously. Those three grams can be allocated for the production of glutathione, creatinine, heme and bile salts. That still leaves around a 12 gram gap in your requirement for collagen turnover. Now most people might get only around three to five grams of glycine from their dietary sources, which still leaves around five to seven grams of a deficit in terms of their glycine demand. If you take a collagen peptide supplement like ten grams of collagen peptides then you're gonna get only three grams of glycine from that. And by the end of that, you would still need around three to five extra grams of glycine. Now we could talk an entire video about glycine which I've already done. You can check out my full breakdown of the longevity benefits of glycine. But the main message is that to support collagen, the glue that holds you together and literally the biggest protein that you start to lose with age, then you want to get at least twelve grams of glycine per day. To get the other amino acids for collagen synthesis, then you can just take, like, ten grams of collagen peptides per day. Based on the studies, it needs to be low molecular weight hydrolyzed collagen peptides, which will be the most effective ones. Of course, you do want to get collagen for food as well, but if you're really hoping to get the reduction in wrinkles and skin hydration and skin moisturization, etcetera, then based on the evidence, then you do need to take low molecular weight collagen peptides. If you want to learn more about the health benefits of collagen and glycine, then check out my book with doctor James DeNickel Antonio called The Collagen Cure. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.