There are some people who live over a 100 years old, even if they have, like, a, you know, mediocre or even unhealthy lifestyle. Like, they smoke, they eat chocolate, and they don't take care of their health that much. Of course, there are some genetic factors that are at play here, and there are certain genes that are associated more with longevity. So in this video, I'm gonna talk about these longevity genes that make you live longer and how can you turn them on. Do it. I think a good place to start at is with the, blue zones. So Ikaria and Sardinia are one of the blue zones in the world where people are exception of the living longer. And there are certain, like, genetic features that have been found to be associated with the centenarian hotspots. And when it comes to the Caria and Sardinia region, then the two biggest, like, you know, genetic characteristics are that they have better APOE genes as well as the FOXO3a genes. APOE gene refers to your body's ability to metabolize saturated fat and cholesterol as well as insulin resistance. People who have the APOE three and four allele have a much higher risk of getting Alzheimer's or heart disease if they consume saturated fat in their diet compared to individuals who have the APOE two or two and three allele. I think that this is actually a very big, like, a determining factor whether or not you should be eating like, a high saturated fat or not. And, the individuals who do have APOE three or four allele, then for them it's much safer to, not be eating, like, a lot of saturated fat and to eat mostly, like, you know, more polyunsaturated fats, monounsaturated fats, and, also be on like a more, you know, less fatty diet. But the much more interesting gene that we're gonna talk about in this video is gonna be FOXO three a and that translates into four ks VOX o three a gene, which, refers to your body's or is a gene that regulates your energy sensing pathways like insulin I g one and AMPK. So these, yeah, pretty much nutrient sensing pathways and there is a lot of associations between the FOXO three a variation and human longevity pretty much in multiple studies. Even in the Italians, again, the FOXO3a, there is a big association with FOXO3a and increased longevity even like extreme centenarianism. Even if you adjust for smoking, then, FOXO three a is still associated, with longevity. So, yeah, like even people who smoke and have, like, a generally unhealthy lifestyle, then if you do have, you know, better FOXO three a genes, then they still have a better longevity even if they do smoke. So that probably explains a lot of these longevity hotspots who, do live longer despite being, like, not that healthy apparently not healthy like a diet and they kind of smoke and drink. So this I think this is the biggest reason why they do, kind of live longer from a genetic standpoint that they have a lot of these FOXO3a genes in their, like, local environment in terms of the population. So like I said, FOXO proteins and FOXO3a specifically are regulated in the nutrient sensing pathways like insulin 91, AMPK. So either like you're growing or you're in a catabolic state that, controls things like autologie and those things. Antioxidant defense systems and NRF2, those are, yeah, linked to also this, FOXO three activation through the AMPK, pathway. The FOXO transcription factor FOXO three, is a part of IGF one, and, it is essential apparently for getting the benefits from calorie restriction restriction as well for longevity in terms of, you know, you know calorie restriction is great in terms of having the activation of these many longevity pathways but you know it doesn't necessarily always work in terms of leading to frailty and the muscle loss that can be harmful for overall longevity. But, yeah, you do need to make sure that, you know, the, FOXO proteins apparently immediate a lot of the calorie restriction benefits that you get. And of course, calorie restriction already activates FOXO proteins. But yeah, you know, there's different ways to restrict calories. You can be on a very high sugar, low protein diet, which arguably wouldn't, you know, enable the activation of these pathways at least like in in, in the best optimal way. AMPK, which is the AMP activated protein kinase, also gets activated a lot of these by a lot of these hermetic positive energy stressors. And, yeah, it does have a direct impact on the FOXO proteins as well including sirtuin's autologie and the mTOR suppression. So how do you increase FOXO protein activation? I have written an article about it and, there are pretty much, you know, the standard hermetic stressors that we've already talked about, calorie restriction, fasting, even just acute exercise, heat shock, cold exposure, and hypoxia even so that you can train with some breathing exercises or the, you know, exercise already induces some mild hypoxia. You don't wanna be under chronic hypoxia that's gonna actually promote cancer. But, you know, the, acute hypoxia that you get from some sort of brief breath work or exercise is that's what you kinda want. Some natural compounds that can also increase FOXO three are astaxanthin that you get from seafood like, fish, alpha lipoic acid that you can get from foods like, broccoli, carrots, spinach, meat, organ meats, etcetera, and green tea polyphenols like EGCG active with FOXO three. The second longevity gene or let's say, you know, pathway that is also associated a lot with the centenarians is, autophagy. And, there are like, the centenarians have higher expression and higher, like, biomarkers of pectin one, which is an autophagy protein and, like a reflection of autophagy. Centenarians or people who live over a 100 also have enhanced autophagy lysosomal function. So, they have just a, like, a higher baseline of autophagy activated all the time. And with autophagy, you know, you can also activate it with the similar things that defroxoproteins like exercise, some form of intermittent fasting, and time to read eating, calorie restriction, and these, hormetic stressors, hormetic foods like coffee, green tea, dietary polyphenols, and phytonutrients. So in conclusion, you know, there are certain genetic factors that the centenarians apparently have more than, some other individuals. You know, one of the biggest ones is the APOE thing that they have of more favorable APOE gene allele that, kind of protects themselves against Alzheimer's and heart disease. There are also these elevation of FOXO three and, better FOXO three activation probably like, you know, they're genetically more easily to activate these factors or they have like a higher baseline of autophagy all the time. And, yeah, there are like these genes that the centenarians apparently have. And that protects them against some unhealthy lifestyle, but also pretty much enhances their already existing lifestyle of whatever they're doing. So they're gonna get more benefits from exercise, they're gonna get more benefits from calorie restriction, etcetera. But it doesn't mean that if you don't have these, higher baseline of these certain genetic, like, factors, then you can still obviously live very long and be healthy at the same time because, you know, epigenetics is more powerful than genetics. The epi means above the genetics. So, genetics is just like the predisposing factors, but whether or not some genes get turned on or not depends on, you know, the epigenetics of your lifestyle and what you do. And, the vast majority of longevity is concluded that it is dependent of, like, your epigenetics and you can always take control of the direction of your health. If you are interested in reversing your biological age and want to live longer, then I am looking for a few more people who want to do that, to turn back their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word healthtoinfo@simlond.com, and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Sim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.