Longevity and living longer is often thought to be only for the rich. You need to have millions of dollars to make yourself live longer. Well, that's not really the case. I personally have one of the slowest speeds of aging in the world that outperforms people like Brian Johnson who spends $2,000,000 a year to reverse his biological age. I'm gonna tell you right now that I don't spend $2,000,000 trying to reverse my age. So in this video, I'm gonna tell you how much do I personally spend on slowing down my aging and promoting my longevity and how you can use it to create yourself a very cheap but do you want to slow down aging and live longer? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to infoseemland dot com and I'll send you the details. It's showtime. So let's begin. I have created, like, pretty much a very simple excel spreadsheet of the things that I spend money on when it comes to like longevity and biohacking and those kind of things. So first off, we have food. I usually spend only like around 600, €700. So I live in Estonia and, it is like cheaper to live here than California or even Switzerland or France or something. Those other places. So usually my food expenditure is gonna be like €600 which is a bit higher than dollars. So on dollars, it's gonna be like 650 to 700, dollars per month on average on food. Now the thing is that I also grow some of my own foods. I have like a mini garden and farm. I I have, chickens and I hunt myself so I have plenty of access to a lot of food that I can get for free pretty much, you know. Growing herbs and growing vegetables and growing chickens and hunting the animals, is cheap or it's, you know, it doesn't cost anything else but your time and the physical labor. Now the food delivery is also something that I use. I have my own food company. So it's it's the Crump hemp protein, which is super amazing, like, cleanest plant based protein in the world with no artificial ingredients, just hemp, flour and pea protein flour. And I usually, you know, want that thing for myself as well because I think it's, you know, tastes amazing and super nutritious and high protein. If you want to get a full breakdown and examples of the foods and what kind of actual foods do I eat, then check out my other video about it it where I show the foods that lower my biological age by twelve years. Next up, we have, supplements. So, you know, there are many supplements that I take. I don't have, like, some sort of crazy stack. I don't take any, like, actual medical pharmaceuticals. I don't take like a ton of supplements. On average, I take maybe like fifteen pills or capsules a day which is significantly lower than some other bike or who take like hundreds of pills a day. So I don't think that you necessarily need a lot of supplements. You would only need like the select few that give you the biggest bang for your buck, if that makes sense. If you don't have any limitations to your budget, then of course you could theoretically take a hundred pills a day, but I still think that it's still like, you know, if you get some things from your food then you don't need them from a supplement. Like there's plenty of compounds that you can get from a food that you don't really need from a supplement. So like spermidine is a great example of that. Dietary spermidine intake is associated with reduced mortality, but but it doesn't apply to supplements. So I don't think that is there's no evidence to indicate that you would need to take a spermidine supplement or that a spermidine supplement would reduce your mortality risk. That only applies to dietary spermidine. Most of the supplements that I take generally are something that I don't get from food. You know, for like calcium alpha, beta, gluiterate, you don't get that from food. You don't get NMN from food. You don't get certain other longevity supplements. So the only supplements that I take are mostly like longevity supplements. I don't take like nutritional supplements. If that makes sense. And, you know per month on average I might spend €300 €400 depends on the month. And, of course you have to average it out over the course of multiple months because if I buy a supplement then I usually buy in bulk. Like I buy a large, you know, package for pretty much like the entire year's worth of, supplements. So Do Not Age is a great example of it. They have amazing longevity supplements and they have the option for, like, one month stack, but they also have the option for an entire year's stack. But then, you know, obviously the difference can be if you get the year stack, then usually, let's say, a year's stack of trimethoglycine or Berberine or something like that is gonna cost you over 300 alone to get the year's stack. But the monthly stack is gonna be 30, euros for example. So I usually buy the year stack because it's a bit cheaper that way and it's also a bit more convenient. You don't have to buy it that often. So I have like a year's stack of all these different supplements at my home already and if you like average it out across the entire year, then it's gonna be around $304,100 euros, per month. You can also check out the video for my own personal supplement stack in the description. Next up, we have gym and fitness. This obviously is something that you don't really even need to spend money on if you can work out outside. There's plenty of parks, there's plenty of workout outdoor workout places, you can do pull ups anywhere, you can do sprints, you can run everywhere. So working out can be free, like you don't need any money to work out. You don't need any money to, you know, to spend on fancy equipment or anything of that, but I just, you know, go to the regular gym. I have a gym subscription. It's gonna be a little like, you know, €20 per month or something like that. So it's very cheap, and I don't really spend any other money on, like, exercise. The next category we have biohacks. So I do have, like, you know, red light therapy, I have infrared sauna, I I have different kinds of, biohacking gadgets and equipments. I wouldn't still categorize them in this video and you don't necessarily need to buy your own infrared sauna. Like, an infrared sauna is gonna cost you over €3,000. You can even be, like, a €5,000 if you get like a bigger infrared sauna or if you build your own sauna, which I also have like a traditional sauna, then you can spend up to like €10,000 on just building the sauna. But you don't need to do that, like if you have a gym that has a sauna, then you can already cover that with your gym, subscription already. So you don't necessarily need to build your own sauna or buy your infrared sauna if you have a spa or if you have some sort of, you know, gym that has already the spa spa facilities or saunas inside there. But here, you know, bio hacks are usually categorized things like IVs or something. I had actually COVID after my first the biological age test. The COVID and infections, they're known to increase your biological age. And because I'm trying to, like, actually break my own record, again, to lower my speed of aging even more, then, I did IV to kind of accelerate my recovery. And in that scenario, it makes sense if you had COVID, a glutton IV makes sense and, it's gonna help your body to recover. But I was, I think already pretty recovered. I did it more like, insurance policy and the IVs, they're gonna cost you like 150, sometimes even more if you get like a bigger cocktail of these, antioxidants and stuff. But I just did regular NEC Glutathione IV. Costed like a €150, which is, pretty cheap. And I don't do it every month. I do it, you know, once a year, twice a year, something like that. And last category here is, like, testing. So this includes blood tests or the actual biological age tests. So I've actually spent quite a lot on different tests. I've done, like, almost all the tests, in terms of the DNA methylation clocks. I've used, like, three or four companies to measure my biological age and, to do it as an experiment to see what goes on. And, yeah, like blood work, you don't need to obviously do that either every month, maybe once or twice a year is what I would do a blood work. And, generally, like a regular health checkup with some of the most important markers like cholesterol, blood sugar, etc. You would only pay like a 100 at a private laboratory or clinic or something like that. If you can get it from your doctor for free, then that's obviously gonna be free. But, But, yeah, like usually doctors don't want to do the blood work because they think that there's nothing wrong with you. But, you know, probably the tracking your blood work is one of the most important parts of, you know, longevity because you know what's wrong, what you need to improve on, what you need to fix. Big mistake. So if you sum it up, these main categories, like, on average, per month, I might spend, you know, €1,300 on my biohacking or health routine, but you know, obviously most of it is like just living, food, and gym, and, supplements and those things. It's very cheap, as you can see. It's not, that expensive. Of course, it's for Estonian, let's say prices, it is above average of the average salary in Estonia, but it's not something that breaks the bank. And of course, you can cut out a lot of the things that I do. Like, you can spend less on supplements, you can spend less on on testing or biohacks, so etcetera. And I've also pretty much calculated, like, what I've spent this year or the first six months of 2023 on all of these biohacks. So, if you span it out over the course of six months, then some of their costs might reduce or they might increase this approximation again. So on average, on six months, I'll spend like, you know, 3,500 on food, 1,200 on food deliveries or restaurants, eating out, supplements sixteen hundred, gym 150 for the entire six months of, the gym subscription, bio hacks or the IVs, whatever, $2.50 and testing. So this is higher because I bought like a bunch of these DNA methylation clock tests. I've have like, you know, five or six of these tests that I bought and, they can range anywhere from 300 to 500 per test. I do it as a experiment. You don't need to measure your speed of aging that often. If you do it once and okay, everything is fine, then that's already good enough. But if you want to, like, keep more track or if you have more disposable income, then you can just, buy them more frequently. But you don't obviously need to buy six tests, over the course of six months like I did or something like that. So, yeah, in total, you know, six months I've spent 8,000, 9,000, somewhere between there, euros on my health routines, if that makes sense. And, if I keep in track of this, then for this entire year, I'll be spending only like €15,000, €16,000 on my health routine. And as you can see, it's not that expensive. On average per year, it's gonna be around a thousand euros, €1,500 at max depending on your routine choice of what supplements you take, etcetera. So as you can see, this longevity stuff, this health stuff, and, trying to slow down your speed of aging and trying to promote longevity, it's not expensive. It doesn't have to be expensive. But I hope you got some valuable information from this video. Make sure you check out my other videos outlining my diet, my supplement routine, my workout protocol. But on the net, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.