Andrew Huberman is one of the most popular scientists on social media. I think it's great. He recommends a lot of good advice. He also talks about different supplements. And in this video, we're gonna take a look at the supplements that he is taking. But do you want to slow down aging and live longer? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological cock. If you're interested, then email me the word healthtoinfo@cenl.com, and I'll send you the details. Do it. So, it's on honehealth.com. Andrew Huberman's supplement stack is wild and wildly effective. First up, we have a fish oil. Hovarand is a fan of fish oil for all the health benefits and, of course, is one of the most, like, researched supplements in terms of improving lipid profile and helping with cholesterol levels. So, of course, there is some controversy about fish oil because most of the fish oil, I think, is kind of bad quality. It's very, like, rancid. It's oxidized, etcetera. But if you look at, like, the totality of evidence, even if it were to be the case, the totality of evidence suggests that fish oil has benefits, especially for cardiovascular disease and brain health as well. Now personally, I'm not taking a fish oil supplement. I'm taking actually a cord liver oil supplement. That's less likely to be oxidized. Next supplement is alpha GPC. So, this one is also important for brain function and cognition. So he would found that he would take three hundred milligrams of alpha GPC taken ten to twenty minutes prior to any time I want to focus or concentrate very deeply. Works like a choline supplement and choline is one of the most important, like, nutrients for the brain and it helps to increase acetylcholine in the brain, which is kind of the neurotransmitter most involved with, like memory, learning, and myelination. And the next one is gonna be garlic extract because the alpha GPC, because it's choline similar to carnitine, can increase the levels of TMAO in the gut, which is a marker related to cardiovascular disease. And, of course, this one is a bit controversial, like many people think that TMAO isn't an issue. I'm, like, somewhat in the middle. I don't think that, you know, TMAO alone is gonna be, like, causing cardiovascular disease. In my opinion, it's more of, like, a marker of something else going on because talking about the fish oil thing, then fish actually contains the highest amount of TMAO. So based on that logic then fish consumption should be associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease, but it's not. Fish consumption is actually associated with reduced risk of cardiovascular disease. But regardless, the garlic can help to, mitigate or reduce the TMAO levels. So I do think that garlic is a amazing food. It's very high in sulfur. It helps with antioxidant defense and it also has a lot of, like, these other anti inflammatory and antioxidant properties, especially allicin is the main compound that mediates those health benefits. So I think the allicin taking allicin is probably more potent than a garlic extract in my opinion. So I I take, like, maybe five thousand milligrams of allicin every day. And, I mean, there's, like, wide benefits that you can get from allicin and garlic, dietary garlic. Next up, we have tyrosine. So taking tyrosine can help with the dopamine levels. So you can use it as a nootropic. I personally have taken tyrosine in the past. I'm not doing it right now because, my baseline dopamine levels are already pretty high. So I have no issues with, like, motivation or focus. I'm pretty, like, dialed in with my my cognition in terms of being able to just work without any stimulants, without any nootropics. And, yeah, like, the tyrosine can be a very good supplement for lower if you have lower baseline dopamine or if you're just trying to, like, pick up the slack or just give yourself, like, a short short term boost. Next supplement, phenethylamine or PEA is a stimulant that may increase dopamine and for Huberman, acts as a focus and work aid in order to do intense bouts of work. Now, personally, I haven't used this supplement. I don't really have any comments to it either, but you can get it from things like a chocolate. So that's something that I do take. Like, I eat dark chocolate pretty much every day. Glutamine, another amino acid, the main, like, like, function of it is gonna help to, improve the intestinal permeability and pretty much supports gut health in that way. I don't take glutamine myself because I do eat, a relatively high protein diet, and I think I'm getting plenty of glutamine from the dietary sources. And, of course, there is some controversial, let's say, evidence about the glutamine that it could, like, feed cancer cells. Creatine, that's something I do take. The main benefits of creatine has to do with, like, muscle strength and muscle power and muscle speed, but, of course, creatine also has brain and nootropic benefits, so it can help with certainly aspects of brain function, but it also, like, mitigates sleep loss and actually reduces your sleep demand. I take it pretty much every day and, I do think that it's, like, one of those supplements that, over time will be accepted as actual, like, a longevity supplement. Ashwagandha, so this is like this adaptogenic herb, and, Huberman takes this ancient herb to help me reduce my cortisol, though I don't get some of the long term effects of stress. He doesn't take ashwagandha every day. He only does it, to deal with short and medium term stress. Yes. I do think ashwagandha has good evidence to support its effects for stress management and even increasing testosterone levels, especially for men who have lower testosterone levels. But there are some people online who have shared their experience of taking ashwagandha that it makes them a bit more, like, docile or reduces their, I don't know, like, emotions or something like that. I haven't experienced anything like that. I'm not taking ashwagandha. I don't have any stress issues. But if I were to have chronic stress or, some short term periods of high stress, then I would certainly consider adding ashwagandha to my stack. Chill out. Next up, we have some testosterone boosters, Tongkat Ali and Fadocia Agrestis. Yes. There are a few studies showing Tongkat Ali helping with, testosterone levels. Correct me if I'm wrong, but I do think that, Huberman is on testosterone replacement therapy. I might be wrong. But, you know, if he is taking TRT, then the Tongkat Ali and Fadocia Agrestis probably isn't gonna do much because the TRT is, like, 10 times more potent than these, supplements. These supplements probably will work if you have low natural testosterone levels, maybe even, like, normal moderate testosterone. So, like, in the middle range, then you also see probably some improvements. If your natural testosterone is already high, like, above 700, 800, something like that, then I wouldn't expect to see, like, a large jump in testosterone by using these supplements. Next up, we have Athletic Greens. So this is this green powders drink. I do think that micro microgreens and, these green supplements I mean, yes. You you get, like, a more higher concentration of these vitamins and minerals from those than compared to, like, actually eating. But, yeah, I mean, the dosages are pretty small, so we still need to, like, eat, like, a well balanced diet. They can certainly work towards increasing your nutrient intake for the day. But if your baseline diet is not that nutritious, then it's not gonna gonna it's not gonna do anything almost because the dosages are still relatively small. So it's not gonna be that just take this and you don't need any other vitamins or minerals from your diet at all. So, yeah, I mean, you still need to eat, like, a good diet. But, as a, like, short term insurance policy, then I don't think that it kind of hurts. Multivitamin as well. On top of that, I personally am not taking any multivitamin. The multivitamins may have, like, just too many of the things that you already have too much of or that you wouldn't want too much of. So they're almost like filler. The cheaper cheaper nutrients in the multivitamin are just added there to fill it up and to reduce the price of, or the manufacturing cost while not being adequate in a lot of the other, like, micronutrients that you may be deficient of. So, if you are taking a multivitamin, then it's probably better to actually take a multivitamin that addresses your particular deficiencies. So a lot of the, you know, vitamins and minerals in a multivitamin like zinc or iron or b vitamins, chances are you don't need it if you're eating, like, some animal products. If you're eating, like, a plant based diet, then yes, you might need iron and b vitamins and zinc. But too much iron, too much zinc can actually have, like, negative side effects. So instead of taking a multivitamin, I'm a much bigger fan of actually targeted supplementation of specific nutrients that you are specifically, deficient of. Next up, protein powder. So, yeah, I mean, protein powders are great if you're not getting enough, protein from your dietary sources, and it's a good, like, easy way to also get, generally, like, a higher amount of protein quickly. Electroly powder. So, Uberman's one of the sponsors. He's, LMNT. So this is a very high sodium electrolyte powder. I'm a fan of that as well. I think, is a great, like, a satchel that you can carry around with and, use it usually before my workouts. If you're, like, salting your food, then you don't need to, like, deliberately add an electrolyte powder into your day because this powder is one thousand milligrams of sodium per satchel, two hundred milligrams of potassium, and sixty milligrams of magnesium. So you are getting quite a lot of sodium, but you don't get, like, substantial amounts of potassium or magnesium. So you shouldn't use it as a dietary supplement. Yes. You get, sodium, but you also get sodium from the other foods that you're eating and you can easily add sodium to your food by just, you know, salting it. The potassium is something that you want to get actually much larger, like the RDA for potassium is four thousand seven hundred milligrams. And for the reduced hypertension and cardiovascular disease risk, you want to get at least three thousand four hundred milligrams. So this two hundred milligram potassium isn't gonna do much and and the sixty milligrams of magnesium also isn't gonna do Of course, it helps a little bit, but, you know, you don't wanna take 10 of these. You want maybe you want to take one or two before a workout, preferably because, pre hydrating with sodium is very beneficial for increasing athletic performance. But if you're already salting your food, you're also eating high sodium foods, then you have to be kind of, careful with, like, not taking too much sodium unless you're sweating a lot or unless you're training a lot. If you are working out in in, like, a hot climate or a hot gym environment for one hour, then you lose up to, like, 2,500 milligrams of, salt, within that time frame. And if you take a sauna as well, then, yeah, you do definitely, might want to replenish your sodium stores. But But for the potassium and magnesium, you want to eat the other foods that contain it like, fruits, vegetables, seafood, and etcetera. Essential amino acids, EAAs, so the nine essential amino acids, from my own personal experience, they work great. They help with muscle anabolism and reducing muscle catabolism. I find that they work especially especially great in a fasted state. Like, if you have eaten, if you have taken a protein powder, then you probably don't need the EAAs. But if you haven't, consumed anything, then the EAAs can work great in a fasted state. So they, like, reduce some of the muscle catabolism. Awesome. I love protein. Sleep supplements, magnesium threonate, apigenin, and l theanine, a k a Huberman's sleep cocktail. A hundred and forty five milligrams of magnesium threonate or two hundred milligrams of magnesium bisglycinate. Fifty milligrams of apigenin. A hundred to four hundred milligrams of l theanine. So threonate is the magnesium form that is the most bioavailable for the brain and is also the most beneficial for the brain, and, bisglycinate is the one that has a glycine attached to it. So both of them, I think, are great. They're the one of the most bioavailable forms of magnesium, definitely, like, the top tier magnesium supplements in my opinion. Apigenin is one of these, like, flavonoids inside herbs, especially like parsley and things of that, and it might help with C quality. I personally am more interested about the NAD boosting effects of Apigenin. So Apigenin is a CD thirty eight inhibitor, which can help you to raise your NAD levels. So from a longevity side, Apigenin is, yes, also like a supplement by inhibiting CD thirty eight. L theanine is an amino acid that, helps with, like, calmness and relaxation. Many people use L theanine combined with caffeine and coffee. So if you drink coffee, then take, like, two hundred, four hundred mg of the theanine. It's very safe, but you can also take it before bed if you are feeling somewhat, like, anxious or, you know, overly aroused. In addition to his sleep cocktail, Huberman takes two grams of glycine and a hundred milligrams of GABA three to four nights a week. Now glycine is something that I take every day. I take at least, like, five or ten milligrams a day on most days. Yes. It does help with sleep, but glycine does many other things. It helps collagen synthesis. It helps glucan synthesis, creatine synthesis, heme synthesis. It increases cytology. It lowers blood sugar levels. It reduces inflammation, and it also mimics methionine restriction. So glycine is, yeah, one of the cheapest, most effective, like, biggest bang for your buck in terms of a longevity supplement, in my opinion. The seed benefits are part of it, but I think most people would probably need at least five to ten grams of glycine every day because you don't really get that much from diet unless you're eating, like, this gelatin powder and you're chewing on all the drumsticks and stuff like that. Even then, you probably aren't getting enough. Even then, you might need to supplement at least three or five milligrams. Huberman also takes nine hundred milligrams of inositol, which is a sugar that, yes, it helps to produce, like, sleep neurotransmitters, but, it also is beneficial for blood sugar regulation. So, it has a lot of data about diabetes and insulin resistance. And some of the final supplements here to improve our heart health, vitamin k two, vitamin e, boron, conjugated linoleic acid, and vitamin d three. So five thousand IUs of vitamin d three per day combined with a k two is a good stack because, you need to kind of combine it because, the d three can raise calcium in the blood. So the k two pretty much, directs or helps utilize the vitamin d three as well as, direct, like, the calcium into the bones. So key k two is beneficial for heart health, but also bone health, generally. Boron is another, like, underground mineral that helps to boost testosterone levels. And at the same time, it helps to increase vitamin d three levels as well. So there you have it. Andrew Huberman's supplement stack. Let me know in the comments what you think about it. But if you want to check out my personal stack, then check out the link in the description for a free PDF. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.