I've taken dozens of different kinds of supplements in my life, even maybe a 100. But there are some key supplements that I'm not taking anymore because they might have some negative effects for longevity or overall health. And in this video, I'm gonna give you the five supplements that I stopped taking, and I think that you should too. Stop doing it. So the supplements that I'm gonna mention, I'll go through the reason why I don't take them anymore, what's the reason behind that, and I'll also mention the situations or people who might benefit from taking them. The first supplement is gonna be resveratrol. So resveratrol is one of the most known longevity supplements for at least two decades or something, and it actually, in my opinion, doesn't actually have any scientific data or studies showing even in animal models that it would increase longevity or, lifespan. You can check out my recent video about resveratrol and the studies involving longevity and lifespan. But a quick overview is that resveratrol the studies on resveratrol extending lifespan in some of the animal models were done in a poor way and they haven't been replicated. But there are quite a few studies in humans that it does improve things like cholesterol levels, lipids, blood sugar levels, and metabolic health. But the thing is resveratrol improves the metabolism only in the individuals with some aspects of metabolic dysfunction or metabolic disease. There is no evidence that it would have any additional benefit in people who are already metabolically healthy. And the dangerous thing to this is also that resveratrol can actually reduce your VO two max. It can decrease testosterone levels and it can potentially have a negative effect on muscle growth and muscle strength as well. So personally, I don't have any metabolic dysfunction. I'm in pretty perfect health And in my age, my my age right now is to just improve my fitness and maintain it for as long as possible. And that also includes the VO two max. So there is no reason for me to take rosero's roll because it's not going to improve my cholesterol or blood sugar levels or metabolic health because it's already excellent and it can only have a negative effect on my fitness and muscle performance. You son of a Number two is gonna be vitamin e. So back in 2005, there was actually one study or a meta analysis showing that high dose vitamin e supplementation may increase all cause mortality. So taking more or equal to four hundred IUs a day, which isn't that super high, that actually was was seen to increase all cause mortality in humans. Now another 2011 study found that there was no, effect on vitamin e and all cause mortality, but another 2012 following ones did show that there was some association between that beta carotene and vitamin e seem to increase mortality and so may higher doses of vitamin e. And lastly, there is a 2014 study finding that vitamin e can increase the risk of prostate cancer in men. Dietary supplementation with vitamin e significantly increases the risk of prostate cancer among healthy men. So the evidence isn't like one-sided. There is some, you know, worry to taking vitamin e as a supplement because of the increased risk of mortality. On the other hand, there is other studies finding that there is no association. So I think that, you know, it's something that I don't really, you know first of all, I don't think that there is a huge benefit to taking vitamin e every day because you get it in plenty of foods and, only in some certain cases of, let's say, vitamin e deficiency would you benefit from supplementing vitamin e. And vitamin e is something that I do take every once in a while if, I want to, like, bolster my body's protection against lipid peroxidation. So vitamin e, going to a restaurant or something or you tend to, like, overcook your, foods, then taking vitamin e in that case can be a good, like, you know, hack to kind of bolster against the lipid peroxidation and inflammation. But as a everyday supplement, it apparently isn't worth it, and it it's actually might increase the risk of mortality. And the reason has to do with that. The antioxidants, you don't want to block all the inflammation and you don't want to, like, leave your body vulnerable to oxidative stress. Part of the oxidative stress actually promotes longevity through hormesis. So in some animals, blocking all of the inflammation and oxidative stress actually makes them live shorter. So you do need small amounts of inflammation and oxidative stress to make your body stronger to increase all the antioxidant defenses inside your body and that is done through hormesis. But if you take high dose antioxidants all the time, including Vitamin E, then you might not gain those benefits. So that's why, personally, I don't see a benefit why I would need to take Vitamin E every day And there might be some negative side effects. But I do take vitamin e every once in a while if I'm like going to eat eat at a restaurant or consume like some bad fats for the lipid peroxidation. Fat. Next supplement on the list is carnitine. So it's an amino acid that is mostly used for increasing fat oxidation and fat burning as well as actually muscle growth because the carnitine can increase androgen receptor density which, is like one of the biggest predictors of muscle growth in response to exercise. But carnitine also has a dark side essentially that carnitine gets converted into this thing called trimethylamine enoxide or TMAO which, ease a cardiovascular disease risk factor. The results of this study demonstrate that chronic oral L carnitine supplementation markedly increases plasma TMAO levels in subjects with mitochondrial disorders. Another 2020 study, The Bright and Dark Side of L carnitine Supplementation, a systematic review, prolonged L carnitine supplementation in specific conditions may affect physical performance. On the other hand, carnitine supplementation elevates fasting plasma TMAO, compounds supposed to be pro atherogenic, so it increases the risk of heart disease and cardiovascular disease. Now many people do think that TMAO is not something to worry about that because you get a lot of TMAO from FISH as well and FISH apparently is, you know, cardioprotective. But personally, I think that it's something that I don't really want to gamble with. Like, I do get plenty of carnitine from, the regular meats and stuff like that. I haven't noticed any significant benefit on, like, muscle growth or fat oxidation from supplementing, carnitine. And if I can get away with not using carnitine as a supplement, which I have been doing quite nicely, I build muscle very easily and, I I may maintain a lean body fat percentage as well year round quite easily so I don't see a reason why I would need to take carnitine. And on top of that, there is the risk that it could increase the risk of atherosclerosis. And my family and there is some history of thrombosis and, cardiovascular disease in my family. So it's something that, you know, I just not don't need to take this risk. It's a trap. Next supplement on the list is gonna be chaga mushroom. So these medicinal mushrooms, chaga, lion's mane, and reishi, I think they're amazing. They're super powerful medicinal, let's say, compounds and supplements that can have amazing benefits for the immunity and overall, like, inflammation levels. Now the thing is that I do consume maybe chaga a few times a year but I do it mostly around, like, the winter season, the flu season because that's where I would need to, you know, kind of make my immune system somewhat stronger. If you take chaga, let's say, year round all the time then chance first of all, it can actually weaken your immune system because, I mean, it's still a small hermetic stressor. So you don't wanna keep your body under chronic hermetic stress. And on top of that, the mesenchyal mushrooms can also, lower DHT. There's a small, like, let's say, possibility or a link between there that these, mushrooms can lower testosterone levels if they're taken chronically. So I'm not gonna take chaga, you know, all the time because of that reason. I might take it only a few times, a year especially when I need to strengthen my immune system. And last supplement on this list is gonna be calcium. So calcium is obviously an essential mineral. You do need to eat calcium to support your bones and, higher dietary calcium intake is also associated with lower body weight, more fat loss, and more muscle tissue as well. So calcium is amazing. Calcium can improve your REM sleep and, make you more relaxed, kind of, but the key here is the dietary calcium. The problem with supplemental calcium is that it actually is associated with increased mortality and increased cardiovascular disease risk. So again, the supplemental calcium just tends to accumulate, causes calcification of the, of the body whereas a dietary calcium isn't associated with that. And I do consume a lot of dietary calcium, I consume a lot of dairy, but I don't take a calcium supplement because of the risk of calcification. Now people who have a very low dairy or calcium intake, those people would probably benefit from taking a calcium supplement. But if you're already eating plenty of dairy and you're not specifically calcium deficient, you know, usually it's gonna be postmenopausal women who are at a higher risk of calcium deficiency, then I don't think that it's kind of a good idea to take calcium as a supplement. But do you want to slow down aging? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological cock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@simlun.com and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe. Notification bell is all my name is sim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.