Rapamycin is an immunosuppressant drug used to prevent organ transportation rejection, but many people use it as a longevity drug because in animal studies, it does have life extension effects. In this video, we're gonna take a look at a new study that examined the effects of off label rapamycin use in healthy human adults. But do you want to slow down aging and live longer? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to extend their health span. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@seamlan.com and I'll send you the details. Do it. So one of the authors of the study is Matt Caberlein, who I had had on my podcast as well. And he's a very established longevity researcher who's been doing it for decades. And this study is pretty much looking at people who are taking rapamycin off label for generally the sake of promoting longevity and they just look at what are the results. It's not like a clinical trial. It's not really controlled. It's just like a mostly like a questionnaire based, but it still can give us some insight into the these three hundred and thirty three adults and their experience with this drug. The longevity benefits of rapamycin are generally mediated by inhibition of mechanistic target of rapamycin or mTOR, which is this growth pathway that is involved in longevity and aging of all species generally. And, yeah, inhibiting mTOR with rapamycin has been found to increase lifespan in laboratory organisms including yeast, nematode worms, fruit flies, and mice. And in addition to the lifespan extension, rapamycin has other healthspan benefits in rodents such as lower cancer incidence, improved cognition, improved kidney function, preservation of tendon, improved intestinal function, and reduced gut dysbiosis. So let's look at the demographics of the people in the study. So we have them divided into rapamycin users and non users. So there were three hundred and thirty three rapamycin users and a 172 non rapamycin users. I went through the table and, the participants in both groups were actually pretty similar. So they were around the same age, their height, their BMI, their weight was also pretty much the same in both genders. Of course, the men are a bit heavier than the women, but, both men and women in the same groups in the different groups were, similar. They had similar lifestyle habits. Both of them, both groups exercised in a similar way, ate a healthy diet pretty much and also followed actually aspects of time restricted eating or intermittent fasting. Tobacco use was, quite similar. Interestingly enough, the rapamycin users were a bit higher drinkers, so, like, more than two alcoholic drinks per day. So twelve point seven percent for rapamycin user men and seven point three percent in non rapamycin users men and eight point two percent in rapamycin women and four point eight percent in rapamycin women. Of course, this is just statistics. But, yeah, like the rapamycin users actually generally had a little bit higher alcohol use, but everything else was pretty much the same in terms of their healthy lifestyle. So it kind of helps to confound for the healthy user bias at least a little bit. How long had those people been using the rapamycin? So, about twenty three percent of the women were using the rapamycin for less than a month and eleven point nine percent of the men who had had used the rapamycin for less than a month. One to six months, twenty six percent for women, thirty point four percent for men. Six months to a year, sixteen point four percent for the women, nineteen point two percent for men. One to three years, twenty three point five percent for women, twenty four point seven percent for men. And over three years which is a long time, 15% for women, 9.6% for men. So there were both like new users of Replicon so I would consider using Replicon for less than six months still relatively like a new user. And, we also had long term users, so one to three years actually. Almost like a quarter of the entire group, was using rapamycin, for, like, a long term already. What kind of dosages did they use? So the most common dosage was somewhere between three to six milligrams, which is also like the clinical, dosage for the, clinic kidney transportation. There was, of course, more men in the study than women. But, yeah, men generally took, like, even like in the larger doses, there were significantly more men taking the larger doses above six milligrams. And the only dosages of per week eighteen and twenty milligrams, there's also, like, I think, like, there's probably, like, one one MEN for each of those. So the MEN were kind of more more experimental with the higher doses as well. You son of a So what did the rapamycin users experience? What was their perceived benefits of the users using rapamycin. Of course, we have to keep in mind that the placebo effect is quite strong and, of course, if you are taking rapamycin off label, then chances are you're doing it for the longevity benefits and you believe that it has benefits for your longevity and health. So it has a huge placebo effect that is hard to control for, but we can just have to, like, keep it in mind that people taking rapamycin off label generally would expect that it has longevity benefits and that may make them perceive the benefits as well to the, you know, getting all these benefits from taking rapamycin. So rapamycin has antiaging properties. What do they think? Agree. Sixty five percent of the people taking rapamycin believed that it has these antiaging benefits and zero percent disagreed and neither was thirty four point five percent. So these are the individual probably like, I don't know. Maybe it does. I'm just maybe taking it for some other reason but, you know, chances are they're taking it for the longevity benefits. My health has improved since taking rapamycin. 44.7% agree with that. So almost like half, a bit less than half, 5.7% disagree and 49.5% are neither. So that exactly 50% pretty much are the ones that don't know if it has improved their health or not. I'm happier. 34.8% agree. 4.8% disagree. 60.4% don't know if it has improved, has made them happier. My brain works better. 35% agree, 5.1% disagree, 59.5 are in the middle. I feel younger, 37.5% agree, 5.7% disagree and 56.8% are, yeah, in the middle. I have more energy, 38.7% agree, 6.3% disagree, 55% are neither. Family and friends have commented that I look good, 38.7% agree, 7.2% disagree, and 5.1% are neither. So it's a pretty long list. I'm not gonna go through it a lot more. But the general trend is the same that around, like, one third or one quarter of the people taking rapamycin saw the benefits related to, like, how they feel, how do they look, interest in sex, arthritis, urinary flow, quality of sleep, around, like, one third to one fourth of the people saw or perceived to gain those benefits. So it's like a still perceived subjective experience. And, maybe, like, very smaller amount very insignificant amount of people disagreed with those perceived benefits and the vast majority of people generally have or a lot more, even like 80 or 90% in some cases, 80%, 70%, some somewhere between there. Those individuals are, like, in the middle. They don't know. So they're neither. So it's again, you know, many people do experience the placebo effect much more strongly if they believe in the supplement, etcetera. And a lot of people who don't, like, really feel that they don't feel any difference, they're gonna be somewhat in the middle that neither. Like, it should work or I think it should work or something, but, I haven't myself, like, you know, experienced anything. Disappointed. What about the negative side effects? So there are also reported negative side effects and, reported frequency potentially negative health conditions experienced in the last three months by the survey respondents. And in this analysis, they only included rapamycin users who had been taking rapamycin for at least ninety days or three months at least. Abdominal cramps, only seven percent of the, total participants experienced. And among the non users, which was a 100 and seventy two participants, fourteen percent experienced abdominal cramps. Among the rapamycin users, so among two hundred and forty five individuals, only two percent experienced abdominal cramps. Depression, fifteen percent of the non users experienced it, and four point one percent of rapamycin users experienced. Abdominal pain, twenty point nine percent of the non users and eight point six percent of rapamycin users. Muscle tightness, forty five point three percent among non users and twenty nine point eight percent among the rapamycin users. So among these negative side effects, rapamycin users did experience less of these negative side effects with the exception of mouth ulceration or just mouth sores. So among the non users, four point seven percent experienced mouth ulcers whereas fourteen point seven percent among rapamycin users, almost like three times more, they experienced mouth ulcers. And that Matt Caberland also talked about that in the podcast that this is the kind of main negative side effect that almost all not all of them but, you know, a lot of the the most common negative side effect of rapamycin use is the mouth, ulcers. Overall, I think it's a pretty interesting study. Of course, it's not an actual clinical trial. It doesn't really tell you about the actual, you know, effects of rapamycin. A lot of it might be placebo because the people who are taking rapamycin off label already kind of believe in it or they're doing it for the sake of longevity. But I think it's still worthwhile to, like, research these individuals who aren't, like, yeah, like in the clinical trials and to see, like, what are their perceived experience while taking rapamycin. Now personally, do I think that rapamycin has any longevity benefits or does it extend human lifespan? I think it's too early to say that. There are, of course, yeah, like these dozens of animal studies showing that it does extend lifespan but, you know, you know, it's very almost impossible to, actually know whether or not it works in humans. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized, stay empowered.