We're gonna take a little break from hacking the ego into hacking the metabolism because the metabolism itself is still one of the, you know, crucial things for your existence as a whole. Your metabolism creates your reality in a sense that your consciousness, your body, your mind, they all work on your metabolic engine. And the word metabolism itself translates into change. Everything is always changing in your metabolism. It's always running to some degree. And there are hundreds, even more, different pathways and processes in the body happening all the time. And to be healthy, to feel great, to have energy, to lose fat, to build muscle, you would need to at least know to a certain degree how to hack it or how to control it. So, that's going to be the purpose of my presentation, to give you five principles and five keys or cheat codes, as I like to call them, to improving your metabolic health. First of all, I'll start by refuting a common misconception which is that your metabolic rate slows down with age. How many people have you heard about it? Yeah. Many people. It's, you know, it's like common knowledge but based on actual science it's not really the case. At least it's not as severe as many people think it is. So, your metabolic rate actually stays relatively stable throughout your entire adulthood and it only stops to or starts to decrease about 0.7% after your 60s. So before that it stays still relatively the same. So, the aging process kicks in only when you get, in your elderly years. So that's actually good news because it goes to show that a lot of the things that control your metabolic rate and your metabolic health are determined by your lifestyle in general. And the reason why people start to gain weight with age actually has to do with just their current state of metabolism and their degree of insulin resistance. So, insulin resistance is one of the most common metabolic health conditions out there. It promotes diabetes, cardiovascular disease, Alzheimer's, cancer, and, is generally not a good thing. So what insulin resistance does is that it makes it more easy for you to store weight or store fat and, a lot of it, you know, has to do with your body's inability to store carbohydrates and glucose in the cells. And as a result, the glucose molecules stay in the bloodstream for longer. They start to cause more damage over time and that's where all the ailments and metabolic disorders come in. And this also leads to leptin resistance, which refers to your body's inability to receive the satiety cues you would normally get from eating food. And as a result of that, people overeat calories and they gain weight from that as well. So the process works normally that you eat food, you get the calories, your fat cells release leptin and the leptin will tell the brain that it has received enough calories and as a result of that you stop eating or you're satiated. With leptin resistance, which usually comes from insulin resistance or eating very hyper palatable processed foods, then this leptin signaling, becomes dysfunctional and the brain doesn't receive the signal. And as a result you keep eating, you overeat and you gain fat from that. So hack number one to override this process is resistance trading. So lifting weights, doing calisthenics, any form of resistance is, I think, one of the most underrated and the most effective ways to actually improve your insulin sensitivity, leptin sensitivity, as well as overall metabolic health. And, the funny thing about your metabolism is that the vast majority of your metabolic rate or how many calories you burn per day actually doesn't come from exercise or the activities you do. The huge vast majority of it, over 60%, comes from your basal metabolic rate which is the processes that are required for you to stay alive. Breathing, different digestion processes, metabolic rate, heartbeat, all of that comes from your basal metabolic rate and the more muscle you have the higher your basal metabolic rate is. So you're going to be burning more calories at rest without doing anything which is, you know, very beneficial. You don't have to exert that much effort to stay metabolically healthy and to burn calories as well. The other things that contribute to your daily calorie needs are exercise activity thermogenesis which is exercise which is actually a very small amount. Non exercise activity thermogenesis like fidgeting, tapping your feet. Some people are very hyperactive so they're burning more calories in so doing. And the last one is the thermic effect of foods which refers to how many calories you burn to digest a particular food. So muscle by itself, just by existing, burns two to three times more calories than fat. And, if you have more muscle then you'll have a higher basal metabolic rate and generally you will be healthier as a result of that as well. And resistance training is the only way to actually build muscle unless you're, maybe doing some gene editing or something like that. Like these myostatin deficient cows that build muscle without doing anything. Humans aren't like that so we need to lift something and do resistance training to build muscle tissue actually. Exercise, especially resistance training, also increases your insulin sensitivity and glucose uptake dramatically and it can be almost like a 100 times more efficient. If you're exercising then you activate these different glucose disposal translocators like LUT4 and that helps you to shuttle glucose into muscle tissue even without insulin. So it's very powerful and, it's actually more powerful than insulin itself if you exercised before. From a resistance training perspective then, free weights, the ones that, require you to, you know, enforce some balance like barbells, dumbbells, barbell squats, deadlifts, bench press, those, they based on research do have a more superior hormonal response as well. They release more growth hormone, they increase more testosterone, they increase protein synthesis more, they make you build more muscle and those kind of things. And based on the research then the heavier loads are better than lighter loads and moderate loads with the exception that if you're doing moderate weights like about 10 repetitions of your maximums then, keeping the rest shorter can overcome that. So it needs to be heavy and it needs to be somewhat intense to get this beneficial hormonal response from training. And like lighter weights, what I call like weights with cardio cardio with weights, like this a lot of lighter weights, they don't really give you this testosterone boost and then it'll give you like a growth hormone response either. Hack number two is my favorite because I like sweet potato fries and pancakes. It's called carb back loading. So, you know, the common knowledge is that, you need carbs breakfast and maybe lunch and don't eat any carbs after six because you somehow magically store them as fat, which isn't true. I would argue that it's much smarter to eat carbs later in the day instead of the morning. And the reason for that has to do with the natural circadian rhythm. Yes, we are more insulin sensitive in the earlier parts of the day, but not in the morning immediately after waking up. When you wake up in the morning, you're actually somewhat insulin resistant because of the higher amounts of cortisol your body produces naturally. And cortisol, the stress hormone, it increases fat burning. It's good for that but it also makes you insulin resistant to a certain extent that it makes it easier to store calories as fat. So it's not a smart idea to eat like Cheerios or croissants for breakfast because you know you are more prone to store them as fat. And in the morning there's also obviously the, ghrelin response, the hunger response in the morning that happens. You may be somewhat hungry in the morning. But this is based on research also short term. You don't stay hungry all day if you, you know, don't eat. So the ghrelin and circadian rhythm also fluctuates. And lastly, growth hormone which helps your body to burn fat. It doesn't really help with muscle growth but it helps with burning fat. This also rises a few hours after you wake up. So eating breakfast with high amounts of carbohydrates would, basically turn off all these processes. You turn off fat burning for the rest of the day almost and you prevent the rise in growth hormone and you don't get these beneficial responses, hormonal responses that would occur. So I'm not saying that you shouldn't eat breakfast, I'm saying you shouldn't eat carbs for breakfast. It's actually much better to stay lower carb with higher protein for the satiety effects as well as the fat burning effects. And instead the carbs should be eaten after workouts. The best time to do it is after resistance training because like I said resistance training activates blood four receptors that increases your glucose disposal by a 100 fold compared to being sedentary. So, your muscles they can store about 400 or 500 grams of glycogen which is huge. That's almost like 2,000 calories of carbohydrates. And if you have depleted your muscle glycogen with heavy exercise then those 2,000 calories almost immediately get sunk into the muscle glycogen if you eat or if you seriously depleted your muscle glycogen. But for that you need to exercise. You need to exercise before eating the carbs and the following blood sugar response from that meal would also be significantly lower because of the enhanced glucose disposal from the exercise. Liver glycogen, that is only a very small amount that you can store about one hundred-one 150 grams and only like 500 calories. This gets depleted with fasting as well so it takes only twenty four hours to deplete the liver glycogen and, yeah, in so doing you go into ketosis as well. So it's, yeah, not a good idea to eat a bunch of carbs in the morning that would prevent these pathways from getting activated. So it's better to wait after you've lifted weights with a resistance rating because then the carbs themselves would have less effect on your blood sugar response and calorie intake. So this is an overview about the effect of different macronutrients on your system. So protein obviously has the highest thermic effect of food, so you burn the most calories. For digesting protein, it's up to 20% to 30%. Carbohydrates actually also have a very also decent, thermic effect of seven to 15% and fat has the lowest thermic effect. So you burn the least calories digesting fat. So it's actually easiest to do, store fat as fat as well. Whereas carbohydrates, they, can also increase your thyroid function and metabolic rate by doing that. So, it's just the timing of when you do it. Earlier in the day, you want to stay low carb and ketotic with higher protein and high fiber. And later, after you've done resistance training, then you want to eat carbs as like a, you know, they would be sunk into your muscles. Hack number three, glucose disposal agents. There are also supplements and natural ingredients that can enhance glucose disposal. The best one or the kind of one of the best ones is vinegar. Apple cider vinegar is very common. And, yeah, just adding apple cider vinegar or any any vinegar to your meal, salad dressing or just drinking it from water before eating, that can dramatically lower the following glucose response from that meal. So, yeah, instead of eating just pasta or, potatoes, then, have some apple cider vinegar before that and that's gonna be beneficial. Next up, walking is very effective in lowering the postprandial, glucose response. And, doing them more frequently is actually better than having, like, a one single session of long walks. So three fifteen minute walks spread throughout the day is better than a forty five forty five minute walk in, only once a day. So, yeah, after every meal, go for a ten to fifteen minute walk. It's gonna cut the, blood sugar response in half. Chromium is one of my favorite minerals. So chromium enhances insulin sensitivity and allows glucose to enter the cells. If you're insulin resistant and you don't have enough chromium, then the blood sugar is gonna stay elevated for a lot longer because your body can't store the glucose anywhere. You're insulin resistant and you don't have any glucose disposal agents either. If you're insulin resistant and you have enough chromium, you take it as a supplement or from dietary sources, then, of course it's not you don't clear the bloodstream completely but it's actually still much better. Some of the glucose will get in thanks to the chromium that, activates chromodulin inside the cells that helps to shuttle glucose into the cells. If you have insulin sensitivity or like your training and then you have chromium as well then that's the kind of magic bullet in that sense. That's the most effective way to clear the bloodstream very efficiently. Berberine or dehydroberine, the more enhanced version, is also a very powerful glucose dissolves agent and it also lowers insulin. With Berberine the danger is that it also activates AMPK which is, antagonizing towards, like, protein synthesis and mTOR activation. So you don't want to take berberine, like, after you've lifted weights, but it's good to take it maybe before or, on the days that you haven't lifted weights. Here are some additional ones, alpha lipoic acid, magnesium, cinnamon, quernilla silvestre, bismillar extract and vanadium, very common supplements and even like cinnamon as a spice is very good. Hack number four, the microbiome. It's a very vast, complex ecosystem. And we all know that by science now that the microbiome can have a huge impact on your insulin sensitivity and body composition as a whole. So here are some, strains of bacteria or probiotics that can benefit your metabolic health and weight loss like the bacillus, things from starting from sauerkraut ending with raw dairy beneficial. Akkermansia very good. You get it from polyphenol rich berries and prebiotic fibers like artichoke and things like that. Pectin, that helps to feed clostridia, a type of bacteria. You get it mostly from apple skins and pectin as a supplement is very good. I've noticed very great results from that. And time received eating or immuno fasting also helps with the microbiome and actually helps to pretty much create more brown fat or beige fat by converting some of the white fat into, brown fat. Hack number five, not three, is a high protein intake. So like I mentioned, protein has the highest thermic effect of food and, it also burns the most calories as a result of that. Protein also helps with muscle growth. So if you eat protein, enough protein, you'll build more muscle and you have a higher basal metabolic rate as a result of that. And the higher intake of protein also helps with weight loss and satiety. Based on research, the kind of maximum threshold after which you don't see any additional muscle growth benefits is around 1.6 grams per kilogram of body weight. So for some someone who weighs seventy kilograms or eighty kilograms, they would need around, 140 grams, 130 grams, somewhere between there at least. And any more than that doesn't really help with muscle growth, but it may help with fat loss because you're burning so many calories for digesting the protein. Obviously, you still need to be in a calorie deficit but protein can help you to create a bigger calorie deficit by burning calories for digestion as well as keeping you satiated. So as an overview, here are the five metabolic cheat codes or hacks. Very effective ones. Number one, resistance training, some form of exercise that involves resistance. That's the best way to increase your insulin sensitivity and metabolic rate. Number two, car back loading. Eat your carbohydrates after exercise because that's the best time to do it. You're the most insulin sensitive after resistance training. Number three, use different glucose disposal agents. The easiest ones, vinegar and walking. Number four, microbiome. Eat different kinds of probiotic foods as well as polyphenol rich berries and vegetables. And lastly, higher protein intake that helps with the metabolic rate and, muscle growth. All right. Thanks for listening and, yeah. If you have any questions then I'll be around for a little bit.