Longevity is thought to be for millionaires only, and many of the longevity interventions are considered to cost a lot of money. But there are also some very cheap longevity supplements that everyone can get access to. In this video, I'm gonna give you the five cheapest longevity supplements. Do it. Number one is gonna be creatine monohydrate. So creatine, one of the cheapest and the most effective, sports performance hand handling supplement in the world. It's been researched for decades and it has multiple benefits on muscle performance and muscle strength as well. With age, having adequate amount of muscle mass and muscle strength is actually quite vital and it's almost inversely associated with longevity. So if you if you don't have any muscle mass and poor muscle strength then your risk of getting hip fractures and just, you know, frailty and sarcopenia is also much, greater and creatine supplementation may have, you know, like, anti sarcopenic effect in terms of being able to maintain muscle tissue that, declines with their age. Accumulating evidence suggests that exogenous creatine supplementation has the potential to increase aging muscle mass, muscle performance, and decrease the risk of falls and possibly attenuate inflammation and loss of bone mineral. Creatine supplementation also increases the quality of life in the elderly even without associated resistance training. These data indicate that creatine supplementation without associated training in the elderly could potentially delay atrophy of muscle mass, improve endurance and strength, and increase bone strength, and thus maybe a safe therapeutic strategy to help decrease loss in functional performance of everyday tasks. Now historically, creatine has been very cheap. Like, you could get it for even just a few dollars, but since the pandemic hit then the supply chains of creatine were a bit disrupted and the price of creatine, at least in most of the world, did increase quite significantly almost three times. But still, I think what you get from creatine is still so, you know, effective and one of the most cost effective strategies to improve the, decline of muscle mass and muscle strength that occurs with aging. And, of course, besides that, you also get to the cognitive and, like, the brain benefits as well. Next supplement is gonna be glycine plus N acetylcysteine. So I'm gonna put these, two together because they work in conjunction in terms of increasing your body's glutathione levels which is the master antioxidant and, glycine and NLCD plus cysteine supplementation or GLINAC in older adults improves glutathione deficiency, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, inflammation, insulin resistance, endothelial dysfunction, genotoxicity, muscle strength and cognition. So twenty four weeks of supplementing glycine plus in a c in older adults was well tolerated and lowered oxidative stress and increased glutathione levels and mitochondrial dysfunction, decreased inflammation, insulin resistance, and pretty much, you know, improves virtually all biomarkers that are related to inflammation. And, yeah, inflammation pretty much affects virtually all metabolic processes in a negative way in excess at least. And with age, you see this increase in basal inflammation levels. NLCD013 supplementation also has, like, immunomodulatory effects and, at least in patients with, tuberculosis, then NAC does, pretty much is associated with a reduction in all cause mortality within ninety days. In patients with septic shock and acetylcysteine administration is also associated with a reduced thirty day mortality in the ICU patients. So just boosting your body's gluathione levels is very important in terms of affecting your immune system in a positive way, lowering baseline oxidative stress, lowering inflammation, and just having, like, overall, like, a protective effect against aging. Both glycine and NAC are reasonably cheap. Like, they're both very easily accessible, and you can find them pretty much anywhere. And last supplement is gonna be vitamin D. So as a hormone, the, vitamin D is pretty important. It's the master hormone, in my opinion, in regulates the immune system, regulates hormones and metabolism overall. And vitamin D status is associated with mortality as well. So like low levels of vitamin D are associated with increased risk of mortality and too high excess vitamin D levels are also actually associated with increased mortality. So it's like a u shaped curve where the lowest risk of mortality is in the middle. The optimal ranges for vitamin d are around fifty to a hundred fifty nanomoles per liter, which is gonna be around fifty to sixty nanograms per milliliter. But as a supplement, then vitamin d has also been actually found to be associated with, reduction in mortality risk. In this 2014 meta analysis, they took a 159 randomized clinical trials with over 95,000 participants, and they found that vitamin d three seemed to decrease mortality in in elderly people living independently or in institutional care. Another 2012, analysis on vitamin d and calcium found that, vitamin d with calcium reduced mortality in the elderly. Vitamin d with or without calcium reduced mortality by seven percent. So obviously it's just important to get your vitamin d levels optimized from sunlight first and foremost but, in cases if you have vitamin d deficiency, your vitamin blood vitamin d levels are low then it is also worthwhile to take some additional vitamin e supplement in the short term and it's not gonna have like any negative side effects in the long term if you keep the dosage around like, you know, depends on the deficiency how much you need. Like a maintenance dose for someone living in the North in the wintertime could be something between two thousand, four thousand, five thousand IUs depending on their vitamin d levels. But if you do have, like, an actual severe vitamin d deficiency, then anything like ten thousand IUs can actually also be somewhat good. So there you have it. These are the five cheapest longevity supplements. There are certainly probably more of them, but this is the list that I put together into this video to, you know, talk about. Do you want to slow down aging and live longer? If yes, then I am looking for more people who want to reverse their biological age. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@simlun.com, and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification mode will not even be seen. Stay optimized, stay empowered.