Intimate fasting has been one of the most popular dietary trends over the past few years. But what if I told you that one study found that skipping meals, especially skipping breakfast, was associated with increased mortality? So in this video, we're gonna take a look at the study. But if you you do want to slow down aging and live longer, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word healthtoinfo@simlun.com and I'll send you the details. Do it. So the study was published actually in August 2022. Meal skipping and short term meal intervals are associated with increased risk of all cause and cardiovascular disease mortality among US adults, total of twenty four thousand adults over 40 years of age. They participated in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey of the years 1999 to 2014. And a conclusion of the study was that eating one meal per day was associated with an increased risk of all cause and cardiovascular disease mortality. Skipping breakfast was associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease mortality, whereas skipping lunch and dinner was associated with increased risk of all cause mortality. A lung participant with three meals per day, a meal interval of less than four point five hours in two adjacant meals was associated with higher all cause mortality. Now, first of all, this is an epidemiologist study, which means that it's a food questionnaire based study and we're gonna pretty much unravel the underlying reason why there was associated increased risk of mortality in the people who skipped meals and did intermittent fasting. So as you can see, there are four columns here. Meal frequency one, two, three, and over. Four meals per day. There's actually the least participants in the one meal a day group and they were all pretty much the same age on average. So, actually, you can see, actually, the one meal that they had the lowest amount of calories on approximation, but, they actually have the unhealthiest healthy index score. So they have the lowest healthy eating index score which means that they're eating the unhealthiest diet on average. And as you can see the three meals a day group actually has the highest healthy eating index score which means that they have the healthiest diet which makes sense a lot of these and it kind of supports the healthy user bias. The people who are eating the three meals a day generally also follow a healthier lifestyle. They have a healthier diet overall, which of course contributes to the higher mortality risk in the one meal a day group. Snacks frequency is also the highest in the one meal a day group. So they weren't actually eating one meal a day, they were actually eating they had 2.8 snacks per day on average. So that's another misleading finding of this study. Next up, we have the gender. So the one meal a day group has also the highest amount of males, fifty five percent, and we know that males generally have shorter life expectancy than women and the three meals a day has forty five percent women. So the lowest amount of males and the highest amount of women, at least based on the epidemiology, we know that women live longer than men. Disappointed. Looking at race and ethnicity, then we can find that there's also very big discrepancies between the groups. So the 1,000,000 a day group has the least amount of, non Hispanic whites and the highest amount of non Hispanic blacks. Unfortunately, there is a higher or shorter life expectancy among non Hispanic blacks and, the whites generally have a higher life expectancy. Education, so the one meal a day group also had the worst education or the least amount of education, as you can see, less than high school diploma, 30% versus the three meals a day group at only fifteen percent of less than high school diploma and college graduate or above sixty percent versus forty one percent. So again, we know that education is a protective factor against mortality and all different kinds of diseases. If you are higher educated, you tend to follow a healthier lifestyle, you have higher income, you have higher socioeconomic status, and you just have better health as a result of that as well. So poverty is one of the biggest, let's say, risk factors for dying of any cause, which means they have less access to health care, they have less access to good medical, procedures, etcetera, and they're less likely to follow the healthy lifestyle as well. Smoking status, so the one million lady people smoked the most. So the, there was least amount of never smokers in, the one milledi group and the highest amount of never smokers in the three meals a group. So almost half of the people who ate three meals a day have never smoked whereas only thirty seven percent of the one milledi group have never smoked which means that up to forty two percent of them were current smokers versus 15%. So there's almost like three times more smokers in the one millile day group than in the three millile day group which of course will explain the reason why they have higher mortality risk and higher cardiovascular disease mortality especially. Smoking is known to cut at least ten years of your life, if not even more. If you get cancer and cardiovascular disease, both of them, then you can even cut like twenty years of your life. The one mil a day people were also the most frequent heavy drinkers and they were the least amount of non drinkers. Physical activity, another important factor measured by METs, so metabolic equivalents, the, one meal a day group had the highest amount of people in the least amount of physical activity, 51 versus 41. And the highest activity group over 1,200 MET minutes per week, 39% versus 44%, which means that the three meals a day group had higher physical activity compared to the one meal a day group. Food insecurity, so 18.2 versus 7.1%, which means that, yeah, the, one meal a day group had significantly higher food insecurity, which explains the poverty aspect, the lower socioeconomic status. So, yeah, like, the reason why they were eating one meal a day and probably the reason why they were, you know, smoking more as well and, consuming more alcohol was because they didn't have actually food. It's a trap. So as you can see, this study has many holes in it and it's definitely not, like, honest in my opinion to, report that, skipping meals and I mean, it is honest by the sense that skipping meals is associated with increased mortality and increased cardiovascular disease mortality in this study because they just looked at those people who, among the people who skipped meals, they had the worst eating habits. They had they were the higher heaviest smokers, heaviest drinkers, they were the least physically active, and they were also the poorest, the lowest education. So, I mean, it's yeah. Like, it's associated with the higher mortality, but it's not that the skipping of the meal and skipping of the breakfast was that's what caused it. It was mostly the other things that actually caused the mortality risk. So it's very dishonest and disingenuous, in my opinion, to kind of make the conclusions that skipping meals is gonna be bad for you when in reality the reason why those people in this study died was because the other things: they were poorer, they had less education, they smoked, they were less physically active, and they just had an unhealthy lifestyle. There are actually numerous previous studies, 2012 and 2013, 2015, kind of linking together breakfast skipping with increased risk of diabetes. But, if you look at all the, like, nuances of the studies, then you can find that it's yeah. Like, those people who skip meals, they either overeat. Later in the day, they smoke, and, they also just follow unhealthier lifestyle habits or they just can't afford to eat that much, which is the reason why they died. I mean, they don't die to poverty, but poverty is what causes their, let's say, poorer health in a lot of ways. So the point of this video is that, you don't have to necessarily fear that skipping meals is bad for you. Of course, there's another story about muscle mass and muscle maintenance, but it doesn't inherently increase your risk of mortality. Maybe in the elderly who are, let's say, 70 or 80 years old, for them, of course, I wouldn't recommend eating one meal a day or two meals a day. They need to be consuming more protein to maintain their body weight and in the elderly people lower body weight is actually associated with mortality through sarcopenia and just malnutrition. So the elderly certainly need to make sure that they do get adequate amounts of protein throughout the day and preferably in, like, three meals. But someone who is in their twenties, forties, even fifties probably has nothing to worry about. That But one of the easiest, lowest hanging fruit for adding years to your life is making sure you don't get the chronic diseases such as diabetes, obesity, kidney disease, heart disease, Alzheimer's, those things. And if fasting helps you to control your calorie intake and achieve that, then it's not going to shorten your lifespan. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized, stay empowered.