Welcome back to the channel. My name is Sim Lund and today we do another Instagram Q and A. If you want to ask me a question then follow me on Instagram at Sim Lund and I'm doing those Q and As regularly there. Alright, first question. What time do you usually train? So, over the past years, it has changed slightly. I used to work out, around 4PM and 5PM, but nowadays, I tend to actually work out around, like, 1PM, 2PM. So I've shifted it a little bit slightly earlier because I've also started to eat a bit earlier as well. I finished eating around five or 6PM. Whereas in the past it was like 7PM. So yeah, it's just like a two hour shift backward to or towards earlier. I haven't noticed any like huge difference in terms of, you know, obviously how I train. But, yeah, it's just, like a deliberate choice that I've made. I've never, like, really worked out first thing in the morning. I don't, like feel like doing that and I definitely don't work out late in the evening. Do you want to slow down aging? If you do, I'm looking for a few more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested then send me an email to info@simlund.com and I'll send you all the details. Why does coffee reduce absorption of minerals, creatine, etc? So, with the minerals is probably just the phytic acid in the coffee that can bind to certain minerals. In some cases it's good. Like I think it's good to bind to some of the iron that you eat with coffee because, you know, excess iron is very problematic, especially for men and, but not not necessary for women. So it depends on the situation but overall I think it's good to bind to some iron for example and, in some cases like to excess calories as well. If you eat like a high calorie meal then it's good that the coffee can bind to some of the calories or like make you, you know, increase your metabolic rate first of all but also excrete some of the calories. When it comes to creatine then, yeah. It is, you know, for many years it has been taught that caffeine and creatine don't go well together, that you don't absorb creatine if you mix it with caffeine. Now the evidence is a bit more like two sided or is it like apparently it doesn't really matter that much. But yeah, like certain minerals for sure that coffee makes you excrete probably from the phytic acid and the caffeine can also play in some part probably. Is heart disease reversible? Well, depends on the severity of of heart disease and, you know, if we had a heart attack already, or some other like, event stroke or something. So, you know, I always I do believe that, you know, almost every medical condition can be reversible unless it is like some very late stage cancer or something like that, then you probably have to like just do damage control. But even then, like damage control is still better than, you know, giving up and, you know, going kind of yielding to the condition. I think it's always worthwhile to, you know, put as much effort in and, to, you know, make sure that you are doing everything you can in terms of your lifestyle and the diet that you can do that. With a heart disease then, yeah, there's I think, you know, obviously there's many medications now that you can use even like statins and things like that have probably saved a lot more people, from that, even if they have started to take the statins after an event. But yeah, I think, you know, there's, you know, condition there's like situations where it is very much possible. Obviously, it's preventable. Again, I think the main message is that it's preventable. Like if you don't have heart disease right now then, you know, it doesn't mean that you can't get in the future, but it definitely means that you can prevent it for sure. I see I'm currently reducing carbs in my diet. What side effects should I expect? So usually, when you are restricting carbs and going on keto, then the biggest side effect is just the water weight loss. You excrete a lot more water because you hold on to less water because of the lack of insulin. You may also experience, like, brain fog and lethargy and fatigue from the Kia flu if it is your first time doing that. So, yeah, there's no, like, real negative side effects besides that. You may like lose strength at gym. You may be more tired. You may lose water weight. And, the other side effects could also be that you feel like less hungry. That usually can happen. Tried everything but not able to lose fat. So, you know, this obviously is very common by a lot of people to claim that, you know, they tried everything, etcetera. And in a few very, very few cases, it is it is true that they have literally, you know, tried everything and nothing seems to work. And in that case, there has occurred some, like, metabolic adaptation that has reduced their basal metabolic rate and, you know, caused this plateau. But in most of the cases, it usually has to do with the individual not really, you know, doing things right or not knowing if they're doing something wrong. So if you're not really tracking all your calories, if you're not really pretty much weighing all the food and measuring everything and, you know, looking at exactly what you eat, then in those cases you don't really know if you are doing everything correctly, if you haven't done that. Because, literally there are studies that people think they're eating like, you know, 500 calories less, but in reality they're actually eating 500 calories more. So, there's a huge discrepancy between people, you know, thinking how many calories they're eating and how much calories they're actually eating. If you weigh all the food that you eat, then you actually see, woah, you know, this 500 calories of, I don't know, some dish, it looks it looks actually a lot smaller than, you think it is. So like, let's say ice cream, like a bowl of ice cream, that's almost like, you know, 800 calories, like, this much. But you think that it's only like, you know, 300 or 500, for example. So this is an example that, you know, people who don't, you know, do dieting for a living or who don't weigh their foods exactly, they don't really know how many calories they're eating. Of course, you don't have to do that to lose weight, but if, you are, you know, clueless or you're kind of hitting a plateau and you don't know what's going on, then the first thing to do is to actually, yeah, just weigh everything and to measure everything, count all the calories, and also just follow like a good, plan in terms of a diet plan that enables you to stick to a calorie deficit and also also incorporates aspects of resistance training, cardio, for sure. If you're not doing cardio, then obviously you need to do the cardio, and making sure that your sleep is well. Check your hormones just in case maybe you have low testosterone, that more or low thyroid, that definitely slows down the weight loss. Can we use glycine for hair fall? So glycine is definitely useful for hair growth, by supporting collagen turnover. It's not it's not like, you know, a miracle for hair growth, but, you know, it, at least has, like, a benefit. Does glycine have side effects? So I haven't seen any like legitimate side effects. You know, there's the studies that they take ninety grams of glycine a day and there's no side effects from that. Some people have commented that if if you have like histamine intolerance or SIBO then you shouldn't take glycine or that glycine is harmful in that scenario. I personally haven't seen any like actual like, evidence to prove that it happens. So, right now I'm not gonna say I'm I'm gonna say that there is no or I I haven't seen at least like any real scientific side effects to glycine. Some individuals can get, like, hypoglycemia from taking too much glycine so they get, like, tired or they get a headache or something like that. But the reason for that is that the glycine kind of lowers your blood sugar too much which causes this hypoglycemic response. But those are pretty much the only things that I I know. Next question, coffee versus bone broth for a morning drink. So, you know, it depends when. Immediately after waking up, I wouldn't recommend drinking coffee because your natural cortisol rise is already, you know, elevated. And, taking the caffeine at that point would make you crash and, can also make you, like, dependent off the caffeine to get energized. Bone broth is a good drink in the morning, I think. Personally, I don't I wouldn't like to drink bone broth because it can be a bit like too heavy. Immediately after waking up I would just drink water and maybe some minerals, mineral water or something like that after waking up. The bone broth is definitely good before your first meal. So yeah. But it's not like a bad thing to drink in the morning if you like it. Personally I would, you know, drink water immediately after waking up and then like one to two hours after waking up, I'll drink coffee. And if I were to drink bone broth then I would drink it before my first meal or just like as a snack in the middle middle of the day. Ideal breakfast, I think an ideal breakfast obviously just has to have protein and fiber that would satiate you for longer and prevent like this big ups and downs in the blood sugar. So like eggs and a little bit of, salad or vegetables I think is, you know, traditional breakfast but definitely very very suitable and optimal as well in a lot of ways. I wouldn't like to eat like very very heavy things in the in the morning personally and I definitely wouldn't recommend eating like a lot of carbs either for breakfast. Should your hands be warm when fasting daily sixteen and eight? You know, if your hands are cold during the fasting window then it probably means that yeah. Like there's less blood flow there and that can be from like low thyroid or just, yeah, you know, being in a calorie restriction in that time frame. So obviously, you don't need to have your hands warm if you're doing fasting. But it could be a sign that, yeah, like you're just either restricting your calories too much or not eating enough food. And over time it could cause like some retinopathy or not retinopathy, sorry, but, you know, neuropathy. So that over time that coolness and lack of blood flow can damage the fingers as well and could lead to like some permanent damage. But yeah. I would much rather focus on the, you know, calorie intake and the fasting window. How is the NMN subject going? I believe this refers to the NMN ban by the FDA. I haven't heard any news from that, but I think that they're still like just investigating and seeing what they're gonna do with the NMN eventually. How to deal with oxalate overload? So oxalate usually comes if you're eating like, you know, a lot of raw these oxalate rich foods like raw beet root or a lot of raw spinach on raw kale and those kind of things. If you're just eating like a normal diet and you cook your foods and you cook your vegetables, then chances are you don't have any problems with oxalates. Only like a few individuals who are predisposed to it can mostly experience these side effects. And you know to break down oxalate you need calcium and vitamin c. So you just make sure that you also eat like a you know good balanced diet. That's kind of the key to this. I have a presentation about vitamin d at uni. Any tips? So, you know, I mean, depends on the class or what depends on the the style of the presentation but you know, I would just include the not only like the vitamin d but also like the sunlight benefits. Obviously, I think that's kind of overlooked. Not only is the vitamin d important but sunlight also has all these other benefits that we need to take into account. Like the UV radiation, melatonin, NAD, and circadian rhythms, all those things. How do you have your coffee? Is it bad to have milk in it? So I usually have my coffee like black and maybe like a little bit of like one teaspoon of milk or something just to make it a bit less. It's not like white coffee, it's like beige coffee at that point. But yeah, I mean, it's not bad to have some milk in it. I don't think that there's any issues with that. I mean, you lose some calcium with coffee as well and, you get some calcium from milk. Does that make sense? What time of the what which time do you start your day? How is a normal day look like? Usually I start my day like on average I wake up at like 6AM and at sometimes I'll wake up at 5AM as well. The latest I'll wake up is like 06:30 or seven but usually it's like yeah just six or a bit before 6AM. And my day usually just looks a lot about, you know, this work that I'm doing content creation, writing books, emails, whatever, you know, things I'm doing related to the YouTube channel and my overall like business, then I'll definitely like work out as well. Some form of physical activity, saunas, walking, spending time with my wife and you know eating dinner. That's kind of that's the general average a day, what it looks like. If I do carb cycling in four days, do I need to supplement vitamin C every day or just on the carb day? So interesting. I don't know if you would need to supplement vitamin c if you're eating carbs. There's no, like, inherent, reason for that because, I mean, carbohydrates usually have vitamin c in it already. So, yeah, I don't think that there's need to take the vitamin c. I personally take vitamin c only before my exercise and if I take the collagen with it. So you know the best time to take vitamin c is before exercise and with collagen because it helps to support the collagen synthesis and the collagen turnover. Can glycine be supplemented in subject with hypothyroidism? I don't see a reason why not. I mean, you know, glycine doesn't have any, like, antithoroid effects. It, helps with inflammation, helps with blood sugar levels and, you know, it definitely like lowers your body temperature slightly, but, I don't think that's an inherent reason. Although, like, hypothyroidism individuals may have lower body temperature, it's not going to make the condition worse. And, it definitely helps with, like, collagen turnover and things that this, you know, it helps with the skin turnover, which is something that can also suffer if you have hypothyroidism. Which supplements to take before a fasted workout? So depends on the goals and the type of workout. If you're doing like lifting lifting and the resistance training, then I would suggest to take like, you know, some of these amino acids or some protein or HMB or maybe like citrulline, beta alanine or something like, you know, this that help to, have a better workout. Those are generally, you know, better to take even if you're fasted. Because working out fasted just, in most cases isn't the most optimal for at least like muscle growth. If you're working out for like cardio then you inherently need to take any supplements. Yeah. That's kind of my my philosophy about it. But I do prefer to still take some protein even before cardio because you know, you're less catabolic if you're doing cardio and you can you push yourself more by doing that. So if you are, you know, doing cardio in a fasted state then, it's like, you know, you're burning a lot of muscle. Especially if you're if you're starting to go like anaerobic. If you're doing like anaerobic cardio in a fasted state, then that's pretty catabolic and kind of harmful for the muscle maintenance. But if you have, like, some protein before even the high intensity cardio, then that kind of prevents that. Why is why my face is often bigger bloated even though I work out and look fit? So that depends on you. You might have just a bit more extra body fat. So the face is one of the last places you start to lose the fat from. So, you know, you probably need to be a lot leaner than you think you are. And, you know, there's things like sleep affects that. If you're sleep deprived, that's harmful, you know, or if you are eating too many carbs, you have insulin resistance or Yeah. Just holding too much water weight in the face by eating too many carbs or having too high insulin levels. But that's part of the things that I would look at. Like inflammation, you know, can also affect that, but that the inflammation usually comes from the insulin resistance or not sleeping enough. Next question. Does ten to twenty grams of hydrolyzed collagen powder plus two to three grams of vitamin c easy enough? Or it has or it has to be collagen peptides. So the hydrolyzed collagen powder is collagen peptides, generally. They're they mean the same thing. So the the difference between them is just like a marketing thing. The collagen peptides sounds fancier, but that generally they're the same thing. The hydrolyzed collagen and the collagen peptides. Two to three grams of vitamin c is more than enough. So even even like eighty milligrams of vitamin c is enough to start the collagen synthesis. So you don't need any more than like a hundred milligrams of vitamin c and I wouldn't take like two to three grams of vitamin c. That's a bit too much in my opinion. So yeah I would just take a hundred milligrams of vitamin c and twenty grams of collagen. Maybe ten is enough already. Another question by the same individual, if it's okay with twenty grams of collagen powder, should I split the dose or can I take the twenty grams in one sitting? So yeah, like either in two doses of the twenty grams or one dose. I think, twenty grams is fine to take in one dose, or in one sitting. There's no harmful effects to that. You would just get a lot of collagen precursors immediately. Best moment in the day to take vitamin c supplement. I personally think it's yeah like either in the evening on a rest day if you haven't exercised or before exercise on a day that you lift. Because that's where it, helps to synthesize collagen the most. Decaffeinated coffee also suppresses minerals when combined with food. Yes. That I I think I think it's, true because the decaf still has, you know, obviously, polyphenols and folic acid that can do that. What's your take on grounding earthing? What about grounding mats? I think grounding is something to definitely consider. Some people need it more than others. Very like, EMF sensitive people generally need it. I'm not EMF sensitive. I do have a grounding sheet on my bed. I don't have a grounding, like, mat on my computer right now. But, yeah. I mean, I do ground accidentally, you know, at least a few a few times a day because I'm in the countryside and, you know, I'm just going outside and touching the ground in some shape or form, as a like a environmental exposure. Of course, it's much harder in the city in the winter, but, yeah. Like at least, like, once a day, it's good to to, like, you know, ground yourself for maybe, like, even, like, a few minutes. Thoughts on pro metabolic diets? Not sure what you mean by that. So I I would guess that pro metabolic diets refer to just the idea of raising a metabolic rate a lot than boosting thyroid function, with different means, whatever it is. I think that it's, of course, important to have, like, a good metabolic rate. You know. A low metabolic rate increases your cholesterol, increases your risk of getting obesity, increases your risk of diabetes, but at the same time, you know, an excess metabolic rate can also lead to autoimmune diseases and you can also just become frail and sarcopenic if you have just too high metabolic rate. So there's obviously needs to be a balance. If I were to choose, you know, which one would I want, like would I want to have like this very cold low thyroid, skinny, low metabolic rate? Or if I want to have like a high metabolic rate that has energy and, you know, high body temperature, then I would probably choose the high metabolic rate. But, you know, the best is probably just, you know, like a normal metabolic rate. How do you measure that? That's hard. But, yeah. You don't wanna be struggling with weight loss, but you don't wanna be like struggling with getting enough calories either. Like I think, you know, from a longevity side then, you know, excess metabolic rate also, you know, causes more reactive oxygen species and wears your body down through the metabolism. So it's not that, just a fast metabolism. Met metabolism is always better. You do also like wear and tear the body out too much if you just eat too many calories as a as a baseline. Next question, what is the most optimal time to take the glycine and NAC combination when lifting? So yeah, glycine NAC combo, it has been found to have a positive effect on lifespan by boosting glutathione. And, you know, NAC and antioxidant, I think taking, yeah, the NAC before the workout in the morning is better than after the workout because that's going to if you take it after the workout, then it's gonna reduce the muscle anabolism that you get. So it's better to definitely take it before. Cardio or weights first to deplete glycogen. I would definitely do the weights. So you deplete the glycogen, then you're in a fat burning state more more in a kenotic state, and then doing cardio is much more, like, more beneficial for obviously fat loss and the, you know, metabolic flexibility side as well. Do you think oil pulling is worth the claims? So, I think oil pulling so yeah, like you swish around oil like olive oil or coconut oil in your mouth to, like, remove bacteria and what are like other things. I think you wouldn't need it if you have like a good dental routine. I think oil pulling probably works in terms of having these antibacterial properties is necessary. Probably not if you use like a good toothpaste and a toothbrush. So yeah. I don't think that it's, you know, I don't do it. I don't think that it's kind of inherently mandatory, but it wouldn't like harm. It wouldn't harm you either. If you have like some bacterial problems in your mouth then yeah, like coconut oil oil pulling is probably good. But I wouldn't like if you don't have any health or dental problems then you probably don't need it either. If if you have like a good toothbrush. I wouldn't do is like obviously mouthwash is gonna kill the bacteria which is also actually linked to some health problems and definitely don't do that. Is eating the cartilage from drumsticks good for collagen? Yes. So like yeah. Like the soft bones and the cartilage and the chicken wings and those things are very good source of collagen. Thoughts on dry brushing. So that's another like this alternative health method where you, you know, brush your skin with, like a brush and that also like removes dead skin cells and pretty much helps with like skin, you know, anti aging side. I haven't done that myself either. I think that it's, you know, it probably is good in in a lot of ways. I think the sauna is probably better. Like in Estonia and Finland, we have like this whisks or I mean like whips or you know these are branches like a juniper not juniper tree that's like a bit hardcore, but, you know, the birch leaves. So you have birch leaves on a stick and you like beat yourself with those, that is I think a bit better because the sauna already, you know, eliminates the dead skin cells and detoxifies the skin through the sweat. And if you beat yourself with the sticks, then that also like, you know, directs more blood flow to the skin that helps with the blood flow in the skin, delivery of nutrients, elimination of skin scale skin cells. I think that's a bit more, let's say, optimal and much more effective probably as well than the dry brushing. But if you don't have the sauna and you don't want to whip yourself with the leaves, then, yeah. You can do the dry brushing. Is it bad to soak beans or meat in soda for tenderizing? That's an interesting question. I think that's I think they mean the baking soda for example. To soak beans or meat in baking soda. I don't see a reason why you would want to do that. You know, baking soda has a lot of sodium so you definite you would definitely like make the food a lot saltier so you wouldn't probably need to add any extra salt. The, alkalinity of baking soda, so it's very alkaline. It could like reduce the acidity of the meat. I'm not sure. So that could be good, but obviously you do need acidity as well for breaking down the food. So I think it's, you know, it doesn't have like any real negative side effects, but it does like reduce maybe the acidity of the food and definitely adds a lot more salt to it. It. Supplements that should ideally be taken with food. So this would be mostly like this fat soluble vitamins, vitamin a, d, e, k. And, yeah, that's pretty much it. Like I wouldn't take a lot of supplements, with food unless they are fat soluble and you need to have some fat with them. I prefer to take most of my supplements with like, in a fasted state with some water. TMG, vitamin d and spermidine take in the morning or after a meal. So I would take, them in the morning probably. I mean the vitamin d, it already has like a little bit of fat in it. So that's why you probably don't need to like eat extra fats from there. Is icing your testicles for fifteen minutes a day good for improving testosterone? So, I think the claims that it increases testosterone, there's not enough proof to that. I think it would indirectly have a positive effect on testosterone levels. But I think the biggest impact is gonna be on sperm count and sperm motility. So definitely has a positive effect on the sperm, but the testosterone, not sure exactly. I don't I don't think it would hurt. Like, you would probably still want to, you know, do it a little bit for the sperm benefits. What's the perfect protein to fat ratio for weight loss? So, depends on the other diet that you're eating. Let's say, if you're eating like a normal diet, then I would say that for, protein you wanna get like for optimal weight loss or the most like effective weight loss is gonna be like, you know, 40% of your calories coming from protein. So that's gonna be like a hundred, hundred fifty, even 200 grams of protein, for most individuals. And the fat, I would stick to like yeah. The bare essentials 35% and the rest of it come from carbs. So that's kind of the most effective weight loss, macros probably. 40% protein, 35% fat and 25% as carbohydrates. Then if you're let's say a bit less a hardcore, you know, you're, eating like a less restricted diet then, you know, 35% protein is still something that you would want to aim for for good weight loss and maybe 40% fat and the rest from carbs. Anything less than that I think any more than like 50% fat isn't needed and it's definitely not like it's counterproductive a little bit and anything less than 30% of protein is also a counterproductive for weight loss. Which grain is healthiest to eat most often? So grain, well I think maybe like buckwheat probably. Buckwheat is a pretty healthy grain and it has like pretty good micros and minerals as well. And it tastes pretty nice. It has its low glycemic index, has a lot of minerals and pretty kind of sage eating in my opinion. Hey mate you said you do OMAD. What is a normal day of eating for you? So right now I'm doing that Yeah, like before my workout I'm drinking a protein shake with some collagen and maybe like a piece of fruit or something. Then I work out and in the evening I'll eat. Yeah, like meat, vegetables, fish, tubers, potatoes, those fruits again and cottage cheese, yogurt, those kind of things. What diet would you recommend for healing after ankle surgery and is fasting a good idea? Well I would definitely maybe encourage some aspects of time machine eating because if you're like immobile and you're not moving around that much then you're not burning that many calories either. And it's good to not get fat is to, is to do some times you're eating. But you also wanna make sure that you pretty much supply the body with the right right nutrients to help with the healing and recovery. So you do want to have plenty of protein and collagen for that. So glycine as well there. Maybe like you know get 20 of collagen even like 30 of collagen and like twenty grams of glycine as a supplement and some high protein foods as well. Exercise daily, lean, muscular, eat good, cholesterol is 277. What to do? So there are like, you know, things that raise cholesterol. Obviously number one is gonna be saturated fat intake. So if you're eating a lot of muscle meat and you know, butter and saturated fats, then kinda reduce that. The second thing is to eat more fiber because the fiber will bind to that. If you're living in the northern, you know, regions of the world then and you're not getting a lot of sunlight then, you know, vitamin d or sunlight exposure helps to convert cholesterol into cholesterol sulfate that helps with, you know, these like glutathione and as well as vitamin d and just hormones overall. So if you're not getting enough sunlight, then that's an issue or that that would be like an explanation of why the cholesterol rises. If you have low thyroid, which doesn't sound likely for you, but, yeah low thyroid function raises cholesterol and actually excess zinc intake also raises cholesterol by reducing copper absorption. So this zinc copper ratio determines your kind of cholesterol levels and excess zinc from too much muscle meat and not enough organ meats or not enough dark chocolate or beans, that also raises the cholesterol levels. Thoughts on Lion's Mane? I think Lion's Mane is probably the one of the best nootropics because it directly helps with nerve like helps with the brain cell growth and neurogenesis. So yeah definitely has like a very good track record for like a mental performance and cognitive function. Thoughts on periodic five day fasting for health and longevity. I think five days is a bit too much. You definitely don't need to go for five days kind of most of the benefits plateau at day three. So there's no inherent reason to go for day five. You're just gonna lose a lot more lean tissue and slow down your metabolic rate. So I don't I'm not a fan of fasting for longer than three days. I think periodic forty eight hour fast is great and maybe seventy two hours fast as well every once in a while. But, five day fast maybe like once a year is probably fine. But I personally think that day three is where you already get most of the benefits and you don't really need to do these super long fast like five or seven days if you are, you know, exercising regularly and being kind of mindful about your overall diet. Alright. That's it for this q and a. If you want to ask me a question then make sure you follow me on Instagram at simlund and, I can ask you a question next time. But, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like and subscribe. Notification bell as well. My name is sim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.