One of my favorite amino acids and supplements in the world is glycine. In fact, I think it's actually one of the best longevity supplements that you can take on a daily basis that's gonna improve your health span and slow down aging. In this video, I'm gonna do a very thorough overview of glycine and its longevity effects based on this new study that came out. Do it. And the reason I decided to do this particular video has to do with this study published on thirty first March twenty twenty three. So very new. It's called glycine and aging evidence and mechanisms. So So it's giving you a very nice overview about the longevity benefits of glycine and how it can affect aging and lifespan. So here are the highlights of this paper. The simple amino acid glycine extends lifespan in worms, mice, and rats. Glycine also improves aspects of health in mammalian models of age related disease. Glycine is the acceptor of GNMT, an enzyme responsible for methionine clearance. GNMT also converts glycine to sarcosine, an autophagy inducing metabolite. Glycine may prolong life by inducing autophagy and mimicking methionine restriction. So glycine has many other benefits beyond just mentioned here. But when it comes to actual, you know, these lifespan extension in these model organisms, then it comes down to primarily two things, which is increasing autophagy and mimicking methionine restriction. Cool. And when it comes to methionine restriction then this is something that also has been shown to be very beneficial for longevity at least in rats and other animals. So excess methionine, it can disrupt methylation and even raise your homocysteine levels, which will increase the risk of cardiovascular disease. So methionine is one of the most abundant amino acids in the diet. You get it from eggs, meat, and other animal protein sources primarily. And excess methionine, yeah, is associated with shorter lifespans. Methionine restriction has been found to be able to extend the lifespan in rodents by 30 to 40%. And the way it does so is by also inhibiting some of the mTOR expression. So methionine helps to pretty much stimulate mTOR, the growth pathway in the body and, yeah, it can have like a negative effect on the speed of your aging. And yeah, like methionine restriction is, clearly has been shown to be beneficial for longevity on slowing down aging. And glycine can pretty much mimic the effects of methionine restriction without necessarily needing to restrict methionine, which is great because it's very hard to restrict methionine unless you are on a very zero animal protein diet. And glycine pretty much helps to buffer against methionine toxicity and supports the methylation that prevents the rise in homocysteine and, also like jazz, pretty much inhibits the excessive toxicity effects of methionine in two large amounts. So it matters more the ratio between methionine to glycine. If you do want to learn everything about the benefits of glycine and how to take it and when and in what amounts, then check out my book with Doctor. James DeNickelantonio called The Collagen Cure on Amazon. But let's take a quick step back to this new study and they have a very good overview of the studies linking the, you know, use of glycine. So in rats, a diet containing eight or 12% of glycine, resulted in twenty eight point four percent median increase in the males' lifespan, which is very significant in worms' diet containing one millimole of glycine, 10% mean increase in lifespan. In flies, it overexpressing the GNMT enzyme, which kind of limits the synthesis of glycine. So overexpressing that increased lifespan by 9.3% in females and 13.3% in males. And as you can see from these other studies, yet adding or increasing the glycine intake drop to at 8% can increase the lifespan of these animals. There's also the aspect of age related diseases and healthspan of how glycine can slow down the development of these different age related diseases and supplementing mice with glycine prior to implantation with melanoma cells suppressed tumor growth. Long term supplementation with glycine decreased fasting glucose, incident triglyceride and IGF-one levels in male rats. Vascular endothelial function is improved by the oral administration of glycine in older rats. In obese male mice with glucose intolerance, glycine supplementation, in addition to calorie restriction, enhanced fat loss while preserving lean mass. But of course, these are model organisms and we should definitely look at more in the human clinical trials. So, in a cohort of seventy two type two diabetic patients, five thousand mg a day, so five gs of glycine a day over three months led to a reduction in pro inflammatory cytokines and hemoglobin A1c. In a separate clinical study involving sixty metabolic syndrome patients, systolic blood pressure was decreased in response to fifteen gs a day of glycine for three months. Improvements in various stroke scales were documented in two hundred acute ischemic stroke patients treated with doses of either one thousand mg a day or two thousand mg a day over a five day period. Six thousand mg a day for eight weeks improved urine storage systems in patients with overactive bladder. At a dose of three thousand mg a day over a period of three days reduced fatigue in sleep restricted subjects. So as you can see, there are many longevity benefits to glycine. In animal models, it does extend lifespan and the reason we know that is because rats and flies, they live relatively short. So we can do those tests in these animals. Of course, it's very hard to do any kind of lifespan or longevity study in humans. In humans, you can look at how does those different compounds and these supplements, how do they affect the markers of age related diseases, the hallmarks of aging and just healthspan. Based on that, there is clear benefits to taking glycine and the benefits of glycine generally have to do with improving the blood sugar levels, fasting the insulin levels, triglycerides, even lowering the demand for sleep, improving brain function and helping with just overall aspects of vitality. There was actually one recent study of 2020 in mice where combining glycine and N L Cidylcysteine, so NAC. Both of these amino acids are precursors to glulothione synthesis and glulothione is your body's master antioxidant that pretty much is needed to slow down aging and counteract the oxidative stress that you get from aging. And in this study, the glyNAc supplementation, glycine plus NLC, resulted in 24% longer life in the mice. In humans supplementing glyNAc or glycin NLC in older adults improves the hallmarks of aging. So different kinds of hallmarks that are associated with accelerated aging. GLINAC supplementation for twenty four weeks in older adults was well tolerated and lowered oxidative stress, corrected intracellular gluathione deficiency and mitochondrial dysfunction, decreased inflammation and endothelial dysfunction and genomic damage and improved strength, gait speed, cognition and body composition. So a lot of the longevity benefits come from the methionine restriction and the autophagy stimulation that pretty much helps to clean out the cells from these dysfunctional components as well as boosting glucosamine levels which just enables the body to function with less inflammation and oxidative stress which is very crucial for aging and it also pretty much buffers against the methionine toxicity that many people who are eating predominantly animal based diets or just too much muscle meat, then it just balances out the methionine. Glycine also has a very important role in anti aging directly by helping to reduce wrinkles and collagen synthesis. Glycine makes up every third amino acid in collagen, which is why there is such a large requirement of glycine for optimal collagen turnover. The less collagen or glycine you consume, the slower your collagen turnover is. A slow collagen turnover increases the damage that occurs to your collagen, such as glycation and oxidation, and reduces collagen deposition into tissues. Collagen is the most abundant protein in the human body, making up approximately 30% of all your protein by mass. It makes up your hair, teeth, skin, nails, organs, arteries, cartilage, bones, tendons, and ligaments. Collagen is literally the glue that holds you together. So making sure that you preserve your collagen is very important for slowing down aging, especially when it comes to wrinkles. Starting at the age of 20, you lose just under 10% of your skin's collagen content every decade. So by the time you're 75 years old, you would have lost 50 of your skin's collagen content. Up until very recently, it was thought that the collagen turnover was very slow and it only happened over the course of many years over the entire lifespan. However, recently it was shown that collagen turnover happens every day and is part of your daily protein turnover. In 2009, it was discovered that the need for glycine for optimal health is around fifteen grams per day. You need at least twelve grams per day for optimal collagen turnover plus another three grams for the formation of things like glutathione, creatine, heme, etc. Your body only makes three grams of glycine per day. And if you only consume around two to three grams of glycine from foods, then it means that almost all of us are in a 10 gram glycine deficit every day. However, this estimation is based on the assumption that your glycine recycling rate is 95%. However, if glycine's recycling rate is more like cysteine's then glycine would have an 85% recycling rate. If that's the case then we would need three times more glycine. Not 12 grams but actually 36 grams for optimal collagen health. Basically all the foods that have some skin on it generally have a bit more glycine. Fish skin, chicken skin and different kinds of animal tendons, ligaments, bones, they all contain significantly more glycine. What I like to do is also eat sugar free Jell O. So the gelatin in the Jell O is an amazing source of glycine and it's actually one of the highest sources of glycine. It's low sugar, it doesn't spike your blood sugar and it tastes pretty good. When it comes to the methionine balance, then you do need to pay attention to that as well. So if you are eating a lot of muscle meat and animal protein specifically, then you definitely need to increase your glycine intake because glycine is gonna counteract the negative side effects of excess methionine on homocysteine and in the aspect of shortening Some of the highest methionine foods include egg whites, lean beef and other kinds of muscle meat. Glycine can protect against protein oxidation and advanced glycation end products formation, which is very important for antiaging and longevity because these AGEs, advanced glycation end products, they're pretty much, you know, these glycated proteins or lipids as well. And they can just cause more damage to the tissue. They can promote diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and overall mortality. Eating a very high glycated diet which involves, you know, cooking at high temperatures or just using sugars and other kinds of oils when cooking your proteins, then that is something that also accelerates aging and accelerates especially the skin aging in terms of the wrinkles. So So glycine is one of the supplements and amino acids that actually counteracts and protects against that. And glycine directly also inhibits the AGE signaling pathway. So AGEs are advanced glycation end products and RAGE is the receptor of AGEs. So it suppresses that signaling pathway and also reduces the subsequent oxidative stress and reduces the glycation. So it works from both ends. First of all, it inhibits the activation of the advanced glycation in formation and on the other hand, it also calms down or reduces the side effects of glycation by reducing the blood sugar levels. In diabetics, supplementing with five grams of glycine three to four times a day improves A1C levels. Glycine supplementation improves insulin sensitivity in humans and helps to lower blood glucose levels by potentiating the effects of insulin. Thus, one of the best antiaging strategies is to ensure an adequate glycine intake. And if this wasn't enough then glycine also improves sleep quality and it can help to relax at night by being very similar to GABA, so it's GABAnergic, the glycine in the brain and it also helps with relaxation through GABA pathway and it has shown to be very beneficial for improving sleep quality and reducing the time it takes to fall asleep. People who ingested three grams of glycine within one hour before bedtime saw an improvement in subjective sleep quality fell asleep faster and were less sleepy during the day. So as you can see there are so many health benefits to glycine as an amino acid and as a supplement. First of all, you want to make sure that you do get adequate amount of glycine from your foods. As a general rule of thumb, you do want to include a lot of glycine rich foods when you are eating muscle meat as well. I mean, you will want to eat glycine rich foods regardless if you're eating muscle meat or not. But if you are having a meal that has some extra methionine and muscle meat then, I mean, the safest thing to do is to also just take some glycine supplement. So taking three to five grams of glycine with your meal. So whether or not you're eating a high carb plant based meal or a high muscle meat meal, it doesn't matter. Adding glycine onto that is just very beneficial in terms of managing your biomarkers, lipids, blood sugar and also lowering the advanced glycation end products. So in conclusion, glycine is amazing. It has many benefits for slowing down aging and longevity. In animal models it has been shown to be something that does extend lifespan and mimic methionine restriction, which is pretty damn awesome. In humans, it apparently improves age related conditions, especially if you combine glycine with NAC as a glynaq supplement and that, you know, obviously increases your glutathione levels. But taking glycine alone as well, so taking around I think most people would benefit for at least five to ten grams of glycine a day which is kind of a moderate amount actually. If you're really upping the dose, if you're eating a lot of muscle meat for example or you're just interested in getting more of the benefits of glycine then you can take even up to twenty grams a day and maybe thirty grams is a bit too high. But in studies where they have taken like eighty grams of glycine even, they don't see any negative side effects. Some of the potential negative side effects may have to do with hypoglycemia and nausea or a headache if your blood sugar drops too low. But other than that there aren't no deleterious health effects to glycine. But do you want to slow down aging? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to infoseemland dot com and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized, stay empowered.