Some foods that are considered healthy actually have a bad effect on your health and may accelerate aging. In this video, I want to talk about 10 of those foods that you want to limit. Do it. Number one is gonna be fruit juices. Fruit in its whole natural form is very beneficial for your health. It has all these different kinds of micronutrients and enzymes, and it's also pretty, you know, low glycemic and it's satiated much longer than something in a juice form. Fruit juices just are very concentrated and they have all the the fiber removed from the fruit, which increases the glycemic response of that and, can also just increase the risk of diabetes. There is actually the association between sugar sweetened beverage consumption, which includes fruit juices as well. Now personally, I think that a cup of freshly squeezed orange juice or grapefruit juice or other like fresh juice is actually, you know, it's okay. It's something that you don't wanna have like with every meal but if you drink like a one cup of fresh orange juice a day then that's probably fine and has no real significantly harmful effect on your health. But most of the store juices that generally don't have almost any fruit at all, they're just very highly concentrated with sugar then yeah those are the ones that you want to avoid. Number two is raw cruciferous vegetables. Broccoli and cauliflower, I think they're actually very amazing and one of the healthiest vegetables in the world. They have a lot of polyphenols and help to boost your body's glutathione levels. However, the issue is that when you eat them raw, they contain a lot of these goitrogenic compounds that can reduce the iodine absorption, which can also then lower your thyroid function and cause even goiter. Fortunately, cooking the cruciferous will reduce the amount of goitrogens in it. So what you want to do is make sure that you cook or boil or steam your cruciferous vegetables properly before eating them. And I wouldn't really recommend eating them raw, at least not in very large quantities. Number three is gonna be oat milk. Oat milk is one of the most popular plant based milks in the world, but it's actually very high in added sugars, and it will definitely spike your blood sugar levels upon consumption quite significantly. You can definitely test it out with yourself and you can see that the rise in blood sugar from oat milk is very high compared to regular dairy or other plant based milks. Number four is gonna be canola oil. So canola oil is almost considered to be like a heart healthy oil by the mainstream food market, but it's certainly not very beneficial for your heart health. Canola oil is processed in high heat and temperatures and pressure which oxidizes the oils and can cause lipid peroxidation in your body. Lipid peroxidation is a huge inflammatory response that damages your tissue and increases the risk of cardiovascular disease and other ailments. Ailments. Now if it were to be cold pressed canola oil, then that is something that you can probably get away with. And even small amounts of actual heated up canola oil is not, you know, something that you have to, like, manically worry about, but it's certainly not healthy for you. Like, it, you can your body can, of course, handle a certain amount of oxidative stress and inflammation given that you have a properly working antioxidant defense systems and glutathione, etcetera. But if your antioxidant defenses are already over whelmed, then, yeah, just adding that, you know, oxidized oil onto your diet is just making things worse. Number five is margarine, which is thought to be another heart healthy fat, but it actually turns out that margarine and added trans fat consumption is associated with increased heart disease risk. So personally, I don't like to add a lot of added fats to my diet anyway, whether that be butter or margarine or any other, canola oil, whatever. But margarine is actually, yeah, one of the worst fats for your health. 48% body fat. Number six is gonna be banana chips. So banana chips, they're fruit, they're low calorie, and they must be healthy for you. But, unfortunately, most of these banana chips are fried in different kinds of oils, which is usually canola oil. Banana chips are significantly higher in calories than regular bananas. They're probably, like, three to five times higher in calories than regular fresh bananas. And frying those banana chips in the oil also creates these advanced glycation end products that cause wrinkles, increase the risk of diabetes, and are definitely not healthy for you. So regular dried fruit like raisins or dates even, they are significantly healthier than these banana chips because, yeah, the banana chips are just fried in the oil that increases the calorie content a lot. Banana. Banana. Number seven is ham or other kinds of processed meat. Processed meat consumption is associated with increased risk of mortality and is also considered a carcinogen, which increases the risk of cancer. So all these different kinds of sausages, hot dogs, and hams, all those things, they are not that healthy for you. Number eight is all different kinds of sports drinks. What I'm referring to is specifically sports drinks that have added sugars. Consuming liquid sugar just causes a massive rise in your blood sugar and it can also cause internal resistance. Of course, if you're a physically active person and you consume those sports drinks during your exercise or closely around exercise, then, yeah, you can probably get away with it. It's not gonna have a massive impact on your blood sugar levels even if you just burn it off and use it to restore your muscle glycogen stores. However, if you're the kind of person who drinks these sports drinks just when they're sitting on a couch, then that's definitely not really advisable. And, yeah, just consuming sugar sweetened beverages is associated with increased risk of mortality. If you are choosing a kind of electrolyte drink or a sports drink, then what I recommend is to just have ones that don't have any added sugars, they're zero calories and they just have added electrolytes. Number nine is gonna be raw kale. So raw kale, similar reason as raw cruciferous. It has a lot of goitrogens that can just be harmful for your thyroid. Raw kale can also have a lot of oxalates that can cause kidney issues and kidney stones. But fortunately, you can also break down these oxalates and goitrogens if you cook it. And I don't think that eating kale is inherently bad for you. It's just that if you eat it raw Gonna have a bad time. So if you are eating kale or any of these greens then it's somewhat better to just cook them slightly and heat them up. And lastly, number 10 is different kinds of salad dressing. So salad dressing inside this bottle, you've probably seen them, they just contain a lot of canola oil and added fats. Certainly, they're also very high in calories so they don't really provide any nutritional value. They obviously have a taste profile and taste effect but you can easily find low calorie versions or zero zero calorie, these salad dressings. If If you are looking for a salad dressing then just look for something that has either olive oil, avocado oil or, you know, something that is low calorie. So there you have it. This is a list of 10 common health foods that are actually not that healthy for you. If you do want to slow down aging and live longer then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological cock. If you're interested, then email me the word health, the info@simnun.com, and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Sim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.