Is it possible to reverse your aging process? Well, a new 2023 study showed potential reversal of biological age in women. Hey, my name is Sim and in this video when I talk about this study, what kind of results did they see, what was their diet like, and I'll also share some of the problems with this kind of biological age. It's showtime. So the title of the study, Potential Reversal of Biological Age in Women Following an Eight Week Methylation Supportive Diet and Lifestyle Program by Kara Fitzgerald, who is actually also the authors of the previous study that we have, the first of its kind in humans of reversing or showing epigenetic age reversal in humans. And this study was done in 2021, so two years ago, and this particular study was done on 43 healthy adult males. So this new study is kind of a follow-up to that 2021 study because this one is done only on females. So we have two case studies in men and women both showing potential reversal in biological age test as measured by the Horwath DNA methylation age clock, which, is currently, like, considered one of the gold standards for measuring biological age. But, of course, it, just measures, like, one aspect of aging, which is then methylation process. So regardless, they took six women, and, they all exhibited a biological age reduction between 1.22 and 11.01 from their baseline biological age. So the average decrease was about 4.6 and because there is only six participants in the study then you can pretty much see all of them listed out here. You can see their chronological age. So, yeah, like they're all between 56 or actually one other one is 46, 46 until 62 years of age. Actually, they weren't like none of them were biologically older except for this 46 year old who was biologically 49 years old or at least like the test measured that it was. And all of them were actually pretty, you know, healthy in terms of that. They weren't, like, severely unhealthy that they didn't have, like, a ten year, like, higher biological age, which would be very easy to reverse within eight weeks. But as you can see, they were pretty much either very close to their actual chronological age or slightly below that on average. All of them saw some improvements or some reductions in their biological age except for this one participant who actually, I think, this is the individual who actually stopped the intervention. Now this is only six participants. Of course, it's a very small study. You don't have a lot of data, but if you actually also combine it with, like, the previous study that they did on males that you can see that, yes, these apparently, like, it does have, like, some effect in terms of whatever the protocol is that they follow in the study. It does apparently have positive effects in, women and men. So what did they actually do? What was their actually, like, protocol that they followed? Generally, they ate, like, a methylation supportive diet. These, foods that have methyl donors that help with the methylation process. So two cups of dark leafy greens, two cups of cruciferous vegetables, three cups of colorful vegetables, a quarter cup of pumpkin seeds, a quarter cup of sunflower seeds, two servings of methylation adaptogens, one to two beets, which is very high in trimethylglycine or betaine, liver or liver supplement, three three ounce servings, per week, which is very nutrient dense and also high in methyl donors. One serving of egg, five to 10 per week. So, on average, like, one egg per day is slightly more. And the healthy eating habits, I exercised for at least thirty minutes a day and practiced breathing exercises twice, slept at least seven hours, passed at twelve hours after a meal and eight cups of water per day. Now, the program of the study wasn't something very groundbreaking as you can see. They just focused on a generally healthy diet with some aspects of time restricted eating. Of course, they also did exercise. They also made sure that they slept long enough and drink enough water and do some breathing exercise, so like manage stress, etcetera. Wait a minute. And I also want to talk about the effectiveness of the biological age test. Like I said, the Horvath's clock is considered right now, like, the gold standard for measuring biological age, although I think it's still very limited and it definitely doesn't tell you, like, your biological age, actually. It just measures your DNA methylation and it measures, like, different cpG sites and these different patterns, different DNA methylation patterns that are associated with certain ages. And one of the issue with these biological age tests is that they can vary quite a lot. So, for example, stress and infection and inflammation, all those things can actually increase your biological age as measured by the DNA methylation test. And if you think about if you get cold, if you get, you know, the the virus, for example, then your biological age in that particular moment will increase because your body is under higher amount of stress and inflammation. But did you actually get biologically older? I don't think so. It's just that in the short term, your body is experiencing this higher amount of stress and inflammation, which based on the tests would tell you that you're older. But, I think it's pretty reasonable to say that you actually didn't age when you got infected during that time. And, it actually restores back to normal after recovery. So this particular study found that, yes, stress and infections and those things, inflammation generally, oxidative stress, whatever the cause is, is going to increase your biological age and, it's gonna make you appear older based on the DNA methylation patterns. But the biological age will reduce back to normal, back to baseline as you were before during recovery. So that's kind of, you know, almost any stress, Like, even, like, with exercise, you will see an increase in inflammation and oxidative stress, but it goes back to baseline. And with exercise, you actually see an improvement like supercompensation. You go to a lower level of baseline with inflammation at least. And, again, you know, I wouldn't put too much, let's say, emphasis on these DNA methylation tests. Yes. They do tell you something. I have measured it myself. It has told me that I'm nine years younger than my chronological age. I think that it's a valid measurement. Yes. It does tell you something. It tells you, like, the pattern of the DNA methylation, and it does compare it to the average population. But I wouldn't say that it's inherently, like, yeah. It's not gonna be that reflective of your actual biological age, especially if it's so variable. If, if you if you get, like, some sort of a short term infection or whatever. I've actually had, like, people who I've worked with who have taken a test. Like they said, I took the test. It says I'm five years older than I was before. What's the issue? And it turns out they had, like, an infection two weeks before taking the test. So, yes, if you take the test while having an infection or recently having combated an infection, then you're gonna be older. So you need to be very, wise and aware of when you do the test and what other factors may affect the result. It's a trap. But regardless, this study and the previous study in 2021 both show that in men and women, it is possible to reduce the DNA methylation age with a relatively short time period, only eight weeks, of following a DNA methylation supportive lifestyle and a diet. So, yes, it is possible to see an improvement in your health and see a reduction in your DNA methylation age. Whether or not the DNA methylation age is actual reflection of your biological age is up to debate, but I think it is certainly a good sign that you're heading in the right direction. And it's certainly, like, it's much better than having a super high score in the DNA methylation age test, if you get what I mean, unless you have, you know, seriously recently have been exposed to some sort of infection or something like that. Do you want to slow down aging and increase your health span? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to do that. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@simlun.com, and I'll send you the details. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized, stay empowered.