How long will humans be able to live in the future? And what's a good alternative to collagen if you can't take it? These are some of the topics we're gonna cover in this q and a episode. If you want to ask me a question in the future, then make sure you follow me on Instagram at seamlund. It's showtime. Alright. The first question is, until what age do you think we'll be able to live with all the new technologies and information? So that's a very interesting question. I'm actually researching my next book or actually I'm already in a process of writing my next book that is focused around longevity and life extension. And this is something that I've been, yeah, just looking at researching over the last few weeks and months. So what I've come to the conclusion right now is that there is, let's say, obviously, the certain, current estimated biological limit for human life lifespan, which is around a 120 years. The oldest living person in history was John Clement from France. She lived until the age of 122, which is the, you know, greatest, longest living human in history. The second place is a Japanese woman and she lived until a 119. So there's actually a pretty wide gap between John Clement who lived until 122 and the second longest living person and the third longest living person is also a 119. So there's a three year gap between those things. And because of this reason, many people who were like investigating John Klement's actual, like verified ages and stuff like that, they they came up with this theory that it wasn't actually John Clement who lived until a hundred and twenty two. John Clement was maybe thought to die actually at the age of 59 and it was her daughter Yvonne who pretty much pretended to be John Clement. And And, if that were were to be case, then Yvonne would have died at 99 years of age. So she kind of faked being her mother because of, like, tax reasons and, you know, those kind of things. Now this theory isn't actually accepted as mainstream theory. The mainstream theory is that, yes, John Comand did actually live until 122, and Yvonne died at around, like, 35 years of age to some sort of a disease. So it wasn't, the Yvonne faking to be her mother. It was actually John Clement living until a hundred and twenty two. And we have a lot of, like, these, you know, birth birth data and a lot of these other age verifiers who interviewed John Clement. They they came to the conclusion that, John Clement was actually the person who lived until 122. And based on this knowledge then, you know, John Clement does exceed what many scientists think is the human maximum lifespan limit, which would be a 120. But we don't whether we don't even know if that were to be the actual maximum human lifespan limit because no one has ever obviously lived longer than John Conant. But, you know, with, many theories has that with over the past few decades or the you know, next few decades, we're gonna have these massive breakthroughs in medicine and technology that are just going to add a bunch of extra years to or, you know, of course, those technologies, they're gonna increase average life expectancy. That's a trend that is increasing, meaning that people, on general, are going to live on average longer, but, there's no evidence that they would actually break the ceiling of the maximum human lifespan, which is around a hundred and twenty years. Now there are also some scientists that use mathematical modeling on mortality rates to see that, the human body, you know, it has theoretically the capacity to stay resilient and to wean off this a traded decline up until the age of, like, a 120 to a 150. So they think that the maximum lifespan is, like, a 150. We just haven't reached that, yet. And, of course, you know, with mathematics, it's you can always put things into the different kinds of formulas, and you can use Bayesian analysis, which is another method to, like, predict future outcomes based on previous, knowledge. But you don't necessarily know what's the actual, you know, future, let's say, outcomes are gonna be. You can never predict whether or not we are actually at the limit. And those theories would say that it's, you know, they they say that it's, like, 90% likely that by the year 2100, so in like eighty years from now, there's like a 99% likelihood that, we're gonna break the hundred and twenty two year record. But they say that it's virtually impossible, at least within this century, to make it past a hundred and thirty five, even if take into account the steady increase in average life expectancy. So even all these mathematical models that, you know, don't take into account the limitations of human biology and the aging biology, they're just based on mathematical models of the increase in average life expectancy, then even those models, they see that the maximum that we could reach within this century is a 135. Of course, there's also many, you know, more more theoretical, more experimental scientists who are in in into, like, this transhumanism and biohacking and those kind of things. And they say that the longevity escape velocity is gonna happen in 2035, which which means that, you know, every year you stay alive, your life expectancy increases by two years, which means that, you know, you're gonna live forever because your your kind of outpacing or, like, your life expectancy, we which is increased due to medical breakthroughs and different kinds of pharmaceuticals, outpaces your speed of biological aging. So you can become immortal or at least you're gonna live until hundreds of years. Now there's no evidence, like zero evidence to indicate that we're anywhere close to this kind of, longevity escape velocity. We haven't made any, like, actual, like, breakthroughs in this area at all and we don't even know what to target. Like, we don't even know what is the thing that is going to enable us to reach this longevity escape velocity. Not many people think it's AI that's gonna help us to reach there. I personally, you know I mean, it would be nice. Like, I wouldn't be against living, or humans living, hundreds of years longer than right now, but there's literally no evidence right now that would indicate that we're anywhere close to that. So with that being said, I do think that there is gonna be, obviously, the increase in average life expectancy across the entire world. And, in the, you know, longest living countries right now like Japan and South Korea, you would see that, you know, the average life expectancy might increase up to, like, 85 and 90 years of age, which means that on average, people at birth are expected to live until 90 years of age. And, that's obviously around, like, ten ten years more than right now on average. And and I think that for us to, you know, reach the average life expectancy of, like, a 100, then we still need at least a hundred years of science and breakthroughs. But, again, we don't, you know, we don't know what the future brings. We don't know whether or not we will make any breakthroughs, at least based on right now, You know, given the fact that we're not gonna make any massive breakthroughs in antiaging science based on just the mathematical models, then, you know, the average life expectancy might increase or it will certainly increase. And, the maximum lifespan beyond a 120, it's possible. It's possible that it will, like go above a 120. But again, those gains are gonna be very small. You might those gains are gonna be, like, only a few years. So I don't think that we're gonna reach this everyone's gonna live until a 150 time frame, within our lifetime, at least. This episode is brought to you by alitura naturals. Alitura brings you the best natural skin care products for radiating skin and antiaging. Regular skin care products are full of ingredients and fillers that actually cause more harm than good. Alitura uses only active ingredients sourced and handcrafted in Hawaii. Their products contain zero fillers. The Alitura night cream received the twenty twenty one Clean Cirt beauty awards for best face cream. Alitura also has skin moisturizers, clay mask, serums, and cleansers. Head over to alitura.com and use the code SIIM, s I I m, for a 20% discount. And the next question was actually very similar to this one. So, like, how long do you think that I'm gonna live? So, you know, okay. Let's take a small overview. An Estonian male. Right now, I'm 29 years old, and the average life expectancy in Estonia is around 78 or 79. It's not that great, you know. It's, certainly not as good as Japan, which is like 84, but it's better than a lot of other Eastern European countries and a lot better than Russia or even United States. So I do think that, you know, the average life expectancy in Estonia is gonna increase as well. The issue is that in Estonia, there's some, you know, issues in regards to health care, and the average Estonian does consume a lot of alcohol. So I'm by I'm not by any means an average Estonian. I don't drink at all. I have a very healthy lifestyle. I'm in excellent health right now. I'm in excellent body condition right now. I have very good habits. And there's, you know, there's nothing, at least in my predictable future, that would change that. Like, there's no way that I will revert to alcoholism or, revert to, like, a bad diet or I would gain, like, 50 pounds or, you know, 20 kilos of body weight. You know, there's little there's very little chance that that would happen. So I'm I am on a good trajectory in terms of reaching the average life expectancy of Estonians and potentially above that and beyond that as well. So I would I would say that, for sure, I will reach 80 at least on my current trajectory. But, again, you know, I'm 29 years old right now. So in fifty years, we will probably have some breakthroughs in technology. So by that time, if you take into the mathematical model and the trend trend line of the life expectancy increase across the entire world, not Estonia, then you would say that maybe I would live until ninety ninety something, 95 or something like that. I don't think that I'll be some sort of a supercentenarian. I don't have the genetics for that to become a centenarian. And supercentenarian, then you need pretty much your you're like you really need to have very good genes for that. So even like a healthy lifestyle, it's very unlikely that you will reach centenarianhood if you don't have good genetics. So becoming a hundred and hundred and twenty, a 115 years old, you need to have good genetics. And I don't have any good genetics in my family. Like, my oldest like, the oldest person in my close family at least and, you know, some distant families, you know, the oldest person in there isn't older than 80. So they're all they have all died before 80 years old. So I don't have any good genetics in that sense. But, because of my, you know, very healthy lifestyle and because of my healthy health status right now, which will be maintained for the next decades for sure, I'm I'm kinda quite sure of that, then, I would say, yeah, my trajectory or my projection projection of how long I personally will live is gonna be, you know, at least 90 years old, 95, something like that. And, of course, if something terrible goes wrong you know, my grandfather died to colorectal cancer at the age of 36. So if I do have some cancer around my 35 years of age, then, you know, it could all change. So the to prevent that, I have to just take early detection and prevention extremely seriously, which I am. I'm gonna, you know, go out of my own way to make sure that, I am going to if I do have some sort of cancer early in my life, then I'm gonna detect it as well quite early. And the same applies to heart disease. I have some heart disease in my family as well. So I'm gonna make sure that I'm gonna detect it early and I'm gonna do, like, you know, everything in my power just to prevent getting all these chronic diseases. Next question is, any merit to tracking morning body temperature for an indicator of thyroid metabolism health? So generally, your body temperature function and your metabolic rate, to a pretty large degree. Now, how valuable it is or how relevant it is, I think your, you know, thyroid functioning and your metabolic rate, they only matter to the extent of your metabolic health, your body composition, and your overall health status. So what they find in at least the oldest living people in in the world is that they do have higher levels of TSH, which is thyroid stimulating hormone, which would indicate that they have low thyroid functioning. And there is some reasons to believe that a lower thyroid function could have some longevity benefits because you're burning, let's say, less calories and you're causing less free radical stress on your mitochondria and therefore, you age slower. And And having like a lower body temperature, at least in some animals, does, you know, it it it indicates that or it shows that those animals might live a little bit longer. In humans, obviously, it's a lot more complicated than that because if you get certain kind of metabolic diseases or if you start to gain weight because of your low metabolic rate, then it's counterproductive. So it only matters in the context of are you in good metabolic health and are you in good body composition and how is your, like, overall health. Because if you have low thyroid function and you are slightly chubby or you have like a little bit of too much body fat and too you're too heavy and your you have your blood markers are also messed up, like, the things that will rise with low thyroid functioning is gonna be cholesterol. So if you have low thyroid, your cholesterol is gonna increase, which could be a risk factor for metabolic syndrome and heart disease to a certain extent. And if you have low thyroid, you're gonna gain weight, then your insulin sensitivity will also decrease. You might get insulin resistance down the line. You might get prediabetes down the line. So in those cases, having the low thyroid is bad because you're gonna increase the risk of your metabolic syndrome. So you have to make sure that your final outcome is optimized, which is your body composition and your blood work. So if your blood work is clear, your body composition is also clear, meaning that you're at a relative low body fat percentage, you have good muscle tone, you have good muscle strength, and you're in good fitness, then in that case, the low thyroid is probably quite beneficial. So there's no point in arbitrarily increasing your thyroid functioning and metabolic rate just because you think it's healthier, for example. And likewise, it's not a good idea to deliberately suppress your thyroid function and deliberately suppress your metabolic rate because it can increase your risk of metabolic syndrome and, obesity because you're having lower metabolic rate. So it's comes down to the final outcome. How is your body composition and blood work? And, tracking your, let's say, body temperature, you know, it can tell you some things like it can certainly tell, you know, aspects of thyroid function, but you also have to correlate it with other symptoms. So if you are losing a lot of weight, you're becoming more frail, you have brittle skin, your hands are cold all the time, you have poor thermoregulation, you get hair loss, you hair thinning, you're tired and fatigued all the time, then that, yes, would mean that you might have, like, a lower thyroid function and lower metabolic rate. Now if, your body temperature is normal, then everything else is also normal, then, of course, you don't need to kinda worry about it at all. But the body temperature, you know, it can also reflect some other things related to your recovery. So if you have somewhat higher body temperature, then it could mean that you are getting sick, for example. You might have caught an infection. If you see that your HRV is also low, your resting heart rate is higher, HRV is lower, your body temperature is also higher, then that probably means that you have caught a cold or some sickness or some infection. Or you might be also overtrained, like, overtraining is a pretty big thing that is going to raise your risk of infection and and, increases your body temperature as well. So you just you can you can for sure, you can use it. But I wouldn't get, like, too, let's say, worried about it. And I would only, you know, determine if it's valuable based on your other symptoms, like your body composition and biomarkers. So like I said, if you have low body temperature, which would indicate, like, low thyroid, lower thyroid, and lower metabolic rate, then, it only matters or it's only dangerous if you also have the other side effects of low thyroid functioning, like weight gain and poor biomarkers. But if you have lower body temperature, you have lower metabolic rate, but your body composition is fine, your biomarkers are also perfect, then that's actually a good thing, at least based on some of the things we know about aging and longevity. So the goal shouldn't be to have super high metabolic rate. The goal shouldn't be to have super low metabolic rate either. The goal is to have optimal body composition and biomarkers. And then see, okay, how does the body temperature correlate with those results? Next question, what is an alternative to collagen peptides if you're sensitive to them? Like amino acids and eggshell membrane or something like that. So collagen generally, you know, depends on the source. The most collagen is gonna be like beef collagen or fish, collagen. There's very little of other types. They're like, most of them are gonna be beef or fish. Collagen, you could be allergic to some of those, compounds. Like, you could be allergic to fish. There's also the potential that the beef could be contaminated with some heavy metals or glyphosate or something like that. So, you know, obviously, it depends on the type or the source of what type of collagen are you taking. So first, you know, you can try different brands, some more reputable brands, that are third party tested for heavy metals and glyphosate and things of that. You can try those. But, yes, if it is a case that you really can't take actual collagen peptides because you you're very sensitive to them, whatever the symptom might be, gastrointestinal stress, some sort of autoimmune response, inflammatory response, sleep issues or gut tissues or whatever, then, you know, the best next best alternative is just beef gelatin powder. And, beef gelatin powder is very high in it has a very similar amino acid profile to collagen peptides, so you can still increase your daily collagen intake with regular gelatin powder. It's I would consider it more, like, more hypoallergenic because it generally is just regular gelatin powder. But, you know, if you have a beef allergy or something that, which is very rare, but, if you do have a beef allergy, then you still will respond or you're gonna react to even the beef gelatin powder, not to mention the beef collagen peptides. But, yeah, beef gelatin powder is a good natural food alternative to collagen peptides. Now the issue with, the beef gelatin powder is that we don't have, you know, clinical trials showing that the beef beef gelatin powder would help with hallmarks of skin aging or reverse markers of skin aging the same way we have, with collagen peptides. So the collagen peptides are, by now, pretty well established to have benefits for helping with skin aging and improving skin elasticity and reversing hallmarks of skin aging. We don't have those studies for gelatin. And, you know, it might be that the gelatin is just too large of a molecule compared to low molecular rate collagen peptides. We don't know that yet. At least I haven't found any, like, studies comparing the two or something. But, if any you know, at least you're gonna increase your daily collagen intake, which in turn can help with collagen turnover and maintaining skin health and joint health and those kind of things. So I would still increase my gelatin in or, like, increase my glycine and collagen intake. And if you can't take collagen peptides, then just take beef gelatin powder, for example. Next question, what's something in the research that was considered to be healthy, but now turns out it's not? So, you know, the issue I have with food or nutrition research is that it is very subjective and it all depends on the context, you know. Argue you could make the argument that, you know, all food is fine in moderation as long as it doesn't make you gain weight or it doesn't make you become diabetic or it doesn't increase your, let's say, other bad biomarkers like blood pressure or stuff like that. You know, yes, you can make the argument that, if it if it fits your macros, then you can eat anything. Of course, over the long term, you might not optimize your micronutrient profile. You might not optimize your just hormones and other, like, insulin sensitivity if you eat just junk. But, you know, to a certain point, even the unhealthiest foods, your body can deal with it if you're in a moderate calorie intake. And likewise, if you're overeating healthy foods, whatever the definition is, just whole foods, let's say, if you eat too much potatoes, fruits, meats, fish, eggs, if you're in calorie excess, especially if you're eating like thousands of more calories above what your body needs, then even at that point, those healthier and whole foods can have, like, negative effects on your health. So the calorie still matters in that context. But I think, you know, all of these unprocessed foods generally are not that healthy. And we do have a lot of, you know, studies finding that ultra processed food consumption, which would be chicken nuggets, donuts, cookies, chocolate, I mean, like, Snickers bars and those kind of things, and pizzas and, other processed foods, like ultra processed foods, not not things like olive oil or, like, dairy or something like that, which are also processed to a certain extent. Those ultra processed foods, are associated with shorter life efficacy and increased mortality risk. You know, of course, the calorie content is huge in this because if you are just eating burgers and fries, then you're gonna get a lot more calories than you would get from the whole unprocessed foods. Secondly, there are some foods that are also considered to be healthy, but, might have some associations with poor health outcomes and increased mortality. One of them being, of course, sugar sweetened beverages, they're not considered healthy. But in this category, they also put fruit juices. And at least, like, when I grew up, fruit juices were considered pretty healthy. Like orange juice and apple juice and cranberry juice, they're considered to be healthy drinks, like healthier alternative to soda. But when you look at the research, then the sugar sweetened beverages, whether that be sodas or juices, then they are still associated with increased risk of diabetes and increased mortality. Now if you eat if you drink, like, unprocessed and regular orange juice that you just made yourself, like you just squeeze, you know, three, four, five oranges and you drink that, then, you know, you can still yeah. Within a certain metabolic and, like, calorie intake, it's still healthy. Of course, if that's, like, the majority of your diet, then at some point, you will experience some, like, worsening of your insulin sensitivity, and you might gain weight. And you might just, you know, consume too much fructose, which, can increase, like, fatty liver and stuff like that, even if it's like a whole fruit. It's just that, you know, in a fruit juice concentrate, you're getting, like, let's say, a dozen oranges if you drink, like, multiple cups per day. So it all but it still depends on the calorie intake. Like, even if you are in a very high juice diet, but you're in a calorie deficit, then yeah. I mean, in the short term, you're gonna not see any negative side effects to your metabolic health. But, I would say that fruit juices, at least the ones that you get from the store, which aren't, you know, fresh pressed juices, those are pretty bad. And they used to be considered pretty healthy. Like my mother thought it was healthy. I drank some of these, you know, apple juices from the store, like in this tetra packages. Those ones, they're in most cases, they're gonna be just with added sugars and, not that healthy because they also, like, have removed the fiber and the other, like, nutrients from there. So it's mostly, like, just juice concentrated that tastes like juice, but it doesn't have actual, you know, the healthy components of the fruit that you would get from a, like, a whole pressed, juice format. Secondly, I would say that granola is also something that I don't think that is really healthy, at least like the children's granola. You know, when I grew up, we ate this bland, unsweetened, just this whole grain muesli. That that's not the crunchy granola that is sweetened with sugar. Like the muesli, that is just oats, some coconut flakes, a little bit of, dried cranberries, and no sugar, no any other, like, sweet things, just this unflavored muesli. I think that's probably fine. That's healthy in in the in the say in the meaning that it doesn't have a bunch of sugar and it doesn't it's not ultra refined carbohydrates. It's this whole whole grain oats kind of. But the other granola that is, this ultra refined grains and, added sugar and added chocolate chips and those things, then that's, I would say, certainly unhealthy because, yeah, refined carbohydrate intake is also associated with increased mortality and increased diabetes. So that doesn't necessarily just apply to pastries and donuts. But if, you know, the regular granola is used with ultra like ultra refined grains and it has added sugars, then I would say it's equally as bad as a like a donut. So if you are eating, like, muesli or granola, then make sure it is, like, low sugar and, you know, the regular muesli that is unflavored, then that is kind of the healthiest option, I would say. But even then, you know, if you're that's what your only breakfast is like, then I would say it's not optimized in terms of the macronutrients. Like, the breakfast, ideally, you know, it could have carbohydrates, but the breakfast should still have plenty of protein as well to you and, you know, help with protein synthesis and stuff like that. So, you know, just having granola or just having muesli for breakfast, even if you put milk there, is is not enough protein. And, ideally, we would still need some more protein for that. So that's why, like, you know, with the with the, crump that we made, we made our own healthy breakfast granola that is high protein, low sugar, or doesn't have any added sugar except for a little bit of honey and some dried cranberries. It's high fiber, high protein, and lower carb with no added sugar. So that's what I've I would say like, the crunchy granola that has added sugar is bad. Regular, unflavored, unsugared muesli is generally a bit healthier. Next question. Haisie would like to know what workouts is most important fixed to your routine. So, obviously, I've made multiple videos about exercise on my channel. I think exercise is the most powerful antiaging longevity intervention we know It's more powerful than any supplemental drug as of now and, exercise will certainly reduce your mortality risk the most out of anything. Now the thing with exercise is that technically any form of exercise is good. Any form of exercise will suffice. So what you want to do is just, you know, stimulate the benefits that you get from exercise such as increasing your heart rate in the short term so that you would lower your basal heart rate, you would lower your inflammation, you would boost your immune system, you would strengthen your joints and tendons, you would increase your incidence activity, you would burn some calories. All those things come from any form of exercise, whether that be badminton, whether that be soccer, lifting weights, running in a park, walking with your dog or playing with your dog, whatever. All of those movements, you know, helped achieve those effects at least to a certain extent. Now there are obviously more effective ways of achieving those effects. That's where it comes the idea of doing a structured workout plan that incorporates both resistance training that optimizes for muscle strength, bone density, and muscle mass. And we will have cardiorespiratory activities that focuses on card respiratory fitness, heart health, and blood vessel health and those kind of things as well, which you can achieve with, you know, any kind of sports, soccer, tennis, all those things are cardiorespiratory activities and, you know, interval training, high intensity interval training, sprints, cycling, what jogging, get the park, zone two cardio, all those are in that category as well. I personally do both, obviously. I do resistance training and cardio respiratory fitness. The research suggests that with weightlifting, if you want to maximize muscle growth, then the kind of upper amount of weightlifting workouts per week is gonna be around three to four. So if you really want to optimize muscle strength and muscle mass, then three to four workouts per week is the upper limit. And after that, you don't really see additional benefits. Of course, if you're like a professional athlete or a bodybuilder or some sort of you know, who takes some sort of performance enhancing substances, then your recovery is faster and you can work out more often as well. But the average person, generally, the recommended amount the maximum recommended amount is three to four per week. I personally work out with weights three times per week because when you look at, you know, the maximum benefits, then the benefits for from high intensity and resistance type activities, they peak at around, like, a hundred and fifty to two hundred minutes per week. So you don't need to do more to get the biggest reduction in your mortality risk and cardiovascular disease risk. So you I I personally don't see the reason to do more than that. So I don't really work out any more than two hundred minutes per week with weights. And usually, my workouts per session are like forty five minutes. So I actually have pretty short, resistance training sessions because that's what already optimizes and that's what is giving you the maximum benefits for risk reduction from resistance training. You could do more, but then you have to be really careful with recovery and actually make sure that you are, you know, recovering and not overtraining. So there's no additional benefits from the longevity perspective from overtraining. You might get additional weight loss benefits from overtraining or you might build more muscle and more strength by training more often. But from a longevity perspective, then you don't need to train any more than three times per week and forty five minutes per session. That's what I do. And, with in regards to cardio workouts, then the threshold or the maximum upper limit for benefits for cardio is actually a lot higher. So when you look at how much moderate vigorous activity you could do, then you can still see benefits even if you go from two hundred minutes up until eight hundred minutes and nine hundred minutes. So theoretically, you could do even nine hundred minutes of moderate physical activity per week and still keep getting benefits in terms of lowering your risk of all cause mortality and lowering risk of cardiorespiratory, or cardiovascular disease. So I think it's much more important to focus on getting more of the moderate physical activity because you get the maximum benefits from resistance training even within a hundred and fifty to two hundred minutes per week. So you don't need to do more than that. But if you miss out on the moderate physical activity, which includes zone two cardio, hiking, walking your dog, you're doing something that is more than just regular walking and sitting down, but it's not as intense as lifting weights or doing interval cardio, then you're gonna get more benefits by doing more of the moderate physical activity. And that's what I've been shifting more towards over the past year or so. I'm doing significantly less resistance training. I'm still at pretty advanced levels with my muscle mass and muscle strength, and, I'm doing a lot more of the moderate physical activity. So I'm walking more, I'm rocking, I'm hiking, I'm doing more zone two cardio, and, I'm getting at least six hundred minutes per week of moderate physical activity, which includes, yeah, different kinds of, you know, they're not super strenuous physical activities. So like, yeah, brisk walking, hiking, and, cycling zone two cardio. So on average, I'll aim for around two to three zone two cardio sessions per week for forty five to fifty five minutes. So I don't ever, like, work out longer than sixty minutes because, because I'm working out pretty much every day, so I don't need to have super long workout sessions. And it could actually be more counterproductive to work out over an hour if you're working out every day because you're gonna tap into your recovery, and that can actually just, you know, cause some increased risk of respiratory tract infections and, other, you know, poor health outcomes if you're just overtraining. So I don't wanna overtrain. I do want to maximize the a hundred and fifty to two hundred minutes of resistance training per week, which I will achieve with three forty five minute workouts per week. I'll alternate in between upper body, lower body, and those kind of things. And I do want to maximize that I get at least, like, six hundred to eight hundred minutes of moderate physical activity per week. So I guess that's that's my answer to the question. It's obviously pretty, you know, precise. But, I would say that, you know, workout like, the simpler answer would be workout with weights three times per week. You don't need to do more than that. You could, but it doesn't give you additional longevity benefits. And instead, do at least, you know, two to three cardio sessions as well per week. But if you do cardio, then don't make it too intense because if you start to do zone three, four, five cardio, then that is already categorized as this vigorous physical activity instead of moderate physical activity. So if you are doing cardio, then the zone two cardio is the way to go. So zone two is around 60 to 70% of your maximum heart rate. So you can subtract your age from 220, you're gonna get your maximum, heart rate, and the 60 per 60 to 70% of that is your zone two. So you do that for forty five minutes per session. And ideally, do like, you know, at maximum, I think three zone two cardio sessions per week is kind of the upper limit, but one at least. I try to do like two to three, per week. Next question, can I feel like my twenties even well into my fifties and sixties? It's hard to define how do you feel like you're in your twenties. Do you look at aspects of body composition? Do you look at aspects of muscle strength? Other types of fitness, your Rio two max. You know, there are certainly things that do decline with age. By default, your muscle strength, muscle mass, testosterone, and your VO two max decline around 10% per decade, roughly, roughly speaking. So it's hard to be precisely like in your twenties, in your fifties and sixties because there is gonna be some decline. Now they do find that the individuals who maintain a physically active lifestyle, they they can function up up to like 30 three decades younger functionally as fit as the 50 year olds who didn't exercise. No. That's not a really high standard. But I would say that if you're 80 years old and you can function like a 50 year old, then that's still a huge win. Because at 50 years old, you're still pretty independent. You can still do pretty much everything that you want. You can still walk around. You can take the stairs. You can lift stuff. You can play with your dog or grandchildren, whatever. So at 50 years old, being able to, you know or at 80 years old, being able to do the things that a 50 year old would, even if they're not, like, super fit, then that's still a huge win because the 80 year olds that don't have that good strength and fitness, they're, like, falling off the cliff pretty hard. Like, at 80, you know, my grand grandmother is 75 years old. She has had poor health all her life. Recently, I saw her. She has lost a lot of weight. She's very skinny and, you know, she kind of needs a cane to walk around and she's not even 80. She's 75 years old. So and she because and then that's the reason is because of her she has had some health issues pretty much all her life and she obviously has never, like, exercised regularly. But if you're 80 years old and you are fit and you're functionally as fit as a 50 year old, then that's pretty huge win and that's obviously what you want to strive towards to maintain this better health and better functional fitness and functional freedom up until you're 80 and 90 years old, even. So there's even, like, this 90 year old, gymnasts who are able to do some very basic and simple gymnastic tricks, which, you know, is pretty profound when you think about how much you know, it's just gymnastics is very complex or is very taxing on the body in terms of the joints and impacts and those kind of things. So, yeah, if you are able to do gymnastics when you're 90 years old, even if if it's, like, a simple cartwheel or, you know, you're rolling ground or stuff like that, then that's a huge win. In your fifties and sixties, it's very possible to be as fit and healthy as a 30 year old or a 20 year old even because the average 20 or 30 year old, they're not super healthy. But if you are maintaining better, let's say, fitness, muscle strength, VO two max, bone density and body composition, you don't wanna be overweight, then yes, you can act and feel like a 20 year old. I'm pretty sure of that. And we have research showing that at least thirty years, you can be at least thirty years younger in terms of your, physical fitness compared to your peers. And that's the last question of the q and a. If you want to ask me a question in the future, then make sure you follow me on Instagram at simlund, and I'm gonna do those q and a's quite regularly there. But do you want to achieve and maintain biological youth? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to add healthy years to their life. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@simlund.com, and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is sim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.