Most of your longevity and lifespan is determined by epigenetics that refers to your lifestyle, habits, and the environment that you're exposed to. Hey, my name is Simon Land and in this video, I'm gonna tell you the five habits that shorten your lifespan. Do it. So number one is gonna be eating too late. So, this refers to the concept of time restricted eating and circadian biology. So we know that the circadian rhythm mismatches are linked to many of these chronic diseases like heart disease, cancer, obesity, diabetes and Alzheimer's. On the flip side, confining your eating window in some shape or form with thymosroid eating and intermittent fasting can have a protective effect against those things and even reverse some of those conditions. I personally think that it doesn't really matter if you eat like very early or if you eat slightly later, but you definitely want to avoid eating immediately before bed. Let me explain. The reason has to do with melatonin production and all these other processes that are supposed to occur in your sleep. Melatonin is considered the sleep hormone but it also governs pretty much all the other longevity pathways and processes. The first few hours of going to bed is where you produce the most melatonin and that is also where you produce the most growth hormone and other of these, anti aging, functions. Eating too much food immediately before bed can take away your energy from those processes and it can also reduce your sleep quality. If you have like a massive meal that raises your heart rate, raises your blood sugar levels and makes you sweat or raises your body temperature in some way, then it's gonna reduce your sleep quality. And with bad sleep quality you're not getting that good benefits from these functions that melatonin is going through. There's the also the thing that melatonin actually makes you somewhat insulin resistant. So melatonin binds to the pancreas and prevents you from producing insulin. So this is the one the biggest reasons why you don't wanna be eating in the evening and you don't wanna ever eat like in pitchback darkness. Your body also recharges its antioxidant defence in your system with NADPH. If you're eating then your body is in a slight energy surplus in that moment of time and it will also take away energy from the recharge of n a d p h and n a d. So what I recommend to do is to not eat anything at least three to four hours before bed. That's the minimum and optimal even like five hours. But of course that's not feasible. In most cases, if you have to eat something like an hour before bed or something, yeah, just keep it smaller, keep it, lower glycemic and don't consume like super large amounts of carbohydrates because melatonin, it does make you insulin resistant. Diabetes. Number two is gonna be sitting all day. We know that sedentary behavior is associated with old cause mortality and pretty much all the other chronic diseases as well. Whereas exercising and staying physically active does the opposite. If you are sitting in a computer chair or sitting in a car, the vast majority of the time, most hours of the day, then that does pretty much, age you faster and increases your risk of mortality from all causes. So what I like to do is use a standing work desk if possible. I like to take many movement breaks. I like to break up long periods of sitting with walks, stretching or just jumping jacks, whatever it is, just to keep your body moving. Walking is a great way to counteract sitting but if you, let's say, sit five or six hours in a row then, going for walks isn't gonna, you know, make up to all of it. It's more effective to have more consistent periods of movement throughout the day than to be sedentary all the time and then do like a very long workout session or something like that. So it's important to have like, you know, every hour or so have at least a few minutes of movement whether that be just walking, stretching or just standing up even for a few minutes. Do it. Number three is gonna be phone scrolling before bed. If it has a blue light filter on then it's fine. But the artificial blue light like the blue and green wavelengths from the smartphone or computer screen or TV or the ceiling lamp or whatever it is, that can reduce your melatonin production and with lower melatonin levels, you know, like a worse time to fall asleep, you'll have less melatonin for conducting these repair processes in your sleep and blue light exposure at night is also actually associated with chronic diseases like diabetes, obesity and Alzheimer's. Weird things like blue blocking glasses, use different kinds of blue light filters on your smartphone and that's gonna be fine. You know, I would still like try to limit the scrolling of the phone even if you have the blue light blockers, on because, you know, it's psychologically is a bad habit, but it's not gonna age you. It's not gonna make you age faster. But the blue light itself exposing your eyes to the blue lights before bed because it, you know, suppresses melatonin and reduces the heat quality, then, that definitely ages you faster. Number four is gonna be restricting your sleep. Whether that be like waking up too early, going to bed too late, staying up past midnight, having your regular sleeping patterns. Restricting your sleep in any way is gonna have a negative effect on your longevity, body composition and overall health. Sleeping less than five hours increases your risk risk from all causes by fifteen percent. And, yeah, just chronic sleep deprivation catches up on you. It may not increase your risk of mortality, but it definitely ages you in multiple ways. Like it ages you in terms of your metabolic health. It ages you in terms of your skin quality and skin health. It ages you in terms of your brain function because you can't really, like, assess or you can't track your brain aging as easily as you can do it with your, blood sugar levels, for example. But, yeah, just, restricting your sleep reduces the quality of your life and ages you faster in multiple ways. On average, you wanna get at least six to eight hours per night as an adult, but optimal I would say seven to eight or even eight and a half hours in some cases. And last, number five is gonna be mouth breathing. So humans, we are supposed to breathe through the nose most of the time. Of course, there are some cases where you have to breathe through the mouth like when you're exercising or if you're doing something very strenuous. But, you know, when you are breathing through the mouth, you are stimulating stimulating the sympathetic nervous system. That is gonna keep your body in a state of fight or flight. It raises your cortisol and stress levels and it actually, deprives your brain from oxygen. So if you're sleeping with your mouth open and you're breathing through the mouth then that can cause like sleep apnea. That definitely, deprives your brain of the oxygen during your sleep and damages the brain, ages the brain and reduces your overall sleep quality. To fix that you need to teach yourself how to breathe through the nose all the time. And this is something that many people don't pay attention to at all and they don't even know that they are breathing through the mouth. And if you are stressed out all the time then chances are you are, subconsciously, without knowing it, breathing through the mouth all the time. If you want to reverse and slow down ageing then, email me the word health to infoseemlan dot com and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.