Usually, insulin resistance and diabetes results from overnutrition. You just consume too many carbohydrates or even too many fats or calories, which ends up giving you impaired glucose tolerance and insulin resistance. But there is one key nutrient without which even healthy people can experience impaired glucose tolerance and mild insulin resistance. So in this video, I'm gonna talk about this one specific vitamin without which you can get diabetes. It's showtime. In 1939, four young healthy twenty to twenty nine year old women were put on a thiamine deficient diet. They were getting less than 0.1 of thiamine per day. They all saw very rapid impairment in glucose tolerance. Injecting one milligram of Thiamine Chloride subcutaneously for four days reversed that phenomenon. Another 1940 study on six healthy white women aged 21 to 46 saw that a low Thiamine intake of zero point fifteen milligrams a day or less caused diabetic blood sugar curves. In this case as well, thiamine injections at doses of one milligram reversed these symptoms. Here are the conclusions of the authors from these studies. Number one, thiamine deficiency in as little as fifteen days, but especially after two to three months, leads to impaired carbohydrate tolerance. Number two, thiamine supplementation improves glucose tolerance in those who are deficient. Number three, symptoms of thiamine deficiency are vague, such as lack of appetite and fatigue. Number four, thiamine deficiency can cause electrocardiogram changes. So what is thiamine? Thiamine, also known as vitamin b one, is an essential vitamin. Some of the more well known disorders caused by thiamine deficiency include beriberi, which causes severe malnutrition. Thiamine deficiency can also cause optic neuropathy, and thiamine deficiency can also cause diabetes. Numerous studies show that thiamine or thiamine related compounds improves diabetic glucose control and diabetic symptoms. Thiamine at a hundred and fifty milligrams a day has been seen to significantly reduce blood glucose and leptin levels within one month in twenty four drug naive type two diabetic patients. Thiamine administered as one time hundred milligram IV dose improved endothelium dependent vasodilation in ten type two diabetics during an acute glucose tolerance test. So why is thiamine so important for glucose? The active form of thiamine, thiamine diphosphate, acts as a coenzyme for three essential enzymes involved with glucose metabolism. You also need magnesium to form thiamine diphosphate inside the body. Usually thiamine deficiency occurs in third world countries where they're consuming usually like just white rice or other processed carbohydrates that actually leads to thiamine deficiency and causes this beri beri syndrome. But what are some of the other reasons for thiamine deficiency even in industrialized societies? Poor glucose control and insulin resistance such as in type one and type two diabetes promotes thiamine deficiency by down regulation of thiamine absorption transporters. High glucose levels even in non diabetics are going to reduce thiamine absorption because of this reason. Basically, you're gonna urinate out more thiamine with elevated glucose levels. This is a vicious feedback loop as the higher your glucose levels are, the more thiamine you would actually need. There are many medications and pharmaceuticals that also increase thiamine need, such as proton pump inhibitors, oral birth control, angiotensin receptor blockers, diuretics, and chemotherapy. Foods that can make you excrete thiamine are highly polished rice, processed grains, alcohol, coffee, and tea. So how much thiamine do you need to not get diabetes? The RDA for thiamine in adults is one point two milligrams for males and one milligram for females. During pregnancy and lactation for females, the requirement is one point four milligrams. The highest food sources of thiamine are pork, zero point four milligrams per three ounces. Trout, zero point four milligrams per three ounces. Black beans zero point four milligrams per half a cup. Mussels zero point three milligrams per three ounces. Tuna zero point two milligrams per three ounces. And squash zero point two milligrams per half a cup. If you're someone who has either symptoms of thiamine deficiency or you're someone that has some aspects of poor glucose control and high blood sugar levels, then you could also consider supplementing Thiamine. In terms of supplementation then for the optimal glucose oxidation, it's likely that supplementing with all three forms of thiamine is the best. But for a minimal effective dose, just a regular thiamine HCL is enough. If you're not overweight and you don't particularly have metabolic syndrome or you don't have type one diabetes or type two diabetes, but you still show symptoms of impaired glucose tolerance or your regular blood sugar levels and hemoglobin a one c are elevated for no other reason, then it's very likely that the reason for the high blood sugar levels is a particular nutrient deficiency, whether that be thiamine, chromium, sodium, or some other minerals. If you want to learn everything about improving your glucose levels and hemoglobin a1c, then check out my book with doctor James DeNicole Antonio called The Blood Sugar Fix, available on Amazon and Audible. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. So you optimize, stay empowered.