If you're doing everything right and you're checking all the boxes, understanding what are the one, two, three, or four individual bottlenecks in your metabolism is probably gonna be a lot more informative about to how you can get an extra ten years of high quality life. Chris, welcome back to the show. Thanks, Sam. Great to be here. Yeah. You've been on the podcast for several times, and, I I always like to refer to you or resort back to you in terms of the finest details and nitty gritty of all the micronutrients and different metabolic pathways because I think, yeah, like, you're one of the best, people out there who just, you know, obviously share such good information about these topics in such a, like, more simplistically understandable way, but also, yeah, like, going much more or going in, like, the all the detail and, you know, all the in-depth with all these, you know, related metabolic pathways and different kinds of nutrients. So in this episode, I wanted to talk about mostly, you know, what's the role of different kinds of micronutrients and vitamins and minerals, for longevity because, you know, usually people talk about, okay, what foods do I eat? What's the macros and what's the food groups? Is it vegan? Is it keto? Is it carnivore? Is it paleo? But, yeah, like, what's the actual we won't I wanna talk about, like, what's the actual, like, micronutrients and, different kinds of, you know, other compounds that are more, like, you know, under underlying the macronutrients, if that makes sense. Yeah. Well, I'm I'm the detailed guy. So Yeah. And, you know, I I think, you know, my audience is also very familiar with the idea behind, you know, glycine and methionine. And, you know, protein is probably the biggest thing that comes up when people talk about food and longevity so that you need to, like, restrict your protein, eat low protein diet, because if you eat too much protein, it makes you grow too fast and gives you cancer or those kind of things. So, you you know, it's actually many layers deeper than that. Obviously, there's, like, the amino acids that play different roles in that longevity process. So, yeah, like, what's what's you know, maybe you can start with, like, what's the role of these main main amino acids in this, like, the glycine and, methionine? Well, I think the first thing that you need to think about is you need to get into a little bit more granular detail when you're when you're talking about what you mean by longevity. And I think one of the biggest problems in the longevity space is that people focus on longevity at the expense of focusing on what not to die of. Right. And you wind up looking at experiments in worms or, you know, if you're lucky, rodents, maybe monkeys sometimes Right. Where the reality is not like the human reality at all. And it's and I'm not talking about that a monkey is not a human or a mouse isn't a human or a worm isn't a human. I'm talking about the fact that in animal experiments, you have highly controlled conditions where they are not likely to die of the things that humans are likely to die of. So if you trace if you look at, like, number one, what are the proportions of of causes of death? And number two, in what sequence do they occur in? Most people are gonna die of heart disease or cancer, but if you aren't doing what you need to protect yourself against a physical injury when you're young, there's no point in really optimizing for protection against cancer. You know, at at this point, you're lucky you like, you are very well endowed genetically or very well supported nutritionally, and and or just lucky if you get to die of cancer because that means that you passed through heart disease. Like, if you look at what was the leading cause of death over time, it was tuberculosis in the nineteenth century, and then it became heart disease because people lived long enough to get that. And as emergency medicine became better at treating heart attacks in the moment, it became cancer because having a heart attack was not necessarily a death sentence. And when you're thinking about that, in order to get to dying of natural causes where you might be concerned with this generic longevity factor type of thing that you would be studying in animal experiments, you have to make your way through not dying of physical injury, not dying of diabetes, not dying of respiratory infections, not dying of heart disease, not dying of cancer, etcetera. Mhmm. And most of us are not even getting there. So if you're looking at something like protein, you wanna be thinking first and foremost what prevents sarcopenia and what prevents osteopenia and osteoporosis. Because if you fall and fracture your hip when you're in your sixties, you're lucky if you make it past the year according to the according to the longitudinal studies. Like, there's a very high mortality rate from just that. Right? So it's almost like, why are we even thinking of someone presented an abstract at a conference in a mouse study about methionine and glycine balance before we're thinking of what's the right amount of muscle mass that we wanna have, what's the right amount of bone mass that we wanna have, and what's the effect of protein on that. Right? So I would say first and foremost, you want a high high enough protein intake to maintain high quality bone mass and muscle mass. And you really have to think about this starting young because peak bone mass is age 25 to 30, and it's all downhill from there. Now it's not necessarily all downhill at an individual level because you can come in with lower than normal bone mass, and you can fix your diet and fix your training program, and you can increase it. But at a population level, you hit peak bone mass at 25 or 30, and then it's just downhill from there. That means that you wanna you wanna be thinking about this when you're in when you're 20 years old so that you can prepare yourself to have the highest peak muscle and bone mass that you can have when you're 25 and the slowest descent after that, basically. And, again, on an individual level, sure, you can become a pro bodybuilder when you're 35 and you can increase your muscle mass. But, like, generally speaking, the trajectory is downward from there. Now with that said, there is some evidence that in a general longevity sense, you do want a balance between the sulfur amino acids, methionine, and cysteine that are abundant in animal proteins, especially milk and eggs above all, but are much more abundant in animal proteins and plant proteins. And glycine, which is rich in the collagenous tissue of those animal proteins, and the general gist of this is that methionine, too much methionine is gonna deplete your glycine. Glycine is is protective, in longevity. And if you just look at what was the ancestral intake of animal proteins, I mean, typically, you are not even distant ancestors, but typically our great grandparents, at least as recent as great grandparents, probably grandparents, would be largely eating the whole animal in which half the animal mass basically is collagenous tissues. And so you would naturally have that if I ate meat, I also ate bone, I also ate skin. And I think one interesting thing is you brought up at the beginning this debate between vegan versus carnivore versus whatever. In a sense, from the methionine glycine balance standpoint, you have some optionality between the two. Because if you eat nose to tail carnivore and you eat vegan, both of those have a pretty decent balance between methionine and glycine. However, vegan, it it's hard to get enough. And I I the vegan bodybuilders are gonna come at me for this, but generally speaking, it's harder much harder to hit your total protein target on a vegan diet. Mhmm. You know, probably you're not gonna be able to do that except the protein supplements. And when you start deviating from that, you have to you you know, if you're on pea protein, you're still gonna have a better methionine, methionine glycine balance than on, like, lean chicken breast. But as you deviate from the whole foods vegan diet, you do have to micromanage your balance more. So you're not as automatically protected as you would be on a sort of whole foods vegan diet. But but that is sort of like, well, you better skip over osteopenia and osteoporosis and Yeah. All those other things in between if you wanna leverage that methionine glycine balance in your vegan diet towards living in 95 or a 105. Right. Yes. Like, the the biggest irony is that you go on to slow protein diet to live longer, but then you still die to a hip fracture, you know, in your seventies or 80 you know? Yeah. Like, 65 or something like that already. So, yeah, like, you definitely there's, like, layers to this longevity thing. Like, yeah, first make sure that you get to, you know, fifties, or, you know, first make sure that you don't die to, like, like, some, you know, some some tragic event that you could prevent, like, you know, not putting a seat belt on or those kind of things. So, yeah, like, you know, at any or different ages, you have, like, different focuses. Like, if you're young, then you have to focus on slightly different things, like, mostly, you know, building this reservoir of muscle tissue and bone density and other fitness parameters that inevitably do decline with the decades. Even if you're, like, you know, elite level athlete, your VO2 max strength do decline regardless. You you decline significantly less than someone someone who doesn't exercise at all, but it's still going it's like, you know, damage control over the course of decades. And if you start at a higher point and if you, like, enable yourself to reach a higher point with your muscle strength and muscle mass and your max and bone density, then you fall to a, like, a higher standard in five decades, for example. Yeah. But but let's say, what is the, like, reason why excess methionine could be harmful for, and and in what situations, it is, let's say, negatively impacting health and, like, longevity? Well, I think it's easier to say the potential negative effects on health than it is on longevity just because there's not a whole lot of research in the lifespan front. But when you, when you get to I mean, if you consume more methionine than you need, part of the negative health impact will be glycine buffering. So what happens is methionine is used to methylate things, and in the process the process of methylation is what we use for things like synthesizing creatine, synthesizing phosphatidylcholine, regulation of gene expression, regulation and synthesis, regulation and decomposition of various neurotransmitters and hundreds of different things. And because we use it for so many hundreds of different important things, we need to regulate it. And what happens is when you have a sudden influx of methionine through eating a steak, for example, you will have more methyl groups than you need that come from that methionine, and you will use glycine to buffer them. And if the balance is handleable, you will later salvage those methyl groups in the fasting state. But if the methionine influx is high enough, you're gonna run out of your ability to do that recycling, and you're just gonna lose the glycine and the methyl groups in the urine. So under those circumstances, you're losing glycine, and that's has all kinds of potential negative health consequences. Glycine is important. Does an inhibitory neurotransmitter that helps you, cool down your body temperature when you sleep so your sleep could suffer. Glycine is important as a detoxifier, so your detoxification of drugs and environmental toxins and things that you don't want in food chemicals, could suffer. For example, salicylates are a compound in food that are detoxified primarily with glycine. And although salicylates are not, you know, the average person can handle them, they also hurt your energy metabolism by poking holes in the mitochondrial respiratory chain and by inhibiting various enzymes. Some people are salicylate sensitive, and they get direct symptoms when they consume salicylates. The average person's going to have some kind of decline in their energy metabolism at minimum even if it's not symptomatic from not being able to clear those with glycine. There are studies that show that glycine helps stabilize blood sugar, so losing glycine is probably gonna compromise your blood sugar handling. And if you look at the list of the top 10 major killers, diabetes is one of those things, and so there could be a relationship there. And glycine is extremely important for your own collagen. And as a result, it's, you know, from a beauty perspective, it's important from for, like, kind of looking like you're not aging too fast, but internally, do that call you know, collagen is is, providing structures around all your internal organs, and it's the major protein in bone. So from the perspective of going back to that list of top 10 killers and seeing osteoporosis on there, it's also gonna be important in that respect. Then on top of that, too many sulfur amino acids get metabolized to sulfate, which is good for us. But on the way there, they get metabolized to sulfite, which is highly toxic. And so having chronically elevated sulfite levels is is probably gonna cause kinda, like, low level toxicity that could probably elevate inflammation levels, contribute to the anxiety problems and all kinds of stuff like that that's gonna maybe not cause a top 10 killer, but still kind of slightly tug on your Mhmm. On your longevity strings, in the background. Yeah. Yeah. That's and, yeah, like, lysine has, you know, a ton of many different roles, like, glutathione and creatine and heme synthesis and bile acid synthesis. So it's, like, almost you know, it's it's considered a nonessential amino acid, but, you know, if you look at it, what it does, and, you know, given the fact that your body actually doesn't make that much of it, and most people aren't eating that much glycine either from diet, then it's like you you would still like, most people are, like, deficient in glycine, actually. At least the standard person who doesn't eat any of these glycine rich foods, like, you know, tendons and chicken skin or fish skin and, gelatin powder. Yeah. On top of that, the glycine pathway is basically dependent on carbohydrate and folate. So most glycine is synthesized from pyruvate, which is the end product of glycolysis that you get when you burn carbs that's converted to serine, and converting serine to glycine requires, the unmethylated form of folate. So you need a high folate and b twelve intake. And that, you know, the the methionine glycine balance is probably gonna be worst in people who are low carb, high meat. You know, like, a carnivore diet has to have horrible methionine glycine balance if it's if it's, like, a steak only diet, because you're not only not consuming the the glycine rich parts of the animal, but you're also you have extreme carbohydrate restriction and low folate intake, which are going to trash your endogenous glycine synthesis. Right. Yeah. Unless you're eating actually nose to tail. So in that case, you're That's why I said a steak only carnivore diet. Right? Yeah. Yeah. You can Yeah. You can certainly do a carnivore diet nose to tail for sure. That's sort of like a old, kinda like old school Saladino carnivore versus Sean Baker kind of work. Yeah. Well, I I I would would be interested to know, like, what's their homocysteine levels. I I don't I haven't heard by you sharing those, but, yeah. Because, you know, if you are not getting enough glycine and you're eating a lot of methionine, then your homocysteine levels will also rise, which is quite harsh. No. No. No. That's not that's not right. So your your homocysteine is not gonna be a good, reflector of of methionine glycine balance at all because if you have an influx of methionine, what glycine does is it takes the methyl group away from methionine to generate homocysteine. So homocysteine is gonna be much more linear ly tracked with methionine intake regardless of glycine. Okay. You need b six to break down the homocysteine. Well, you know, I guess under so you do need serine or glycine in order to break down homocysteine using the vitamin b six dependent transsulfuration pathway. So I suppose, I guess you're you're right, but just not the way that I was thinking about it. So a steak only carnivore diet, the big the big problem on the homocysteine level has it's unrelated to glycine buffering, but it is related to the fact that if your serine and glycine levels are low because, a, you're not synthesizing serine from glycolysis, and b, you're not consuming glycine that is, I mean, there will be serine in meat, so it's not gonna it's not gonna be the worst case scenario, but you're gonna have lower endogenous serine synthesis from carbohydrate and and you don't have the glycine, and so that probably does compromise the transsulfuration pathway. So that might increase, but that you would see that primarily as an increase in postprandial homocysteine rather than fasting homocysteine. In fact, you might argue that in that case, fasting homocysteine would be misleadingly low and make your lab work look better than it is. Gotcha. Yeah. Yeah. Because, you know, homocysteine, if it's too high, then that's it's a cardiovascular disease, risk factor. So how you know, it's obviously not the, like I don't know, like, how in terms of, like, the tiers, like, how high of a risk factor it is. Obviously, like, blood pressure is probably much bigger or incident resistance. But, like, how how bad is the high homocysteine if you, you know, like, have too much methionine? I guess it depends how high it is. I mean, I I don't I don't really think of it like that. I mean, I think of it more like if your homocysteine is high, that's a reflection of the metabolic pathway being backed up. And I take it more of as more of an indicator than than otherwise. Right? Like, if your homocysteine is high because your folate is low, you got bigger problems than just the homocysteine being high. You you have a folate deficiency. Your homocysteine tie because your b twelve is deficient. You've got bigger you know, like, you can you could you could do, they don't do this, but, like, if you if you did homocysteine plasma apheresis and took the homocysteine out of the plasma and put the plasma back in, that's not gonna stop you from having your reversible central nervous system degeneration from the b twelve deficiency. Right? So, yes, homocysteine is a factor because it causes it causes a too much homocysteine causes oxidative stress, but I think that's kind of a distraction from the fact that if your homocysteine is how you got something else that's wrong, that has a bunch of other negative effects that you need to figure out. Gotcha. Yeah. And by the way, homocysteine can be totally normal, and you can have serious problems in your methylation and transsulfuration pathways. Mhmm. And you would never catch them unless you run a a more expansive panel. Yeah. True. And, you know, obviously, when you're talking about methylation then or just, you know, methionine itself is, you know, essential nutrient. You don't wanna be, like, too low methionine either or, like, you you don't wanna obviously avoid all methionine. And it's virtually impossible because, like, all foods have some methionine. So, yeah, you just need to Yeah. I think that's I think that's also, like, not, not something that you wanna do anyway because methionine is used to synthesize, for example, glutathione, which is the master cellular antioxidant. It's incredibly important for detoxification. It's used for synthesizing taurine, which is, important in the central nervous system, especially it's used for synthesizing sulfate, which is very important for hormone regulation and for detoxification. So I think it's I mean, it's from a biochemical perspective, it seems pretty clear that you want a lot of methionine and glycine. And that really also that that really also goes back to the let's take our heads out of the one like, the generic longevity basket. Just think about what's killing people first. Mhmm. You want high protein for good bone mass and good muscle mass. Yeah. So so what's the the board at yeah. Go ahead. Yeah. Like, what's then what's, like, a good ratio or, like, how do you, like, how do you see, like, a optimal protein, structuring for just, you know, maintaining the good muscle mass and also not, you know, doing any harm? Yeah. I think that I think it's it's it's pretty easy to say how much protein do you need for optimal body composition. I mean, that that data suggests that the minimum would be 1.2 grams per kilogram body weight, and the sweet spot is probably closer to double that. If you had a if if you had a exclusively body composition related goal, you might wanna triple it. But if you're just looking at optimal muscle mass, I think you want you're shooting basically between a half a gram if you think about your weight in pounds, half a gram to a gram of protein of non collagen protein per, pound of body weight. And, you multiply that by 2.2 if you're thinking about your weight in kilograms. In terms of balancing with collagen, you could think about it a couple ways. I think as a general rule of thumb, you basically want, about a minimum of fifteen grams of collagen for every 100 grams of noncollagen animal protein. But you I could definitely conceive of the possibility that traditional ancestral intakes were much higher on the glycine side, on the collagen side, just on the basis that the weight of an animal carcass is basically fifty fifty in terms of the non collagen, the collagen rich animal protein. There's certainly you have to adjust that for the accessibility. Right? Like, so it's it's certainly easier to eat the muscle meat of an animal than to consume all the collagen that's inside the bone, which requires pulverizing it. And, certainly, like, a lot of the collagenous tissue is not super chewable. Right? So if you if you adjust that downward, so if if you say, like, 50% skeletal muscle, 50% collagen rich tissue, you probably gotta take the edibility of the collagen rich tissue down to, like, cut it into a fifth, basically. Because you're either you're boiling it and you're getting whatever comes out in the boil or you're pulverizing part of the bone, which you're mainly using as a calcium source, etcetera. Right? So if you if you account for the edibility, it's probably going to be somewhere around, you know, every 100 grams of protein gets 20 grams of collagen, something like that. But I I came to when I came up with 15 grams of collagen for every 100 grams of non collagen animal protein, I was also looking at, like, what would restore the methionine glycine balance of plant foods, and it kind of works out that way. So because there's no randomized controlled trials of different ratios of these things versus longevity Yeah. I'm I'm just trying to find, like, what's the consensus between different types of ways that you would think about it. And so I think when you when you think about it in multiple different ways, like, what's the what would our ancestors get? What would have a kind of consensus balance between whole animal and plants? It all kinda works out like that. But another way to think about it that would allow you to go a little higher would be what are the potential therapeutic uses of glycine? And if you look at, human trials, you're basically looking at three to five grams with a meal can help stabilize blood sugar, three grams before bed can help with sleep, three to five grams in the context of gelatin. So fifteen grams of gelatin, but not lower doses. Fifteen grams of gelatin's got about five grams of glycine in it. In that context, before exercise, it can help collagen synthesis in joints. So if you're kinda combining these, you could say, well, you know, five grams with each meal, three grams before bed, five grams before exercise, then you could argue for, like, a twenty to twenty five gram intake of glycine if you're maximizing the therapeutic value, excluding the studies of schizophrenia using sixty grams, which by the way is, I believe, is, like, roughly equivalent to what gets turned over in in the maximal collagen turnover, which is highly variable between people. Like, maximal turnover like, the maximal estim maximal estimated individual glycine turnover is some somewhere around that sixty grams that, has been used as an antipsychotic for schizophrenia. But so if you look at it like that, I would say, like, I would create a window and say the baseline is getting this five extra grams of glycine a day from fifteen grams of collagen for each hundred grams of non collagen animal protein in your diet. So that looks like maybe if you're on the upper range of supporting your body composition with the with the regular so called regular protein, maybe you're getting a 150 grams a day if you weigh a hundred fifty pounds. And then you're adding to that, 22 and a half grams of collagen. About a third of that is glycine. And then that's the bottom of the window, and then the top of the window would be maybe twenty to twenty five grams of glycine, which you would get from sixty to seventy five grams of collagen or gelatin, or, divide that by 10 and you have the cups of bone broth that you would have to drink, or you could just or you could be getting it from glycine powder or whatever. So that I mean, if you get it from glycine powder, it's it is that twenty to twenty five grams. If you're getting it from any of those other sources, you're looking at three times that for the collagen based protein. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, the the amount of glycine you could eat is, yeah, like, pretty high per day. Like, you know, I think there are some experience even like that ninety grams per day is also, like, pretty safe and, no side effects. So, but, yeah, like, there are maybe, like, a few side effects of some people, like, have have heard them say that, you know, headaches or nausea or something like that. But, you know, that could be because of to someone with a glycine cleavage system disorder, and they're gonna put them in the hospital and they might die. But so there's there's there's individual variation in in everything. But, yeah, I think that I mean, the lesson is that the the take the the the random person who submits themselves to research studies and doesn't get kicked out at the enrollment process, that person as a prototype is probably gonna be able to tolerate a massive amount of glycine. Yeah. And, yeah, I mean, there's so many reasons to take glycine, I think, besides, you know, even if there is, like, yeah, like, no there's a methionine thing because, yeah, like, doesn't matter. There's, yeah, like, just the other benefits for the collagen alone. It's like, you know, you do need, you know, at minimum, like, twelve grams of glycine for the collagen turnover. And like I said, it could be even, like, higher, like, up to sixty or thirty six milligrams or yeah. Depends on what reference someone uses or what, you know, what, thoughts or opinions they have about it. Yeah. But I'd I mean, the big elephant in the room, though, is that, endogenous glycine synthesis is not a constant, and it's going to be highly correlated with carbohydrate intake, the rate of glycolysis, and the availability of tetrahydrofolate, which is young methylated form of folate, which requires having a high folate intake and requires a very robust turnover of folate in the methylation system and the other systems that folate is involved in. So if you have a very high flux of folate to those systems, a very high folate intake and a very high carbohydrate intake so that you're relying primarily on carbohydrate oxidation, you're probably gonna need a lot less glycine. Whereas if you are on a carnivore diet, your glycine needs are gonna be way higher because you're kind of maxing you're bottoming out all those processes. The carbohydrate intake, the folate intake, the folate flux, etcetera. Gotcha. You mentioned taurine a little bit while ago, which is interesting or relevant because, like, a few weeks ago, there was this this mouse study that showed that the taurine supplementation extended their mouth the lifespan of their mouth mice. So, you know, obviously, it's not a human study or anything. But, what do you think about what of role of taurine? What's, like, the benefits of taurine? And what do you think of adding it as a supplement? Well, I didn't see that study, so I'm not I'm not too sure. I mean, taurine is, it's import well, it's important for, bile acid conjugation, and it's important as a it's kind of in the central nervous system, it's kind of aligned with GABA. But it also is just an intermediate in transsulfuration, so it's sparing to sulfur amino acids, and it is a precursor to sulfate. So you it's I mean, without without redoing that study blocking various different pathways, it's kind of hard to figure out what the living longer, part of that is. You know, you you might just be inhibiting the transsulfuration process and, sparing sulfur amino acids or something like that. I don't know. Sparing them. Gotcha. Yep. Yeah. In the well, in the study, like, the human equivalent dose that it took was three to six grams, where they saw the life extension. And, I think they the the rationale or the, like, mechanisms was, yeah, like, through, like, some, you know, cardiac protection or something that, or in addition to, like, other things. But, like, you know, part of the reason I think the the taurine has, like, some benefits is also, like, the heart heart health benefits, if I'm not mistaken. Yeah. Well, there was a research in humans going back decade many decades ago from, like, the mid twentieth century where high provision of sulfur compounds was shown to be very protective in humans against heart disease. And I'm pretty sure all the sulfur compounds were interchangeable. And so it was like, the hypothesis at that time was that it was from sulfate because, like, it didn't matter which sulfur compound you provided. They were all equally protective in the models that they were using. Right. And, sulfur or sulfate helps with, gluathione, like, the main mineral for that. Well, the argument back in the day was that it was helping with cholesterol uptake. So I don't know. Did did if you saw that mouse study, did they look at the blood lipid levels? Although mice are terrible as models of human, blood lipid. But did you, did you no. I I didn't I didn't recall anything like that. But yeah. It like, interesting that there's a there is in Japanese, at least, there is one paper talking about that, you know, the Japanese get a lot of taurine in their diet. And, that's, you know, part of the at least a paper speculator that that's one of the reason why Japanese have, like, some better longevity. And, of course, there's other things that contribute to that, but, yeah, like, the seafood and all the sea vegetables, they're actually the highest source of dietary taurine or one of the highest sources of, and eat they're even higher in taurine than, like, meat and stuff. But, yeah, that can be the another topic for another discussion, unless you want to, like, add anything about it. No. Not really. I mean, I I guess no. I guess I would just say that it's, like, without highlighting the exact mechanism, it's difficult to say where it would fit in in the human case. Mhmm. Because it's way more humans are dying of discernible causes of disease than are dying of old age. My grandfather died of old age. I mean, he he had no particular health problems, and he was like, well, I'm gonna be dying soon. And, he was like, I can feel it. God's calling me. And everyone got prepared for a year, and then he was like, yep. I'm gonna lay down. And then, and then he asked people to pray over him, and then he just, like, laid there and gradually lost various functions over the course of a week. You know, but most people don't die like that. Like, most people are you know, they wind up if they either got run over by a car or they had a heart attack or they had a cancer. They, you know what I mean? So I just the longevity studies in animals are not the top thing thing that I'm gonna look at. I'm not saying there's not a general longevity factor. I'm just saying that you don't you're you don't even gain the right to be concerned with the general longevity factor until you don't die of an infection, don't die of, you know, the that whole list. Right? And so, it's interesting, and I'd like to know why it is, but, but, like, that's that's just not the first that's not the that whole field of research is not the gonna be the first place I'm gonna look for how to live longer. Right. Yeah. Like, you obviously the first focus is to avoid the chronic diseases and maintain good health span, if that makes sense, like the living healthier for longer. Yeah. And, you know, on that on that, note, I I strongly, strongly suspect that after you hit the low hanging fruit of things that are obviously healthy, what is any given person's personal longevity strategy is probably highly unique to them. Because I think that there's let me let me just kinda introduce this topic. So on average, everyone, on average, people are each person's carrying one to two clinically relevant rare mutations for genetic disease, and they don't have a genetic disease because maybe they're heterozygous for it, and it's not manifesting as a genetic disease, but it is probably one of the biggest bottlenecks in their metabolism. If that's the case, it probably doesn't matter if the person is eating crap and inside all day and not exercising. But if you're doing everything right and you're checking all the boxes, I think understanding what are the one, two, three, or four highly unique individual bottlenecks in your metabolism is probably gonna be a lot more informative about to how you can get an extra ten years of high quality life than looking at, like, what what increases the group mean lifespan among mice. Mhmm. Because if I mean, let's just I I it's easier to illustrate it with a couple of big examples. Right? So, you don't want diabetes. Right? There's things that obviously increase the risk of diabetes in the general population, and there's obvious reasons why diabetes has become very common in our society. And that's some of the clearly demonstrated, like, factors are obesity and overweight. Some of the contentious factors are sugar intake. Some of the sort of fringe hypothesis, but maybe true factors are artificial lighting and environmental toxins and all that stuff. But I would I'm gonna I'll have better numbers on it in the next couple of months because I'm in the midst of analyzing this data. But I'm gonna right now, I'm just gonna guesstimate that somewhere around thirty percent of people probably have a rare mutation that is a unique block in carbohydrate, fat, or protein metabolism. And it's different for each person because there's hundreds of these. Right? There's there's, you know, on the order of seven or 800 different, like, full blown clinical diseases of energy metabolism, and they're all each one is very rare. But, collectively, most people have one or two of these of these very rare things. Right? So, like, thirty percent of those are something that's going to fundamentally impair your your ability to metabolize a certain amino acid or a certain type of fatty acid or carbohydrate generally, etcetera. Right? And so why don't all fat people get diabetes? Why don't all people in America get diabetes? Why don't all people who have office jobs get diabetes? Obviously, it's because of these different things between them. Right? And now you can there's voluminous data on the many, many, many common polymorphisms that might correlate with diabetes risk. But if you're walking around with a, you know, fifty percent of a defect in a thiamine transporter, you know, your residual risk of getting diabetes after you control for being lean, going outside, being active, and all the all the general things that we know everyone should do is probably far more determined by the fact that you have cut down your your thiamine transport by fifty percent such that on a good diet, you will have a thiamine deficiency. Right? Like and Yeah. And that's just one of those things. Right? That could be, there could be hundreds of others. And so I think that that person, their longevity is probably going to be primarily influenced by thiamine supplementation. Right? The the fact that taurine can give a little bit of an edge to all mice for that person is probably less important than the fact that they had a unique bottleneck in their energy metabolism that is at the point of thiamine, and that thiamine supplementation is the one thing they can do to fix it. Mhmm. You know, and it to be clear, if they're obese and they don't exercise and they're indoors all day, etcetera, like, they probably don't thiamine's probably not the thing they should be thinking about. You know, but, I mean, we're not talking to that type of person anyway. We're, you know, we're talking to the the highly motivated people. And so I think that after you after you say, okay. I've I've checked all the boxes to protect myself from injuries, respiratory infections, diabetes, osteoporosis, heart disease, cancer. Now what do I do to get more longevity? I just think it's it's gonna be like your the next good ten years of high quality life you that you could add is probably gonna come from introspecting on your own uniqueness rather than to the general longevity literature. It's the way I see it. Yeah. That's a very good good point. Like, genetics is obviously massive and, you know, the centenarians themselves, like, they, they, you know, a lot of centenarians do follow, like, a relatively healthy lifestyle or they follow the fundamentals. But, you know, most of the centenarians, at least I think the reason they live long is they have, like, some good genes or they live in this environment that enables their particular genes to reach their maximum or reach a longer life, if that makes sense. And, yeah, like, if you have, like, a particular bad gene in whatever this or this bottleneck in whatever it is pathways, then, yeah, like, you're gonna be, like, you know, not broken, but your body will function at a much lower, you know, efficiency. And, yeah, like, just fixing that is gonna give you, like, a massive improvements. And I think, like, the most, I think, most common example most people have heard about is the, like, the MTHFR gene, so methylation, genes. So, yeah, like, for those people who are, like, poor methylators, then fixing them or supporting their methylation is gonna be, like, one of the most important things for their, you know, not just longevity, but also, like, overall health and, you know, how they how they function during daytime. Yeah. I'm not talking about that, though. So the m t you I mean, you could split MTHFR into the thing that everyone's talking about and the thing that I'm talking about. So the thing that everyone's talking about with MTHFR is the common polymorphisms, the c six seventy seven t and a twelve ninety eight c polymorphisms. The thing is there's and I don't have either of them, but I'm one of 13 and, you know, you you can I I mean, I I'm not gonna say it's not relevant, but the relevance is is probably that, if you have low MTHFR activity based on those common polymorphisms, you probably need an extra one point six milligrams of riboflavin a day, and then you should probably move on to think about something else? And that's not to say that, well, look. Here's the thing. So if you look at homocysteine levels, and I'm I'm not saying homocysteine is the be all end all of, of methylation, but it is an index of the function of the MTHFR enzyme because if you're making enough methylfolate, you're using it to recycle homocysteine. And there's if there's also very there's also rare genetic defects in MTHFR that are much stronger, and they're associated with way higher homocysteine levels, like in the hundreds, or for people who are homozygous in the seventies, eighties, nineties. And, and if you look at c six seventy seven t, basically, if you are, homozygous for it, you have elevated homocysteine. If you are compound heterozygous for c six seventy seven t and a 12 ninety eight c, you have somewhat lower homocysteine, but it's it's it's still higher than normal. And when you get down to one copy of c six seventy seven t, it's like, maybe your homocysteine is, like, a little bit high, but it's not very consistent. And people with a twelve ninety eight c who don't have c six seventy seven t don't have elevations of homocysteine at all. And if you, you know then you add on the very rare, MTHFR mutations where you can get homocysteine up even higher than that. You basically just have a linear, a linear inverse correlation between MTHFR activity and homocysteine. So high MTHFR activity is normal homocysteine. And as you go down, it takes you have to kinda get down, like, 40 or 50% of MTHFR activity to see a rise, and then you just start seeing, it rise depending on which mutation you have. The more MTHFR activity goes down, the higher homocysteine goes. And then if you have if you're an edge case with a very severe defect, homocysteine just keeps goes all the way up like that. Right? So why are why do eighty seven percent of people have at least one of these polymorphisms? Obviously, it's because they don't matter that much. And why wouldn't they matter that much? Probably because riboflavin intakes used to be higher in ancestral populations and allowed these mutations to spread without causing harm because what the study shows that if you take someone who's homozygous for c six seventy seven t, if you add one point six milligrams of riboflavin to their basal intake of riboflavin, so you're probably bringing it up to somewhere around three, three and a half milligrams total, you abolish the homocysteine rise. And modeling of the enzyme shows that all c six seventy seven t is is just a minor decrease in the binding affinity of the enzyme for the riboflavin. And what the human studies show, the intervention studies in humans, is that that binding activity has gotta be off by only a little bit because only a little bit of riboflavin fixes it. Right? So I think you're I mean, I think you're right that that that will be a longevity influence if you don't address it. But no one for no one, is MTHFR gonna be their primary genetic piece of information that's gonna be, like, their primary unlock. And I I think that people have a very, distorted view of this because of the Internet support groups where people with MTHFR get together and they talk about their symptoms and they wind up saying, oh, everyone in this MTHFR group has this, this, this, this, and this. All the studies are wrong. It does so much else. But of you can pay like, if you do it like that, you can pay anything you want on MTHFR because everyone's got MTHFR. So all you have to do is put the people looking for a support group together into one support support group and pretty much everyone looking for help as MTHFR except, you know, even if I mean, I I would go into a support group, then I need help, and I I wouldn't have MTHFR. But I'm, like, 13% of people. Right? So that just allows people to grossly exaggerate what MTHFR is doing. It's like it's like, you know, you hear hear some of these stories and you're like, that doesn't happen to eighty seven percent of people, so that's not MTHFR. Right. And I'm I'm not saying again, I I don't I'm not I don't mean to minimize its importance. Like, if you are riboflavin deficient and you have MTHFR, especially if you have other genetic interactions with the methylation pathway, you can wind up having things kind of pile on top of each other in a negative way. In fact, like, it's conceivable that someone has their if you take all the there's enough common polymorphisms that interact with MTHFR that you can put yourself in the category if they're all stacked on top of each other where you've got a 50% decrease in folate uptake into the cell. You've got a 70 something percent decrease in, the enzyme that precedes MTHFR. You've got a 75% decrease in MTHFR, and you compound those. And you can have a pretty severe deficiency. But that's that's probably more common than having one of the very severe MTHFR mutations. It's like one in two hundred thousand people are homozygous for for them. But it's but it's not but it's not that common. What I'm talking about in general is that let's say you have the severe defects in MTHFR. The rate from newborn screenings of severe MTHFR mutations is one in two hundred thousand. No one knows how common it is to be heterozygous for it, but the parents of the chill babies and children that are found in newborn screening with massively elevated homocysteine, The parents have homocysteine that's on the order of seventies, eighties, nineties. And homocysteine has a very strong anti fertility effect, which means that the rate of carriers who have homocysteine in the seventies, eighties, nineties, sometimes it's in the fifties, sixties, that's probably a lot higher than you would expect from a back calculation of one in two hundred thousand homozygosity. Because if homocysteine causes infertility, that means that a lot of infertility and, you know, you expect it it goes up when when people are trying and they get IVF, but you also have to take into account, like, how much fertility is by accident. Right? So, like, the, a lot of people don't know the accidental pregnancies that they didn't cause, but it was probably, like, multiple with multiple people. Right? So, so the reality is that, like, there would be a lot you would probably have a way more my guess is that you could have 10 or 20 times higher incidence of the heterozygosity for the severe mutation than you would expect from looking at one in two hundred thousand homozygous incidence. And if you look at homocysteine curves, there is a huge rightwards a mirrored. Right? So rightwards skew of the homocysteine curves meaning, it's it's a bell curve, but then there's this long right tail that is the, the just a little tail of people with crazy high homocysteine levels. And if you're looking at adults in a population that has diabetes, you're looking at that and you're saying, yep. Those those are the people with poor kidney function because they're not cleaning clearing the homocysteine out. But I found a study of high schoolers in Europe where the right tail looked the same. There was one percent of these kids. There's no way on earth this is explainable by a high incidence of renal impairment in high schoolers. Right? It's just they're not old enough to have that renal impairment. And there's still a heavy rightward skew of homocysteine where there's just one percent of these people have homocysteine fifties, sixties, seventies, eighties, nineties. And so I think a lot of I'm not saying all of it, but I think a significant percentage of that could be rare mutations that no one's looking for in MTHFR. And that's the type of thing that I'm talking about. Right? So Right. That might be that might be someone's. Mine, as far as I can tell right now, is a mutation in, an enzyme called ACAD nine, which plays a dual role in fatty acid oxidation and the mitochondrial respiratory chain. And I'm finding that supplementing with riboflavin and altering my macros around that specific mutation is the highest payload thing that I've done in my life above and beyond the low hanging fruit of the types of things that I think everyone should do. You know? So I think that there's there's enough of those that each person's gonna have something different, and it's not gonna be what anyone's talking about. Mhmm. Gotcha. Is there, like, is there a way for the average person to discover those bottlenecks without, you know, having such you know, you will probably, like, recognize those things, much faster than the average person. Or, you know, the average person will they will might they might do their genetics. They might know if they have the MTHFR or not. They might know if they have, like, some other bad genes for heart disease or whatever. But, yeah, like, what how do they go about finding those, bottlenecks? Yep. Yeah. They they don't. So, the the best thing that you can do is is get whole genome sequencing instead of getting, instead of getting SMP chip genome sequencing. Mhmm. So, so this like, this is the problem with the genetics that everyone's focusing on. In the SNP chip companies like twenty three andMe or Ancestry, they, they're not sequencing your DNA. They are testing you on a binary, test for each single nucleotide polymorphism that they're interested in. And the way that they do that is there's basically ink spots for each person in a batch that are splattered onto a chip that go they cluster in one direction or the other for being, positive or negative for that single nucleotide polymorphism. And the way that the methodology works is they look at the clustering, and then they say, okay. This is the dividing line based on how the clustering looks. I mean, it's not a person who does it. It's a computer system. But it looks mathematically at, like, oh, people are clustering over here and one here's one cluster. So this is the line. These people have g. These people have c or what you know, whatever the the SNP is. Right? The problem with that is that when it's common, it's accurate because you have a robust sample size of people in both clusters. If you're looking for something that's rare, it's anti accurate because you have almost no one on one side of the chip. And so recent research shows that SMP chips are 84% inaccurate. Mhmm. Right. Meaning, they give you the wrong answer 84% of the time when they are looking at something that has one an allele frequency less than one in a thousand. So on that basis alone now if you have something in in the report the company gave you, if it's a rare gene, they probably did, like, five different tests to try to corroborate that they have the correct answer for that. But if it's in your raw data and you import it into some third party algorithm, you're feeding the algorithm 84% inaccurate data on all the rare stuff. Mhmm. So even if they're including it in the sample like that you so by contrast, the technique that's used in whole genome sequencing is actually looking at what nucleotide is there. And so it's not perfect, but it's, you know, it's above 90% accuracy. And then what they do is they read your genome 30 times, 50 times, a 100 times, and 90 upwards of 90% accuracy becomes way upwards of 99, you know, point whatever number of nines accuracy. And you can do you can get a lot out of getting all of you know, selecting an all reports option. So if you like, usually, these companies say, like, $200 as the baseline for doing your genome, then, like, $200 for our reports or $50 for one of them. It's like so if you just get an all report function add on to the basic genome from a whole genome sequencing and not whole exome sequencing, whole genome sequencing, whole neither of these are whole anything, but whole exome sequencing is 2% of the genome, and whole genome sequencing is, is 90% of the genome. So it's Nice. They speak for themselves. The numbers do. So if you just get all, like, their reports, I think you that's a good starting place. But what I'm doing right now, like, what I'm in the sort of, like, the next big thing that I'm working on is, I'm working I partnered up with someone in my membership program who is a software engineer who, has not commercialized this app yet, but he's letting me use it. And I can upload someone's raw data, and then I can go in. I can I can search by gene and look at every mutation there and see which ones are, cross referenced with, databases of prediction models of what it does to the gene, databases of clinical reports of disorders associated with that gene? And I can go through and I can say, okay. Like, within the context of energy metabolism, there's these 20 mutations that stand out, but then we can rate them by, you know, how like, which ones have consistent reports of diseases associated with them in the ClinVar database, which is a clinical variations database where people support putative mutations that are responsible for genetic diseases, which ones are supported by commune computer modeling that they do something bad, and then, like, then I can cross reference that with the person's lab data, and I can say, okay. You have these three genes look particularly bad. These two genes are highly correlated with the weird things in your data that are other otherwise not explainable. You know? So I hope that this I hope there's a way to scale this, but their truth is that I'm doing it at the mic like, exceedingly microscale level now. That doesn't change the fact that I that I just I'm at the point where I I would not recommend anyone waste money on a 23 and me from a health perspective these days because I have seen what the tip of this iceberg looks like in myself and 10 other people. And I've also seen the recent data quantifying. Right? Like so I'm I'm pairing this with recent data from the, what was it called, the million exome study where they took whole exome sampling, which again is 2% of the genome, not not 90%, like whole genome. So this is a gross underestimate of the possible mutations. But they took a million people, and they looked at the whole exome samples, and they said, okay. How many genes in the population are there for things that are associated with rare genetic disorders in the ClinVar database that have a grading of two or higher, which a grading of two stars in the ClinVar database means there are multiple practitioners who have submitted your report, and there's no conflicts between them. Right? So if someone says it's pathogenic, someone says it's not pathogenic, it's not two stars. But if there's at least two different people submitting the reports that both say it's pathogenic, that would be a two star rating. So that's where I took the the data when I said one or two people carry something. The average number of of rare gene mutations that would not be found in this SNP ChIP assay, but can be found through whole genome sequencing that have consistent multiple reports from different submitters in the ClinVar databases being putatively associated with a genetic disease. The average is 1.6 per person. K. Now that's from whole exome sequencing, so it's it's probably an underestimate. So it's probably something like two to four per person. And that doesn't I'm not saying, like, everyone's got two genetic diseases. What I'm saying is if there's two to four of these per person and let's say that thirty percent of them pan out to be very significant impacts in metabolism, that means the average person has one one, bottleneck in their metabolism that grossly outweighs the net result of averaging together the 500,000 polymorphisms that are making things go up or down 5%. Right? Like, if you, and part part of the problem too also is that these things are nonlinear. Okay? So I have let's go back to me for a second. I have an ACAD nine that works, and I have an ACAD nine that doesn't work. If the ACAD nine that works requires 1.3 riboflavin per day, and the ACAD nine that doesn't work requires four hundred milligrams of riboflavin per day, I do not have a linear response to riboflavin. I have 50% of ACAD nine working with the first one point three milligrams of riboflavin, and then I need hundreds of milligrams to get the other some portion of the other 50% to work. Right? So this this is, this is like a, it's sort of like a binary, like, you may need to like, you may need to be on a carnivore diet, or you may need to supplement with five hundred milligrams of thiamine, or you may need to supplement with two hundred milligrams of riboflavin, or you should not use co q ten. Or, like, just come up with with all of these things where it's it's not, it's not a linear response to many things. It's one thing that should be avoided or one thing that should be megadosed. And I it just makes no sense to me that, I mean, we have to deal with the fact that that we have not scaled the analysis of these things. It's it's what I'm working on right now. But I just I would just say just, like, wait, chill out. Like, stop micro analyzing, the 500,000 things that are that are not doing much in you and and focus on, like, the general principles. And then and then, hopefully, we can kind of, in the next few years, find some way to really scale looking at those highly individual things in each person. That's the way I'm seeing it. Yeah. Yeah. That's that's pretty, you know, eye opening in a lot of ways. And, you know, the the I guess, like, the bottlenecks also vary in degrees. You know, someone has, like, a very Yeah. More serious bottleneck, and the other one might not notice anything, like, subjectively. They don't feel that they have a bottleneck, but they might do. So, yeah, like, you know, there's a huge degree and range in this as well. Yeah. I totally totally 100% agree with that. But even still, let's say that you know, consider this nonlinearity. Right? Like, let's say that your carbohydrate metabolism works good enough that you don't notice any problems on one point one milligrams of thiamine per day, but you can't but you are otherwise supercharged because you have done everything right and all your other genes make you, high level athlete that will probably live to a 120 years old. Right? But you have one problem in your carbohydrate metabolism that will only work correctly in the presence of five hundred milligrams of thiamine a day. Mhmm. You might not ever notice any problems. But once you've taken home the silver in some Olympic sport, it's quite possible that, like, the one thing that you could do to get gold is actually add the five hundred milligrams of thiamine Right. That you didn't know you needed to optimize your carbohydrate metabolism, you know, because it doesn't matter to your blood sugar on a day to day life, but damn straight, it matters when you're trying to be one fraction of a second faster than the next person, and the way that you get faster in that moment is to burn a little extra carbohydrate. Right? And, like I am. And I you know? And that that like, also, maybe that's the way that you get your extra ten years. Maybe you'll live to 95, and maybe you would've lived to a 105 if you would figure out the time and thing. Like and it's so it's not you're not trying to solve a problem so much as it becomes, you don't really need to optimize this last piece, but that but that last piece might be the piece that really makes, like, a high impact puzzle fit together that you didn't know is there. You know? Right. So you are working on that. Do you know, like, any other companies right now that do the whole genome sequencing? There are a number. I have used Dante Labs for myself and a number of clients this year. Only in the last month, I've been getting complaints from several clients that their Dante results are taking longer than they should, and they're not getting an explanation for it. And I know Nebula is another company that a lot of people have been using, and I haven't gotten a chance to use them myself or analyze any genomes from it. But from my perspective, it doesn't really matter. Its whole genome is whole genome and anything else is everything else. And I'm not at the point yet where I can say, this company is better than that company. I was using Dante just because a few other people had used it. They were getting results from it. So I was like, oh, I'll do that for myself. I was getting results from it, so I started recommending it to other people. They were getting results from it. But it it doesn't the company doesn't matter that much, though. It's the whole genome sequencing methodology that differentiates whole genome from all the other stuff. And the company, like, maybe the quality of their reports differs or their customer service differs, but the the make or break thing is that it's whole genome sequencing. Gotcha. Right. And, you know, the thing because think of it this way too. You do it's not an all or nothing thing that you learned everything from your genome. Like, if you just get the all the reports that are available now, there's a certain amount of information you can learn from that, but you still have the whole genome sequenced. And so that can be the basis for reports that that company issues in the future or it can be the basis of working with me in the future on a deeper analysis of the raw data or whatever it is. You're not limited to whatever the reports currently are in that sense. Right. Yeah. I think, yeah, we've been going pretty deep with all these topics. And I I don't want to, like, go into another rabbit hole with another, topic like choline or TMAO and those things. So we'll do, like, another future episode about that. But, yeah, like, is there anything else you want to add to the end before we, stop? Not really. I mean, I I would just, I guess, summarize a bit and say that when you're looking at longevity, I think the first thing that you wanna look at is a time dependent, probability dependent strategy to make it through all the causes of death. And when you're young, you wanna be thinking about putting on peak bone mass and peak muscle mass, and you wanna be thinking about, injury prevention. Right? Because if you so I would say I would say through and this becomes more important when you're older, but it's much better to start when you're younger. You know, if you're if you're starting out in your twenties training, I would sooner rather than later start maybe meeting with a physical therapist once a year who's qualified to do a functional movement screen or some other type of movement therapist who's qualified to do a functional movement screen and work on high quality movement and injury prevention at that point. Because when you know, if you imagine the person who falls and breaks their hip and dies a year later, there's numerous things going on, and it wasn't just about bone density or muscle mass. It was also about neuromuscular control and movement patterns. And, I mean and there's so much suffering that goes alongside that, like, chronic back pain and stuff that you would also not be dealing with when you get to that age if you you've thought about those things. So I think starting young, you really wanna be thinking about muscle mass, bone mass, and and high quality movement patterns that are checked by an expert in in functional movement patterns. And I and then I think, you know, going forward to think about, like, respiratory infections and diabetes, I think, mostly comes down to having a good diet on on factors that most diet war camps would probably agree on. Right? Like, if you find the consensus among the paleo, vegan, carnivore, South Beach, Atkins, whatever is the new thing is. Like, the, you know, the obvious things, like, mostly eat whole foods, you know, eat well rounded enough to get all your nutrients. And I think, that plus the movement stuff that I just mentioned is probably the strongest diabetes prevention pack that you can have. And I think getting good nutrition is generally gonna cover most infections. And heart disease, I think you can layer on some stuff with, like, look at your blood lipids and tweak that a bit. I think cancer is a lot more, there's a much greater controversy over cancer, but I think most of these things are also going to protect you in that realm. And I so I think, you know, eat well, move well, get outside, get good sunshine, properly sleep, and manage stress. That bucket, I I think when you check those boxes and you've checked the, like, the sort of specific boxes along the line of disease prevention, I think after that, it's you wanna better understand your uniqueness. And I I want I don't want it to come across as super hopeless in terms of the last conversation that we had where it's like, you know, I'm going into the raw data of esoteric genetic analysis to find the next thing. I I I strongly stand by everything that I said there, but if you want kind of a poor man's, version of finding genetic idiosyncrasies, I think self experimentation is the key to that. Right? So rather than looking at a mouse study of, like, do carbohydrates make mice live longer, I think you wanna say, do I have good body composition, good blood sugar, and feel well on a high carb diet or on a low carb diet. And you can do that with carbs. You can do it with protein. You can do it with fat. You can do it with types of food. You can do it with supplements. And if you can find the sweet spot between effortless good body composition and feeling well, you know, on the and there's various things you can look at. You can look at your blood pressure. You can look at your blood sugar. You You can look at how often do you get sick. You can look at, do I feel rested when I wake up in the morning. You can look at, do I feel fatigued all day or do I feel good. You know, all those all those very general things that boxes you could check about being able to confidently say, yes. I am a healthy person. When if you if you self experiment and find where that sweet spot is for you, I think that is more accessible, more empowering, and ultimately higher quality both than taking longevity, mouse studies and generalizing them to yourself and looking at, 40 reports of 500,000 out of the 6,000,000 polymorphisms that you have and getting, you know, 300 pages of things that you should do with your with your diet. Right? Like, I think I think just simplifying it and saying experimenting and saying, like, where is the sweet spot for me is probably going to be, the simple way to find the genetic idiosyncrasies that I that we were talking about in the data intensive way. Yeah. Yeah. I agree. Like like, the mall mice and, other animals, they, you know, the in the lab environment, they live in a completely different setting. And I don't think, like, anyone would like to swap places with those animals even if they live longer, like being hungry and, the, scientists are injecting you different stuff or putting, like, under cold or heat or whatever. So it's not another, like, a fun life to live for sure in those laboratory, environments. But Yeah. Especially if there's especially if there's no hamster wheel in the cage. Yeah. Yeah. But, yeah, it was great talking with you. And, yeah, we'll probably do, like, another one in the future about, other topics. Yeah. I'd love to. Alright. It was great talking with you. Alright. Take care, man. But do you want to slow down aging and live longer? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological cock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@semlion.com, and I'll send you the details.