In 2019, there was an outbreak of e cigarette or vaping associated lung injuries called EVALI. It affected thousands of people. People were taken to the hospital and they were seen to have damage to the lungs resulting in diffuse lung infiltrates. Symptoms of vaping associated lung injury include shortness of breath, cough, and chest pain. Long term effects of EVALI include long term respiratory disability, cognitive impairment, symptoms of depression, anxiety, PTSD, and persistent vaping. The EVALI epidemic was thought to be caused by vitamin e acetate used in some vapes. However, it's speculated that the vaping itself could also be the reason. In this video, I'm going to outline the research about whether or not vaping is safe or not. Vaping or tobacco consumption using ecigarettes has been rapidly growing in popularity over the past decade, especially among younger adults and teenagers. In 2011, there were only 7,000,000 adults using ecigarettes, but that number has risen to 68,000,000 in 2020. It's been found that up to fifty percent of high schoolers have used an ecigarette. Vapes are devices where you inhale vapor infused with nicotine and other chemicals. It's been found that ecigarettes do contain different carcinogens, toxicants, and ultrafine particles, which are known to cause adverse health effects. We know that smoking is terrible for your health. Someone who smokes is expected to lose about ten to fifteen years of their life. E cigarettes deliver nicotine without tobacco combustion, which is safer than smoking tobacco, but it still poses no cardiovascular health concerns. The safety profile of vaping is not fully clear because it's such a new thing and we don't have long term data. It is considered to be somewhat safer than regular smoking because of containing less toxins than cigarette smoke. The Royal College of General Practitioners from England has stated that ecigarettes are unlikely to exceed 5% of the harm from conventional smoking. That's quite a bold statement, and it would mean that vaping is 95% safer than regular smoking. However, the FDA hasn't approved any ecigarette as a smoking cessation device or authorized to make any claims about risk reduction comparisons to regular cigarettes. Some acute effects of vaping are increased heart rate, blood pressure, and respiratory issues. Ecigarette smokers often report irritation of the mouth, nose, and throat, as well as chronic cough or phlegm. Vaping is associated with an increased risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, bronchitis, and asthma even among those who have never smoked regular cigarettes. A 2017 study on high school students in California found that both past and present ecigarette use was associated with a twofold increase in the risk of chronic bronchitis symptoms. Ecigarette users have also been found to be at a higher risk of asthma and chronic pulmonary disorders. Inhaling ecigarettes is known to cause airway flow resistance, which suggests airway obstruction. There's also reports of sight threatening ocular injuries ranging from corneal burns to full thickness corneoscleral laceration resulting from vaping. Yes, vaping is safer than regular smoking, but it doesn't come without health risks. Whether or not vaping is going to kill you prematurely or give you heart disease or cancer, we don't necessarily know because it's such a new thing. Ecigarettes hit the market only in the early two thousands. So it's been only twenty years and not enough long term studies have been done. It is also true that ecigarettes help you to quit smoking. Randomized controlled trials found that ecigarettes appear to help with quitting smoking compared to regular nicotine replacement therapy. However, using ecigarettes as a therapeutic intervention to quit smoking may lead to permanent nicotine dependence as shown by meta analysis on the topic. What's more, increased sales in nicotine ecigarettes haven't been found to translate into more smokers using ecigarettes to quit smoking. In fact, there's more evidence that people who start vaping move on with regular cigarettes. Using regular cigarettes and e cigarettes together causes more negative health effects than either alone. So if you have to choose between bad and worse than the bad option, yeah, it is somewhat better than the worse option. But by choosing the bad option, you might end up having both. You might end up having both the bad option and the worse option because once you start vaping, you actually are more likely to also start smoking. But this doesn't apply to every person. Quitting bad habits can be hard, especially if you do it cold turkey. That's why most people end up rebounding with their bad habits. The sponsor of this video, Fume, looks at the problem differently. Not everything in a bad habit is wrong. So instead of a drastic, uncomfortable change, why not just remove the bad from your habit? Fume is an innovative, award winning flavored air device that does just that. Instead of vapor, Fume uses flavored air. And instead of harmful chemicals, fume uses all natural delicious flavors. You basically insert the 100% plant based cores with different flavors, such as lemon, grapefruit, mint, or vanilla into the fume, and you just get flavored air that smells and tastes great. It doesn't pollute the room or leave nasty smells. I personally find the fume very helpful for helping some of my family members break bad habits. It's easy to use, a 100% natural with no chemicals or bad ingredients, and it helps with de stressing while trying to break the habit. Head over to tryfom.com/seam or scan the QR code and use the code seam to get a 10% off on your order today. That's it. If you have a family member who is struggling with bad habits or something like this, then make sure you show them this video. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like and subscribe. Notification bell as well. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.