We know that exercise is good for you and any amount of exercise is better than nothing at all, but there was a new 2023 systematic review of recent studies outlining the training strategies to optimize life expectancy and cardiovascular health. So in this video, we're gonna take a look at this study and talk about the most optimal ways to train for longevity. But do you want to slow down aging and live longer? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word healthtoinfo@ceblan.com and I'll send you the details. Do it. So the study is called Training Strategies to Optimize Cardiovascular Durability and Life Expectancy published by James O'Keefe and others. And they pretty much took the most recent studies between the years of 2011 to 2022, which is very broad spectrum or a whole lot of studies involved. The first and most important thing I think that they discovered was that, physically active lifestyle and carter respiratory fitness itself are the most associated with reduced mortality and being sedentary and being leisurely is associated with increased risk of mortality. They found that moderate physical activity had a greater reduction in mortality and cardiovascular disease mortality than vigorous physical activity which means that, of course, both moderate as well as vigorous exercise will have a positive effect on reducing mortality risk but, the moderate the more moderate physical activity, presumably, you did, the lower your risk of mortality was whereas the vigorous physical activity plateaued after a certain point. And as you can see from this graph then the more minutes per week you did of moderate physical activity which includes things like walking, hiking and say, some aspects of swimming or this leather more leisurely physical activity that isn't super intense. That was like in a linear dose dependent manner that the more you did it, the lower your risk of mortality was. So if you did eight hundred minutes or eight hundred and fifty minutes of moderate physical activity per week, you had a minus thirty five percent in, the risk of mortality. In terms of vigorous physical activity, so this includes gym, high intensity cardio, more intense sports, those kind of things. So the benefits of that plateaued around one hundred and fifty minutes per week. But even if you did, seven hundred minutes of, vigorous physical activity was still associated with a seventeen percent reduction in all cause mortality. So the seven hundred minutes still gives you some benefits compared to doing only a hundred minutes, for example. So, seven hundred minutes is better than a hundred minutes but there's no, like, huge difference between a hundred and fifteen to, six hundred or seven hundred minutes of vigorous physical activity per week. To get the seven hundred minutes of vigorous physical activity per week, then you would have to train, like, an hour and a half every day, which, obviously, most people aren't. But if you did, let's say, one hour of vigorous physical exercise per week, then that put you around three hundred and sixty, minutes per week, and that already is, you know, is pretty very beneficial still. In terms of cardiovascular disease mortality, there was still the linear dose dependent matter for the moderate physical activity. So the more moderate physical activity you did, the lower your cardiovascular disease, mortality risk. So doing eight hundred and fifty minutes of moderate physical activity reduces your cardiovascular disease mortality by forty percent. With the vigorous physical activity, however, after a hundred and fifty minutes or two hundred minutes, that's where you had the the lowest risk of, cardiovascular disease mortality, fifteen percent reduction. And after that, it started to go into more of like a j curve. If you know hormesis, then, j curve hormesis is that the lower level of, let's say, activity is increasing your mortality risk. If you don't exercise at all, if you don't do any vigorous physical activity, then that's bad for your longevity. But if you exceed a certain threshold, if you start to do too much, then it actually also starts to increase your cardiovascular disease mortality risk. And now I personally think that is very subjective. This is an epidemiologist study which means that of course they didn't control for many vector factors, but I do think that, you know, there's no point in doing like over an hour of vigorous physical exercise every day of the week. There's just no point. Like, you do become, yeah, super fit etcetera but it doesn't have, like, longevity benefits beyond what you necessarily need. Like, moderate physical activity still appear appears to be much more important, after a certain threshold like, there's no threshold for doing moderate physical activity. Like, the more moderate physical activity you do, like, an hour and a half every day of walking slash hiking slash yoga or whatever, then that is linearly associated with reduced mortality risk. But with, vigorous physical activity which includes, you know, high intensity cardio and more prolonged endurance then, yeah, there is a certain threshold effect. And I personally think that, yeah, maybe two hundred minutes doesn't necessarily apply to a healthy fit individual already who, you know, takes care of their other aspects of health as well. But, let's say if we do, like, eight hundred minutes, which means an hour and a half of vigorous physical activity every day, then that's not first of all, it's not needed for the longevity benefits. But and it's it may have, like, some negative side effects eventually as well. So I personally would recommend keeping the vigorous physical activity between, like, 150 up until three hundred minutes or three hundred and fifty minutes a day. So if you do like an hour of vigorous physical activity every day then that puts you into the three hundred and sixty minute mark and that's still you get the 15% reduction pretty much in, the cardiovascular disease mortality risk. Next up, they found that the cardiovascular fitness or the VO two max was also associated, with reduced mortality risk and increased survival. So the fitter you wear, the bigger your VO two max is, then the lower your mortality risk generally is compared to the least fit and this is something that I talked about in one of my previous videos as well. VO two max is actually the biggest or one of the biggest fitness related predictors of mortality. So the people with the lowest tertile of cardiorespiratory fitness have about the forty five percent higher mortality risk compared to the highest tertile. So there's almost fifty percent difference in the mortality and survival rate between the extremely fit individuals and the the least fit individuals. But how do you build the VO two max mostly? You build the VO two max mostly with moderate physical activities or doing zone two cardio. So that's why, you know, the best way to build the, VO two max and cardiorespiratory fitness with the least amount of negative side effects and the least, let's say, wear and tear on your body is to do moderate physical activity which involves long steady state modressed zone two cardio. So if you don't know zone two, there's different aerobic zones. Zone two is where you're still able to talk while doing it. So you can still breathe through your nose, you're maintaining aerobic metabolism, you're maintaining fat metabolism and you can do that for many hours if needed. Doing like a few times a week of sixty minutes of the zone two cardio is the perfect like recipe for just improving your card respiratory fitness, your zone two cardio, as well as getting your moderate physical activity hours in. So to get up to like the eight hundred minute per week mark then, yeah, like obviously walking is included here and based on this study then the moderate physical activity, which reflects zone two cardio and increasing your cardiovascular fitness is, yeah, actually one of the most important thing that I think many people are neglecting. Big mistake. Next up, the study talks about strength training because, yes, strength and muscle are also associated with longevity and reduced mortality quite a lot and, they report about a recent comprehensive meta analysis where thirty to sixty minutes per week of strength training produced significant risk reductions of seventeen percent for all cause mortality, eighteen percent for cardiovascular disease events and nine percent for all cancers. So yes, strength training and resistance training is very beneficial for reducing mortality risk and improving longevity. And one of the reasons has to do with the age related muscle loss or sarcopenia. So So if you're inactive, you lose about three to 8% of your total muscle mass per decade which is quite massive. So you start to lose the muscle generally around thirties for, let's say, unhealthy people and in your forties for healthier people and by the time you're 70 or 80 years old then you've lost like one third of your muscle mass that you had in your youth and that sets you up for a lot of potential problems down the line such as frailty, hip fractures and metabolic syndrome and weight gain. So, yeah, muscle mass and muscle strength are very important. But they also find that there is potential j shaped benefits to resistance training and strength training. So the similar as with the vigorous physical activity that doing too much is associated with slightly higher risk and and they find that the benefits of strength training, were completely lost at the durations of around one hundred and thirty to one hundred and forty minutes per week with possible harm at progressively higher doses. So as you can see from this graph, then, yes, the around the hundred and fifty minute mark, you start to actually see a relatively increased risk. Wait a minute. Of course, you have to take it with a grain of salt. Depends on your age, depends on your, like, vitality and depends how you train as well. If you're training, like, one hour every day for an hour and a half of strength training, then I do think that, yeah, that's probably too much. You don't need to do, like, a long session. Like, there's no point in having, like three, three hour sessions unless you are like a powerlifter or a competitive athlete and that's a whole a whole different story. But personally, what I do is I train at least three times a week, maybe four times on some weeks and my sessions aren't that long. Actually, I train for maybe like forty five minutes. I don't spend a whole lot of time at the gym. Like, I do have like very long rest periods as well because I am mostly focusing on strength and like power lifting focus right now. So I think that it also depends on, yeah, like how how you train. Are you training, like, one minute rests? Are you training five minute rests? All those things matter. Like, if you train for an hour but you have, like, five minute rests between sets and you only end up doing, like, two exercises, then that's not necessarily, you know, I don't think it's gonna matter in terms of increasing your mortality risk. But if you do, like, three hour or one and a half hour workouts five times a week, then that's probably a bit too much because, you know, if you are committing that much time to the strength training then chances are you're, like, lacking in some of the cardioid respiratory fitness in my opinion. So the takeaway in my opinion is that, yes, you should still train for, like, two to four times a week at least. There's no point in training more than four times a week but there is a probably increased risk if you train less than two times a week. So between two to four times a week is the sweet spot. Next up, they're talking about actually other dimensions of fitness such as balance, flexibility and body composition. So if you're not able to stand on your one leg for ten seconds without losing your balance and you have to put the other foot on the ground then that's eighty four percent higher mortality risk. The other balance test is the sit to rise test which we talked about before as well. So being able to get off the floor with as least help as possible. So if you have to put your arm on the ground then that's minus one point. If you get off the ground with no help then that's 10 points. If you have to put your arm, your leg and you have to grab the chair and you have to put your other knee as well then that's, you know, minus four points. Every point of assistance that you use subtracts one point. Next up is specific sports. So tennis had the highest added life expectancy to the people nine point seven years, badminton six point two years, soccer four point seven years, cycling three point seven years, swimming three point four years, jogging three point two years, calisthenics three point one years and health club activities one point five years. Tennis is a sport that may require, like, more, like, agility, more balance, more speed, more endurance so it's a very wide spectrum or broad spectrum sport. You need to think about as well your moves and you need to be very quick so that's probably the physical aspect of why it has, like, some benefits but at the same time there's also the issue that people who play tennis usually have higher socioeconomic status as well. So like they have more disposable income, they have less stress, they have more money, they have more access to healthcare. So that's the reason why they might have the higher life expectancy as well. But there's also the kind of competitiveness and social aspect. So, yeah, social sports, social team sports like badminton, soccer, etc, they appear to be quite actually beneficial for longevity. So just exercising alone, you miss like some of the social aspects. So socializing and maintaining social relationships is actually quite important. Nature therapies, so spending time in nature, those who spent over a hundred and twenty minutes per week in nature were fifty nine percent more likely to report good health and twenty three percent more likely to report well-being compared with those who reported spending no time in nature. So you want to aim for at least two hours per week spent outdoors in natural settings. Gardening is consistently linked to physical and mental health benefits as well as longevity. And lastly, we're gonna talk about dog ownership. So individuals who adopt a dog into their home compared to non dog owners are approximately 14 times more likely than to be recreational walkers and four times more likely to meet current exercise guidelines of a hundred and fifty minutes per week. So people who get the dog, they're just gonna be more physically active which will help their longevity and health as well. Dog ownership for people who are otherwise living alone was associated with significant all cause mortality reduction of thirty three percent and cardiovascular disease mortality reduction of thirty six percent. So if you're a person who lives alone, getting the dog is actually quite beneficial, not just because of the physical exercise aspect but also the socializing aspects. So if you're living alone then the dog is gonna provide you with, like, companionship, loneliness and unhappiness, sadness, all those things are actually very dangerous or very damaging to your mental health as well as longevity. So humans are social creatures and having a dog for an elderly person is, like, almost life saving in a lot of ways because it's gonna force them to be more physically active and it also provides a company. People living in multiple person households, so people who aren't alone, also benefited from dog ownership with less impressive but still highly significant reductions in reductions in risks of all cause mortality and cardiovascular mortality. Eleven percent and fifteen percent reductions respectively. So eleven percent reduction in all cause mortality and fifteen percent reduction in cardiovascular disease mortality. So even if you are not alone, if you knew if you have a family, then having a dog is still beneficial because you are forced to go for walks with the dog, probably. So if you have a dog and you need to walk it several times a day, then that's gonna contribute to the moderate physical activity that you have to accumulate over the entire week. So going for longer walks and going for walks several times a day for people who otherwise wouldn't do it thanks to the dog is, yeah beneficial for longevity. Because of that reason, you're gonna just get more steps in, basically. You stole John Wick's car and, killed his dog. So there you have it. This is the study. Of course, there are some nuances that we discussed in the study. If you exercise, let's say, four times a week with weights an hour or an hour and a half per session then that's I don't think that's necessarily going to increase your mortality especially if you're young etcetera. It's more important in my opinion to accumulate the moderate physical activity than it is to accumulate the vigorous physical activity. You don't need to grind it out every day to benefit your longevity and based on this study, then grinding it out too much too frequently is actually is gonna have diminishing returns. So if there's something that you grind out, then let it be moderate physical activity which includes walking, hiking, gardening, etcetera, and doing zone two cardio. That's what you want to accumulate. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.