One of the oldest and most known ways of extending lifespan in virtually all species is calorie restriction, but it also goes a layer deeper than that with some studies indicating that protein restriction and especially restricting certain amino acids is the key to actually mediating a lot of the benefits of calorie restriction as well as the extension in lifespan. So in this video, we're gonna take a look at all the different studies that talk about the restriction of methionine, the specific amino acid that appears to be important for having the life extension benefits. Do it. I think a good place to start with is one of the earliest studies in this field of, protein restriction and especially methionine restriction 1993. We report here that lifelong reduction in the concentration of a single dietary component, the essential amino acid L methionine, from 0.86 to 0.17% of the diet results in a 30% longer lifespan of male Fischer three forty four rats. Methionine restriction completely abolished growth although food intake was actually greater on a body weight basis. And the next year 1994, they found again that methionine restriction increases blood glutathione and longevity in the same model of rats F344. Methionine restriction resulted in a 42% increase in mean and 44% increase in maximum lifespan and in 43% lower body weight compared to controls. Blood growth on levels were increased by 81164% in mature and old methionine restricted animals, respectively. Of course, these studies are done in rats. There aren't no actual clinical human studies on methionine restriction in terms of longevity and whether or not it's gonna increase lifespan because it's virtually impossible to do that kind of a study because humans will live exponentially longer than mice and rats do. However, there are some human studies as well on dietary methionine restriction and they do find that it increases fat oxidation and helps with weight loss in obese patients or adults with a metabolic syndrome. However, there are some possible longevity benefits for humans as well in terms of regulating your methionine intake. You see excess methionine can raise homocysteine which is a cardiovascular disease risk factor. It's one of the most powerful risk factors for developing cardiovascular disease and if you consume too much methionine and you don't support adequate amounts of methylation then your homocysteine levels may rise and this is the kind of issue that may also have a negative effect on your longevity. However, for excess methionine to have a negative effect on your homocysteine levels and cardiovascular disease risk then you would also have to be inadequate in the methyl donors that would buffer against the methionine. One of the key amino acids that prevents that and counteracts the possible rise in homocysteine by methionine is glycine. And there are actually studies showing how glycine supplementation can mimic the benefits of methionine restriction and mediate a lot of the longevity benefits as well similar to calorie restriction because it prevents the rise in homocysteine and also prevents the other negative side effects of excess methionine in your diet. So in this particular study, they found that a diet consisting of 8% glycine in mice led to a four to 6% statistically significant increase in lifespan. But in this study, they actually found that the glycine supplementation may mimic the same longevity benefits as methionine restriction, which has been shown to extend lifespan in rodents by thirty to forty percent. And glycine does suppress the methionine induced hyperhomocystinemia which means that, yeah, methionine increasing your homocysteine levels and glycine is, yeah, the main amino acid that is able to do that but, of course, there are some other key nutrients here as well like vitamin b12 and other, let's say, vitamins and minerals and compounds involved in the methylation cycle. Betaine or trimethylglycine has also been actually shown to decrease plasma homocysteine levels. Supplementation with at least four grams a day of betaine or trimethoglyceline for a minimum of six weeks can lower plasma homocysteine. So what we know based on the studies is that excess methionine in animals does shorten their lifespan and restricting methionine in these animals extends their lifespan. That lifespan extension can be up to 30 to 40% but the issue with those studies, of course, is that it's animal studies and it's also very impossible to conduct similar methionine restriction in a human population. Those animals, they're always in the laboratory setting. They're enclosed from the outside environment. They're living in a pathogen free environment and if a human were to try to mimic that, first of all, they would like feel very unhappy. It will be very uncomfortable and very hard to pull it off. And second of all, low methionine intake can also increase the risk of certain other diseases. Like you may get actually increased risk of pathogens and you have a weaker immune system and lower methionine intake can also suppress growth pathways and this is one of the mechanisms that they do think that methionine is also involved in the pathways of aging and longevity. Methionine increases IGF-one levels, it increases the mTOR activation, which are all involved in in the process of growth and muscle growth but also aging. So for humans it's obviously very hard to be on a very low methionine diet because almost all foods have methionine. Methionine is an essential amino acids, it's the most abundant amino acid in the diet. You do get more methionine from animal protein sources and, let's say, eggs, fish, meat, etc. But you do also get methionine from plant based sources. So it's very impossible to be on a zero methionine diet and you don't want to be on a zero methionine diet. You want to get adequate amounts of methionine but you don't want to let methionine to raise your homocysteine levels. The more likely scenario is that the methionine will raise your homocysteine levels if you're not getting enough of the methyl donors, mostly B12, glycine, and trimethylglycine. There are some genetic differences here as well. Some people need more of the methyl donors and other people need less. Most people would still benefit from supplementing glycine for at least like ten to fifteen grams a day. You can check out my full breakdown of the longevity benefits of glycine and why you want to take it but you want to support your collagen synthesis and creatine synthesis, glutathione synthesis as well with at least twelve-fifteen grams of glycine per day. And if you're eating more methionine, which like eighty percent of people are if they're eating like animal protein sources, then you would want to actually increase your glycine intake probably a lot more. Now the glycine can come from either your supplements, just the glycine powder is great, you can add it to teas, you can add it to coffee, you can just take it with a spoon, it tastes nice and sweet and it has a good benefit for balancing Composition and Methionine. But you can also get Glycine from plant based sources, plant based protein sources have more Glycine to Methionine and you can get Glycine from these tendons and ligaments and different kinds of skin tissue. And if you want to learn more about optimizing your glycine intake then check out my book with doctor James called The Collagen Cure. Interestingly enough, it doesn't appear that you need to be on a continuous methionine restriction either to get some of the longevity benefits and the healthspan benefits. And in this study, they found that intermittent methionine restriction was as good in reducing IGF-one and having the longevity benefits similar to continuous methionine restriction. Of course, this study was done in mice again but they found that intermittent methionine restriction produces similar beneficial metabolic effects to continuous methionine restriction. So the takeaway message, in my opinion, is that you don't wanna be eating a lot of methionine all the time. For the longevity benefits, for the healthspan benefits, you want to balance your methionine with glycine rich proteins. And if you're not eating enough glycine rich proteins, then the easiest and the most important thing to do is to supplement with either trimethylglycine, glycine, or a b twelve. But do you want to slow down aging and live longer? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to infosiemland dot com and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is SIEM. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.