Welcome back to the channel. My name is Seem Lund, here with my wife Inka. Today we're actually doing another two part series about saunas. So part one is on Inka's channel where we talked a bit pretty much about all the benefits of sauna, the research about it, and, pretty much how to do it. Like what are the optimal frequency, temperatures, types, and those kind of things. So yeah, check out part one on Inka's channel in the description. Here in part two, we're actually answering some questions that we asked or people asked on Instagram about, you know, so just, you know, different kinds of small questions about sauna. And it's more like a Q and A. Do you want to slow down aging? If you do, I'm looking for a few more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then send me an email to info@seamlondon.com and I'll send you all the details. So let's start. First question, sauna with cold plunge post workout. Yes or no? So should you do the sauna with a cold plunge after a workout? You know, my opinion is that that, sauna is great after the workout because it helps with the growth hormone release, which can have even like an enhancing effect on your, results from the workout. But also just, you know, recovery side, you, supply the muscles and joints with the blood flow and nutrients that are needed for recovery. So it improves all aspects of, you know, recovery and, performance or not not not like the results that you get from the gym. With the cold plunge, the issue is that, there is some suggestion or research showing that too much cold exposure, too cold exposure like ice baths, cold baths, they can reduce muscle anabolism. And not necessarily muscle strength or endurance, but muscle anabolism for sure. So it depends on what you're doing. Don't do it after like bodybuilding workout or resistance training where you're trying to build muscle, but after other types of exercise, it's, okay to do. Yeah. And maybe here, I don't know. You have looked more more into this at what's the temperature, but still making sure that you cool the body enough after sauna. So as we talked previously in my channel, is that in Finnish dry sauna and these studies, they use this intermediate cooling. So just taking a cool shower or rolling in the snow in between sauna sessions is, like, a good practice to avoid any, yeah, fainting or Yeah. Yeah. You heat it up. Yeah. The studies refer to more like the ice baths. If you do, like, a regular cold shower, then it's not it's fine. It doesn't have any, like, negative side effects. But if you do, like, you like, this five minutes of sitting in an ice bath, then, that would be counterproductive for muscle anabolism. And what do you think about, like, yeah, in this context, like, if you do first exercise, extraneous exercise, then sauna, which is a stressor, and then cold plunge, which is a stressor. Maybe it's just too much stress altogether. Or I don't know. I mean, like, it actually promotes recovery, like, the the different types of stressors. Like, the cold like let's say do your cardio, then after that sauna plus cold plunge is very good because the cardio can increase the inflammation and soreness more. But and, the cold will just, you know, reduce it a lot and reduce the pain or the stiffness on the joints and stuff. So I think it depends on the workout. So it's more like a muscle strength exercise then? Yeah. Like, I wouldn't do it like after weights. But after cardio is actually good for faster, recovery. Okay. Because you don't need, like, the inflammation for the cardio benefits. Mhmm. But you do need some inflammation for the, muscle growth and anabolism. Are sauna blankets good? I haven't actually used a sauna blanket myself. I mean, I think infrared sauna blankets probably, yeah, like they do still have, like, these infrared lights. So it doesn't matter how hot it is. You still get infrared benefits for the skin and sweating a little bit and skin. But I think that, like, they're I don't know. Like, I haven't used them. Like, I looking at it, I I would say that it's a bit, like, you know, messy and, you know, you have to kind of I don't know how you clean it and I don't know all the procedures involved with that. But I think it's still like a compact compact sauna blanket or dis sauna cubes where you're, you know, sitting in a cube, with your head out, I think they're still better than nothing at all probably. Yeah. It's just the sweating and detoxifying and getting heated in your body. One thing that I found is that in this, Japanese studies and the and the, like, the protocol in Japanese, when you do this infrared sauna therapy, which originates from Japan, apparently, it's called WOWN, is that they go into the sauna for thirty minutes, and then they lie under a blanket for thirty minutes, minutes, like, in a heated room of 28 degrees Celsius. Mhmm. So it's not a sound of blanket per se, but it includes this, like, lying, you know, increasing even the heat, heating of the body with the blanket. Interesting. But yeah. Also, I don't have any body with the blanket. Interesting. Yeah. Also, I don't have any experience with sauna plankton. I guess. Yeah. I mean, like, I think they're they're easy to use and they're, like, small and compact, but, maybe you need to stay them for a bit longer and you, like, need to clean them more often. How often and long for benefits? Well, yeah, that's what we covered in detail on part one, but briefly, I'll we we can say that the frequency is anything, like four times is the maximum benefits, four to seven times and four A week. Yeah. And four is better than one time a week. Mhmm. So yeah. Anywhere as well as much as you can pretty much. Yeah. So at least one time a week. Mhmm. But better if you can go several times a week, stay, like, twenty minutes at least at a time, and then come off, cool your body. Maybe you can do another session of twenty minutes if you feel you want to, but you don't have to. And, yeah, 80 degrees Celsius. Yeah. And we have another question, later that's, is it okay to be in the sauna of three plus hours? In Finland, many people actually do this long sauna sessions. I don't know if it's more beneficial than doing twenty minutes, but in in the Laukkanen study, actually, they show that the increased duration being in sauna was linked to better benefits. But the average that Finnish people that, like, did that was already linked to many health benefits was the twenty minutes about I think, yeah, like, you don't need to do it any longer than twenty to thirty minutes. After that, you just increase the risk of dehydration and, you lose a lot of minerals through sweat as well, especially sodium. And if you're not, like, replenishing the, electrolytes and salt, then yeah, you're probably gonna get some heatstroke or something like that. Because yeah, like you lose even like in one hour of sweating, you lose like almost two grams of salt. So almost like your entire RDA of salt you lose in one hour. So if you, like, completely deplete yourself, then not, you know, probably some, health dangers come from that. So when, for example, in Finland, when we do this kind of longer sauna sessions, it's usually you go to sauna, you stay there, you go out, you may even hang out outside in the snow, you know, like for me. I think I think this question also probably refers to that, you know, he they go to the sauna for twenty minutes or something, then they go out, drink some beer in the lobby, go take a swim sometimes, then back to the sauna for twenty minutes and you know, back and forth. I don't think you're like If you stay in the sauna literally for three hours in the same room all the time then that's probably ever like very dangerous. But if you do it like this, that you know, you do twenty minutes sets pretty much and rest in between, yeah, I mean, it's fine. I guess I guess Probably greater detox benefits but also detox of water and minerals and everything. So if you do this, you just need to drink a lot and, you know, drink mineral water and make sure you cool your body in between the sessions. But Yeah. There's probably no need for actually do this. Yeah. When is optimal to drink during sauna? Before, during, or after, or all three? I would think. Well, I would say all three. It depends on how fast you get How dehydrated? Yeah. And how much you sweat and everything. I usually pre hydrate before sauna. So I drink some minerals and I drink water before sauna already. Then sometimes I take a few zips in in between sauna session. I drink after as well. It depends on on the sweating and Yeah. I I mostly do it, like, before and after. So So like if I stay in the sauna for twenty thirty minutes then I don't really usually drink anything between there. Not usually a question not actually a question but would it be cool if you could also promo sauna just for relaxing? And another one is, please mention it's for pleasure and relaxation, not only for efficient benefits. Yeah. We talked about this at the previous part, but that's a big big part of the sauna benefits is that it's such a relaxing place to be. There is no distractions. You're just there. It's kinda like a mindfulness thing as well. Yeah. And in it's also might be, like, a social place. Mhmm. Yeah. Don't fall asleep, though. So don't like, if you lay down and you feel sleepy, then probably not a good idea. Mhmm. So, try to, like, you know, sit so that you would stay awake. Mhmm. Or if you do lay down, then, you know, make sure that you're not about to fall asleep. Next question. Should I worry about my testicles getting heat, testosterone, semen quality, etcetera? Yeah. I would I would probably be careful with it. So, you know, to the extent or of how careful you should be depends a lot, you know. If you have already existing, like, fertility issues, then the excess heat and so on are probably makes it worse, so to say. And if you are like have you're trying to get, pregnant or something but isn't working and then you do all the sauna as well, then I would probably like stop the sauna for the time being. If you're not, you know, trying to get pregnant, as a man, you know, trying to get your woman pregnant and not as a man. But, you know, in that case, you wouldn't have to worry about it that much that you're old. Like, manically need to like cool down the testicles, because the, spermatogenesis and those things, they resume afterwards. So you just have to stop doing the sauna for a little bit. But I do think it's like, you know, good practice as a man to just cool down the testicles after the sauna, within cold water and maybe like, yeah. If you're very careful then having like some cold pack or, just cold water even doing the sauna through like splash on the testicles. Next question. What's the best entry level purchase? Bag or small wood two piece sauna? Bags require more time. Bags. What do you mean by bags? I'm not sure. Is it the sauna? Maybe the sauna, like the cube thing or the Maybe. I mean, the best entry for purchase is, like, you would the best entry is probably, like, going to the gym or, you know, if you have, like, a local gym or something, that's probably the best. Find a gym that has a sauna. That's kind of the best. I think that's very beneficial. Just, like, find the gym. Usually, the membership includes the access to the sauna. So you can go to the gym for the gym or you can go to the gym for the sauna. It's very, very easy. Like, there is no need to actually have your own sauna if you can go somewhere. Yeah. But also some people like to have their own gym, so why not own sauna? I think infrared sauna is probably the easiest at the beginning because you can put it in any room. It's not big. Like, we have it in a hallway. And, if it's there, Yeah. Like, yeah, it's I personally I I personally wouldn't want to bother with an infrared blanket or these cubes. Yeah. Me neither. I would much rather have it as just a regular actual Yeah. Proper sauna. Yeah. But, you know course, it's not available for everyone. And then if it's like if you have the option of actually having a sauna in your house, I think that's one of the best things to do. Yeah. But if you would have if you would choose between a back and going to the local gym for a Finnish dry sauna, then I would go to the gym. Yes. Question, when you're not used to sauna, is it risky? Yeah. To a certain extent. Yeah. Like, you can definitely, like, overheat more easily or faint if you're not used to it. So it kind of, yeah, I'll have to build up the heat adaptation over time. But you do you do it actually pretty fast. Like, even within a few weeks, you're very fast adapted to heat. And just to recognize and learn at the beginning how your body reacts to it is quite important. So, I have an example of this. I have a friend who's Chinese, and she came one of the first times she was in sauna was in my parents' house. And, we stayed in sauna for maybe ten minutes. And then I told her, let's cool off a bit. And it wasn't very it was, I think, sixty, seventy degrees. But after that, she came out. She was already very fainty, and she wasn't hasn't been used to it. And, so now she's been in Finland for over five years, close to ten years, and she's very used to saunas now. But at the beginning, it was a bit harder for her. And you need to kind of know how your body reacts and then, you know, be very gentle to it at first, make sure you hydrate and stuff like that. Yeah. But it's not like usually I wouldn't expect it to be anything dangerous for for the body. It just Yeah. It's uncomfortable. Yeah. Uncomfortable and the faint is probably the biggest issue if you're not used to it. Or, like, if you have high high blood pressure, then that's also probably something to be more careful with because, you know, the sauna does increase your heart rate and stuff like that. In the short term, it can or in the long term, it reduces blood pressure, but in the short term, like, it can be too much. And if you do it, like, you know, cold like, you do the sauna and into the cold water, like, ice lake, then that can also be dangerous if you have hypertension or some heart disease because there's sudden, like, shifts in the temperature can be too much for the heart. So, yeah, like, you have to be kind of modified based on that. Mhmm. But in general, like, sauna is pretty safe. So Yeah. No need to stress over it or anything in Finland. Like, even children go to sauna. So Yes. Babies as well. Really? Babies? Well, I when I was a baby, they took me to sauna. Any hints about paraplegics or people with loss of thermal sensitivity doing sauna? So kinda similar that, you know, don't do it too much, and look at, like, you know, obviously the temperature, look at the humidity. If it's too high humidity, then you can overheat more easily and cause more stress to the body. And obviously, the time is easy to track. Like, don't be in the sauna for, you know, sixty minutes in a row. You know, the optimal time is somewhere like, you know, nineteen to thirty minutes. And, if you're starting off first, then stay, like, only fifteen minutes. Then, after that, go for the other twenty minutes and just, yeah, try to, like, cool down your body still after coming out of the sauna. Like, cool down the body a little bit with some cold water. How how long do you stay in the sauna room? How many times do you throw the water and how many rounds do you usually do? We touched a little bit on this topic, but the water throwing, we didn't cover. So I guess I would this is a questionation, but I I think about three times I would throw water. Four or five times. Yeah. How hot it is? Like, if it's very, like, not that super hot, then you can throw more because you want to get hotter. If it's already, like, burning and stuff, then you throw less. So the the the water is kind of yeah. Like, to calibrate the heat level of the room. Yeah. But usually we stay, you know, twenty minutes usually. And we don't usually do multiple rounds because we already do the sauna, like, in almost every day. But if you were, like, going to the sauna once a week, then I would do, like, multiple rounds. I would do, like, two rounds, twenty minutes each, probably. And yeah. And don't throw the water too frequently. It's generally not a good idea to throw it every thirty seconds or so. It gets too hot very fast. So too much heat is also not good for you. So just, like, every now and then to get this like a a wave and then let it cool down. Yeah. And what it actually does is that it cools down the room, in the long term. So like in the show, you throw it. Yeah. There's a, like, heat wave coming, but, it, like, reduces the overall temperature of the room after after that. Oh, interesting. So, yeah, like, it does raise the heat wave, but it kinda cools down the body Mhmm. Or the the room. Best time of day to use and preferred binder when using. So we talked about the time, which is, you know, pretty much everything every any time except five, six hours before bed. And the preferred binder to use, like so, yeah, like, if you detox and sweat in the sauna, then it's good to, you know, bind to those toxins in some shape or form. If you sweat, yeah, like, you just you do want to, like, wash off the sweat because otherwise, you reabsorb the toxins in the sweat. But like any supplements as binders, we don't usually use it. Mhmm. We just, yeah, wash. But if you would want to use, like, activated charcoal, it's pretty good and chlorella and spirulina. Like, I I don't think that you need any any, like Yeah. Massive binders. Yeah. Like, because the sauna itself is already a detox process. Yeah. Like, the sauna doesn't make you detox in your bloodstream. Yeah. Like it's not like a liver detox. Yeah. You're sweating out. You would need to you would need more of these binders if you are doing, like, fasting or some other detox protocols. But in the sauna, the majority of the toxins come out of the skin through the sweat. So that's what you want to, like, you know, remove. And we briefly discussed about niacin. Like, if you want to enhance this process, then niacin helps to really push those things out. Yeah. And question is doing forty five minutes, four plus times per week in an introvert zone are safe or recommended? Yeah. I mean, it's good. It's safe for sure. Like, there's no side effects. And from a health side, then four times a week based on studies at least these link to all of the other kind of benefits. Yeah. I mean disease and There is no necessarily need to do that long. Yeah. You But if you like it, then why not? One thing the only thing I guess here is to monitor is the the humidity. If the infrared sauna or the environment is very humid, then, you know, staying even at 60 degrees in a very humid environment is not good. But, yeah, if it's not usually infrared sounds are not humid. And, Yeah. Like twenty minutes, even with infrared sounds are like a good like, you get all the benefits from there already, pretty much. Maybe thirty minutes most. Thirty minutes. Yeah. With the infrared, I think, like, one issue is that, you know, too much infrared is also harmful, because it's like radiation in, like, small amounts. Yeah. Like I wouldn't maybe forty five minutes is a bit too much. So, you know. Yeah. And too much like infrared light can also like damage your skin. So it's like, again, a moderate thing that you need to do, like twenty to thirty minutes. It's probably, like, the most recommended. Next questions are reasons why I don't sweat a lot in the sauna. It's pretty hot and everyone around me is sweating. So you don't sweat that much either. So what do you think is the reason? I don't know. I've I've never sweated that much even in workouts or I think it's just personal quality. I know many people who sweat immediately like you, and I know many people who doesn't just sweat so much. It might be related to some, like, hormonal functions or just, you know, skin qualities or whatever. But I think for you, it's because of you have like a slightly lower body temperature as a baseline. Yeah. So you have a cooler, colder body a little bit, and lower like metabolic rate. So that's, you need like a bigger, you need more heat to to first heat up the body to normal levels and then start to get the hypothermia. Yeah. And I've actually hacked this thing. I know how to get my body to sweat immediately in infrared sauna, but it requires the normal sauna. So if I go into the normal sauna only, I still require, like, fifteen, twenty minutes to start wetting sweating. But if I first go to normal sauna for five minutes and then I go to infrared sauna, I start sweating in infrared sauna immediately. Yeah. So as you said, it's probably just like elevating. You need to heat up your body first and then get to hypothermia. Yeah. So maybe try, I don't know, a small exercise before or something to get your body, warm, warm up and then go to sauna. Yeah. Next question. Should you mix infrared sauna with a dry sauna throughout the week? Well, I just briefly touched on this topic. You want to sweat this? Yeah. I mean, I did it frequently when we were in Finland. In in our gym, we had both saunas. So I first went to the normal sauna for five minutes and then to the infrared sauna. And I guess the clue here was not to stay in both saunas for thirty minutes, but actually five minutes to heat up the body and then go to the infrared sauna. I did it because I just really wanted to sweat in the infrared sauna and I really needed to take the infrared sauna because I had knee recovery process going on. So I wanted mostly use that for the recovery process. But I don't see see any reason why you couldn't mix these saunas as long as you don't go excessive. Yeah. I think I guess he means, like, you know, one day you do regular sauna, the other day you infra sauna. So I think that's very good. I think that's, like, actually, you get more benefits by combining them because there are some things that you don't get from the dry sauna that you get from the infrared, which is, you know, the joint benefits and the skin collagen synthesis and the brain synaptogenesis and melatonin production from the infrared light. Yeah. So like, yeah, optimally you probably wanna do both. If I had to choose only one then I'll choose the infrared because you can get still some cardiovascular benefits from the infrared as well. But, you know, ideally both, I think. So what what we do is that we do most of the day or most of the time, we do the infrared. So, like, say maybe three times a week we do infrared and maybe one to two times we do the regular sauna. Something like that. If I had to choose only one, I would actually use the dry sauna and I would use infrared light, like a light device for the infrared benefits. Yeah. That's that's possible with the red light. Yeah. Because it's harder for me to sweat in infrared sauna. And the dry sauna I get, yeah, sweaty. So Yes. So that's a preference as well. Difference between infrared and traditional, so we kind of alluded to that. And in the part one we talked about it as well, but most of it is the the infrared penetrates deeper so it reaches joints and brain tissue. Would you say steam room or far infrared sauna is more beneficial to overall health? Steam room not. Yeah. Infrared sauna is definitely healthier. Yeah. So in steam room, you cannot sweat that well. It can actually pose a strain to the heart. So definitely dry sauna or infrared sauna. How long should one be in sauna to get most benefits and also how hot should be We have covered this. But, you know, briefly twenty to thirty minutes and 80 degrees Celsius. Yeah. Just after solar, my knees and quads feel really tight. Why is that? Could it be the loss of electrolytes and minerals? I have not. I don't know. That was just a guess. Yeah. It could be. You may Knees feel sore. Tight. Okay. Interesting. Maybe you're sitting weirdly or I don't know. Maybe you're just sitting there. You could do like some stretching stretching if it's, tight. That could help. Regular last question is a regular versus infrared, which is yeah. We talked about already. So yeah. Check out part one for the full breakdown of that on Inka's channel in the description. But, yeah, other than that, thanks for watching this video. Where can people find you? So my YouTube is youtube.com/@iamincalend. Mhmm. And thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.