There are dozens, if not hundreds, of different longevity supplements out there that may have some beneficial effects on your longevity in some way or another, but they definitely have a wide degree of effectiveness. Some of them are very effective and very worth it, whereas others not so much. So in this video, we're gonna do a tier list of all of the longevity supplements that I could find and some of the supplements that have some longevity effects. But do you want to slow down aging and live longer? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their bulge of coco. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@ciblan.com and I'll send you the details. It's showtime. So first supplement on the list is gonna be TMG or trimethylglycine. So I personally am a huge fan of TMG as a compound, obviously, you can get it from food. But as a supplement, it also has some interesting effects. Obviously, the biggest beneficial effect has to do with methylation. If you have poor methylation genes, then TMG is gonna be quite, important supplement to take. And, when talking about the aspects of biological aging, then poor methylation is something that does accelerate aging quite a lot as well. And with these DNA methylation age tests that measure your biological age, then, upping your TMG intake from dietary sources has been found to reverse or slow down the aspect of biological aging. So TMG is certainly a supplement for poor methylators, I would say, is like a must. And, for non poor methylators, so, like, people who have good methylation genes, then it still has some interesting effects because it can also even have some exercise performance effects and obviously supporting methylation and helping to lower homocysteine, which is also one of the effects of TMG, is still very worthwhile. So I would put it, you know, it's very safe and, it has quite an effective, like, you know, let's say, result from the use of it, so I'll put it into good tier. It's not god tier because we don't have any direct, like, even, like, mouse studies that would show that it extends lifespan or something like that, but it definitely has, you know, indirect effects on longevity and aspects of biological aging. Glucosamine sulfate, another very cheap and very safe supplement. I take it, three grams every day. And of course, usually glucosamine is associated with, like, joint health and osteoporosis and things like that, which is true. It does help with those conditions, but interestingly enough, there are, like, a few human epidemiologist studies finding that glucosamine use is associated with reduced mortality and reduced cardiovascular disease because of the anti inflammatory effects primarily. And, because of that, I'll put it also into the good tier that it's very safe, it's very cheap, you know, you would want to support your joints and tendons pretty much. Everyone would want to do that and, there are, like, actually some, you know, evidence to suggest that it might even have some, like, longevity effects. So I'll put it it's better than TMG, I would say, because it's kind of universal for almost, like, everyone. Curcumin. So, the kind of, curry supplement or the, is something that you can get from turmeric. So curcumin, is also a very powerful anti inflammatory. It certainly has many studies showing that it helps with, like, aspects of joint pain and inflammation in the body by boosting glutathione. So, I do think that curcumin is also especially, like, if you get it from dietary sources, if you just spice your food with turmeric and curry then, that's a very good thing in my opinion. And, you know, that's part of the reason why Indian people have very low rates of arthritis, for example. And, part of the reason has to do people think that, it has to do with the curcumin intake. There is no, like, lifespan, effects. Like, I haven't seen any studies showing that curcumin extends lifespan. But, yeah, it does just have a, like, a very powerful anti inflammatory effect. But the issue is that it can also, like, blunt some of the effects of muscle growth, especially if we take it post workout. So it's, yeah, something has some nice anti inflammatory effects, but I would put it into, like, okay tiered. It doesn't have, like, any powerful, you know, kind of effects that you wouldn't get from other anti inflammatory sources, but it's still kinda easy. Let's say dietary intake is for sure very beneficial. But whether or not you should supplement curcumin depends on, like, other factors and I would say that the supplemental curcumin has less evidence and it certainly isn't as, like, safe than a dietary curcumin. And the same applies to sulforaphane supplements. I think they're okay. They boost glutathione, but whether or not you need it depends on, like, yeah, like your baseline inflammation and, yeah, like because they also suppress the muscle growth pathways then they might not be, like, most suitable all the time. Resveratrol, so, you know, this is kind of the most controversial supplements in a lot of ways. It's hyped up to be, like, the most powerful longevity supplement, but when you actually look at the studies then, no. Not so much. Like, yes, in some mouse studies and some nematode studies, they do find that it has life extension effects, but, you know, obviously, the evidence in humans is very limited. And, in humans, it actually has been found to have quite a lot of negative side effects, such as reduced VO2 max, reduced testosterone, and even reduced muscle anabolism, so I'll put it into the bad tier. Like, resveratrol is very beneficial if you have, like, diabetes and metabolic syndrome and high cholesterol, for example. But, in otherwise healthy people, you know, it depends on what you're kind of, valuing right now or what your goals. Like, if you want to improve, like, your v o two max, then I would certainly take it out from your stack. Rapamycin is, certainly the most powerful, most potent longevity drug in the world. Like, it has a lot of animal studies showing that it extends lifespan, and, the effects cannot be up to, like, 60% increase in lifespan, which is the, like, largest effect, at least based on, like, what what's what's what's what's out there. So it certainly is, like, you know, god tier in terms of the effect of actually extending lifespan in animals. You know, the issue with human studies is that we don't have any, like, actual human studies showing whether or not rapamycin actually does have longevity effects. I do think that it does. Like, we just don't have the studies yet. Maybe in, like, five years, we actually will have a human clinical trial showing that it has, like, actual life extension effects in humans. So so based on that, I would put it, like, in the good tier based on the human studies. But, yeah, we'll try to rank it, you know, trying to take all things into account, so to say. Like, we try to consider all the possible variables from a for a human living in a in a free world, if that makes sense. And rapamycin, you know, it has a few side effects. There was this this recent questionnaire based study looking at recreational users of rapamycin, so people who take rapamycin off label and, to see what are their experience with rapamycin. And the biggest side effect was, like, mouth soreness and overall they did report that, like, maybe it was placebo, but it was, like, they did report that they felt better in some ways or they felt that they were eating slower, which is very subjective, obviously. But, just because it is the most, like, powerful in terms of life extension, I'm gonna put it into the god tier. And metformin as well, I'm gonna put into god tier because it has the most strongest effect. Like, it's the most potent out of all these longevity supplements in terms of life extension and antiaging effects. So metformin in diabetes certainly extends life expectancy and makes them live longer. In non diabetics, the evidence is less clear whether or not it will extend their lifespan. But, you because it is so powerful as a anti diabetic drug, I think it could even be used as a rec as a recreational supplement. But, yeah, you know, the protocol for that obviously varies between people. Berberine is considered like natural metformin that, has similar effects in terms of lowering blood sugar. Obviously, it's not as powerful as metformin in terms of lowering blood blood sugar, but it, is a good alternative for a non diabetic person who wants to, like, stimulate similar pathways in the body as metformin does, but with less side effects. So metformin also has some side effects in terms of VO two max and, testosterone and muscle growth. So, but berberine has, you know, similar effects with a with a little bit less side effects. But berberine still can inhibit muscle growth. So it's not, you know, it's it's not like a get out of get out of jail free card. It has similar side effects. So I'll put it into, like, a good tier because, you know, it's a good, way to mimic some aspects of, you know, like rapamycin use or metformin use without actually taking these compounds. And, there are no like, a lot of life extension effects from berberine, but it does again help with aspects of metabolic health and, diabetes. So you can use this on, like, cycling it. Like, if you don't have diabetes, then you just cycle it on some days. Creatine, I I think, is good. I'm gonna put creatine into the good tier because creatine has a wide range of longevity effects in terms of muscle growth, muscle strength, muscle power, and, just like bone density and brain aging cognition. So creatine has both cognitive and physical benefits that are beneficial for slowing down aging and longevity. So that's why it's gonna be in a good tier, but it doesn't have any, like, life extension effects. Like, giving even creatine to animals hasn't, like, extended their lifespan. So it's just it is more like a health span supplement, which means that it's extending your health span. You maintain functional fitness and longevity for longer, but you don't necessarily live longer, if that makes sense. So, yeah. It's, certainly a very good supplement. The only downside to creating can be that for some individuals, it could cause damage to the kidneys if their, kidneys are already like, they have some renal insufficiency or some other kidney damage already, then, for those individuals, creatine isn't recommended. But creatine can also reduce the o two max if you take it. So if you're trying to, like, boost your cardio or trying to increase your v o two max, then I wouldn't use creatine in that period of time. Next up, we have, aspirin, which, is also, like, a more over the counter pharmaceutical, and, it's still pretty safe. Like, there's very few, like, side effects compared to, like, rapamycin or metformin, so to say. Like, aspirin does have some, you know, anti inflammatory effects, and it could have, like, some life extension effects in as well in some animal models. It's just that in healthy people that have in some reports that aspirin could increase the risk of, gastrointestinal bleeding and other issues like that. So my stance on aspirin is that, you wanna use it only in a microdose. So, like, microdosing aspirin in a situation of high inflammation. So, like, sleep deprivation, circadian mismatch, whatever else, like some infection, that can be a good anti inflammatory to use. But chronic use probably has, you know yeah. It might increase the risk of this gastrointestinal bleeding as reported by a few, studies. So, I'll put it into okay tier. So it has a few side effects, so you don't wanna take, like, chronically. But, the anti inflammatory benefits are certainly, like, worthwhile. K calcium alpha ketoglutarate. So, this one is, interesting. You know, calcium alpha ketoglutarate is not the same as the regular alpha ketoglutarate. And we have at least one study showing that using the calcium alpha ketoglutarate supplement reduced biological age in humans as measured by the DNA methylation clock, the Horvath's clock. Now, of course, you can make the argument whether or not this Horvath clock, is it even relevant? Does it actually measure your biological age? You know, of course, I think it doesn't tell you, like, your entire biological age. It just tells you one aspect of it, which is the DNA methylation. So, it does benefit DNA methylation, apparently. And, your alpha ketoglutarate levels do decrease with age so you have less AKG in the body and calcium AKG is the best way to, like, raise your AKG levels in the body. So AKG is involved in the Krebs cycle and, energy production and those kind of things. And it apparently also supports methylation, which is very beneficial for longevity. But, you know, that's only just one study that we have right now. We don't have a bunch of other studies about this compound. So because of that, you know, I think it's expensive. Like, it's a bit more expensive than some of these other, like, trimethylglycine or glucosamine, definitely. So I'll just put it because of that. I'll put it into the okay tier. We do have one study showing that it has, like, slows down aging or reverses the biological age, supports methylation, etcetera. But, that's that's pretty much it and it's expensive. So it's not something that I would prioritize, if that makes sense. Melatonin, I think, is guttier because both as a hormone produced by a body and as a supplement, it has a lot of antiaging and longevity benefits. So first of all, melatonin as a hormone, the hormone that your body produces every night when you go to sleep, has a wide variety of longevity. All the longevity pathways are regulated by melatonin. So all the repair processes, DNA repair, sirtuins, autophagy, NAD recycling, you know, the entire gambit of your body is regulated by melatonin in your sleep. And if you have low melatonin, which happens with age, so your body produces less melatonin the older you get, then that's that's where you start to see fragmentation in sleep, poor sleep quality, and also the other aspects of aging. And, that's what that's a huge issue. So you wanna make sure that you, you know, maintain the production of natural melatonin as as long as possible. But as a supplement, we also have a ton of studies showing that supplemental melatonin also improves health and improves aspects of aging. So starting with macular degeneration, ending with high cholesterol, and, you know, there's bunch of other animal studies as well, like testicular protection or, you know, it protects against a lot of oxidative stress because of the anti inflammatory effects of melatonin and it's pretty safe, like, in reasonable amounts. So it doesn't suppress your natural melatonin production. That's a big myth. Your body still produces melatonin if you stop taking it. So it doesn't work like TRT that, it still has. Your your your body still maintains the ability to produce melatonin if you stop supplementing it. So you don't have to worry about that. The only negative side effect of melatonin is that it can be contraceptive, so it can reduce fertility in women at least, and it can postpone puberty. So you definitely don't want to give melatonin to children and you don't probably want to take melatonin, you know, you don't wanna take it before you're, like, over 20 years old. Because, you know, if you're 18 and you're still going through some aspects of puberty, if that makes sense. And and that's the only side effect. And the contraceptive effects start at, like, seventy five milligrams of melatonin, which is obviously a very large amount. And usually, you would take only, like, zero point one to one milligram, maybe three milligrams. Three milligrams is the pharma pharma dose. So, and, I do think that for the elderly, melatonin supplement is very beneficial. But, before that, you can, like, you know, cycle it. If you want to boost your sleep quality every once in a while or want to catch up on some lost sleep, melatonin is kind of, very good one for that vitamin d three. So I think that's also god tier because, obviously, you don't get a lot of the all the all the benefits of sunlight from vitamin d. Like, you get the UV radiation, you get the circadian rhythm alignment, you get the nitric oxide boost, you get the other bunch of anti inflammatory effects from sunlight that you don't get from a vitamin d three supplement. But we do have a bunch of, human studies showing that vitamin d three use is associated with reduced mortality. So, I think that's a pretty high quality evidence, or, you know, high degree of certainty that vitamin d supplementation by keeping your vitamin d levels, vitamin d blood levels normal has antiaging and longevity benefits. And the side effects are pretty minor. Yes. In very large doses, it could have, like, some, you start to leach, like, some calcium from your bones, but that generally applies to, like, very large doses. If you take, like, a maintenance dose, which is, like, two thousand to five thousand IUs, then you you don't get that at all and chances are it just helps you to, normalize your blood vitamin D levels, especially if you're in the Northern Hemisphere. If you're anywhere, you know, know, starting from Central Europe to upwards to Northern Europe, then you probably would benefit from taking vitamin d, especially in the darker months. You probably don't need to take it in the summer months, but at other times of the day when you get less sunlight, then it certainly If you live in closer to the Equator or in the Mediterranean, then you probably don't need a vitamin d three supplement. So it depends also on your, like, blood vitamin d levels. And, you know, why your blood vitamin d levels in the blood might be low could be because of other reasons, not just lack of sunlight. If you have too much body fat, then your body vitamin vitamin d levels can be low. If you're not getting enough sulfur, then your vitamin d levels can be low. So obviously, there's many things that contribute to your vitamin d levels, not just sunlight. But, yeah. The, the reason it's in gut here because because it's safe and it improves a very important biomarker, which is your vitamin d d three levels. And we do have human studies showing that it does, like, reduce or reduce the risk of mortality in humans. Magnesium, I also think is gut here because it's very safe. It pretty much has no side effects almost. You know, you would have to take like maybe ten grams or something to maybe get some side effects. But, you know, the only side effects for magnesium supplements could be that you get diarrhea, maybe some arrhythmia for some people, but you would already have to have high blood magnesium levels or you could be, like, low in sodium or low in potassium. But, yeah, like, risk of getting arrhythmia is much higher if you take, like, potassium, for example, compared to magnesium. So generally, the biggest side effect of magnesium could be diarrhea. And, if you take only, like, two hundred, four hundred milligrams a day, then, you're just improving your blood magnesium, levels, if that makes sense. Vitamin k two, I also put into the gut tier because, again, it's very safe. It improves, you know, heart health and, we have some, human studies also showing the association between vitamin k two and reduced mortality and reduced heart disease, which is obviously one of the biggest. It's number one killer in the world, which is heart disease and k two from both dietary sources as well as supplement could be, worthwhile for sure. Fish oil is a controversial one. On one hand, we have, you know, a bunch of studies showing that omega three's fish oil, even if it's the regular rancid fish oil, based on the studies, at least, fish oil use is associated with reduced heart disease and reduced mortality. Some studies find a stronger association, some other studies find, not a significant association. But the overall, at least based on my understanding, is that the overall association is that it's still more beneficial than not, or the association is there for reduced mortality and reduced heart disease specifically. So based on that, it should be guttier. But because I do think that most of the fish oil is, like, worse quality, I'll put it into good tier. What I recommend is more like, cord liver oil or krill oil is generally a lot better than regular fish oil, because the regular fish oil is probably rancid or has probably become oxidized to a certain extent. And krill oil is less oxidized or less likely to be oxidized and cord liver oil, as well, if that makes sense. Cert six is a very novel compound and, it's, derived from, seaweed. And the biggest effects have to do with, like, DNA repair and circadian rhythm alignment and anti inflammatory effects through the through the sirtuins. But, yeah, this is a very new supplement. We don't have almost any studies and, but it doesn't have any, apparently, negative side effects. I've been taking SIRT six for, yeah, like over a year and, I haven't experienced any negative side effects. So I think it's safe and but the issue is that, yeah, like, the benefits of it are limited. So we don't have enough evidence to definitely say that it has any, like, antiaging or longevity effects. So I'll put it into, like, okay, tier. And it's a bit more expensive as well. NAC is gut tier because we have actual human clinical trials combined with glycine and NAC. So we'll put glycine here as well immediately. So the glycine NAC combo, you you know, it it could be even higher here. I think it's a kind of staple in a lot of ways that, both the glycine and NAC increase your glutathione levels and we have human clinical trials showing that the GLINAC combo, reduces hallmarks of aging and improves functional outcomes of aging like muscle strength and gait speed and just body composition. So all those things improve upon the use of glycine and NAC. So we have, you know, at least a dozen, I think, of human trials with this combo of supplements and it's the most, I think, the most safest and most researched, like, actual longevity supplement in humans, so to say. And I'm a huge fan of both of these. Glycine has additional longevity effects through increasing autophagy. So the cell recycling, it improves the clearance of junk material from the cells and the, aspect of methionine restriction. So glycine also mimics methionine restriction and prevents the rise of homocysteine, which in excess can increase the risk of heart disease. And methionine, like, in large amounts also is associated with cancer and shorter lifespan in animal models. So, you don't wanna get too much methane. You wanna balance it with glycine and the easiest way to do that is to kind of take a small amount of glycine as supplement and combine it with NAC so you get that glutathione boost. Glycine alone also increases glutathione and NAC alone also increases glutathione, but combining them together apparently, is more effective. CoQ ten. So, this supplement is mostly known for mitochondrial function and heart health. Now we do have, yes, some, human studies about this, but, yeah, it's not it's not a lot. And, I think that CoQ ten, it doesn't have any, like, actual life extension studies or reduced mortality studies, so I'll put it into, like, good tier. It's, good. It doesn't have, like, any, like, real side effects, but, it's a bit more expensive again. And whether or not you actually would get any benefits in terms of longevity is still up to debate, but I think that it's good. NMN so this NBD booster and nicotinamide riboside, I'm gonna pretty much judge them on the same, like, criteria. So both of them raise NND levels. None of them have shown to extend lifespan even in animal studies, but, NMN at least has some human studies that improves incidence activity and even improves gait speed. One recent 2023 human study showed that NMN increased, like, walking speed in the elderly, which is obviously good because gait speed is associated with reduced mortality. So the faster you walk, then, generally you're in better health and, the lower your risk of mortality. And I do think that NMN certainly has a lot of longevity benefits if your NLD levels are low. But it's, again, the evidence isn't completely there yet, and there could be, like, you know, the aspect of price. So it's more expensive than regular kind of supplements. So I'll put it into good tier, both of these. Both of these are in the good tier because they do improve at least in terms of energy production and some aspects of metabolic health. But, the price is but we don't have, like, actual life extension effects seen yet, and the price is also a bit higher. Niacinamide, so this one is different from NMN and Nicotinamide riboside because it's cheaper and it works through a different pathway. So it works through the NED site recycling pathway, which, improves aspects of NAD recycling. So I'm gonna base this higher than NMN and nicotinamide riboside because you wanna support the NAD recycling, which is more important than just taking an NAD booster, if that makes sense. And niacin as well, it does raise NAD levels similarly, but it also has, like, additional cholesterol benefits that improves your lipid profile. The only downside to niacin is that in large doses or, to chronic use, It can cause some aspects of insulin resistance and obviously it creates this flush effect that your skin feels like it's burning. So that's the kind of a negative side effect of that. Quercetin, a senolytic. Now I think the evidence of quercetin, is limited. So, I'm gonna put it into okay tier. We don't have any life extension effects. It's a senolytic. It helps to clear senescent cells. Same with fisetin. It's also a senolytic. So, yes. Senolytics may have some, benefits for storing down aging. It's like the senescent cells are a hallmark of aging. And the older you get, the more senescent cells you accumulate, especially in a disease state. And, like, clearing the senescent cells might have some longevity benefits for sure. It's just that, we don't have any, like, you know, evidence based protocols yet and, the the human clinical trials are also kind of lacking. So we don't know whether or not, you know, or how frequently or how much Synolytics you need to use, in my opinion. So, besides that, you there's also, like, some other natural ways to clear senescent cells like fasting, exercise and those kind of things. So, it's hard to say whether or not it's worthwhile to kinda supplement, these things. And even then, we don't know how effective these supplements as senolytics are. They certainly have anti inflammatory effects, antioxidant effects, but we don't know if they're even effective for or we don't know if they have any, like, meaningful effect on in terms of senolytics, like, if the effect is any, kind of worth it. Apigenin as well, it's, it's, you know, obviously, it's a herb or it's a compound you get from herbs like parsley and stuff like that. Some of the benefits of apigenin are, like, anti inflammatory, antioxidant, similar to kind of senolytics. It has senolytic properties. The The additional benefit of Apigenin is also that it's a CD thirty eight inhibitor, which increases your NAD levels. Now the, yeah, the issue with Apigenin is though that it's quite again, like, it's if you start to add all these these things up, then your budget for the supplements are gonna be quite it's gonna be quite big if you start taking all of these supplements. So that's that's why, like, the price to benefit ratio, I would say, is probably not worthwhile. You there's, like, natural ways to manage your CD 38 levels, like, with exercise and sleep and some dietary sources. So I'd much rather just get the apigenin from the herbs that you add to your food rather than get them from a supplement because the supplement is pretty pricey. Next up, we have taurine. So, taurine is, kind of the new brother or sister in the club of anti aging, supplements or longevity supplements because of this recent mouse study showing that taurine supplementation increased lifespan by up to ten to fifteen percent or twelve percent. I don't remember precisely. But, yes, your taurine levels do go down with age, and taurine might have some beneficial effects in terms of longevity. But, we don't have any human clinical trials. It was only a mouse study, so it's too early to say whether or not taurine has, like, actual longevity effects. So, based on that, I would put it into, like, a good tier because taurine has benefits for exercise, it has benefits for endurance and heart function, and it might have some longevity effects as well. And it's pretty cheap. It's not as expensive as, like, NMN. It's kind of as as expensive as glucosamine, for example. So it's not an expensive supplement, but it has quite a lot of nice benefits that I think would be worth it. Vitamin c. So, this one, is, you know, obviously very, like, known, safe, and, highly used antioxidant as a supplement. And, you know, besides that, it can also help with collagen synthesis. The issue with vitamin c is that, you know, antioxidant supplementation actually is associated with some higher aspects of mortality, especially, you know, if you're probably doing it, like, chronically or in, like, a very large doses. So you don't wanna take, like, large amounts of antioxidants all the time. Small amounts of antioxidants probably is, okay. And, that's why I'm putting it into to the okay tier as well. There's probably no side effects to vitamin c as a supplement. If you take, like, a hundred milligrams of vitamin c every day, then chances are nothing not not like, you're gonna you're not gonna experience any downside. You will help with collagen synthesis for sure, and you'd reduce maybe some aspects of inflammation on the body with a small antioxidant effect. But, like, large doses of antioxidants like vitamin c probably I personally wouldn't, do that, if that makes sense. Next up, we have two forms of vitamin e, tocotrienols and tocopherol. So, you know, some people say that the, tocopherol is, the more beneficial one that has, like, health effects, and toggotrienols are the ones that are actually associated with increased mortality risk similar to vitamin c. So I would say that, you know, certainly you wouldn't need to supplement vitamin e in most cases because, you know, you get the vitamin d e from a lot of, foods and, yeah, based on this currently, you know, vitamin e use is actually associated with increased mortality risk. So I personally think that it's not kind of worth it, you know, and I will put it into the bad tier because, yeah, like, the evidence just isn't there that it would have any, like, life extension effects, if that makes sense. And, based on, like, some actual studies, then it might even be associated with increased risk. Next up, we have collagen. So, I think this one is god tier because everyone pretty much needs collagen and, everyone will lose collagen the older you get. And that decrease already starts in your twenties. So if you think that you're waiting until you're 40 or 50 until you start taking collagen, then it's already too late. Your collagen starts to decrease already in your twenties and supplementing collagen peptides in multiple human clinical trials have been found to reverse aspects of skin aging and wrinkles and stuff like that. So the earlier start with collagen, then the better it is. And there's literally, like, no side effects to collagen if you take it only, like, ten to twenty grams a day. Hyaluronic acid. So, this one is another skin supplement, helps with skin moisturization and aspects of skin aging. There is some evidence that it, does actually help with that with the skin aging. It's it's just that, it's kind of, again, more, you know if you take collagen, you probably don't need to take hyaluronic acid additionally. But it's not gonna hurt. It's just that the price aspect again, like, if you start taking all of these, then your budget is gonna be pretty high. I'll put it into okay tier. It doesn't have any side effects. It, does help with skin aging, but it's probably not as good as collagen or glycine for that matter. Allicin. So this one is from garlic. You're not gonna get significant amounts of allicin from just eating garlic unless you're eating, like, 20 cloves of garlic. And allicin does have benefits for lowering blood sugar as well as, improving lipids and is also antibacterial. So it's good for the gut and, helping with, like, dysbiosis, for example. So allicin, I think is, very cheap and is also effective. So I'll put it into good tier. Inositol, this supplement is, mostly beneficial for, you know, blood sugar management, and inositol is involved with neurotransmitter production and, just sleep even because of the neurotransmitter connection. So it's effective, and it's pretty cheap. It's sweet similar to glycine. So, yeah, I think it's a very, like, a good supplement. We're gonna put it into the good tier. Alright. Next up, we have spermidine. So, spermidine is also becoming quite popular as a supplement based on a few studies showing that higher dietary spermidine intake is associated with reduced mortality and even reduced heart disease. But the issue is that that applies to dietary spermidine. So we don't have any, human or we don't have any actual studies showing that supplemental spireminine has those same effects. So I'll put it into kind of, you know, bad tier because you're you're gonna get the the the the spireminine required amount from, dietary sources very easily if you eat some foods that are high in spireminine. Like, if you eat some wheat germ, which is actually another of this, spyrimidine food as a supplement and is also high in t TMG, I'll put it into guttier because its actual food is probably more bioavailable through that mechanism and it's a higher source of spyrimidine And, it will also be beneficial for actually contributing to your dietary spironidin intake. So wheat germ is one of those foods. You can also get spironidin from mushrooms, cheeses, and a little bit of meat and mostly, like, just, you know, vegetables and stuff like that. Those are already gonna give you adequate amount of spramedine. So the supplement spramedine isn't even I think there is actually one study showing that the supplement spermidine isn't isn't even, like, absorbed, so to say. So I wouldn't, you know, take the, supplemental spermidine. Next up, we have a multivitamin. So, yes, there are a few, like, human studies showing that multivitamin use is associated with reduced cognitive decline and, that's it pretty much. At least that's what I've, the only one I've seen. Like, multivitamin, first of all, you're gonna get a bunch of different vitamins and minerals. Whether or not you need those vitamins and minerals depends on your diet. I think you would be much better off by targeting the supplements that you need. Of course, it's very convenient to take a multivitamin that has a bunch of different vitamins and minerals. It's just that, you know, sometimes it can be overkill and, sometimes it just makes expensive urine. But because, you know, there is the association of, you know, the vitamin multivitamin use with reduced cognitive decline, I'll put it into okay tier because we have, you know, some evidence to suggest that it might help with the brain aging at least. But because it's kind of a shotgun approach rather than a sniper shot, which I would much rather prefer, then I'll put it into okay tier. Methylene blue is a supplement, I have, you know, mentioned every once in a while. I'll we'll I will be making a video dedicated video to this as well. And, methylene blue, it's not a fish tank cleaner. Of course, it can be used as a fish tank cleaner, but methylene blue is actually, on the list of the World Health Organization's, list of essential medicines. So it's used for some medical conditions. And, yes, it's a legit medicine, if that makes sense. It's not, some sort of a fish tank cleaner that some people just like to use. And there are some longevity benefits for methylene blue as well, mostly through inhibition of oxidative stress and, skin aging as well. So the it protects the skin from oxidative stress, both UV radiation and whatever other forms of oxidative stress you might be exposed to. It protects the mitochondria from oxidative stress, so it helps energy production, lowers the burden of aging on the mitochondria, and it also, triggers, this it triggers, like, fibroblasts and wound healing in the skin. So it has both mitochondrial benefits, it has skin aging benefits, and it also has been found to improve, short term memory in humans. So it is a good some supplement. It's a good longevity supplement, actually. So you would want to still, like, microdose it, like using these tinctures or these trochees. Take, like, one milligram. You don't wanna, like, take large amounts. But, yes, it's an actual legit, like, longevity supplement, in my opinion. Molecular hydrogen. So this is another, like, less conventional, antiaging supplement, and the biggest effect has to do with the anti inflammatory and antioxidant benefits. And, hydrogen is obviously the most abundant molecule in the universe, pretty much, and it has anti inflammatory effects. It's just that we don't have, like, a ton of human studies. The difference between molecular hydrogen and other antioxidants is that it apparently doesn't blunt the oxidative stress from exercise, which is good. So molecular hydrogen appears to be like an adaptogenic antioxidant. So if you need to lower your inflammation, then it's gonna lower your inflammation. But it doesn't interfere with the adaptations you get from exercise, for example, which is great, which means that you can take it after exercise. But I would much rather, yeah, like, take it in the morning or before bed away from exercise if you want to be safe. But it does have anti inflammatory effects. It's just it's a bit more expensive again. And it's certainly not like the first line of defense, in terms of antioxidants that you want to take every day. Like, I'd much rather take glycine and NAC every day, or, like, glucosamine and vitamin c even. But, yeah, it certainly has anti inflammatory benefits. Spirulina, another dietary form of, sprulline, although not as high as wheat germ, spirulina may also have some other, you know, beneficial compounds. It's it's actually, like, a good plant based source of some iron, although not like heme iron, obviously. But, it's okay. Like, it can bind to some, you know, compounds. It can be used as a binder. It can help to detox, but it doesn't have, like, any life extension effects for sure. So I'll put it into okay d tier. Next up, we have DHEA. So, this is a precursor to testosterone. For the elderly, it certainly will help with hormones even in men and women. So, if you have low testosterone as a man, then it does raise your testosterone levels naturally as well. But if you have already normal or high testosterone levels as a man, then you probably don't see any difference. Your DHEA levels do go down with age, so you could expect to benefit from DHEA if you're in your forties or fifties or sixties. For women, DHEA even has, like, anabolic effects, so it can even improve, muscle growth and fat loss, so to say, because they're like, testosterone levels are obviously naturally significantly lower. So I'll put it and there's no, like, little to no side effects, but in some countries, you can't get it, over the counter. So that's why I'll put it you know, it's it's safe but you have you know, if you wanna be safe then consult with your doctor or take a blood test to see what your DHEA levels are or your, sex hormones. But it's still good for the elderly, specifically. Like, it's the natural alternative to TRT. Whether or not you need TRT, you need to consult with your doctor, but, you can take DHEA with less barriers and with significantly less, you know, commitment. Like, DHEA isn't gonna suppress your natural testosterone production like TRT will. If you take TRT, then your natural testosterone levels will, or your natural testosterone production will decrease, so you're kind of dependent of the TRT. And TRT certainly is beneficial for someone who has low testosterone levels and they need to take TRT. But if you just have, like, a little bit of low testosterone, and it's not, like, clinically low, then maybe DHEA is kind of the first step to try out. Cocoflavinols or just dark chocolate or raw cacao, we have, the COSMOS trial, which I used Cocoflavinols daily supplementation, and they did find that the Cocoflavinol use was associated with reduced cardiovascular disease risk and cardiovascular disease mortality. And I'm a huge fan of dark chocolate and, raw cacao because of the high polyphenol content. And, yeah, it's it's very high polyphenols and higher polyphenol intake is associated with reduced mortality, reduced cardiovascular disease. And, you know, if you take it as supplement, then you can expect no side effects. If you start eating, like, several bars of dark chocolate, then obviously, the number one is that you're just getting too many calories, which will kind of like, it's it's counterproductive in that sense if you're just getting overweight from eating too much dark chocolate. And, some people also get, like, the oxidant issues from, like, cacao and dark chocolate, but most people don't. If you just take, like, one square of dark chocolate like I do, then you're probably not gonna get any side effects. If you take the coke of thiazolidol supplement, then you probably will also avoid, those side effects. And last supplement on the list here is lithium orotate. So, lithium, you know, you would think that, what, am I gonna start leaking batteries or something? That's not the case. Lithium orotate as a supplement has actually shown to improve aspects of cognitive decline and neurodegeneration. So it's nootropic. It's neuroprotective, and, it certainly is important for brain aging. And the funny thing about lithium is that higher lithium content in the water, the drinking water, is also associated with reduced homicide and reduced suicide. So, low lithium or lithium deficiency might have some, let's say, negative effects on mental health and negative effects on brain health and brain function. So I do think that lithium is a very beneficial nootropic agent and, for brain aging, like, for brain aging and antiaging for the brain stack. I would certainly include it there. And, yeah, I'm gonna put it into the good tier because, yeah, there's plenty of evidence to show that it is neuroprotective and beneficial for brain aging and even reduce, you know, the risk of homicide and suicide. So there you have it. This is kind of the tier that I put together off the go right now. Know, you could certainly change a few things around. Like, you could definitely put resveratrol in junk tier. You could put vitamin e in the junk tier as well, for example. And, you know, you could put rapamycin based on some metrics to, like, a lower tier, like a bad tier. But because it is there is evidence in animals that it is a very potent life extension molecule, then I'm gonna put it into DUGA tier. And I do think that, you know, at some point, we will get the human clinical trials that we need to, like, show that, yes, rapamycin actually has some nice longevity benefits in humans. Metformin could also be in the junk tier for based on some metrics, like based on the reduction in testosterone and v o two max. But, you know, metformin obviously saves a lot of people who have diabetes. Whether or not it will actually be beneficial for nondiabetics is up for debate. You know, there's you could you could argue both ways. You could argue that, yes, it inhibits blood sugar levels. It it reduces your hemoglobin a one c. All very true. But it can also have, you know, some other negative effects. I do think that metformin probably is, still a very effective and very powerful longevity supplement. It's just that it requires a lot of commitment in some sense. And you need to know, like, what you're signing up for. If you are taking, you know, any any of these supplements for sure, but especially rapamycin and metformin. So there you have it. This is the current ranked list of the longevity supplements. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.