In one of my previous videos, I talked about how glycine and NAC are part of my top three longevity supplements. And in some recent animal studies, they have shown how glycine and NAC supplementation can extend lifespan by up to twenty four percent. So in this video, we're going to take a look at glycine and NAC together and why you should combine them together. Do it. I guess a good place to start with is a human clinical trial published January 2023 where they show that supplementing glycine and NAC or glyNAc as it's called in, older adults improves gliopharma deficiency, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, inflammation, physical function, and the hallmarks of aging. What they found was that glyNAc supplementation in older adults for sixteen weeks was safe and well tolerated. By combining the benefits of glycine, NAC, and glutathione, glyNAc is an effective nutritional supplement that improves and reverses multiple age associated abnormalities to promote healthy aging in humans. And this graphical abstract will show you some of the benefits and the effects of glyNAc or glycine and NAC. And the main benefit comes down to boosting glutathione, which is your body's it's considered like the master antioxidant. It's certainly one of the main ones and the most important ones specifically through the liver. And glucuron is something that is very important for slowing down aging and improving many other health outcomes. And glynaec through glucuron synthesis pretty much helps with inflammation and oxidative stress. It improves serosin essence, mitology, and just, you know, all of the hallmarks of aging in a lot of ways are connected to lack of gluathione and increased inflammation and oxidative stress, which then if you fix that or correct that or just improve the gluathione levels, then you will see, you know, an improvement in the whole market of aging as well as, you know, functional outcomes such as muscle strength, walking speed, waist circumference, blood pressure, and, you know, other biomarkers. How much glycine or NAC did they take? Well, they took about, a hundred milligrams per kilogram per day each of glycine and NAC. And the placebo, the control group was alanine, two hundred milligrams per kilogram per day. What they found was that only glyNAX supplementation in older adults resulted in significantly improved a gluethane concentrations by 121 after two weeks and by one hundred and sixty four percent after sixteen weeks, to levels not different from younger adults. And in the beginning, the older adults had 66% lower muscle glutathione concentrations than the younger adults. So, yeah, like, you know, with age, you do see this decrease in glutathione, which then is part of the reason why you accelerate in the hallmarks of aging as well. Of course, there are many other reasons for that, why that happens, but, obviously, yeah, like the lack of glutathione and just increased inflammation and the increased oxidative stress is something that kind of accelerated. If you are an individual with a worse lifestyle, you have more comorbidities, you have, let's say, metabolic syndrome or diabetes or poor nutrient intake or your lack of exercise, then your gliothone levels are gonna be lower and you're more susceptible to, the increased oxidative stress and inflammation. But this is not the first study. In 2021, there was a review on the effects of glyneX supplementation on both, like, animal and mice, mouse studies, as well as human clinical trials. And the review did find that the the glyneX supplementation generally does improve, you know, things like glutathione deficiency, the hallmark of aging, and, you know, functional outcomes. It is particularly exciting that glyanax supplementation appears to reverse multiple aging hallmarks. And if confirmed in a randomized clinical trial, it could introduce a transformative paradigm shift in aging and geriatrics. So, yeah, this was 2021 and this, the 2023 clinical trial that we just talked about kind of supports at least partly the findings of this review as well that glenex supplementation can affect the hallmarks of aging. In this study, they only covered seven hallmarks of aging so it doesn't cover all of the hallmarks of aging. But you don't need to obviously, you know, hit all the hallmarks of aging with just one supplement. It's pretty impossible to kind of have this miracle supplement that just improves everything unless it's exercise, which pretty much does so. But, yeah, like, glynaic supplementation at least improves, many of the hallmarks of aging that we know are associated with accelerated aging. Another 2021 study found that the glynaic supplementation in older adults improves gliothione deficiency, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, inflammation, incident resistance, endothelial dysfunction, genotoxicity, muscle strength, and cognition. So this is also like a clinical trial and, they did find that for twenty four weeks, the, in older adults, glynaq supplementation was well tolerated and safe and indeed lower oxidative stress and corrected the gluathione deficiency. And a 2020 study found that glynaq supplementation in patients with HIV who are experiencing accelerated aging because of their disease. Patients with HIV had significant effects in measured outcomes which improved with glyNAc supplementation. However, benefits receded after stopping glyNAc. And in type two diabetics, another human study, they do find that the glyNAc supplementation improves impaired mitochondrial fuel oxidation and lowers insulin resistance. They found that the glyNAc supplementation for fourteen days significantly improved fasted mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation by 30%, decreased insulin resistance by 22%, and lowered free fatty acids by 25%, which, goes to show that they found an improvement in their symptoms of insulin resistance. So as you can see, there are multiple studies over the past few years, clinical trials in humans as well, showing that the glynex supplementation, glycine plus NAC, improves many aspects of health, especially those related to accelerated aging. Obviously, it's too early to presume or it's very hard to presume that the glynex supplementation would extend lifespan in humans the similar the way it did in the mouse study where it improved lifespan by twenty four percent. But the glynex supplementation has been definitely shown in multiple human studies, animal studies as well, showing that it improves the hallmark of aging and at least improves functional aspects of aging. Wait a minute. Now it is also important to realize that in those studies, the patients or the subjects of those studies were either older adults or they had, you know, other comorbidities like diabetes or HIV or something else related. So all those people already had low levels of glutathione and they had increased, let's say, oxidative stress and inflammation, which got improved with the glynex supplementation through increasing glucathione levels. Maybe there isn't that big of a carryover to individuals who don't have any comorbidities like a younger adult who already has good health and they're fit and their growth hormone levels are already high. They, you know, eat a good diet, they exercise, etc. It's hard to say whether or not it would have like any significant, you know, improvement in oxidative stress markers or inflammation markers or even if it would matter because their inflammation is presumably already low if they follow a healthy lifestyle. But the benefits of glycine, for example, go far beyond just correcting things like gluoton deficiency and you can check out my other video about the full in-depth benefits of glycine. Glycine also improves collagen synthesis, which is very important for slowing down skin aging and improving joint health, etc. And glycine also improves sleep, glycine lowers blood sugar levels, glycine improves bile salts synthesis, heme synthesis. So, yeah, the glycine is something that I personally take pretty much every day all the time. And briefly I'll mention this new study as well that I covered in the other video, glycine and aging. And, glycine may also have like direct life extension benefits at least in other animals through mimicking methionine restriction and inducing autophagy, which both of have life extension benefits at least in other animal models. Now with NEC, I do think that NEC is amazing. I take it regularly and I think that you could definitely take that also regularly with no no real side effects. The issue with NAC is that it may also have, like, some inhibitory effect on muscle performance, muscle strength, and especially high intensity exercise. So there are studies showing how the NSE could blunt some of the positive adaptations to resistance training. So if you are, let's say, a young individual who is training hard and is trying to improve their fitness and physical performance for the sake of longevity as well, obviously, then you have to be kind of careful of not taking NAC all the time. If you're an older individual or someone who has, let's say, some sort of infection, comorbidity, diabetes, other disease states that lower your glulophan levels and warrant having higher glulophan synthesis, then in that scenario you could take, you know, NAC all the time. But if you don't have any issues, you don't have any complaints, you don't have any comorbidities, then it's better to take NAC maybe, you know, on the days that you don't exercise or on the days that you're not lifting heavy because it can reduce power output and it can also inhibit some of the positive adaptations to exercise by blunting the inflammation. So you don't wanna blunt inflammation all the time. You wanna reduce the inflammation when your inflammation is, you know, skyrocketing and and you wanna boost your growth hormone levels when you need it. And there is also the thing that some individuals with histamine intolerance can also react negatively to NAC supplementation because NAC inhibits or, reduces histamine breakdown. So overall, what I recommend is that you can take glycine with no side effects. The only side effects might be like a headache or too low blood sugar or something like that. And the side effects for NAC have to do with mostly muscle strength and muscle performance. So if you are prioritizing those, at least on some days of the week, then don't take NAC on those days whereas you can take Glycine pretty much every day unless you're getting a side effects. But overall, Glycine and NAC are amazing. That's the reason why they're they're in my top three holy trinity of longevity supplements. If you want to find out what's the third supplement on the list of the holy trinity then check out this video that I just made. But do you want to slow down aging? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological cock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@seamlun.com, and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Ceem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.