In one of my recent videos I said that sauna, in my opinion, is number three when it comes to the most powerful activities that you can do for your longevity after exercise. But like with any other hormetic stressor like sauna and exercise, it can also have some negative side effects that you need to be aware of. And too much or overdoing it isn't always better. So in this video, I wanna talk about some of the negative side effects of the sauna and how to avoid it. Do it. The first negative side effect that many people aren't aware of is that excess heat, for men at least, can be contraceptive. The heat on the testicles can shut down spermatogenesis and reduce sperm count and sperm motility, which is why it has been used the sauna has been used as like a traditional contraceptive in the last century and probably before that. Now those contraceptive effects aren't probably permanent. Sperm activity and sperm count returns to normal after you stop taking a sauna for a short period of time. It's just that in the presence of excess heat and chronic heat exposure on the testicles especially, then you do shut down the spermatogenesis for that moment at least. Now some of the things that you can do to prevent that is to cool down the testicles after the sauna or even during the sauna. So that's why many people like to use things like ice packs or just cold exposure on the testicles when they're in the sauna. But I prefer, like, to actually just take a cold shower after the sauna, just shoot the cold water on the testicles to cool down the walls and, to, yeah, pretty much, enable them to return to, like, a normal temperature instead of being overheated. When you're outside of the sauna, you can also just cool down the testicles with, like, an ice pack. I wouldn't actually take the ice pack to the sauna because, you know, the heat can melt some microplastics into your skin potentially or something like that. And, yeah, you don't want to, like, melt microplastics into your testicles when you're holding it on your balls in the sauna. Big mistake. When it comes to women, then this is not an actual hormones and fertility in a lot of ways. So for women, there is no contraceptive effect of the sauna. It's mostly for the men. And the second side effect is actually also for men, unfortunately, or fortunately, you know, depends how you look at it. But, yeah, the the sauna can also or the heat stress can also significantly increase prolactin levels and the prolactin increase can be between a 113 to 1280%. Like and the mean or the average is a 500%, 510% increase in prolactin. So if you don't know, prolactin is a hormone that actually reduces testosterone levels in men and increases aromatization. So, it's definitely, you know, obviously high prolactin levels aren't healthy for men. It It lowers dopamine, it lowers testosterone, or if you start to get a little bit of gynecanastia as a man then that could also be a sign of, yeah, probably too high prolactin levels and, if you do the sauna too much every day then that could raise that could be explaining part of the reason why you may develop like some gynecomastia or if you have high prolactin levels and maybe low testosterone levels as well. But again, like, for me men women is not necessarily like an issue. Disappointed. Now the third side effect kind of is self explanatory. It's heat stress or heat shock, heat stroke and you can, like, potentially faint if you are in the sauna for too long or if you're not used to it or you're dehydrated, you're you're hypoglycemic so the sauna increases GLUT4 activation and increases insulin desensitivity which then will lower your blood sugar levels quite rapidly. And, yeah, the sauna is agreed to like a, you know, preventative activity for, you know, insulin resistance and glucose intolerance as well as high cholesterol levels. But, yeah, like, if you go to the sauna while fasted and with already existing low blood sugar levels, then you could, you know, get slightly faint. You could go hypoglycemic. You could, you know, pass out and, you know, potentially even get heatstroke if you do the sauna too long. And, actually, there have people who have died when they were participating in the World Sauna Championships. And when it comes to the health benefits of the sauna, then you don't need to be in the sauna any longer than, like, twenty minutes. At twenty minutes, you pretty much cap out all the health benefits and, the temperature doesn't have to be super high. Either too high temperature can actually even damage brain cells and, be bad for memory. So, you want to keep the temperature between 70 degrees Celsius and maybe 90 degrees Celsius at max. If it goes above a 100 then, yeah, it starts to have a negative effect on memory. People who have already existing hypertension or cardiovascular disease or something else related then they have to be also careful with swapping between the extremes of temperatures. So if you have heart disease, you have high blood pressure, then it's not recommended to do the traditional cold plunge back and forth with the sauna because these very drastic alterations in temperatures, they can pretty much give you a stroke or you can get a heart attack if you already have hypertension and high risk of cardiovascular disease events. But if you're healthy then they generally don't have that risk although you have to be still careful with, you know, if you are going to like an ice lake or you're going for winter swimming from the sauna then, yeah. I mean it's still dangerous to jump into, like, ice cold water if there's no one around especially. So you have to be careful about that. So there's many people who die every year but they don't die in the sauna but they, you know, go out of the sauna to jump into the ice lake and then they get stuck underneath the ice or whatever. They get they get hypothermia or whatever and then they or or like a cramp, whatever, it can happen. It's very rare that people actually die in the sauna. Alright everyone, chill. And the last side effect of the sauna is loss of electrolytes. So because you're sweating quite severely in the sauna you do lose a lot of minerals and other electrolytes from from the sweat. It is estimated that one hour of sweating, you lose about 2,400 or 2,500 milligrams of salt, with with a mixture of, sodium and chloride. So that's like one teaspoon of salt per hour of sweat and if you stay in the sauna for thirty minutes then that's a half teaspoon of salt literally that you lose through the sweat. There's other minerals as well that you lose like magnesium, iron, iodine, etc. The amounts aren't that big. You can replenish them quite easily with a good diet but one additional mineral that you can lose from the sweat in large quantities is chromium. And it's not that you lose like a very large amount of chromium through the sweat, it's just that it's very hard to replenish chromium stores. So the absorption of chromium from dietary sources is only like 1%. So you need to be consuming a lot of chromium to replenish your daily RDA of chromium and the highest food sources of chromium are like oysters and seafood, but you can also take, like, a supplement. But overall, you do lose a lot of minerals and salt from your sweat, specifically through the, sauna and that's why it's, like, it's worthwhile to, like, make sure that you stay hydrated and drink mineral waters or just, you know, use more salt to season your food with. But that's it for this video. Make sure you check out my other video about the health benefits of the sauna. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.