Another q and a time. If you want to ask me a question, then follow me on Instagram at simlund. Alright. First question, can longevity protocols be achieved without popping any pills? Let's say you the answer is obviously, like, yes. You don't need to take any pills to have a solid longevity routine, especially if you're young or in your middle ages. Maybe in your later years, it still would give you, like, a net positive to have some of the, you know, pharmaceuticals, especially with the coming advancements in some of the longevity drugs that we will have in the next few decades or so. So right now, we don't just don't have any supplement or pill that is as strong as a healthy lifestyle and as strong as regular physical exercise and a good diet, just none of those supplements really work as well. But in the next coming decades, I would presume that we will have, you know, some, at least a few of these longevity molecules that might move the needle in a much more performed way. You know, but do you need to do it? This obviously depends a lot on many other factors. No. You don't need to do it. You will probably achieve, like, 90% of your longevity potential with just diet and exercise and general lifestyle, in my opinion. Even some of the more, let's say, more evidence based, supplements even like, you know, fish oil or glynac or, you know, even like rapamycin or so those kind of things, you probably won't see any more than, like, 5% of benefit or 5% of the actual results when it comes to longevity. There's there's just not they're not just that powerful enough. And, maybe in the few decades, we will have, like, a more stronger stronger molecules, but, as as of now, they're just not good enough to have, like, a profound effect. And again, even then, if you do have some sort of a breakthrough molecule, I would guess it's not gonna be any stronger than, you know, 10% of, the actual results. 90% of the actual results will still come from a regular exercise routine, good, like, just a lifestyle, not, smoking, not drinking too much alcohol, not being, stressed out. All those things are much more important than any supplements. If you are already doing all the lifestyle things well and you want to add an additional 5% or additional 3% even, you know, because the supplements themselves still are just you wanna add one percent or one to two one, two, 3% more, to your already well rounded healthy lifestyle. So they're never going to replace the healthy lifestyle. They'll always add only, like, one, two, 3%. And, maybe in the next few decades, we'll have some of them that add five, ten percent or something like that. Disappointed. With that being said, I think there are still some, like, even now, there are some, supplements that could have a pretty beneficial effect for the elderly in terms of increasing health span. So maintaining better health for longer and in so doing slowing down the age related decline and some other age related conditions. So, like, a good list of them would be glycine and NEC because it actually has been shown to reverse hallmarks of aging in humans and other functional declines in humans like muscle strength and cognition. Those things you can maintain that at least based on some, randomized clinical trials that in elderly people, GLINAC, helps to reverse that. And, maybe like creatinine as well. Like creatinine is just going to, again, maintain muscle strength and walking speed or cognition even is going to help with those functional outcomes. And maybe like, you know, with age, you see a drop in melatonin, so your melatonin levels go down, your deep sleep, your REM sleep go down, your total sleep quality and total sleep duration go down with age. So So maybe replacing that or filling the gap with your natural melatonin production with some melatonin supplementation could also be like an anti aging strategy. That's yet to be proven, but there's no there's little to no downside, to doing that, in my opinion, especially in the elderly people who see a decline in those parameters. Like, they see a decline in melatonin production. They see a decline in sleep quality, sleep duration, and glutathione levels, antioxidant defense, all those things go down. So, you know, at that stage, some of the supplements could help to fill the gap to a certain extent, but they're not gonna, like, replace again the healthy lifestyle. Quitting bad habits can be hard, especially if you do it cold turkey. That's why most people end up rebounding with their bad habits. The sponsor of this video, Fume, looks at the problem differently. Not everything in a bad habit is wrong. So instead of a drastic, uncomfortable change, why not just remove the bad from your habit? Fume is an innovative award winning flavored air device that does just that. Instead of vapor, Fume uses flavored air. And instead of harmful chemicals, Fume uses all natural delicious flavors. You basically insert the 100% plant based pores with different flavors, such as lemon, grapefruit, mint, or vanilla into the fume, and you just get flavored air that smells and tastes great. It doesn't pollute the room or leave nasty smells. I personally find the fume very helpful for helping some of my family members break bad habits. It's easy to use, a 100% natural with no chemicals or bad ingredients, and it helps with distressing while trying to break the habit. Head over to try phom.com forward slash seam or scan the QR code and use the code seam to get a 10% off on your order today. And a quick little longevity hack. I got a dog with my wife. This is a small multi poo puppy. He's three months old right now. His name is Apollo. And, you know, dog dogs are also actually, dog ownership is linked to longevity. I didn't get the dog because of the study that I saw that the dog ownership is linked to twenty four percent reduced mortality, but, it still, you know, gives a few longevity points. See you there, Apollo. Hey. Hey. Hey. Next question. For a skinny fat guy, 18% body fat. Is it better to bulk than cut, cut than bulk, or body recomposition? State of being skinny fat pretty much refers to having low muscle tone and still like like a visceral fat accumulation with a small deli, or just having, you know, even subcutaneous, excess subcutaneous fat also can be categorized here. You know, you can use a DEXIS scan to measure your lean appendicular mass, and you're gonna have, like, actual numbers to know if you have skinny fat. But if you just have skinny arms and a big belly, then that's pretty much skinny fat. So what do you do in this situation? Should you bulk and try to gain muscle or you should you cut and try to lose the fat first? I think if you're skinny fat, then you probably are very, you know, new to training or you're just desensitized to the training. So you're probably not doing any training right now. So just starting to lift weights will already do the recomposition. So you will already build muscle and lose fat at the same time if you start from a skinny fat position pretty much because you're gonna be sensitive to the stimulus and you're gonna see results very fast. So just even if you didn't change anything, like you still eat the same diet, you do everything else same, but you start lifting weights, you will see a positive body recomposition just automatically like that. Now the way to optimize it further, or if you are already more advanced with training or if you're doing training, then the second most important part is to just eat more protein. So you could replace, your fat intake and carbohydrate intake with some increased proteins, or you could even eat like, 40% of your calories coming from protein and that is also going to help with the body recomposition. This strategy of, like, a very high protein and lower carb, lower fat diet, this will also work in terms of recomposition for more, like, advanced trainees. So if you're already, like, semi shredded or, not shredded, but, you know, a little bit of extra fat, but you already have a solid foundation for muscle mass, you can already see a positive change in your body recomposition as well by eating this high protein, lower carb, lower fat diet. And, this is one of the strategies that, obviously, bodybuilders use as well during contest prep to maintain as much muscle muscle tissue as possible while losing body fat as well. They eat high protein, low carb, low fat. But, if you're a beginner and you're, like, just untrained, then just start lifting weights and try to focus on more the strength side. So, you know, not power lifting per se, but, you know, trying to aim for around six to 12 repetitions and, three to four sets. And in total it's gonna be pretty effective and a great way to build strength and muscle at the same time while losing fat, especially if you're like a beginner. Next question, how can I lower my triglycerides? So triglycerides, fatty acids in the bloodstream, the biggest thing that actually raises triglycerides is carbohydrate intake, and reducing carbohydrate intake is the most effective way to lower your triglycerides as well. So the reason why triglycerides rise when you're eating carbohydrates has to do with the fact that when your body is, you know, burning carbohydrates for fuel, then it's not burning fat for fuel. So your body can't really burn all the fuel sources at once, it can burn all carbs and all fats at the same time, except if you're in a calorie deficit or except when you're exercising very hard. So if you have a very high energy demand, then your body will burn everything, but if you're a regular person or if you're sedentary, then eating carbohydrates reduces the fat burning, and as a result of that, more triglycerides stay in the blood for longer. So a lower low carb diet is the best and fastest way to lower triglycerides. You can still achieve a low triglyceride level on a high carb diet. So my triglyceride levels are around 30 milligrams per deciliter, which is their optimal range. It's like pretty much the lowest. There there is kind of achievable almost below 30 grams is pretty hard, but you want to be at least below 60 with your triglycerides for optimal longevity. But I still need a high carb diet, so how do I achieve that? I just eat less fat. So if you're eating higher carb but your fat is low, then you're gonna have, by default, less triglycerides in the blood because you're consuming less fat and you're consuming less triglycerides. So as a result of that, your body will still have lower blood triglyceride levels if you eat lower fat. So a high carb low fat diet or a low carb high fat diet is the way to achieve lower triglycerides. And obviously, exercise helps with that, weight loss helps with that, you know, making sure that you're not drinking alcohol. If you have too much alcohol intake, then that can raise triglycerides. So, you know, it's kind of two levers that I always follow, low carb, high fat or high carb, low fat. You don't wanna be eating high carb, high fat because that's going to keep your blood sugar, as well as triglycerides levels, elevated, which is a recipe for metabolic syndrome and other health problems. So you you need to always kind of choose either low carb, high fat or high carb, low fat, in my opinion. Protein should be still relatively the same on a moderate to higher end. Lower protein is not the best, but moderate to higher end is gonna be kind of the stable protein intake. And then you adjust the carbs and fats accordingly. Next question, how do you track your sleep? So I use different sleep trackers. You know, I've used the Oura Ring, I've used the Whoop Band, I also have the Eight Sleep mattress, so I have pretty much I can choose whichever sleep tracker I use. There are some things that are similar across these sleep trackers. For example, my heart rate and HRV are consistent across all three sleep trackers. So it's the same on Oura. It's the same on Whoop. It's the same on the Eight Sleep. When it comes to sleep, let's say scores, then there are some discrepancies. I always get like a 100 on my Eight Sleep and I get with Whoop and Aura, I might get like something between 80 to 90 usually. And the biggest reason probably has to do with the fact that I don't sleep solid eight hours. Like, I usually sleep around seven to eight hours, so I never or rarely do I actually reach the full eight hours, but sometimes I do. So the discrepancies aren't, like, that big of a concern. I don't really think you should, like, be so, like, neurotic or very focused about the sleep scores, for example. It's good to know that, okay, I'm getting at least two hours of deep sleep and I I always get two hours of deep sleep on all the sleep trackers, whichever I use. And I always get like one and a half to two hours of REM sleep on all the sleep trackers. So the sleep scores themselves are subjective because the companies use different algorithms to calculate the sleep score whether you get 95 or 76, whatever. That's based on just the algorithm that they choose. But the amount of deep sleep and REM sleep is what matters more. So how many hours of deep and REM sleep are you getting? That's, that's pretty consistent across all the sleep trackers and how many times I wake up and how how long does it take me to fall asleep, that's also pretty consistent across all the sleep trackers. So, yeah, the scores themselves don't matter. What matters more is like how much deep sleep and REM sleep are you getting, and you can use pretty much any sleep tracker to, to gauge that. Next question, does v o two max built on a bike also increase v o two max while running? Yes. So, you know, your VO2 max is just a reflection of your cardio respiratory fitness. How fit are you? How well is your body able to utilize oxygen? And it doesn't matter if you, you know, have a high VO two max from training, swimming, or running, or cycling. If you're a very good swimmer, you probably have a high VO two max even while you're running. It's just that their sports specific specificity also matters in, you know, how fast you actually run. So if you're only swimming and you're never running, then you're gonna get very good at swimming and you're running, like, you're running form and you're running performance, those things are gonna be less optimal because you haven't practiced that much and vice versa. If you're always running and you're never swimming, then, you know, your running form can be good, but your swimming performance might be more suboptimal. So if you want to actually run very fast, like you wanna have a very good five k time or a very fast marathon time, then you need to actually train, and you need to train the running. Having a good car to respiratory fitness obviously helps a lot, like, even the most consistent runner if they have a VO two max of, like, 50 compared to, like, an Olympic swimmer who has a VO two max of 75 or 80, then it will probably still outrun the guy who has the VO two max of 50. Maybe maybe in some except rare cases is not the case, but in most cases, the the guy with a significantly higher VO two max will outperform the one who has a lower VO two max. But, if the differences are small, so like if the difference is only like five points, so if the guy has 50 and the other guys has 55, then the difference probably isn't that big, and the guy who actually practices running more is going to outperform the guy who doesn't run that much, if you get what I mean. So sports specifically matters what endurance sport, what type of cardio cardio do you wanna be good at, but, that matters. But, the overall just putting in the hours of increasing your cardiovascular fitness is what matter matters most. If you're if you're actually measuring your VO two max at the VO two max lab, then they have told that if you're doing the bike, so you can do the VO two max test on on the bike, you can do it on the treadmill, you can do it on the step climber, it doesn't matter which type it is, but they do tell that your VO two max is gonna be around 10% lower when you're doing the bike. So if you're measuring your VO two max with the bike, you're you're expected to get around 10% lower score compared to running. I'm not sure exactly why that is, but that's what they told me, several times. So, yeah, I usually measure my VO2 max with the just a treadmill running test, and, that's the way I also train my cardio and VO two max because I wanna get I wanna get good at running. Like, I like running and I think it's pretty functional as well. Of course, if you do too much running or if you have poor form, you're gonna hurt your knees. If you can't run, a good alternative is to do cycle, you're gonna still increase your VO2 max. Or if you can't cycle even, then swimming is also a very good way to increase the VO2 max. Next question, how important is counting calories or you can skip it and just eat the right foods? Well, obviously, you don't need to count calories at all. I don't count calories. I don't, like, measure them. I don't think about them even. I just eat the same foods every day and on some days, I eat a bit more, especially if I've lifted weights or if I've exercised a lot, then I just eat more calories or eat more food. And on the days that I'm sedentary or if I'm just not hungry enough, then I eat less. And I adjust my intake based on how I look in the mirror. So if I see, okay, I'm starting to gain a little bit of fat, then I just eat less or exercise more. And if I'm starting to get too skinny or if I'm starting to get too lean or if my gym performance is just plateaued, I'm just so tired all the time, I don't have the strength to actually train or if my strength numbers are going down, then that's probably a sign of them in a calorie deficit and, it would need to be eating more if I want to regain that strength. So I just adjust it based on what I'm doing and how I perform and how I look, if that makes sense. I do think it's very valuable to measure and weigh all the foods and measure all the calories at least a few weeks just just to get a baseline understanding of how many calories your body requires and how many calories affect your body composition because ninety nine percent of people have no idea about those things. They have no idea how many calories a glass of milk has. They have no idea of how many calories a piece of salmon has or even vegetables or broccoli or whatever it is. They don't have any idea about how many calories certain foods have. But it is a very powerful superpower, in my opinion, to know. Okay. I know approximately, you know, a 100 grams of oats, dried oats has around like 350 calories. I know that because I've measured that in the past or I've just looked it up in the past. Or one banana usually has like 80 to a 100 calories. That's a pretty good information to know. One glass of milk has around, again, 80 to a 100 calories. So it's one of those things that will certainly improve your nutritional understanding. And, if you have that knowledge then you will also be able to make somewhat better, decisions in your food choices, and especially how much food you need to eat. You don't need to be neurotic about it. You don't need to be, like, obsessively calculating calories, but, it will certainly make it easy, or it will certainly systemize it if you actually count all the calories and if you stick to your allocated calorie intake, then you will pretty much lose weight. Like, you're guaranteed to lose weight if you're calculating and weighing all the foods and you're in a calorie deficit and, you follow all the things that you're supposed to eat and following a meal plan, then you are guaranteed to lose weight. It's just most people aren't willing to do that and, they're not, you know, they don't have this self control or discipline to actually follow a meal plan. But if you were to follow a meal plan and you are in a caloric deficit, then then yes, you will pretty much lose weight. That's pretty much guaranteed. Next question, are you working on another book? If so, what is the topic? Yes, I am writing my next book. It's called The Longevity Deep, and it's talking about the most evidence based, current understanding of aging and increasing health span and trying to extend lifespan as well. So the idea is that, you know, you have your maximum lifespan, which is the day or how long you live, and then you have your hell span, which is how long you're healthy. Most people have a shorter hell span than their maximum lifespan. They start to experience this decline in health span already like ten to twenty years before they die. So the idea is that if you postpone the decline in your health span, you're gonna stay healthier for longer. You'll enjoy life more and theoretically, there's nothing else or there's nothing that would say that you wouldn't extend their lifespan as well if you extend your health span. All the things that increase your health span also have a positive effect on increasing your lifespan and longevity. So the book is about, okay, what is all the information about diet, exercise, supplements, sleep, and, different chronic diseases, age related decline, biological aging, all those things put together into like into this into this book that will just teach you the main main principles of that. And, it is going to come out maybe right now, I'm still in the process of writing. It's pretty long. It takes a long time. So I'm expected I'm expecting to publish the book in February 2024, if all things go well. And you can sign up for the updates at thelongevityleep.com. Next question, somebody asked about training and melatonin. I got interested, what's the benefit? I'm not exactly sure, there was one question about, do you take melatonin on training days? I do take it sometimes, so there's nothing that would indicate that melatonin would suppress the beneficial adaptations of exercise and that it would reduce your muscle growth or VO2 max or anything like that. Whereas some antioxidants, like vitamin c or n NEC or berberine or metformin, they do have a negative effect on exercise adaptation. So you don't wanna take them after exercise. But I haven't seen anything that would indicate that melatonin would do something like that. So it's safe to take on training days as well, And even even then, it actually might help with recovery, especially if you're, like, someone who might get overstimulated by exercising hard. So some people, experience that, so they might lose some sleep. So melatonin can, you know, theoretically help to counteract that or help to fall asleep. But there's nothing that would inhibit the exercise adaptations because you're already taking melatonin in the evening as well. Maybe if you were to take melatonin during the day immediately after lifting weights, then that will be a problem because of the antioxidant and anti inflammatory effects. But I haven't seen anything else in regards to melatonin inhibiting exercise adaptation. You know, there are some theories as well that melatonin could reduce testosterone levels, and insulin then have negative effect on muscle growth. But the studies actually define that melatonin supplementation in young healthy adults isn't associated with lower testosterone. So, yeah, it's not going to lower your testosterone levels either. Next question, is there any point combining Tongkat Ali and Tergesterone or better to just take one? So I think Tongkat Ali probably has testosterone boosting effects in people with lower or moderate testosterone. If your testosterone is already high, then you probably don't see, like additional testosterone boost from that because your testosterone is already pretty high. With Terkesterone, the studies are also a bit conflicting or confusing. On one hand, you have a lot of people online saying that it works great. I have used Torkesterone myself, and I do notice that I'm stronger with it. And, it helps with lifting weights, especially strength based and maybe some muscle growth as well. But at least based on the studies, it shouldn't work. But my own personal experience says it does, and other people online say so as well. So I guess you have to, like, you know, just try it out yourself and see if it works. Maybe it's placebo. Who knows? I wouldn't like spend a lot of money on testosterone or tongkat ali as well, unless you have some lower testosterone and you're trying to like increase it naturally without taking any TRT or something like that. I have taken Tongkat Ali as well. I haven't noticed any difference from that. So, yeah, I'm not taking Tongkat Ali regularly, and, I'm I'm taking Tergesterone every once in a while. Should you combine it I mean, they work differently. Tongkat Ali doesn't necessarily increase, like, muscle strength unless it actually increases your testosterone, then you might see an increase in your strength as well. But they work differently. Like, turkesterone isn't a testosterone booster and Tongalati isn't like a isn't, ecdystero ecdysterone. It's not going to enhance muscle growth necessarily, you know. You could combine them, but at the same time they're both pretty expensive and the evidence about them is also not that, you know, clear. So you know, so you have I guess you have to try it out if you want to and see how it affects you. Next question, do glasses or contact lenses allow good UV rays to get into my eyes or do they block them? So, you do want to get natural sunlight into your eyes. You don't want to look into the sun because that's going to burn your eyes and cause cataracts. So you do want to be outside and have the blue sky reflect the sunlight into your eyes. So you never looked direct never looked directly into the sun or do eye gazing or sun gazing or something like that. But just be outside when the sun is out, that's going to be very beneficial for your eyes. And it can help with the circadian rhythm alignment, it can help with mood, energy production, sleep quality, antioxidant defense, and many other things. So, glasses and contact lenses, unfortunately, you're gonna get mostly the blue light from there. So having contact lenses and walking outside, it does filter out the red and amber light, amber wavelengths of light from the sun, so you're getting mostly the blue light. So that can help with like wakefulness and dopamine and things like that, but getting blue light in isolation is not that healthy because you're getting this very stimulatory blue light that in excess can pretty much increase oxidative stress and cause mitochondrial damage. So like for example, this this blue ring light here, I'm getting only blue light into my eyes and that technically causes oxidative stress to the mitochondria in my eyes and damages my skin and causes wrinkles and those kind of things, you know. I'm doing it only for thirty minutes or so, so it doesn't really matter that much. But, yeah. If you were to wear contact lenses, you're getting this pretty much the same effect or very similar effect because you're filtering out the red wavelengths of light, through through the glass. So ideally, you wanna not wear glasses. I mean, with glasses, you know, the sunlight is gonna come through the sides, so it just reflects everywhere and just goes through it anyway. But with contact lenses, unfortunately, I do think that it does filter out the red light. So ideally, you wanna remove the contact lenses at least for, you know, at least ten to fifteen minutes in the morning. And, maybe in the evening, if the sun is setting and you're getting this red light from the sunset, which is very healthy for your circadian rhythm and melatonin production and those kind of things. So in that scenario, you also wanna kinda remove maybe the contact lenses and let the natural red light into your eyeballs, which is actually very healthy. Next question, how do I lower cortisol? So this is an interesting question. So people associate cortisol with stress and that's bad. Cortisol as a hormone is essential. It's actually very healthy, especially in the morning after you wake up. So you wanna have a pretty big rise or a spike, if you will, in cortisol after waking up because it means that your circadian rhythms are working properly. It also increases your energy, your wakefulness, your fat burning, and synchronizes your circadian clock system. If you don't get the cortisol spike in the morning, then you're actually gonna be very tired and, you know, you're gonna want to have a cup of coffee to get this artificial spike in cortisol. So having the spike in cortisol in the morning is one of the healthiest things for your circadian rhythm and energy energy levels. The problem is that if you have too much cortisol, either measured in your blood work or if you're just having too much cortisol at the wrong time of the day, then that can cause issues. So for example, cortisol in the evening, that's not that is not a good thing for sleep because you're gonna be wired up and anxious and not able to fall asleep. And likewise, maybe throughout the day if you're having too much caffeine, or if you're too stressed out from work, or you're in a traffic jam, or a car accident, whatever, then yeah, your cortisol levels are gonna also rise. One key way to like, let's say, minimize the misalignment of your cortisol production, so making sure that you don't have too much cortisol in the evening is to make sure that you synchronize your circadian rhythms properly. So that means getting up in the morning, getting exposed to natural sunlight, maybe moving around, doing a cold shower, everything to get a good spike in your cortisol levels, to have like a, you know, starting point for your circadian rhythms. Anchor your circadian rhythms in the morning with the circadian and aligning activities like sunlight movement, cold exposure, as even like caffeine in the morning can also help to realign your circadian rhythms and realign the cortisol pattern. So if you're changing time zones, having caffeine in the morning time of the new time zone helps your body to readjust to the new time zone better. So caffeine is actually a very useful tool for realigning the circadian rhythms. And in the evening, you also want to kind of do the opposite or, you know, wind down, block the blue light, maybe take melatonin if you're in a new time zone, and that higher melatonin production then warrants higher cortisol production in the morning, by realigning your circadian rhythms. So on both ends, morning high cortisol, evening, high melatonin, and low cortisol is that's that's the natural circadian rhythm. Other activities to actually lower cortisol, you know, directly during the day can be, you know, meditation has been consistently shown to do that, different breathing exercises, nature bathing, walking in nature, that has been shown to lower cortisol and stress hormones and have like beneficial effects on the immune system even in a very short time. Just going for a walk in nature, in a park, or in the forest, very powerful way to lower cortisol and lower stress meditation like I said. And maybe from some supplements then, you know, sometimes you can be stressed out and you can have high cortisol because you're fasting too much or exercising too much or being in a calorie deficit too much or being on a low carb diet too much. So just eating more or eating something that, you know, helps to lower the cortisol, like protein and carbohydrates, are actually very powerful ways to lower cortisol as well. So like, if you eat carbs in the evening, you're gonna get this nice small crush, you're gonna increase serotonin, makes you more relaxed, that serotonin converts into melatonin and helps you to fall asleep and helps you to be relaxed. So it's the serotonin from the carbohydrates is very very easy and very powerful to lower cortisol and help with sleep as well. And lastly, maybe some supplements like ashwagandha has been shown to lower cortisol as well, but, it might have some, like, other negative side effects like excess herbs, so different kinds of adaptogens, the ones that may help to cope with stress in some ways, the adaptogens. They can also be harmful for your liver in high amounts. So these herbal supplements, I wouldn't take them, in large doses on a regular basis because, yeah, they have been shown to cause some liver damage as well. Alright. That's it for this q and a. If you want to ask me a question, then make sure you follow me on Instagram at simlund. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is sim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.