There are hundreds of different supplements out there and many of them say that they improve your health and make you live longer. But most of those supplements actually have no track record of being beneficial for longevity or increasing your life expectancy. So in this video, I'm gonna talk about the the top five longevity supplements that actually work. Do it. So number one is gonna be creatine monohydrate. You might be surprised why is this sports supplement in this list. Well, creatine, yeah, it has a long track record of being most effective at improving muscle strength, muscle speed, muscle power, and muscle mass, but it also has many longevity benefits such as it improves cognition, it helps with brain aging, it helps with methylation, and is just also very beneficial for reducing the demand for sleep. So creatine as a molecule is almost vital for life because it's used to recycle ATP and produce energy. So without energy, your everything else begins to fall apart. You're gonna start aging faster and part of the reason why you age has to do with the, you know, decrease in energy production. Creatine also is very safe, it has little to no negative side effects and it may cause some adverse side effects if you take, like, large doses. But doses of twenty grams a day hasn't been found to have any real negative side effects on kidney function or anything else. So I do think that creatine is something that pretty much every person could take and even teenagers, it has been found to be safe for teenagers as well. You don't need to take a lot of creatine, Just taking two to three grams already provides you with the adequate amount of creatine on a daily basis that is used for energy production and in so doing you will have an increase in your muscle strength, which obviously is very important for longevity to have muscle strength and adequate amounts of muscle mass, but it also helps to reduce your brain's, energy demands or reduces the brain's demand for sleep. Get more sleep out of sleeping less. And most people, you know, obviously, they experience some aspects of sleep deprivation or irregular sleeping patterns. And, using some creatine, you can buffer against that and avoid some of the negative side effects of sleep loss. I don't sleep. I wait. Number two is gonna be collagen. So this is another supplement that, many people think that is a hoax or it doesn't work but there are at least a dozen of different kinds of human clinical trials showing that supplementing collagen peptides, hydrolyzed collagen peptides improves skin wrinkles, improves skin thickness and reduces markers of skin aging. So collagen is one of the most abundant proteins in your body and most of the skin is made of collagen and it pretty much helps to slow down skin aging. What we see with aging is a significant decrease in skin collagen content and you lose about 1% of your skin collagen per year after the age of 20. So pretty much everyone already starting from their 20s would benefit from taking some collagen and the best form of that is hydrolyzed collagen peptides. The dosage can vary, depends on how much, you know, collagen you actually get from diet but anything from five to fifteen grams is a good amount. Number three is gonna be glycine, one of my favorite amino acids. And, yes, you do get some glycine from collagen but only one third of collagen is glycine and that's not nearly enough of how much you actually would need. So on a daily basis to actually boost that collagen turnover, we would need significantly more, glycine than we actually get and just getting it from the collagen supplement itself isn't enough. You might need even up to twelve, twenty, even like thirty six grams of glycine per day. But for most people, the adequate dose for supporting collagen turnover is gonna be around ten to maybe twenty gs of glycine per day. Glycine also has many other benefits. It actually helps with creatine synthesis which we talked about already but it also helps with the synthesis of glutathione. So one of the main amino acids in producing glutathione is glycine. So with age, you see an increase in oxidative stress and counteracting the inflammation or inflammation that occurs with aging, you need some antioxidant events. And glutathione is the body's master antioxidant, the most powerful one. And with adequate amounts of glulathione you will be able to like mitigate some of the decline in functions that occurs with aging and also to counteract some of the other age related conditions like high blood sugar, high lipids, you know, hypertension, etc. Number four is gonna be N acetylcysteine or NAC. So NAC is another amino acid that is needed for boosting gluethan or producing gluethan and combining glycine with NAC or the GLINAC, as it's called, has been found to actually extend lifespan in mice by up to 28 or 26%. So it is a pretty significant increase for mice at least. And, most of the results have to do with the, increase in glutathione levels and just the increased antioxidant defense that occurs. NAC also has some other benefits on immunity but, the biggest reason why I think it's worthwhile to take it is to combine it together with glycine and get this, you know, double combo on the gliothan production. And last, number five is gonna be niacin or vitamin b3. So niacin, historically, it has been used as a cardiovascular disease supplement that actually improves survival and helps to lower cholesterol levels in cardiovascular disease. So it's, very beneficial for lowering lipids and heart disease, cardiovascular disease is one of the most, you know, top killers in modern society. Most people, you know, at least one out of four people will die to cardiovascular disease. And lowering the lipids, lowering cholesterol levels and in just improving the lipid profile with niacin, I think is something that you know even regular people could use as a preventive measure. Taking Narsin in large doses all the time like in the long term may induce some aspects of insulin resistance or it reduces your insulin sensitivity slightly but, in moderate amounts like maybe even like fifty milligrams of niacin a day has really no negative side effects and it does have a positive effect on the lipids and the cholesterol. Now the insulin resistance also comes usually from the flush version of of niacin and, if you have ever taken niacin then it makes you itch a little bit, makes your skin red and such, but that comes from the flush version of niacin which is niacin. If you take the non flush version which is niacinamide then you can avoid some of the, insulin resistance aspects or the potential induction of insulin resistance and you also avoid the flush. So I personally like the niacinamide version because niacinamide also feeds into the recycling of NAD which is another critical energy molecule in the body that goes down with age. And to recycle NAD then you need niacinamide which is one of the molecules that feeds into the NAD recycling pathway. So there you have it. These are the top five longevity supplements that actually work. Check out my other video about some other longevity supplements worthwhile taking. But do you want to slow down aging and live longer? If yes, then I am looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@simlant.com, and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is sim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.