Ever since childhood, you've been probably told to drink a lot of milk, have a glass of milk with every meal, and consume all the other dairy products to make your bones stronger. But in the longevity community, dairy is looked upon as something that may age you faster and shorten your lifespan. Well, in this video, I'm gonna look at whether or not consuming dairy, etcetera, is aging or shortens your lifespan. Do it. So I guess a good place to start with is why do people think that, drinking milk can shorten your lifespan, and the reason has to do with incident like growth factor one or IGF one. So insulin like growth factor one is a growth pathway inside a body that connects to the mTOR complex. And what IGF one essentially does is tell your body to grow. And, obviously, growing is very important when you are a child, so that's why they tell you to consume plenty of milk when you are young. But, excess growth is obviously carcinogenic. And excess growth, excess IGF-one levels actually are associated with, different kinds of cancers and shortened mortality or shortened lifespans in different kinds of animal species as well. And this 2001 study did look at the effects of milk consumption on IGF-one levels and intake of dairy products was associated with a modest increase in circulating IGF-one levels. But intake of low fat milk was associated with lower risk of colorectal cancer, particularly among individuals with high IGF-one, IGF-BP-three. So at least based on this study, the, dairy consumption does increase your IGF one levels slightly, but the low fat milk intake is actually associated with reduced colorectal cancer. But when it comes to overall mortality risk, then there appears to be a u shaped curve between the association of, IGF-one levels and mortality. So both high and low IGF-one concentrations are associated with increased mortality in the general population. And, the reason has to do with the fact that too low IGO-one levels may increase the risk of frailty, osteoporosis, sarcopenia, and just, you know, dying to a hip fracture or something like that. Whereas, yeah, high IGO-one levels, they do or they will they they make promote development of cancers. And if you already have cancer, then, yeah, like, high IGF-one levels will probably make it worse. But when it comes to, you know, what's the optimal amount, then, yeah, some somewhere in the middle, if you have normal IGF-one levels, then you probably have nothing to worry about in terms of cancer caused by IGF-one. But if you have, like, low IGF-one levels, then, yeah, you might be increasing your risk of, let's say, sarcopenia or frailty, but that is also something you have to take with a grain of salt. You know, one of the biggest risk factors of getting frailty and sarcopenia is not exercising. So if you exercise, you have good protein intake and your bone density is generally okay, then I think that lower IGF-one levels are actually pro longevity in that scenario. If you have low IGF-one levels and you also are frail and you also have sarcopenia and you have low muscle tone, then in that scenario, yeah, like the low IGF-one levels probably would be quite harmful. But if you have too high IGF-one levels, even if you have a lot of muscles, so like bodybuilders usually inject even IGF-one levels. So in those cases, they are, you know, I think they are promoting cancer if they have too high IGF-one levels and they also have, you know, obviously, too much muscle. So associated with high IGF-one levels is true in my opinion. So you don't wanna have, obviously, excess IGF-one level. You son of a And another problem with the IGF-one is, acne. So, apparently acne is a lot caused by also the mTOR expression, which is connected to IGF-one. So, yeah, many people who get acne usually have, like, some form of, like a dairy allergy, and or sensitivity and that's why they develop acne in the first place. So another sign, if you have acne, then that's obviously partly caused by a lot of maybe dairy but can also be some other allergens. But let's continue with looking at the association between dairy consumption and risk of overall mortality. Is there any risk? And this 2019 study found that these data from large cohorts do not support an inverse association between high amount of total dairy consumption and risk of mortality. Slightly higher cancer mortality was nonsignificantly associated with dairy consumption but warrants further investigation. So yeah, in this study they did find a slightly increased risk of, cancer mortality from the higher dairy consumption but it was a non significant so it's not, that powerful of an effect and there's obviously other things that other factors involved. Next study, 2017, dairy food intake and all cause cardiovascular disease and cancer mortality. We noted eleven percent lower all cause mortality and sixteen percent lower cardiovascular disease mortality risk with high yogurt intake. So yogurt consumption was actually associated with, yeah, eleven percent lower risk of all cause mortality and sixteen percent lower cardiovascular disease mortality, which is pretty, significant. Cheese intake was associated with sixteen percent lower all cause mortality and twenty six percent lower cardiovascular disease mortality risk. So that is very interesting. It's even powerful more powerful than yogurt. If I were to speculate why this is so, then cheese obviously has a lot of vitamin k two, which is very important for preventing atherosclerosis and improving heart health. Higher intake of high fat dairy food and milk wasn't associated with all cause or cardiovascular disease mortality, so there was no association there. Neither intake of individual dairy products nor intake of total dairy products was significantly associated with overall cancer mortality. Another 2016 study, dairy products intake and cancer mortality risk, a meta analysis of 11 population based cohort studies which involves almost 800,000 individuals and they conclude that, total dairy products intake have no significant impact on increased all cancer mortality risk, while low total daily dairy intake even reduced relative risk based on the nonlinear model. However, whole milk intake in men contributed to elevated prostate cancer mortality risk significantly. So another study finding that, there is some association between dairy consumption and cancer, especially prostate cancer in this study, and the reason has to do with the IGRA one. But we have another Lancet study as well that involved a 133,000 people, and they found that the dairy consumption was linked to lower rates of cardiovascular disease and mortality. So as a whole, there is some link between dairy consumption and increased risk of cancer, but that link isn't validated by all the studies. And, there are some actual other studies showing that there is no association between increased cancer and, there is actually some association between dairy consumption with at least yogurt and cheese with reduced all cause mortality risk and cardiovascular disease mortality risk. So like the u curve study showed, both low and high IGF-one levels are associated with increased mortality. And it might be that if you are consuming yet too much dairy or you're also becoming insulin resistant, you're consuming the dairy with a diet, like a western style diet, that also raises your IGF-one levels that has too many refined carbohydrates and added oils and added sugars, then that's gonna raise your IGF-one levels as well. But if you have too low IGF-one levels, then that can also be somewhat of a risk factor. And in that case, consuming the dairy, you know, pushes you into, like, the normal range with the IGF-one levels, and that pretty much increases your bone density and increases muscle mass, which, might reduce the mortality risk on that side. Personally, what I like to have is to have low IGF-one levels around a 100 or something like that and still consume some dairy and make sure that you also do, like, the other beneficial activities for bone density and muscle tone, like resistance training and a higher protein intake. But let's continue with some of the other benefits of dairy consumption that apparently may also be very pro longevity. And, yeah, dairy consumption is associated generally with lower body weights. The specific reason for that appears to be calcium. So calcium intake is associated with weight loss and fat loss, even like central adiposity loss. And, when you compare calcium foods like spinach and kale with dairy foods, then the dairy foods generally do a bit better in terms of the weight loss. Increasing dietary calcium significantly augmented weight and fat loss secondary to calorie restriction and increased the percentage of fat lost from the trunk region, whereas dairy products exerted a substantially greater effect. And the effect on weight loss is even superior with isocaloric diets. Substitution of calcium rich foods in isocaloric diets reduced adiposity and improved metabolic profiles in obese African Americans without energy restriction or weight loss, and augmented weight and fat loss secondary to energy restriction. So, obviously, you need to be in a calorie deficit to lose weight, but if you eat the same amount of calories from a high calcium diet or a high dairy diet versus a low calcium diet and a low dairy diet, then the high dairy diet generally will lead to somewhat greater weight loss because of the calcium and dairy. They can bind to some of the fats and you excrete more fat from the food. So you absorb less calories. So you're still in a calorie deficit. But even if you eat the same amount of calories, the diet or the meal that has more calcium and dairy, that's gonna lead to somewhat of a greater calorie deficit. So calcium pretty much binds to, fat and you excrete more of it through the feces. Calcium also increases fat oxidation and pretty much promotes fecal fat excretion. So, yeah, you absorb less calories from the fat that you eat and you also burn more calories from fat oxidation. 48% body fat Another reason why dairy consumption may be beneficial for longevity is that, it also improves insulin resistance and improves insulin sensitivity. So dairy consumption is associated with reduced risk of diabetes and, the reason has to do with the fact that the dairy, because it, you know, is connected to IGF-one levels, it also increases insulin secretion. So it makes your body able to pretty much clear the glucose from the bloodstream much more easily. So if you consume a food that has dairy, then you release slightly more insulin from the insulinogenic effects of dairy through the IGF-one and, that also lowers your blood sugar levels. And that is shown by many other studies as well. Consumption of low fat dairy foods for six months improves insulin resistance without adversity affecting lipids or body weight in healthy adults. Study results suggest that high dairy consumption, four servings a day, may improve insulin resistance without negatively impacting body weight or lipid status under free living conditions. So that is quite crucial, that free living condition part, because, you know, you can do many things to people if they were in a, like, a laboratory. You can control all the calorie intake. But in the free living world, you know, people are gonna do what people are gonna do. Like, they may roll off they may fall off the wagon with a diet. They may just overeat other foods, etcetera. So if you can find a diet that enables people to achieve a calorie deficit, on, like, autopilot, then that's something much more significant. Dairy consumption and risk of type two diabetes in men. During twelve years of follow-up, dairy intake was associated with a modestly lower risk of type two diabetes. Each serving per day increase in total dairy intake was associated with a nine percent lower risk for type two diabetes. Another study, a prospective study on dairy intake and the risk of type two diabetes in women, each serving per day increase in dairy intake was associated with a four percent lower risk of, type two diabetes among these women. And dairy can also improve the antioxidant status of your body. So, pretty much it helps to boost glutathione, which is the body's master antioxidant. And, yeah, you do need glutathione for pretty much counteracting aging. And during incident resistance and diabetes, your body has glutathione deficiency and it also pretty much causes more, you know, oxidative stress and damage to your body if you don't have that antioxidant status. Can I have that Milky Way? So in conclusion, there is no direct association between high dairy consumption and increased mortality risk. There is some increased risk of, cancers, especially prostate cancer with high consumption of dairy in some individuals, but, that association is mostly caused by the higher levels of IGF-one that the dairy may rise or raise. So, you know, it all depends on the person's IGF-one levels. If you do have high IGF-one levels as a baseline then I personally would be more careful with how much dairy are you consuming. But most of the time that the reason why the IGF-one levels are high has to do with like the kind of Western diet. Carbohydrates and other meat products as well can raise your IGF-one levels. So it's not just that the dairy is the cause, it's just that if you're eating, like, a standard Western diet, then, your chances are you're just stimulating IGF-one too much with the high consumption of carbohydrates and and eating several times all the time. On the other hand, dairy consumption is associated with reduced body weight, more muscle mass generally as well, and, lower risk of diabetes and insulin resistance. So all all in all, if your IGF-one levels are normal, they're fine, then you don't have to really worry about dairy accelerating your aging. It's only a problem if your, IGF-one levels are already high or in the borderline high. Ideally, you wouldn't want to have, like, your IGF-one levels above 200. I think that's, in my opinion, that's not the best place to be in terms of longevity. For longevity purposes, you want to have like your IGF-one levels between a hundred and two hundred but not above that. If you do want to live longer and slow down aging then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@simlun.com, and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is sim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.