Welcome back to the channel. My name is Seem Lund, and today we're doing another Instagram q and a. If you want to ask me a question, then make sure you follow me on Instagram at Seem Lund. Do it. So the first question is, can cooking in multicooker, electro grill, steam cooker, etcetera, make food unhealthy? So, you know, I have made some videos about the concept of advanced glycation in products and, over frying your food. It generally does produce, let's say, these unhealthy compounds into the food, especially if you're using a lot of oil and, even, like, carbohydrates. They can develop or produce or, you know, create these, compounds like acrylamide as well that is usually created at high temperature cooking, roasting, etcetera. So, you know, fries, deep fried chicken, bacon, and even, like, coffee beans can have, like, this acrylamide. And, obviously, if it's, like, fat or protein, then it's gonna have these advanced glycation end products or advanced lipid end products. So, yeah, pretty much all food oxidizes or develops this glycation, to a certain extent, which, in large quantities apparently is harmful to your health and it may be increasing the risk of diabetes. It certainly, like, accelerates skin aging, advanced glycation end products because the AGEs, they damage your collagen much more. It's it's the, like, the number one thing that damages your collagen tissue which is the advanced glycation end products and thus, you know, speed up the development of wrinkles and things like that. Should you be worried about that, you know, of course it's good to be aware of, that and not necessarily, you know, you don't wanna be just eating only over fried food. You don't wanna be necessarily or unnecessarily cook your food at very high temperatures and definitely don't deep deep fry your food. I mean, there's no, like, health benefits to to deep frying your food. When it comes to, like, frying on a pan, then, you know, yeah. Try to keep the temperatures moderate. Don't char your meat because the charred meat, these, you know, dark spots and, grilling barbecue, they create these heterocyclic amines which are carcinogenic as well. So definitely, you know, you I I don't think that, there's no, like, health or there's no, you know, rationale or there's no, like, way to explain yourself out of it. So many people say that, you know, these heterocyclic amines, the dark charred meat, isn't a problem but they also eat a lot of meat so it's kind of a bias towards them. And at the same time, people who eat a lot of, let's say, potatoes, they, you know, fries and over fried potatoes then, they create a lot of acrylamide. So it's on all all the foods and generally create these unhealthy compounds. Again, like, in moderation, it's fine. It's not gonna be a problem. Your body has, antioxidant defense systems. Your body has glutathione. Your body has ways to counteract AGEs, acrylamide, and the heterocyclic amines. It's just that if it's like your defense systems become overwhelmed then, yeah, it will, you know, start to cause issues at that point. And the amount of, you know, acrylamide or AGEs and and, these heterocyclic amines is very small compared to the threshold at which they become dangerous. So if you fry your steak, it's not gonna have, like, enough of these heterocyclic amines to be problematic. And likewise, if you eat a meal that has, you know, french fries, it's not gonna be enough to actually have any actual side effects on your health. It's just that if you do it, you know, three times a day with all your meals, then over the course of years and decades, then you probably will experience some faster aging and some, you know, faster development of these hallmarks of aging and age related diseases. So, you know, moderation is key. Don't, like, panic over it. It's fine to eat fried food every once in a while. Maybe like, you know, it's fine to cook them even like once a day in high temperatures but don't necessarily do it for every meal. And, if you can, like, minimize the high temperature cooking then do it. Like, if you can steam your food, like, boiling is generally safer. Boiling doesn't create these, compounds. Yeah. Like, boiled potatoes aren't gonna have acrylamide and boiled meat or boiled chicken isn't gonna have the heterocyclic amines either, and it's not gonna have advanced location end products either. So, yeah. I mean, boiled meat is not the tastiest. The the reason why people like this fried food and crispiness is because it's tastier, but it's certainly not as healthy as something that is steamed or boiled. And, yeah. If you can choose then, yeah, it's kind of better to kind of boil it and steam it or just cook at a like a lower temperature. Slow cooked meat is great, like you put it into this crackpot or crockpot. Sorry. You put it into the pot and in the oven for many hours, that's generally pretty safe and healthy. There are also some supplements that you can take to counteract these, you know, harmful compounds. So when it comes to AGEs, then just make sure that you, you know, reduce the glycemic load of the meal, which means that you, include things like protein, fiber that lower the glycemic response of the meal. Because every time you, like, consume something that raises your blood sugar too high then, that also creates advanced plication end product inside your tissues. You're gonna glycate your own body protein so it doesn't necessarily have to be, like, the protein from your food. And you can actually reduce AGE formation with glycine, which is amazing. Like, glycine inhibits AGE and the receptor of AGE is rage so and it also lowers blood sugar levels so it's kind of the perfect supplement for preventing the AGE formation. When it comes to the, like, lipid oxidation, then you can take vitamin e, you can take or you can just eat polyphenols and fibers and, the same applies to the heterocyclic amines in meat and protein. If you barbecue something then make sure, yeah, you have to, like, include some polyphenol rich fiber and vegetables there to bind to the heterocyclic amines and, also, like, you know, reduce the formation of advanced glycation in products. Coffee is also a good, let's say, drink or beverage to do that. Teas, herbal teas can also, you know, mitigate some of that response. And with the AGEs, you can include some other supplements like spirulina, the same for heterocyclic amines. And carnosine is actually one of the supplements that also is known to reduce AGE formation but, you know, carnosine isn't that well absorbed. So to create carnosine, you you can consume beta alanine, which is another supplement that you can include to help to produce carnosine inside the body. If you want to truly know the state of your health and disease risk, then check out InsideTracker. InsideTracker is an at home biomarker service that you can use to test up to 43 different biomarkers like lipids, liver enzymes, inflammation, sex hormones, and much more. The process is simple. You order the test kit to your home, use the little fingerprint device to give your blood, send it back, and you get results to your online dashboard or app. You can get a 25% discount off all their tests if you head over to seamlund.com/insidetracker, that's in one word, And you can use the code simlund at checkout. That's simlund.com/insighttracker, and the code is simlund. Next question, it's healthy to sleep with relaxing music, question mark. So I guess, the question is, is it healthy to sleep with music and listening to some sort of relaxing music sounds or whatever binaural beats etcetera? I mean, yeah. If it helps you to fall asleep then why not? I mean, in nature, naturally people would still hear like either night owls or they would hear like some, you know, even insects or birds whatever other animals making noises inside the forest or the savanna. So yeah, like it's very unnatural to sleep in complete silence in some ways but, there is some requirement for complete silence as well. So this semi sensory deprivation because that during the silence your body actually or because if there is a lot of noise around you then your brain is always kind of detecting and, you know, scanning the environment and scanning the sounds if something is dangerous and it's gonna wake you up. So it's better for the nervous system and for your brain to be, you know, as in as much silence as possible when you'd be sleeping at least for some part of the night. And I think that actually is also the one of the signals for your body to start to facilitate memory retention and mirror memory. So, yeah. If you're always listening to something or you're always sleeping in some sound, then it might not be as optimal for the brain function and recovery as well. So if you can, then, you know, using earplugs is a great just put put them in like these, you know, soft earplugs. And, that that should also, you know, enable you to deprive your, like, deprive your body from the sensory input of the sound, especially if you're in a, like, environment that may have some noises. Like, if you're in a city, then the earplugs are amazing because it it's kinda prevents you from being woken up by the environment. But if you don't like the earplugs, then using some music can also be actually good as a buffer. Like, if you have your own, let's say, music, like, relaxing music, some binaural beats or something playing in your bedroom, then that kinda creates a shield, like a sound barrier against the outside noise. So, yeah. It's kind of it's kind of yeah. Like, again, you have to figure out what works for you. If you can, then it's better to sleep in silence. But, if you can't or if it helps you to fall asleep better, then why not use it a little bit? Next question, what happens to your body if you do water fasting for three days? Is it healthy? So with three days of fasting, water fasting only, I mean, you're gonna lose quite a lot of weight. So three day fast, that's gonna create around like a 6,000 calorie deficit for the average person and, that equals to at least, like, almost two pounds of weight lost. I mean, you do lose a lot of water during that time as well and you lose you lose fat in that time period, but you may also lose, like, a bit of muscle tissue within the three days. And, that's something that you have to, you know, think, is it worth it for you? I wouldn't recommend doing this excellent fasting for the elderly people because, you know, at that age, it's much more valuable to maintain their muscle tissue as much as possible. And you don't really, you know, gain that significant health benefits from a three day fast that you wouldn't get from a forty eight hour fast or just from a severe calorie restriction for a longer period of time. So I do think that a three day fast is certainly, like, healthy for the for a healthy person. You're already in relatively good health, or if you're overweight, then you don't really have any negative side effects to a three day fast. It's gonna kind of reset the system or you're gonna lose a bit bit of weight. You'll lower your blood sugar levels actually and one of the recent studies that I made a video about showed that, you know, a twenty four hour fast over the course of several months, over the course of six months, three day three times a week was superior to just calorie restriction, over the course of an entire week over the course after six months. So, yeah, like, adding some fasting periods, extended fasting periods, apparently, might have some kind of, additional health benefits for at least blood sugar. It's it doesn't provide extra fat loss benefits, but some people like to do a three year fast to kick start fat loss or just to, like, you know, help with adherence to a weight loss protocol or something like that because it's kinda easy to do a three day fast if you're used to it. But the problem is that, you know, sometimes people overeat and binge after breaking the fast so you have to figure out, like, yeah, which one which way works for you. Like, don't feel the obligation to do a three day fast. Like, you know, there's a lot of health and longevity people say that you need to do a three day fast to live longer, but that's not really true. You know, most of the longest living people in history, they've never done three day fasts, pretty much. They definitely eat a lower calorie diet. They may incorporate time restricted eating, but they don't do, like, these extended fasting periods. And, yeah, like, the extended fasting period can be, yeah, like an additional thing to help insulin resistance and help with weight loss plateaus, primarily. But again, it also has, like, some downside in terms of muscle tissue loss, and you can also lower your metabolic rate and lower your thyroid function. So it's certainly something that you have to maybe consult, like, a professional about, and, I wouldn't do it, you know, just just jumping into it. It's kind of yeah. Like, you need to be aware of the kind of the potential downside, if that makes sense. Next question, do you have a GDA protocol? So I don't know what the GDA means. I think it might mean glucose disposal agent protocol, if I'm if I'm correct. So is what is the do I have a protocol for helping to lower blood sugar levels, helping with postprandial rise in glucose? Yes. Yes. I do. So, you know, there are some very fundamental things that everyone should, do to, kind of help with their digestion as well as the blood sugar response to the meals. So first of all, I think doing some aspects of time restricted eating is quite important and sticking to the circadian rhythms will already set the foundation to having proper insulin function and proper glucose response to any meal. So don't eat at night is pretty much the main message. Don't eat too close to bedtime and don't eat large amounts of carbohydrates, like, before bed and after sunset because your body's glucose tolerance decreases quite drastically after the afternoon. And, yeah, the glucose tolerance is the highest in the earlier part of the day and it starts to drop maybe after three or 4PM, something like that. You can see the carbohydrates obviously in the evening for dinner, but, yeah, just make sure that you can, like, you you can, like, counteract some of that, decrease in the insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance by just exercising before eating the carbohydrates. So I always like to exercise before I eat, especially at the dinner so that, my muscles would pretty much soak up the calories as well as the carbohydrates. So the more muscle you have, the more insulin sensitive you are and the higher your glucose tolerance is. And at the same time, if you exercise before eating, then it pretty much opens up the muscle cells, activates GLUT4 receptors that shuttle the glucose into the muscle cells very easily and you don't even need insulin at that point because GLUT4 shuttles, glucose into muscle cells independent of insulin. So that's that's why even, like, diabetics, if they exercise, they can override or they can, you know, make up for their insulin resistance if they exercise. So that's why exercise is the most powerful, like, you know, activity for improving insulin sensitivity and, overcoming aspects of insulin resistance and the high blood sugar response. So before you eat, exercise, and, ideally, resistance training is the most powerful for the, glucose tolerance, but, even, cardio will definitely have some benefits for that. And if you don't have time to exercise or if you have already exercised, let's say, the day before, then just walking is also just a quick thing to do. Walk for, you know, at least ten to fifteen minutes and then eat. And, that small physical activity already increases your glucose tolerance quite a lot. Then, you can also take, like, in a meal, obviously, apple cider vinegar is an additional, let's say, condiment that you can add to your meal that will lower the blood sugar response. And you can even lower the blood sugar response by 55%. So, yeah, like, just one to two tablespoons of apple cider vinegar as, like, either a salad dressing or mixed in water. Just, make sure you add that to the carbohydrate meal, especially. You can add olive oil to the vegetables. That also lowers the blood sugar response. In some studies, they find that the nuts and almonds and walnuts and those things also do it so because it's in your fat and stuff. But you can still if you eat, like, protein and fiber, then you don't really have to add any fats. Maybe like olive oil is good enough. And, then during the meal, you know, eat slowly. Don't over gorge yourself and, stop at when you're, like, 80% full. And, the first food that you should eat, like, it should be still, like, protein and fiber because then your body is digesting the protein and fiber already before you eat the carbohydrates. So the glycemic response to the carbohydrates will be, lower from the protein. After the meal, you can, you know, just go for a walk. Again, a short walk, ten to fifteen minute walk, again, can drop the blood sugar response quite significantly. And it's the blood sugar returns to normal much faster compared to sitting on a couch. So, like, eating a bunch of carbs and then sitting on a couch and watching TV is kind of the worst thing, to do for your glucose tolerance and glucose glucose levels. So go for a short walk and, you know, drinking tea is also something that lowers the glycemic response. So, chamomile tea is something I like to do after my meals and, yeah, it improves digestion as well and it just lowers the blood sugar. There are specific supplements that you obviously can also take like chromium, berberine, cinnamon is a, you know, as a herb, as a as a, like, a spice on the food you can use. So, yeah, I mean, there's a whole lot of things people can add to the food, to lower their glucose response. And, it's certainly much healthier to try to keep some of the glucose controlled. You know, it's not unhealthy for your glucose to rise after eating. It's kind of normal for your glucose to rise after you eat carbohydrates. It's just that if it stays elevated for very long, then it's a sign of insulin resistance that your body isn't producing enough insulin or the cells are just resistant to the insulin's effects. So, yeah. Going up, going down is healthy, but if if it goes up and stays elevated for many hours, then that's something that you, you know, kind of need to work on a little bit. And actually, my book with doctor James DiNicolantonio, the new book that's coming out, The Blood Sugar Fix, I don't think it's gonna be out at the time of the release of this video, but it's gonna be out in April. So, yeah, like, pretty shortly. So make sure you stay tuned for that. It's, the Blood Sugar Fix on Amazon. Next question. Is there any problem with eating around 200 grams of sheep or goat Greek yogurt every day? No. I mean, if you are not dairy intolerant, you're not lactose intolerant, then no. There's no, like, negative health effects. These Greek yogurt and, yeah, Greek yogurt, the cottage cheese, they're pretty high. In protein, they're actually very one of the healthiest dairy products. In my opinion, they're certainly healthier than milk or, some other, like, sugared yogurts. So, yeah, I personally eat, like, some cottage cheese or some high protein yogurt quite regularly. Not every day but, yeah, almost like every other day at least 200 per per night or per day. And, yeah, in the studies, they find that the people who do eat more dairy have, more muscle issue, less fat, and, it also is, protective against diabetes because the dairy actually stimulates the GLP-one and actually increases insulin release as well, which helps to lower the blood sugar. And the dairy also binds to fats from your food. So I think it's actually very healthy to add some dairy, regardless of the diet that you follow. It's good for a high carb meal and it's good for a high fat meal, especially like carnivores. If you're a carnivore, you eat like some sort of a fatty steak, then it's very much healthier to actually eat some dairy with that, like either milk kefir or cottage cheese or something because, yeah, it's gonna bind to some of the fats, create a larger calorie deficit, and, you obviously need some calcium, which you don't get that much from meats. And when you eat carbohydrates, then the dairy is gonna help to lower the blood sugar, which is also another hack from the previous question, how to lower the glucose response. Next question, what you recommend for someone who struggles staying focused but doesn't have ADHD? Well, I mean, the average person's attention span has been decreasing or I mean, it's a kind of common saying but it's true in a lot of ways because their phones, social media, and just other distractions in our everyday life, they condition your brain to be less focused. You're always checking your phone, you're reacting to different notifications on your email, your inbox, or your smartphone. These, you know, red dots on Instagram or message Messenger, whatever, they're all just grabbing your attention and directing it to somewhere else. So if you're like, okay, I'm gonna start to read. Okay. What's that link? I have an email. Blah blah blah. You're always conditioning your brain to be all over the place. It doesn't mean that you have ADHD. It just means that you probably have rewired your brain to be unfocused and, it's just like a habit that, you created. So the easiest and you you need to realize that your brain is always rewiring itself. It has nothing to do with, like, some of innate, let's say, characteristics of your personality or your physiology or your biology or your psychology, it's Yeah. It's just a habit that you created and you can change habits. Habits take a lot of time and effort to change, but it's possible. If you were to go camping and you didn't take your smartphone with you, you would quite fast within a few days, you would reach a state of equilibrium, again, in terms of your ability to stay in the present moment and pay attention. And, yeah, it's just that the smartphone is always grabbing your attention and and just, you know, making you distracted. So the easiest way to do that is just try to control your environment, you know, turn when you're when you have the phone, by default, the notifications are set on. So you need to turn them off manually that don't show me notifications. Because if you open your smartphone, the home page, and you can see the numbers on the apps, like you have five messages makes you curious. So you want to check it out and that's a, like, a vicious negative feedback loop. Because if you go to Instagram then you start to scroll the feed. So, turn off the notifications, create certain restrictions around your social media use, like keep your phone on airplane mode when you're sleeping, keep your phone on silent and on airplane mode, ideally, you're working, for example, if you're there are different apps that you can also use to remind yourself of these things. But, yeah, the easiest and the most powerful thing is to just rewire your brain to be focused and be quite, let's say, disciplined about it. You have to you have to be disciplined in order to rewire the brain. So and that means resisting the urge. When you feel the urge to check the social media, then, and you and you give into that temptation, you give into the urge, then, it's gonna rewire your brain towards the negative. You're gonna keep reinforcing the habit of getting distracted. Whereas you resist the urge resisting the urge is where the rewiring of the brain happens. You feel the urge to check the phone or check the social media, but you resist it. You don't do it. You put it away. That's where you're strengthening the new patterns in your brain. That's where you're strengthening the new behavior behavioral patterns of, being focused. And, that's what you need to do. You need to resist the urge. There's nothing that is easy about changing the habits, but that's the only way to do it, kind of. Unless you maybe go to, like, a silent meditation retreat or or go camping without the phone, for example. Next question. Thoughts on mushrooms like reishi and cordyceps. They're one of my favorite mushrooms. Actually, the ones that I might be taking quite regularly. So reishi is, the primary, like, use of reishi that I like is that it improves sleep and, especially dreams. Every time I take Reishi, I get dreams and, very vivid dreams and very, like, interesting dreams. I remember pretty much all the dreams, when I take Reishi. So that's some that's the re only reason I take the Reishi and it does help with, like, steep quality as well. There are, like, some other studies that the reishi obviously, reishi had and all the mushrooms have, like, anti inflammatory, antioxidative, effects, and they help with even lipids and blood sugar. But, yeah, the reason I take reishi is because of the relaxation and the sleep. Cordyceps is not necessarily a mushroom, but, it's kind of the zombie, let's say, zombie, yeah. So this is still a mushroom, but it's a zombie mushroom that grows inside the insect and then kills the insect, to grow out of its body, which is kinda quite nasty. But, yeah, the cordyceps, has been found from a health benefit side, it has been found to have benefits for endurance and maybe like libido as well. So it just increases drive in a lot of ways. So I will use, cordyceps when I'm doing, like, cardio or something. I don't take cordyceps that often, but I do like to include it if I'm maybe focusing on increasing VO2 max or just training a lot endurance. Next question, what's your recommended coffee? So, I do have well, I don't it's not my coffee brand, but I am invested in the coffee brand. I'm a shareholder in this coffee brand. It's an Estonian coffee brand. It's called Not Your Average, and, they have very high quality coffees that have been tested for molds, pesticides and heavy metals, etcetera. So it's very clean coffee, no mycotoxins and organic coffee as well. It's, from South America and, it tastes amazing. We have these different kinds of blends with collagen, ashwagandha, maca, and, there's actually one coffee with melatonin as well, decaf coffee, like evening coffee, that helps with sleep. But, yeah, check check it. But, yeah, definitely, you can check it out. Not your average dot co is the company, and I think SIEM, SIEM Lund, or SIEM ten gives you a 10% discount as well. Next question, steam versus infrared versus normal sauna, primarily for heart health and longevity in general. So, when it comes to most of the saunas, they have very similar effects. If your body experiences hyperthermia, so elevation of your body temperature, that's where you start to see the health benefits. Like, it activates heat shock proteins that, regulate autophagy and have anti inflammatory benefits and improve endothelial function, improve blood flow, all those things, and, release growth hormone. So, all the saunas generally have those benefits. The difference between infrared, steam, and the traditional sauna is, there is some temperature differences and, with infrared at least, you do get the unique effect of the of the infrared wavelengths as well, which you don't get from the other sonars. And the infrared light, what it mostly does, it helps with collagen synthesis, helps with energy production, helps with melatonin synthesis as well. So, near infrared light and, I mean, far infrared as well, generally, though they have, like, this, yeah, additional benefit that you don't get from the traditional sauna. But when it comes to the traditional sauna then because the temperatures are much higher then, you get a better cardiovascular workout when you are sitting in, like, the traditional sauna, like a Finnish sauna. It's much higher in temperature and, your heart starts to race quite a lot faster because of that. So I think, you know, you can use, like, either of them. I think that you don't have, like, a micromanage, if you were you know, and ideally you wanna do both infrared and the traditional sauna. With a steam sauna, you know, yeah, it heats up, it helps to relax, like, warms up your body, etcetera. But it's generally, it doesn't get that hot to, you know, kind of facilitate the EHR protein response. And the issue with the steam sonars is also that, you know, because the steam, it can it there can be like some pathogens or bacteria circulating the air and you then you breathe it in. So I don't think that's kind of the most, at least, like, public steam saunas, they're not, like, the healthiest place to be in that side. But, yeah. I mean, still better than nothing. And, if you can choose, then I would choose the traditional sauna instead of the steam sauna. But if you can do, like, whatever you want, then I would do infrared and then the traditional sauna. Like, I would do infrared maybe two times a week, maybe two to three times a week, and the traditional sauna also two times a week. So kind of two and two. That's the kind of perfect protocol, in my opinion. And the last question, since glycine promotes autophagy, will it also inhibit mTOR and muscle protein synthesis? So the glycine does promote autophagy through sarcosine but, it actually also, actually increases mTOR. So, yeah, like glycine is some quite an interesting amino acid. Glycine increases autophagy. Glycine mimics methionine restriction, but also glycine activates mTOR and also glycine increases insulin. So, you know, part of the reason why glycine is beneficial for muscle maintenance, like glycine prevents muscle breakdown, which is great And, the part of the or the way it does is through activating mTOR. So, glycine is, you know, in a lot of ways kind of this very well well rounded kind of supplemental amino acid. It does almost everything. I and I would imagine that the body would, like, still, you know, use it based on what it needs in that moment. So, yeah, you don't have to really worry about the mTOR expression from glycine in terms of longevity because, you know, exercise also increases mTOR and exercise is one of the healthiest thing for longevity. And at the same time glycine has been formed to extend lifespan in animals, through methionine restriction and autophagy increase independent despite the fact that it, increases mTOR. So mTOR isn't the issue. Like, the way you increase mTOR kind of matters and what are the other consequent effects. But, yeah, glycine increases autologie, mimics methionine restriction, increases insulin which lowers blood sugar levels, which is great for, you know, blood sugar management and it also increases mTOR which is great for muscle preservation. So you can take glycine in a fasted state, no problems. You can take glycine with food because then it's gonna lower the blood sugar. So, yeah, I mean, that's why it's kind of my favorite diet supplement. But do you want to slow down aging? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@simlond.com and I'll send you the details. Alright. That's it for this q and a. If you want to ask me a question, then make sure to follow me on Instagram at Sim Lund. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Sim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.