Brian Johnson is the world's most qualified person. He spends nearly $2,000,000 a year trying to reverse his biological age. I've made a few videos about his routine in terms of diet and exercise, but Brian Johnson also takes many different kinds of supplements. In fact, he takes up to a 105 different pills per day. So in this video, we're gonna take a look at his supplementation routine, and I'm just gonna give my own thoughts and opinions about what he's taking. Do it. So Brian Johnson's blueprint or the protocol that he's, following is actually publicly available. It's at blueprint.brianjohnson.co. So here's the supplements. Like I said, he takes about a 105 different pills per day, which is, quite a lot. Upon waking, after waking up, he takes a Carbose two hundred milligrams, which is a prescription, let's say diabetic, drug and mostly it's, done to regulate blood sugar levels and reduce hemoglobin A1cine. And the mechanism by which a carboze works is through slowing down carbohydrate digestion. From a longevity side, of course, reducing blood sugar levels and hemoglobin a1c is quite important, but there are, like, some mouse studies as well, showing how, the carbox can actually result in increasing median, at least the males median life lifespan by twenty two percent and in females by only five percent. So there's a much significant lifespan extension effect in male mice compared to female mice. A lot of these different longevity supplements and you know interventions actually have a much more significant effect in males than in females and so this is not the only one actually. But the acarbose also has potential negative side effects and one of the main ones is actually that it can decrease muscle mass and muscle function in patients with type two diabetes. Now, of course, people with type two diabetes already are at a risk of higher sarcopenia and muscle loss and frailty but apparently based on this retrospective cross sectional study, they found that a carbo's treatment was associated with decreased muscle mass and strength. This is something that everyone has to think if it is worthwhile for them to take a carbo's. I personally am not taking a carbo's decrease in muscle mass and strength, hand grip strength, etc. And gait speed actually. All those things are one of the biggest predictors of longevity and reduced mortality in humans. If you're a diabetic, then of course it's better to manage your blood sugar and manage diabetes with prescription drugs. But if you're like someone who is Brian Johnson who doesn't have diabetes, I personally don't see a practical benefit of taking something like metformin or acarbose. And of course there's also some other less dangerous side effects. So Acarbose as well as Metformin, they can have like some gastrointestinal side effects. At least in this study they found that Acarbose led to mild or moderate intestinal symptoms in fifty percent of the patients within the first four weeks but in only thirteen point eight percent of the patients within the last four weeks. So initially there appears to be like some sort of adaptation period that initially you get some gastrointestinal symptoms. Next supplement on the list is gonna be ashwagandha six hundred milligrams. It does have a lot of these adaptogenic effects so it helps to, you know, improve stress resilience, reduce cortisol levels and there is actually a pretty solid evidence that it does help to raise testosterone levels as well. There is, however, some like a segment of people online that I've noticed who share their anecdotal experience that they experience this anhedonia or this somewhat of a serotonergic effect that it makes them a bit more dull and makes them a bit more, let's say, less in touch with their emotions. Now personally, I am I'm not taking Ashwagandha. B complex, vitamin B complex, so, if you don't know then Brian Johnson's eating, like, oh, yeah, like a 99% vegan diet. The only animal protein that he consumes is collagen peptides. So he takes ten to fifteen grams of collagen peptides in his morning, shake. So the b complex makes sense. Brocomax, so this is a sulforaphane booster. I do think that sulforaphane supplements are pretty powerful as a way to boost Glathaun. Now he is eating a lot of cruciferous vegetables already. I'm not sure if it is like or how much of an effect would adding a sulforaphane supplement twice a day even for him have because, yeah, he's eating already a lot of cruciferous vegetables and, all these meals are pretty much packed with all these antioxidants from these plant foods. So, yeah, I would like to know, like, if he knows like, how much of a difference does this actually play? For someone, like, the average person who is eating, like, the standard American diet, then a silytherapy booster probably have a much bigger effect. Vitamin c, five hundred milligrams or same question, he's eating plant based, he's getting a ton of vitamin C so I don't know what's the effect size that he's expecting to get from this vitamin C because antioxidant supplementation alone hasn't been found to have any lifespan extending effects even in animal models that much and in some animal models inhibiting the antioxidant defense mechanisms actually extends their lifespan. So it's not that you need to reduce the oxidative stress of inflammation all the time and in some studies they find actually that antioxidant supplementation like vitamin C, vitamin E and vitamin A is actually associated with increased mortality risk. So I personally believe that not all oxidative stress and not all inflammation is bad. You do need actually some of the inflammation oxidative stress to turn on your body's own antioxidant defense systems like Glulathione. But vitamin c in smaller doses, good for collagen synthesis. So vitamin c is actually the nutrient needed to initiate collagen synthesis. So a person who is under like chronic inflammation and chronic oxidative stress, for them, five hundred milligrams of vitamin c might make sense. But for someone like Brian Johnson, I would suspect that he would be getting away with even, like, fifty milligrams which is enough for the collagen synthesis. So next up is calcium alpha gluteal gluteal rate. It's actually one of the, like, a new superstar in the longevity supplement sphere because this 2021 study found that Rejuvant, which is the calcium alpha beta glucarate, indeed results in eight years reduction in biological age in humans after an average of seven months of use and this is actually quite profound results. Of course, this is the only human study we have right now. In other animals, the calcium AKG does extend their lifespan as well and this human study at least supports that it does reduce the biological age based on this test. But the issue with these tests is that it doesn't really tell you your biological age. It only tells you one specific aspect of your biological age which is the DNA methylation. So DNA methylation measures your epigenetic changes but there's also like, you know, nine other hallmarks of aging that matter like senescence, telomere length, mitochondrial function, etc. So it's it's not that this this one particular biomarker, the DNA methylation immediately tells you your entire age. So that's a bit misleading and I talked with Matt Cabernan as well on my podcast and he agrees with that that these, epigenetic biological clock tests, they only measure like one specific aspect of longevity and aging. So it's a viable biomarker for sure. It can be used similar. You would use, like, blood work or telomere length, etcetera, but it doesn't tell you your overall biological age. When I did do the DNA methylation test that measures your epigenetic age, then it did show that I was nine years younger. When I did the test, I was 25 and my results were 16. Cocoflavinols, five hundred milligrams. Cocoflavinols, dark chocolate, raw cacao powder is actually very good, for all the polyphenols. In 2022, the COSMOS trial, they used a cocoa supplement which showed that cocoa extract supplementation, it didn't significantly reduce total cardiovascular events among older adults but it reduced cardiovascular disease death by twenty seven percent. So, of course, death is is is the final outcome that you want to avoid. You know, although it didn't reduce the events of cardiovascular disease, but they did reduce the amount of deaths by twenty seven percent, which I think is still, obviously, a good win. But I I I I do take dark chocolate and, cacao flavanols as well every day. D three, vitamin d three, two dozen IUs, I think that's a good baseline dose to take and vitamin d3 supplementation is associated with reduced mortality. You don't get all the benefits of sunlight from the d3 supplement. So you still want to get exposure to actual sunlight. Of course, you don't want to get sunburn, you don't want to get skin damage from excess sunlight exposure, but being in a cave and never getting exposed to sunlight is also bad because the UV radiation has these very unique benefits that you don't get from a supplement. DHEA, so this is a testosterone precursor, twenty five milligrams, and it's a relatively small dose. I see no harm in that. It probably is used to help with the testosterone levels, which we'll talk about later because he's taking the testosterone patch as well, two milligrams as a TRT. I remember him saying something along the lines that, the reason he started taking the TRT patch was that when he first started this protocol, his testosterone levels dropped very low. So he needed to fix that. Because, yeah, like, he's on a low calorie diet. He eats like 20 to 25% calorie restriction over the course of years and months, will inevitably lead to a reduction in testosterone levels. Technically, you shouldn't need TRT at the age of 45, although this would be the earliest age that I would say is kind of okay to start taking it. Of course, if you have like hypogonadal, if you're hypogonadal then, yeah, TRT is better than being the low TRT or being low testosterone. Next supplement is, I guess it's vitamin e sixty seven milligrams, very low dose. I'm not gonna comment anything about that. It's just an antioxidant and, in such small doses, it doesn't have, I would imagine, not any significant effect. EPA, five hundred milligrams. So this is the omega three fatty acid with vitamin e five milligrams. So, yeah, like, as a vegan diet on a vegan diet, you would be better off by supplementing some EPA. But, I haven't seen any, like, choline in his supplement stack, which is also another this critical, let's say, is a vitamin like substance that is also very deficient on a vegan diet and you get it mostly from, like, egg yolks and, liver. But, the choline is actually one of the most important variables or factors that determines if you get fatty liver or Alzheimer's over the course of your entire lifetime. So, I personally am taking even like alpha GPC for the choline and, especially if he's on a vegan diet, I would say that I would I would take like a codeine supplement or alpha GPC on a vegan diet for sure. Garlic, two point four grams and garlic, one point two grams, chaiolic garlic. So garlic is good for the cholesterol and lipids. It's very powerful for, lowering the, cholesterol levels, ApoB, as well as even has some blood sugar management effects, and it can actually boost some antioxidant defense as well. Ginger root, two point two grams, and it's an anti inflammatory. Glucosamine sulfate, one point five grams. So, yeah. Glucosamine is an anti inflammatory. It helps with joints and, cartilage but also has cardiovascular disease protective effects. And there is actually some studies showing the use of glucosamine and chondroitin is associated with lower all cause and cardiovascular disease mortality. So the, use was associated with a thirty nine percent reduction in all cause mortality and sixty five percent reduction in cardiovascular disease mortality. Of course, this is an epidemiology study, but I I do think that, glucosamine has good and it's very safe. It has very beneficial anti inflammatory benefits, and it also is an autophagy regulator. So I personally am taking glucosamine every day. I take three grams every day because a higher dose is needed to get the benefits for the joints at least. So he's taking one point five grams twice a day, so so spread out. But I take three grams. Iodine as potassium iodide, a hundred and twenty five micrograms, so that's for the thyroid probably. Lithium as lithium orotate, one milligram. And this is interesting because there is some association with lithium, and reduced all cause mortality as well as suicide mortality because especially because most of those, you know, suicide and self harm associated mortalities, in people who have, like, some sort of mental mental disorders or bipolar patients or schizophrenia and those kind of things. So lithium has beneficial effects on the brain and it helps if you're like an let's say a person who doesn't have any mental disorder then it's gonna improve your brain health and it's gonna improve your brain longevity. And, but it does help to stabilize like, yeah, mental disorders as well which is part of the reason why it's associated with reduced suicide and homicide rates. So, yeah, that's just interesting to mention. Lycopene. So this is one of the substances or yeah. You get it from actually a lot of these carotenoid vegetables, which, he's also eating a lot. So I don't personally yeah. I don't take lycopene, I guess. Lysine is a amino acid that is also anti anti inflammatory but it has has been found to have beneficial effects on, like, muscle mass and muscle strength as well. Metformin. So this is another prescription drug and, yeah. There is association with metformin and reduced mortality in diabetics. And some of those diabetics even have reduced mortality compared to non diabetics who aren't taking metformin, which of course makes it makes you think that, hey, even if you're diabetic and you're taking metformin, then you can live longer than non diabetics who aren't taking metformin. But, that study, that particular study, they didn't find they didn't replicate the same results. So, yeah. Metformin has maybe potential longevity benefits by managing your blood sugar, but if you don't have diabetes then, I personally don't think it's somewhat, you know, that necessary to take. Especially if you're already eating, like, a very low carb and all the other blood sugar management supplements. And some of the side effects may have to do yeah. Like, again, reduced the e o two max and potentially reduced muscle mass as well. And like nicotinamide riboside three seventy five milligrams, so there's the NAD booster. So in this study they used the 17a estradiol which is this non feminizing estrogen as well as nicotinamide riboside and three other drugs and they found that nicotinamide riboside doesn't affect lifespan. But the non feminizing estrogen which Brian Johnson is also taking, so this seventeen a a e two that, did have a lifespan extending effect in mice, but, the nicotinoid riboside didn't. But I think that the reason why Brian Johnson is taking the NR has to do with the NAD levels, not the potential lifespan extension benefits. So maintaining NAD levels is is beneficial for longevity, but it doesn't have longevity or it doesn't have lifespan extending effects. It has health span extended effects by increasing your exercise capacity and, like, your insulin sensitivity, but it doesn't have direct lifespan extending effects. Inositol cysteine, NAC, so that's the supplement that is also in my top three list that I think is everyone pretty much should take eighteen hundred milligrams twice a day. So he's taking three point six grams of NAC a day, which is quite a lot. And, yeah. That's I I don't think that is anything harmful. Therefore, that there's no, like, real adverse effects to NAC with the possible exception of histamine intolerance. So NAC can reduce histamine breakdown. So if you are someone who has autoimmune disorders or histamine sensitivity, then, I wouldn't recommend taking large amounts of NAC all the time because it can, yeah, just make you break out, in terms of histamine reactions. And NAC also does reduce inflammation, which, may again suppress some of the muscle growth pathways. So Brian Johnson, I don't think he's trying to build muscle. He's trying to maintain the muscle. So his BMI is twenty two, which is quite low, but it's still in the lowest mortality range. So the lowest mortality for his age in a BMI is 22 to 25. And, he's in the kind of sweet spot for that. So he's not definitely not trying to build muscle. He's trying to maintain it and reduce the inflammation. And, like, still exercise, like, exercise is still beneficial. And even if you don't build muscle, then exercises and resistance training is still, positive for the longevity even if you don't build muscle. But regardless, NEC is, yeah, something that I take I don't I don't take it every day, but, I take it every other day, if that makes sense. One interesting thing is that he's not taking, glycine because the glynaq combo. So glycine NAC is a very research there's, like, I think, like, five human studies showing that it affects the hallmarks of aging and, yeah, improves glucagon, reduces oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction inflammation, hallmarks of aging, metabolic effects, cognitive decline, and everything. So it actually has proven benefits for reducing the hallmark of aging in humans and in mice. The glynaq combo has been found to extend lifespan by 24%. So it's interesting why he's not taking the glycine. So he is getting three grams of glycine from his ten grams of collagen peptides, but it's I don't think it's nearly enough for the optimal amount of, glycine. So for the optimal amount of glycine, you need at least 15 grams of glycine because first of all, your body makes three grams of glycine. Three grams of glycine is used to produce glutathione, creatine, and heme, but twelve grams is needed for optimal collagen turnover. So he's getting maybe like a very small amount of glycine from his diet because he's not eating any jello, he's not eating any these tendons and ligaments. There are some plant foods that have glycine but not in that high amounts. So, if you want to really, you know, optimize your collagen synthesis and collagen turnover for the skin benefits, then you need at least fifteen grams of glycine as a supplement. So he's getting three grams from the collagen peptides and he might get two or three grams from his diet, but that still leaves like at least a 10 gram deficit in my opinion. And I have, you know, multiple videos about the glycine and how much you need, etcetera. You can check it out. But, yeah. I personally am taking glycine. I think it's it's even in found to extend lifespan as well by up to twenty to forty percent by mimicking a methionine restriction. So I don't see a reason why he wouldn't, want to take glycine. So at least based on my research, there's no, like, reason not to take, glycine, at least in my opinion. Next supplement is proferine. So this is an iron supplement. So he's on a vegan diet and, yeah. Makes sense for him to get it and he's not at risk of atherosclerosis or liver damage or other negative side effects of iron supplementation. So if you're already eating a lot of iron and you take an iron supplement as well then that is associated with increased cardiovascular disease, because of excess iron. But, because he's not eating really that much iron or pretty much no iron from his diet almost at all, like the actual heme iron, then, yeah, like makes sense for him to boost that with a supplement. Turmeric with piperine, one gram. So that's another anti inflammatory, helps with sulforaphane as well. Taurine, one gram. Amino acid that helps a lot with exercise capacity and blood pressure and cardiovascular function. I am a fan of taurine as well. I'm taking it myself. Ubiquinol, so CoQ10, a hundred milligrams for the mitochondria. So why not? I think that's a very staple for a lot of longevity snacks. Zeaxanthin, twenty milligrams of lutein and four milligrams of as, zeaxanthin. So this is another disease. You get a lot from the carotenoids so it's good for eye health which is very important for aging as well. But, for him, I think he's eating a lot of this lutein and stuff like that from his diet already because of these different colorful vegetables. So yeah. Maybe it's a bit redundant, but I think at the same time, it doesn't hurt either. Zinc, fifteen milligrams. So, yeah. There's not a lot of plant based sources of zinc, and the most bioavailable ones are in, animal proteins. So adding fifteen milligrams of zinc makes sense. Dinner, another a carbo's dose, Brokamax, vitamin c, calcium, cocofamidiol, EPA, garlic, ginger, glucosamine, hyaluronic acid. So this is, another supplement that has become popular for its potential benefits for skin health and skin aging. I agree. I am taking carnatic acid as well. It's a good one. I have no comments on on that one. So next up, tyrosine, five hundred milligrams. So tyrosine is actually the main precursor to dopamine, which, yeah. I am at a baseline, I'm at, like, a high dopamine already. Like, it's very easy for me to get focused and get, motivated, so I have no issues with that. And I actually have tried supplementing tyrosine. It didn't work for me. Like, it just made me a bit too high dopamine, if that makes sense. Maybe Brian Johnson is somewhat different. Maybe his baseline is lower dopamine. Who knows? But, yeah, that's the main reason I would imagine why taking the tyrosine. And it's interesting to take it in evening. I would imagine taking it in morning would might have more positive effects for productivity and like mood and stuff like that. Metformin, again, NSE, nicotine riboside, and turmeric. So that's the dinner supplements. Before bed, three hundred micrograms of melatonin. So that's good. I think every for an everyday basis, if you're taking melatonin every day for the antioxidant and anti inflammatory benefits, which is good for longevity, Melatonin is, I think, as a hormone is the most one of the most important hormones for longevity. So, like, if you take it every day before bed, then a smaller dose, like zero point one to zero point three milligrams or three hundred micrograms is the way to go. Because if you take too much, then you might get actually groggy and you might might, like, just feel much more tired after waking up. Like, if I take one to three milligrams of melatonin, then the next day I wake up a bit more tired, actually. So a smaller dose is, more beneficial if you're taking it on an everyday basis. And I do think that, a small dose of melatonin such as three hundred micrograms every day every day is safe and it's actually good. And these are the other supplements or these additional compounds, extra virgin olive oil, thirty milliliters a day. I am a fan of olive oil. I think it's one of the healthiest oils in the world, high polyphenol content, and it is also one of the most associated longevity foods in the world. Like, all the Mediterranean countries, they are high in extra virgin olive oil and, yeah, the use of olive oil is associated with all these health benefits as well, probably due to the high polyphenol content. Pea protein, 29 to get more protein into his diet. Dark chocolate, 15 grams. So that's, yeah. Good good one to add as well for the polyphenols and boost dopamine and actually taste good. Rapamycin, thirteen milligrams biweekly prescription drug. So, yeah, Rapamycin, it suppresses mTOR and, in a lot of animal studies, it extends lifespan. And, there's no I mean, in humans studies, it does have some positive effects as well in slowing down some of the process of aging. I think it's very early to say if it actually extends lifespan in humans. But out of all the longevity supplements and drugs out there, then rapamycin is definitely the most powerful one. It definitely has the, you know, most researched effects in terms of extending lifespan. And I do think that it works. Probably it works. We just don't have enough data yet, or, like, long term clinical safety studies. But I personally think based on the research we have right right now, I think it works. Whether or not you should take it, you know, you need to assess, you know, what's your situation and what's your age. Someone who is in their 40 in their forties like Brian Johnson, for his age, I think it's worthwhile to take someone for me in my twenties, probably not. So because, yeah, I mean, rapamycin still, reduces, let's say, muscle protein synthesis and makes it harder to build muscle as well. So, yeah. But he's taking it biweekly, which makes it, I guess, a bit better. I wouldn't take it, like, every day. So growth hormones, he's taking growth hormone as well. Zero point six milligrams five times a week. I think this is a new addition to his diet or this protocol. I would like to know, yeah, like, what's some of the changes that he's gonna report. But, at least based on, you know, some animal studies, then growth hormone is also actually one of the pathways that is associated with aging. So excess growth hormone ages you faster. And, yeah, I wonder what's the effects that he's gonna see, and if he's gonna keep it later on. But, yeah, growth hormone alone, people use it as as like this, you know, growth hormone as a drug. And they they do use it as part part of the TRT and hormone replacement therapy, protocols to help with the, you know, aspects of just muscle maintenance and, like, functionality. But, as a hormone, the pathway of growth hormone in I g one is associated with aging, at least in animals as well. But it does definitely help with the, let's say, health span. Like, you just feel better probably if you add growth hormone. And this is the non feminizing estrogen that we talked about that does extend lifespan in male mice. But, yeah, it's very new. Like, I've only seen over the past few months people talking about it. So, yeah, we'll see what's what's gonna happen. It's pretty much very experimental as of now. But it's the non feminizing, estrogen, so it doesn't have the feminizing effects. So testosterone, the TRT patch, two milligrams six six times a week. And, yeah, like I said, he needed to add it pretty much to, raise his testosterone after being on this, calorie restricted diet. And I think many people need to realize that as well if they want to test and try out the Brian Johnson's blueprint as well because there are many people trying it. And, if they're not aware that they potentially may need to start TRT in the future then, you know, they need to be aware of that. So, yeah. Like many people just look at the protocol at a glance. Okay. Eat this calorie deficit. Eat these foods, etc. But they might not go into the depths of, you know, that you need to that you might need to take TRT. So that's why I think it should be one of the highlights that, hey, this is still a medical requirement and, you know, the average person maybe wouldn't be willing to go into that depths. And there's no evidence to suggest that you need to be, let's say, this particular protocol to slow down the aging or longevity. Like, the centenarians, the people who live over a 100, they're not taking a hundred pills per day. Of course, they're exercising. Of course, they're lower body weight and of course, they're eating less calories, but there's no track record of centenarians doing the blueprint. So the blueprint is just Brian Johnson's own n equals one protocol that he's doing and he's, of course, sharing all, like, results and we can see that, yes, it does work for him in a lot of ways that his biomarkers are improving. But, you know, there's of course many things that might be redundant. There's many things that might be overkill and there's many things that might have some negative side effects at least for some people as as well. So you definitely don't need to follow the blueprint to a 100%. And, I mean and I mean, if you are exercising and eating a good diet and losing weight, then that's not the blueprint. That's just a healthy lifestyle. It's just that if you follow this specific, let's say protocol then you're following the blueprint. But the other healthy lifestyle is something that people have been doing for decades and centuries even almost. Like just maintaining physical activity and good relationships and, yeah. You know, you know what I'm talking about. And the last supplement is b twelve, once a week. So, yeah, he's not eating any b twelve from his diet because of the plant based foods. And there were some supplements that weren't on the list as well. So spermidine so he's not taking an actual spermidine supplement. I think he's getting the spermidine from chlorella powder which is a high source of spermidine and he's gonna get thirteen point five milligrams of spermidine. And one recent study did show that the dietary consumption of spermidine at a dose of over eleven milligrams per day was associated with up to thirty percent reduced mortality compared to getting less than nine point six milligrams of spermidine per day from dietary sources. So I do agree that dietary spyrimidine source is probably much more important, than the supplemental spyrimidine. At least we have the data on the dietary spyrimidine. We don't have any data on supplemental spyrimidine extending lifespan or being associated with reduced mortality. So I think the idea like adding chlorella powder, spirulina, wheat germ, cheeses, mushrooms, and different vegetables. Even like meat has a little bit of spyrimidine. So that's what where you want to get your spyrimidine from. Amino complex. So I would assume that's essential amino acids, makes sense. Creatine two point five grams as well. So that's, yeah. As a vegan you don't get creatine from the plant sources. Although the creatine supplements are made of plant based sources. So it's a vegan supplement but you don't get that dietary creatine that much from a plant based foods. And the other one's the same except ceylon cinnamon, which, the main effect for that is it's high in polyphenols again, but it also helps with the blood sugar regulation. So there we have it. This is a long video of the Brian Johnson's blueprint supplement routine. You can check out my full breakdown of his entire routine including diet and exercise. But overall, I would say that, yes, he's taking a lot of supplements. Are those supplements the main reason why he's seeing those, benefits in his health? Definitely not. Like, he also agrees that the biggest effect comes from, you know, eating a good diet and exercising and getting good sleep. So those supplements are just adding maybe, like, five or 10% to his results, whereas the vast majority of the other results come from the the entire lifestyle. But do you want to slow down aging and live longer? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@simlun.com, and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well Miami SIEM. Stay optimized, stay empowered.