Most people take collagen to have the antiaging benefits for the skin. There's a lot of anecdotal experience of people who take collagen and they see a reduction in the wrinkles and improvement in just overall skin quality. But we shouldn't just solely rely on subjective experience and subjective perception because those things can be sometimes misleading. So in this video, we're gonna take a look at studies where people take collagen peptides every day for multiple weeks and whether or not it has any objective improvements in their skin quality. It's showtime. By now, there are up to a dozen of different human clinical trials looking at the benefits of collagen peptides on skin quality and different aspects of skin health. Let's start with one of the older ones, 2014, the effect of oral collagen peptide supplementation on skin moisture and the dermal collagen network. In this study, they used two different types of collagen peptides. One was from fish and the other one was porcine. After eight weeks of supplementation, the porcine peptides had the greatest improvements in skin moisturization. Fish peptides also improved skin moisturization but almost half as much as the pork one. And the placebo group didn't see any significant improvements in the skin moisturization. They also looked at the collagen density in the dermis. And after twelve weeks, the collagen density in the dermis was significantly greater with the collagen peptides compared to placebo. Next up, we have a 2018 study, oral intake of low molecular weight collagen peptide improves hydration, elasticity, and wrinkling in human skin. What they found was that even after six weeks of using the low molecular weight collagen peptides, the skin hydration in the collagen group was significantly greater than in the placebo group. After twelve weeks of using the collagen peptides, the skin hydration status improved even more than compared to six weeks and the same applied to the placebo group, but it wasn't significantly greater than six weeks. When it comes to changes in skin wrinkling parameters such as with skin roughness, then after six weeks of use, the low molecular weight collagen peptides didn't give actually any changes in reducing the skin roughness. But it did give significant results and improvements in skin roughness after twelve weeks compared to placebo. The same applies to skin smoothness. After six weeks, there was no significant changes. But after twelve weeks of use, the low molecular weight causing peptides reduced the depth of the smoothness significantly more than the placebo group. They also looked at the crow's feet, which are these little lines around the eyes and they assessed visually by a dermatologist the effects of the peptides on the crow's feet. In the beginning, both the test group, which was the peptide group, and the placebo group had a very similar score for the crow's feet visual grade, which was 3.23 for the college peptide group and 3.19 for the placebo group. After six weeks of use, there were no significant changes between the test group and the placebo group. But by the twelve week mark, the collagen peptide group saw a significant reduction in the visual score of the crow's feet, whereas the placebo group still stayed pretty much the same compared to the beginning. Overall skin elasticity already improved within six weeks of using the collagen peptides, and it greatly improved even more after twelve weeks of use. But the placebo group didn't see any improvements. Disappointed. Moving on with the 2019 study, a collagen supplement improved skin hydration, elasticity, roughness, and density. So here are the results of the study. The blue box is the collagen peptide group and the red box is the placebo group changed from baseline in terms of percentage. The study lasted twelve weeks and, twelve weeks of using the collagen peptides improved skin hydration by almost 30%. Skin elasticity improved 15% and skin roughness decreased by up to 30%, while skin density or their collagen density also improved by 20%, which is significantly greater than the placebo group. And we have a 2021 clinical trial oral supplementation of collagen peptides improves skin hydration by increasing the natural moisturizing factor content in the stratum corneum. This is also a twelve week study. You see an improvement in the water content and hydration in the skin, whereas it doesn't improve with the placebo. And lastly, we have one of the newest randomized double blinded placebo controlled studies from 2022. Oral supplementation of low molecular weight collagen peptides reduces skin wrinkles and improves biophysical properties of the skin. This study showed that the oral supplementation of low molecular weight collagen peptides could improve the wrinkles, elasticity, hydration, and barrier integrity of photoaged facial skin. So as you can see, there are many studies showing that collagen peptides have a significant improvement in skin aging and skin wrinkles, skin moisturization, skin hydration. Based on these studies, you will also see some benefits within six weeks of using the collagen peptides. But based on the studies, it also looks like twelve weeks is usually what gives additional benefits. So that's why I believe that using collagen peptides every day pretty much for the rest of your life is one of the best things you can do for your skin health and the aesthetic side of your skin aging. The issue is that you start to lose your collagen already in your twenties by about 10% per decade. But collagen is not only for the beauty aspect. Like, collagen has many other health benefits beyond just the facial and aesthetic side. Collagen is also important for the joints and bones. Collagen peptides have also been seen to improve biomarkers of cardiovascular health. And even then, maintaining good skin health is actually quite important for, like, the physical health side of longevity. Your skin is your largest organ, and it protects you against the outside world from pathogens, viruses, and any other kind of infections. So if you have poor skin health, poor collagen health, then you do increase your risk of many kinds of infections, which does impose a great danger to your longevity. Based on the studies, you wanna take low molecular weight collagen peptides. These collagen peptides are smaller molecules than the collagen that you get from food and, thus, they're more bioavailable to the skin. I do believe that getting dietary collagen sources is very good for many aspects of health, but it's very unlikely that you would see, like, an improvement in your skin health by just getting more collagen from your diet. And we don't have any studies in terms of dietary collagen giving those same results that we talked about in these studies, improving skin health and wrinkles and moisturization. So based on the evidence, then dietary collagen, of course, yes, it's good. It might contribute to some aspects of collagen turnover and things like that, but it's very unlikely that they will reverse skin hallmarks of aging and reverse, like, wrinkles the same way collagen peptides do. If If you want to learn everything about collagen, then check out my book with doctor James D'Nico Antonio called The Collagen Cure. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is C. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.