It's commonly thought that eating too many carbohydrates is bad for your health. Some longevity gurus even say that every single time you raise your insulin levels, you're aging much faster and the key to living longer and slowing down aging is to keep your insulin levels as low as possible. Is it true? Well, in this video, I'm gonna talk about the effects of insulin and the role of insulin in aging and whether or not eating more carbohydrates or raising insulin levels is associated with accelerated aging and shorter lifespans. Do it. Let's start with some of the fundamental roles and evolutionarily conserved mechanisms of insulin on aging and longevity. The insulin and insulin like growth factor IGF one signaling or IIS pathway, which connects insulin with insulin like growth factor one, is actually one of the more, like, oldest and one of the most conserved evolutionary pathways that is associated with, longevity and the speed of which the organism ages and lives. Insulin and IGF-one both connect with the mechanistic target of rapamycin or mTOR which is a growth pathway in the body that promotes cellular replication, senescence and, yeah, just in excess it is associated with aging. That's pretty, you know, evident by now. Things that raise mTOR are proteins and amino acids but through the incident in IGF-one pathways, carbohydrates can also activate the mTOR pathway which in theory, at least in mechanistically, has been found to shorten lifespans of like model organisms like different kinds of yeast, fruit flies and rodents. There's no clear evidence to suggest that mTOR expression would accelerate aging or shorten lifespan in humans but it is plausible that excess mTOR activation or this dysfunctional chronic mTOR activation may promote the growth of some malignancies or tumors. In these fruit flies, mutations in the Chico pathway, which is kind of the analogous to the insulin pathway in humans, they found that the median lifespan can now be up to 48% longer. And in c elegans or roundworms, pretty much insulin blocks some of the longevity promoting factors like SKN one. The mice who lack the insulin receptor in the adipose tissue, they have about 18% longer lifespan on average. Cool. And interestingly enough, in humans who have these, mutations in the insulin like growth factor one receptor, they apparently also live slightly longer, so they're centenarians. However, when you look at some actual association studies in humans then they do actually find that the low levels of IGF-one are also associated with increased mortality and the same applies to too high, IGF-one levels. Both low and high IGF-one concentrations are associated with increased mortality in the general population. So too high IGF-one levels may increase the risk of cancer and malignancies and usually if you have, like, diabetes and metabolic syndrome then your IGF-one levels are also somewhat higher because, you know, you're, with higher blood sugar levels and you spike your insulin levels, much more. But if you have too low IGF-one levels then, that usually increases the risk of osteoporosis and, hip fractures and and those kind of things. So if you have not enough IGP levels then you're just gonna be too frail and that is also very important, I think, to note. Yeah, like if you maybe suppress your insulin on IGP levels then it may have like a pro longevity on the one hand but on the other hand you may also increase the risk of your mortality, because of being too frail and losing your muscles. Muscle tissue is obviously very important for slowing down aging and living longer. People who have less muscle, their longevity tends to be shorter and people with adequate amounts of muscle mass and muscle strength then they generally live much longer than their peers. So yes, incident and IGF-one levels are associated with aging and shorter lifespans in these model organisms like yeast, roundworms, fruit flies, mice, etcetera. But that doesn't mean that it's going to translate over into humans because humans obviously have a much different metabolism and, some of the things, there may be trade offs that aren't worth it for humans either. When it comes to humans then we have to look at the actual outcomes and what does the epidemiologist say and what does the actual clinical trials say. So first off, diabetes is clearly associated with accelerated aging and shorter lifespans. People who have diabetes can live up to thirteen years or fourteen years shorter than people who don't have diabetes. There's many reasons why people get diabetes but the root cause or the root mechanism and physiology of diabetes is insulin resistance and improper glucose tolerance. There are many things that contribute to that glucose intolerance and insulin resistance. You can get diabetes by eating too much sugar, you can get diabetes by just hyperinsulinemia and you can also get diabetes by eating too much fat and just too much calories in general. So it's not always eating too many carbohydrates and raising insulin that causes insulin resistance and diabetes. There are even genetic variables like autoimmune disorders that cause diabetes. Tooth and ice cream, an apple pie, and diabetes. Now there are some studies that do find that higher carbohydrate intake is associated with increased mortality risk and that probably has to do with the fact that, you know, eatingexcesscom carbohydrates and being insulin resistant probably also contributes to the increased death from diabetes and insulin resistance or cardiovascular disease that you get. But there are also other studies that find a lower carbohydrate intake is associated with increased mortality. So this 2018 meta analysis with about 15,000 adults and a twenty five year follow-up found that, the carbohydrate intake and mortality followed this u shape curve or u shape association with both low and high carbohydrate intake being associated with increased mortality. Both high and low percentages of carbohydrate diets were associated with increased mortality with minimal risk observed at fifty to fifty five percent carbohydrate intake. This is still like an association study, so people who eat too many carbohydrates probably get them from very, like, these processed sources. And the same applies to low carbohydrate diets. They might be eating a diet that is just very processed and with minimal amounts of these healthy whole food fiber sources. So the food quality matters a lot and, the actual health of the individual matters as well. If you don't have any visible symptoms of diabetes, insulin resistance, heart disease, or hypertension, or anything like that, then, you don't probably have any increased risk. It's not that the diet itself is immediately gonna give you some sort of a disease or shorten your lifespan. It's more like what's the actual outcome of the diet you follow. Ease your diet making you insulin resistant, easier diet making you gain weight, easier diet keeping you at a too high BMI and a too high body fat percentage. So based on the human epidemiology studies, it's hard to say that insulin or, you know, carbohydrate stem cells shorten lifespan or increase your aging. It's definitely true that diabetes, insulin resistance, heart disease, all those things, and glucose intolerance will definitely shorten your lifespan and accelerate aging. But if you don't ever get diabetes, even if you're eating a very high carb diet, then chances are it's not eating you faster so the actual outcome is obviously much more important. Some of the countries with the highest life expectancy in the world follow a relatively higher carb intake. You know, Hong Kong, Japan, Macau, these are all all South Asian and, you know, East Asian countries that eat a lot of rice and they have relatively higher carb intake compared to some other countries in the world. So based on this, it's hard to say that insulin or carbohydrates would make you, like, shorten your lifespan or make you age faster as long as you don't develop diabetes. So the total amount of carbohydrates isn't that important as the individual who's practicing it and what's the actual metabolic outcomes, in my opinion. And this, 2023 and they found that, a certain percentage of macronutrients was associated with a lower risk mortality. A high calorie diet composed of moderately high protein 20%, moderate fat 30%, and moderate carbohydrate 50% was associated with the highest mortality risk. So this is interesting. Then the lowest risk was observed in two separate regions consisting of one, a higher protein, 30% higher carbohydrate, 60% and lower fat levels, 10%. Or the second, diet was lower protein, 10%, moderate carbohydrate, 45% and higher fat levels, 45%. So this is, obviously not low carb diet, but it, restricts some aspects of protein intake. The other group that was with the lowest risk mortality was actually a high protein diet, 30%, but it also was a higher carbohydrate diet with 60% and actually, like, a low fat diet of 10%. So these two groups were associated with the lowest risk of mortality compared to a higher calorie diet composed of moderate protein, twenty percent moderate fat, thirty percent and moderate carb, fifty percent was associated with the highest mortality risk. Now this is an association study. Again, we don't know necessarily what was the reason or what the actual foods these people ate. But, you know, when you look at the macros of this, the 20% protein, 30% fat, and 50% carbs, then that sounds very that sounds very similar to, like, the standard American diet. So the standard American diet, the processed food diet generally is low in protein. So it I mean, it has some protein from, like, the hot dogs and the the buns and stuff like that. You get 20% protein probably, 30 fat and 50% carbs. I mean, that makes sense if I were to, you know, guesstimate the macros of a standard American diet, this, like, TV dinner diet, then that would make sense. And when you look at the macros of the higher protein diet or the higher protein 30% higher carb, 60% and lower fat 10% diet, then then that is very similar to, like, this Japanese rice diet. I mean, Japanese aren't eating low protein for sure. They're eating adequate amounts of protein from fish and stuff like that, but they're also eating high carb. And lastly, the 10% and moderate carb and higher fat levels, I'm not sure. I don't recall any diet like this, but it's certainly, you know, the the longevity benefits probably may come from like the protein restriction in some sense. So in conclusion, in animal studies in model organisms, excess incidence and IL-one levels mechanistically are associated with aging and shorter lifespans. But in humans, there doesn't appear to be any direct evidence to suggest that spiking your insulin is gonna make you age faster or shorten the lifespan. If anything, then it's actually the opposite. Most of the countries with the highest life expectancy and the greatest longevity actually eat relatively high amounts of carbohydrates. And from the last study that we talked about, then one of the studies that was associated with the lowest risk mortality was actually a high carb diet with 60% of the calories coming from carbohydrates. So whatever the diet that gives you insulin resistance is gonna shorten your lifespan. That's pretty clear. If you are insulin sensitive, you have low body fat percentage, you're fit, you're active, and your blood sugar levels are good, then there's no reason to think that, eating more carbohydrates would accelerate your aging or shorten your lifespan. If anything, then it's the opposite. It's a trap. So personally, what I do is I try to be mindful of my total carbohydrate intake. I try to be mindful of, raising my blood sugar levels and I don't want to, like, just keep my blood sugar and insulin levels elevated, all throughout the day. I do practice time restricted eating that, definitely keeps my blood sugar and insulin levels, very low for the most of the day. But I do eat carbohydrates especially around my workouts and on some days I may even eat like 200 or 250 grams of carbohydrates per day on, like heavier workout days and my blood sugar is perfect, my hemoglobin a1c is perfect and my fasting insulin levels are perfect. I have no I have no signs of metabolic syndrome, no no signs of insulin resistance. The opposite, I'm very insulin sensitive, I'm very low body fat and I feel great. So what I recommend you do is just figure out your carbohydrate tolerance, you need to know your blood sugar levels, you need to, you know, monitor how how does different foods affect your blood sugar levels and what's your degree of insulin resistance. If you do want to slow down aging and live longer, then I am looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@simlond.com and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is seam. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.