One of my favorite supplements is glycine because it covers many of the important things related to longevity. However, there are a lot of human clinical trials showing that the combination of glycine and NAC, also called glynaq, has been seen to reverse multiple hallmarks of aging. In this video, I'm gonna cover these studies and talk about the benefits of glynaq. It's showtime. Let's start with the main issue which is the increased oxidative stress that happens with aging. During aging and in various disease states, you see an increase in oxidative stress characterized by reactive oxygen species, inflammation and cell senescence. The reason older people have higher levels of oxidative stress has to do with the fact that their antioxidant defense systems aren't working that well. Older individuals have been seen to have significantly lower gluathione levels than younger people. It's been found that raising gluathione levels with glycine and n a c can correct this gluathione deficiency and as a result improve health status and the hallmarks of aging. The gluathione deficiency in older people appears to be caused by a significant reduction in gluathione synthesis. Gluathione is called the body's master antioxidant because it governs a big proportion of the antioxidant defense. Gluathione is made of primarily glutamine, cysteine, and glycine, which are amino acids. Glutathione synthesis is rate limited by glycine, making glycine the bottleneck for gluathione synthesis. It's been found that gluathione deficiency in aging is primarily caused by a deficiency in cysteine and glycine, but not glutamine. Both n a c and glycine have been shown to increase gluathione levels. A 2023 randomized clinical trial found that supplementing glynaq for sixteen weeks in older adults improved glutathione deficiency, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, inflammation, physical function, and seven hallmarks of aging. The authors claim that only glynaic supplementation in older adults resulted in significantly improved a glucan concentrations by a hundred and twenty one percent after two weeks and by a hundred and sixty four percent after sixteen weeks to levels not different from younger adults. Another 2021 clinical trial discovered that glyanax supplementation for twenty four weeks in older adults corrected red blood cell gluophant deficiency, oxidative stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction. However, the benefits started to go away after stopping glynaq supplementation for twelve weeks. This suggests that older people might need to keep taking glynaq to maintain the benefits of fixing gluathlete deficiency. Even healthy old individuals have been seen to have higher baseline oxidative stress compared to younger individuals and taking glynaq raises gluathione levels in them. There's also a 2022 study on mice that found glynaq supplementation increased lifespan by twenty four percent compared to the control mice by fixing gluathione deficiency and some of the hallmarks of aging. Another 2023 study on mice found glynaq supplementation improves brain gluothermia deficiency and was able to reverse age related cognitive decline. These are obviously most studies and we have no idea whether or not glyinac supplementation would have any life extension effects in humans. But we do have a lot of human clinical trials by now showing how glyinac supplementation improves the whole marks of aging and many of the age related conditions. Glutathione is very important in preventing cardiovascular disease and neurodegeneration. Obviously, you can't prevent these medical conditions with glyNAc but there is evidence that glycine and NAC can improve some of the biomarkers related to higher risk of cardiovascular disease. In older adults, glycine levels are inversely associated with metabolic syndrome and cardiometabolic traits. Supplementing with glycine improves metabolic syndrome including diabetes, obesity, hyperlipidemia and hypertension. Patients with type two diabetes have glutathione deficiency. Glutathione synthesis is decreased in diabetic patients which can be restored with cysteine and glycine supplementation. There's a lot of evidence suggesting glycine improves insulin sensitivity and glucose homeostasis through enhancement of insulin secretion. Whether or not glynaq supplementation would have any benefits for younger individuals, we don't know either. It certainly has a positive effect in the elderly people because those individuals have lower levels of glutathione. But like we just showed, individuals who are experiencing a certain disease state like metabolic syndrome or diabetes, those individuals also have depleted gliothon levels because of the disease state. So even if you're young but you're experiencing more oxidative stress and your gliothon levels are low, then glyneX supplementation can help to raise your gliothon levels. The older you become or the more disease states you have, then your gluethane levels will decrease. The reason you don't wanna take straight gluethane to fix the gluethane deficiency and boost antioxidant defense is because it can actually cause increased oxidative stress. For example, excess administration of NAC alone or Glutathione has been shown to cause insulin resistance, mitochondrial dysfunction, cellular toxicity, and accelerated aging. What's more, the reactive oxygen species are important cell signaling molecules that you don't want to completely eradicate the same way you don't wanna eliminate the reactive oxygen species caused by exercise. So how much glycine and NAC you would need to get those benefits? One of the twenty twenty two studies found that a low dose of glynaq, two point four grams of both glycine and NAC, wasn't enough to raise gluathione, but a medium dose of four point eight grams and a high dose of seven point two grams each did. In the human studies, glycine and n a c are usually given at a dose of around a hundred milligrams per kilogram per day and ninety eight milligrams per kilogram per day for NAC. So I weigh around eighty kilograms. So for me, that would be eight grams of glycine a day and seven point eight grams of NAC per day. If you're an older person who might be a bit more frail and you weigh around fifty kilograms, then you would need five grams of glycine and four point nine grams of NAC. However, keep in mind that's only for supporting the gluophan synthesis. Your glycine demand might be significantly higher than that of NAC. In total, you need at least fifteen grams of glycine a day from various sources to support collagen turnover, Glulathione, Creatine and Heme Synthesis. You can check out my other video about how much glycine you actually need. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.