I do think that melatonin can justifiably be a nutrient. We need it. Similar to, like, vitamin d being used for so many different thing, we need to sometimes correct our levels of vitamin d, very similar with melatonin. And from puberty on, it starts to go down, down, down, down. It doesn't go back up. Welcome to Racine Lund podcast. I'm Hosseem Lund, and our guest today is doctor Diana Minnick. Diana is a nutrition scientist, author, and certified functional medicine practitioner. She serves as the chief science officer at Symphony Natural Health, which offers the world's first plant melatonin made of phytomelatonin. Herbutonin has been demonstrated to have 470% stronger antioxidant properties and 640% greater anti inflammatory effect than synthetic melatonin. Herbutonin is my go to melatonin for better sleep and the longevity benefits of melatonin. To try out herbutonin, head over to symphonynaturalhealth.com and use the code seam 10 for a 10% discount. Diana, welcome to the show. Hey. Thanks for having me. Good to be here with you. Yes. I'm, excited to have you on the podcast because, you know, we've been up or I've been talking a lot about melatonin on my channel and, like, a lot of the longevity and health benefits of that as a hormone and as a supplement. But, you know, there's so much, let's say, misconceptions about melatonin. And for sure, like, there's a lot of problems with the melatonin industry, if you can call it like that, or, like, the melatonin market. It's, like, not very well regulated. So I'm glad to have you on the podcast as, like, like, a very knowledgeable and expert on, melatonin and, just, you know, share people about everything greater to how do you supplement that and, you know, what are the other things people need to, like, know about. Great. Yeah. As a scientist, I feel really comfortable talking about the scientific mechanisms. We can talk about clinical applications. And then, of course, what you just mentioned, like, the practicality of it. Like, how do you actually supplement? How do you choose a supplement? What's the dose? Mhmm. Are you going to stop your body's production? You know, all of those things that I've had so many questions about over the past year. Yeah. So but we can we can start, like, what's how did you cut into this? Like, what made you interested in melatonin and, like, what are some other things related to your background? Yeah. Great question. So I'm chief science officer at Symphony Natural Health. So I began working with Symphony about a year and a half ago, and they have a plant, melatonin. And so by way of understanding melatonin through the work that I was doing with them, I got even more intrigued. But I would say it actually went back even further. During the pandemic, I was monitoring a lot of the nutrition science as it related to the immune system, noticing that there was a lot of discussion about vitamin c, vitamin d, zinc, quercetin, and melatonin, which I thought was really fascinating. And so in my nutrition science mind, I began to look at melatonin as a nutrient, like a circadian nutrient. So that that resulted in the publication of a, of a long review article looking at melatonin as the next vitamin d, and that we published as a team back in September 2022 in the nutrients journal. So that has been my trajectory into all things melatonin. Nice. Actually, I actually found that that study as well that you authored melatonin as a new vitamin d, which is a interesting concept. And, you know, I personally think that as a hormone, you know, vitamin d is a hormone, actually, another vitamin. But, you know, melatonin as a hormone is equally as important as vitamin d. Like, vitamin d is like the master hormone inside the body, but melatonin is like the master antioxidant in in some ways. And I think it's more even powerful than, gulathan, for example, in terms of the antioxidant, properties. Yeah. I think that's spot on. And, you know, what I think is so interesting in the health field is that many times we just wanna pigeonhole a compound like melatonin or like vitamin d or like quercetin or like polyphenols. And then we soon come to realize, wow, they're pleiotropic. They're doing lots of different things. They're not just doing one thing. And I think that melatonin has been pigeonholed into being a hormone, and then people are fearful of it. They feel like, oh my gosh. We should be really cautious about it. But yet it's everywhere. It is in nature. It's in animals. It's in the human body. So I think that there's greater nuance and complexity as it really relates to understanding melatonin and all of these different nutrients. Yeah. So we we can start, like, you know, what is melatonin or, you know, what's the role of melatonin in the body, like, besides just, you know, some of the things that we talked about already? Yeah. So melatonin, if we think of the name melatonin, it was actually coined by a dermatologist back in the late nineteen fifties. He was looking for a skin lightening agent, and there were some earlier papers that were published showing that when the pineal gland of animals was put into a vat of frogs that basically the frog's skin had lightened or its, you know, its, its color. So he became interested, and that led him to coin this this molecule, MELA, which is related to the skin, and then tonin because it had a biochemical structure that was very similar to serotonin. So that's how melatonin came into it. So but, actually, it is a neural hormone in the classical sense. It's produced throughout the body. I mean, quite honestly, it's it's everywhere. It's widespread. It's in the brain. It's in the retina. It's in the skin just like that dermatologist was looking into. It didn't, by the way, end up being a skin lightening agent, but it is in the skin, which is very similar to where we see vitamin d. It is throughout most of the body, organs. It's, highly concentrated in the mitochondria. We have receptors on cells that receive melatonin, and so people can have genetic variance that relate to their activity of melatonin. And I would say that the two main organs that produce melatonin in our human bodies would be the pineal gland is the one that most people think of because we get into the pineal gland producing it in response to darkness. But, actually, the gut produces 400 times the level that the pineal gland does. So they both work a little bit differently. Yeah. Yeah. That's very interesting that the gut has such a massive, like, production of, melatonin because, you know, historically, it's always thought to be produced in the head in the pineal gland, like I said. But, you know, that goes to show that there's many things that affect the melatonin production, not just the light cue through the circadian rhythms. That's true. And in fact, one of the differences with the pineal gland derived melatonin is that that's through endocrine hormone. So when that is released from the pineal gland, it gets transmitted throughout the body. And then it goes to the cells and starts to regulate the clock genes, right, to bring us into circadian rhythm. On the other hand, the gut, when it produces melatonin, it's typically an autocrine or a paracrine effect, meaning that it has more of a localized effect. So it can have some changes in the function of the gastrointestinal tract. So we know that the immune system is mostly housed in the gut, like 60 to 70% of the immune system. So it seems like melatonin is having an impact there. It may also be impacting the secretion of the the the gastrointestinal system. So things like enzymes or, you know, any any number of different maybe neurohormones. It may play a role in motility, and some of the more emerging research would suggest that it's playing a role in the gut microbiome modulation. I don't feel like we we actually know a lot of how that's all happening, but a lot of the, research that's being done is looking at its role in the gut and why indeed it is so high in the gut. Yeah. So what what do I like, or, actually, like, I remember some, rat study that, found that melatonin has, like, antioxidant properties. And, in that particular study, they, you know, it's it's kind of I think they'd, like, exposed the testes of the rats to, like, some sort of a stressor, and melatonin had, like, antioxidant or reduced the oxidative stress in the testes. So it's like it's a very powerful, like, antioxidant in of itself. But, what what I like you know you know, you may we talked about the, let's say, the mechanisms and the functions of melatonin as a hormone, but what I like some of the research about melatonin as a supplement, like because, obviously, many people use it as a supplement. So what are what are some of the, like, research, the benefits of that, or is it, like, safe after all? Yeah. Well, I mean, the first of all, I mean, if we look at the functions of melatonin and you just spoke to its role as a powerful antioxidant, It has basically six functions. So if we think, like, as a scientist and just think of what is it doing in the body, then we can translate into, okay, where would it be good for people? You know, first and foremost, it's an incredibly potent antioxidant. In fact, it's been shown that one molecule of melatonin and its metabolites can actually scavenge up to 10 free radicals. And that's big because most of these other antioxidants like vitamin c or even vitamin e can't do that particular, robust job of scavenging. Usually, they can just do one, two, you know, just a few of them. And I think in part, it's because melatonin is both fat soluble and water soluble. So we can go to a lot of different places in the body. So we'll come back to that when we talk about the brain, but I do like what you said about, you know, the fact that it is so powerful. It's even more powerful in some ways than glutathione. We see that melatonin can stimulate the production of glutathione and antioxidant defense enzymes. So if we think about health conditions, we would think, well, where would you see oxidative stress? Where do you see mitochondrial dysfunction? And typically, all the diseases related to aging are some ways, in in some way, shape, or form connected to, to to melatonin through the the mitochondria. Right? So we think of things like neurotoxicity. We think of things like cardiometabolic health. We think of even digestive health. You know, it's it's pivotal. I would say it's there probably isn't a function in the body that it's not used for, and there wouldn't be a clinical application. You know, in that paper that you saw, you know, we primarily talked about the role in the central nervous system because there's a lot of data there. So when I say central nervous system, I'm talking about circadian rhythm modulation, sleep wake disorders, any kind of sleep disturbance, but also away from sleep, looking at cognitive conditions, migraines, tinnitus, autism, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, even eye disorders. And I think that number two, when I look and just stack up the evidence on melatonin and its clinical applications, I would also see that there could be use for the immune system because it is part of the immune systems. So we look at autoimmune conditions, and there's more and more research there. You know? And even during the pandemic, there was exploration, as I mentioned, into the use of melatonin for COVID, but now also for long COVID, looking at, you know, its chemo preventative uses, you know, even inflammatory conditions as it relates to bone and, you know, the reproductive system, the heart, the cardiovascular system. So I would say that, you know, most people think of it for the brain and circadian rhythm, but there's a lot of other applications. You mentioned the testes. And so especially when we look at infertility, what we see is that there could be a mechanism related to infertility that involves oxidative stress. So when somebody has mitochondrial dysfunction, they're not able to deal with a lot of the free radicals that are produced, then there can be an issue. There's an overwhelm. And so melatonin is produced in high concentrations in the mitochondria, and we think that it most likely plays that role in helping to reduce oxidative stress in a lot of the the free radicals that are flying as a result. Yeah. So it's like a mass very powerful antioxidant. But what why does or, you know, do you think that a lot of the those benefits come from the melatonin's ability to re reduce oxidative stress, or is there something else, like, central to melatonin that, you know, why would you see such a, like, a systemic improvement, through, like, melatonin, if that makes sense? Yeah. It's a good question. You know, because melatonin, first of all, is is in most body tissues and fluids. So it's, you know, it it's right there to do the job. And it's not just an antioxidant, but it's also anti inflammatory. It is, connected to if we look at the cell, it's changing how the cell, not just through the mitochondria, but just in general through its presence, it's changing things like viral replication, the accumulation of proteins like amyloid. So it's able to regulate a lot of different processes. In fact, if you look at even agriculture, they use melatonin as a growth factor for plants to help to produce more of things like phytochemicals. So why is it used throughout all of these you know, why would we see that? Because first of all, of its location, it's in just about all body tissues and fluids, and it's serving, like, six different functions. And so I think that's why it's so integral to so many of these different health conditions. Gotcha. So but what about, like, sleep? Yeah. How does it affect sleep, and I'll what is what's the research about, sleep? Yeah. Well and, you know, that's where most people know about its role is through sleep. Right? And I would say even just to back up from sleep, it's really about circadian rhythm modulation. So the beauty of melatonin is that it's the darkness hormone when we think about sleep. So we as the light becomes dimmer so let's just imagine, like, we wake up with the light. That already helps our melatonin if we if our eyes see that bright light. And then we go through the day, and then let's just say that around 6PM, depending on the time of the year, it starts to get a little bit more dim, and we start to produce more and more melatonin from the pineal gland as our body senses that it's dim, and then eventually it goes into nighttime. So how does it play a role in sleep? Well, we have the highest amounts of endogenous melatonin at the peak of darkness, which is about two to 4AM. And what I think is also really interesting as it relates to sleep, you know, we we see that it can impact REM sleep. It can impact dream states. It can also help to remove neurotoxins through the glymphatic fluid, which I know that you know about. Right? So when we sleep, we see that there's greater convection into this interstitial space around the brain, allowing for the detoxification of the brain matter so we can move things out of the brain better, things like toxic amyloid, things like hyperphosphorylated tau proteins. We get that stuff out, and it looks like at least through preclinical studies that melatonin is playing a role in that transport out of the brain. And there is some, very interesting work being done in animals and in cell studies showing that it may even help with helping to fortify the integrity of the the blush the the blood brain barrier. So, you know, when we think of leaky gut, leaky brain? So, essentially, what we see is that melatonin may be helping with decreasing the permeability of that blood brain barrier. So I think that all of these things are helping with sleep. You know? We know that inflammation ties into how a person sleeps. If a person has neuroinflammation, they're gonna have more issues with sleep. So what melatonin is doing, I believe, through its many different functions is it's also helping to reduce the fire within, the inflammation within. It's helping to recalibrate, reset, and get our immune system back into balance at night. Right? So, you know, we need that time, and that's why we can't shortcut sleep. We need to get the full capacity of melatonin to do its job and to work together with glutathione and some of the other antioxidant enzymes, which are also peaking at night. Yeah. That's very interesting that, growth hormone and even, like, the process of autophagy, which is also another, like, cell, like, clearance mechanism, that also, like, is regulated by melatonin in your sleep. So, like, you know, when you look at the circadian rhythms and, you know, if you'll also look at it from, like, evolutionary perspective, then it makes sense that your body is trying to be efficient with repair and sleep and, recovery. So it just clumps it all together at the time where it's most effective to do so when your body is, like, resting. And, then the melatonin as, like, a master hormone in that scenario is, like, coordinating all these other, you know, repair processes in your sleep, which, you know, makes it such such an important role for melatonin as a hormone itself for just, you know, sleep, but also, like, you know, antiaging and longevity and other, like, just metabolic health overall. You totally get it. And you said that beautifully. Right? And that's why, you know, when people are thinking, oh, you know, melatonin, you know, it's we we need to be careful. And, you know, I I feel like people don't understand the full breadth of what melatonin is about because even through the life cycle, if we look at the endogenous production of melatonin so you're talking about aging and, you know, kind of autophagy and maximizing optimizing internal processes. Well, as we go through the life cycle and, you know, within three months of age, we start to see an uptick of melatonin. Right? So the the melatonin starts to increase when we are children, and it peaks until about puberty. And from puberty on, it starts to go down, down, down, down. It doesn't go back up. So it's like some of the other hormones. So by the time that we are in middle age, we're down from you know, as a child, our pineal gland might produce something like close to one milligram. Now in middle age, we're probably at zero point three milligrams. And then we move into the fifties, and we're at, like, zero point one milligrams where, you know, some of us are even bottomed out. And you could say, you know, is that connected to the rise of chronic diseases that are associated with accelerated aging, which start to come up and up and up at about that time of life. Right? Not to say that everything is related to low melatonin, but I think it can be a contributor, and it's something that we have to look at. Yeah. I mean, I I never actually you know, just this is something that came into my mind right now, but, you know, you're totally right about the fact that, yeah, like, melatonin levels decrease after puberty. And I'm glad that you, brought out the amount that your that we make when we are children and in puberty. Like, I didn't know exactly how much we're making when we are in our teenage years. But I by the way, I didn't I didn't know that when we're adults, we make around, you know, zero point one, zero point three milligrams, per night. But, you know, if you look at the safety from the safety profile, then, you know, taking even, like, one milligram of melatonin is because your body already makes that much when you're a teenager. And when you're a teenager, your your risk of any disease is very low, and you produce the most melatonin. So just looking at it from that perspective and even as an adult, taking some melatonin as a supplement is probably, you know, very safe in that sense, at least in the doses of, you know, a few milligrams because your body already makes that much when you're a teenager. And, actually, that large amount of large amount of melatonin produced in your teenage years and childhood is actually what's, you know, keeping your body very young and healthy. Like, your your risk of this disease is very small and your metabolic is healthy because your body is very, you know, able to recover from all the stressors and inflammation super fast. Whereas when you're adult when you're an adult, then that that ability, like, just decreases, gradually. Absolutely. You know, 100%. And that's why, you know, many times in the biohacking world, there's discussion about taking double digits of melatonin as a supplement. And I I have some hesitation about that because I almost think of it like the Goldilocks principle. The Goldilocks principle is not too little, not too much, just right because, otherwise, we can go to the other place where we could have imbalance. Right? And so what we know has been studied in longer term studies is below ten milligrams, below ten milligrams, and for sure, much more around the one milligram mark, if not even, you know, below and also also just a little bit above if we're looking at jet lag. But when people are taking, like, twenty, thirty, fifty milligrams, you know, I don't know. You know? Melatonin can also have some immunostimulatory effects, and, you know, there might be some backlash of taking too high amounts for a a long period because we we just don't know. Now if that if a higher amount is used, like, under clinical care, because it actually has and there have been some studies looking at people, for example, undergoing chemotherapy or, you know, certain indications where it's just being taken at a higher dose for a short period of time, we do have some research on that, but we just don't have long term data on double digits of melatonin. More is not always better, and we know that. Right. Yeah. Well, at least, you know, moderate doses are perfectly safe and, you know, your body is very you know, you you have, like, their immune system memory or the your body your body remembers what it's like to have larger amounts of melatonin. But it's, yeah, like, it's just with age, you see this, drop in melatonin. And, like you said, if coincidentally, all the other diseases also go up, which are all characterized by oxidative stress and inflammation. So, like, what do you think? Like, is some you know, obviously, there's a lifestyle can affect that to a certain extent that, with a healthier lifestyle, you're able to maintain the melatonin production for longer and higher amounts of it. But, you know, do you think that adults, especially elderly people who have very little melatonin, is it, like, then a smart idea for them to, like, supplement it at that age, like, in their sixties or seventies? I would even see see that that could be something that could be discussed with that person at a younger age than sixties or seventies. I'm talking, like, thirties. And, here are some of the things that go into personalizing a supplement. Right? So first, we have to look at a person's lifestyle. Like, are they a shift worker? If they're a shift worker, they have flip flop their circadian rhythm, and they are more at risk for these diseases of aging than somebody who is not doing shift work. So we need to look at lifestyle. We need to look at the stress level because there is a dynamic balance between cortisol and melatonin. And so for people that are trying to convert tryptophan in the body so if just to back up a second. Melatonin needs to be made in the body upon the signal. So what makes melatonin in the body is first having tryptophan going through a series of enzymes. You know, you see serotonin and then eventually you get to melatonin. So if people do not have proper nutrition to drive that through so we need things like zinc and magnesium. There's a methyltransferase that's involved in that production of melatonin. So if you don't have good healthy nutrition, then that conversion will not be robust. You know, some people have gene variance in methyltransferases as an example. Some people have gene variance in even how they metabolize melatonin. And so tryptophan 95% of tryptophan is being used for energy and other things in the body. So under stress, we use even more of that tryptophan in order to get energy currency and other things. We move more of it away from melatonin, and that's called the kynurenin pathway. So 95% goes through the kynurenine pathway for energy NAD, and then only 5% is dedicated to serotonin and melatonin. So it just depends on how stressed we are, how much artificial blue light do we expose our eyes to. And you know what else? Most people don't realize this. This is two interesting tidbits that I haven't told many people yet. One is that the color of your eyes can also determine your sensitivity to artificial blue light at night and be something that you want to consider as it relates to your need for melatonin. So, essentially, there was a study that showed that people with blue, green, and light brown eyes were even more susceptible to the suppression of melatonin production from artificial blue light exposure because, you know, I have green eyes. So, like, I am very sensitive to light. Many times I have to wear sunglasses and you know? So the same thing will apply at night. So you're gonna be even more sensitive at night if you have light eyes compared to somebody with darker eyes. The other thing that can change, one thing I don't tell a lot of people, this is a a study though where they did it in a sleep lab, and they found that irrespective of your exposure to light through your eyes, that from the moon cycle, So, you know, I always say that rhythms run us, and one of the rhythms is the lunar rhythm. We see that you know, usually, we talk about that a lot more with women in the menstrual cycle, but melatonin in the moon are also synced up. So for four days before and four days after a full moon, we naturally have very low melatonin levels. And if you think about it, many people report that they don't sleep well during the full moon. And many people just chalk that up to, well, it's just because I can see the light and you know? But there may actually be something more. So, yeah, there was a study on that that I thought was really interesting. Wow. That's super interesting. Yeah. Like, that makes sense. Or that that explains the the reporting of, loss of sleep during the full moon. So is it more, like, connected to the Earth's position or the, like, the electromagnetic field of the Earth, or how does it, like, affect through the lunar moon? I don't know if we know. I mean, this was a study that just kind of explored this again in a sleep lab, and I haven't found a lot of I've done some digging on the research here, but there isn't a lot. Right. I mean, I think I think I think the Earth's magnetic field, does affect the circadian rhythms. So it might might have to do with something like that, but, yeah, like, I mean, it's pretty interesting. Well, and even seasonal rhythms. So there's circadian rhythm, there's lunar rhythm, then there's circannual rhythms. And circannual rhythms are the seasonal changes. So what we tend to see is that there's a seasonal pattern to melatonin produced in the body. And you know what's really interesting is that people with autoimmune conditions like multiple sclerosis, they tend to have flares at certain times of year, especially early spring. And melatonin actually tends to be low, And, also, vitamin d tends to be low at that time. That's like you know, spring is kind of that that time of where we are shifting. You know, melatonin needs to get acclimated. So I I like what you're saying here about, you know, just thinking bigger into the macro because Right. Things are always changing. And so, you know, I think we have to get our light right. We have to be connected to the seasons. We also need to overcome darkness deficiency. I think people don't have enough darkness. I think we need to be eating a higher antioxidant based diet. And if you want, we can talk about, can you get enough melatonin from food? And then I think we go into supplementation. Right? But if we're in our thirties on up, I I would think that there is a case to be made for including a high quality melatonin supplement. Yeah. I agree. Like, you shouldn't, like, supplement melatonin for children or teenagers because naturally, they should make a lot of melatonin. Correct. And, you know, there's actually there was this study that I talked about as well recently where there's a lot of, uptick in, like, melatonin poisoning, in children in The United States because parents just give their children, like, very large amounts of melatonin. Like, in one of the studies, they gave, like, five milligrams, like, eight to ten times a day. And Oh my goodness. Yeah. And and the child actually died. So, yeah, definitely not for children. And and sometimes the melatonin for children, you find it in gummies or chewables Yeah. Or, you know, where you could potentially take more than if it was a tablet or a capsule. Right? And we also need to be thinking about how the melatonin is packaged and in what format it's in because melatonin is an antioxidant, so it will break down in light and with exposure to oxygen. So if somebody just has, like, a big bottle of melatonin gummies and they keep opening it and, you know, first of all, it's interacting with the other things in the gummy. You don't know what you're getting by the time that you get it, and maybe you're making your way through the bottle. And now maybe the stability has changed. That's a possibility. Yeah. For sure. And, of course, the amounts are not regulated. So it's, you know, you're getting, like, 400% more sometimes than the label says. So, yeah, it's you know, you need really have to be careful with what kind of a melanoma they're taking. There was a study on that for sure where, you know, showing, like, even under the amount that is on the label. You know, that was a study, I think, with Canadian researchers who had taken, like, 30 different products off the shelf and analyzed the content. So I think it does really speak to that. You need to have a good quality melatonin, which does bring me to ergotonin, which is, it's a plant melatonin. So it's not an extract, but it's actually taken right from plants. So, you know, rice, chlorella, alfalfa into this concentrate. And there was a study on it. There was a study on it in which they compared the plant melatonin, which is ergotonin, which I know you know about, versus synthetic melatonin. And I don't think that people realize that ninety nine percent of the melatonin supplements that are on the market are actually synthetically created. So back in the nineteen fifties when we knew that melatonin came from the pineal gland, there was an effort to actually isolate it from the pineal gland of animals. But as you can imagine, that would be very impractical and not sustainable. And so soon thereafter, it went into commercial production and was synthesized from things like petrochemicals. Right? So different, like, petroleum, cold ether, and a variety of different starter compounds can be the initiating substrate. And then there are a series of chemical reactions. And in those chemical reactions, what you can see is that you could get the production of contaminants. There's an article from 2018 talking about 13 different possible contaminants, things like thalomides or formaldehyde derivatives. So in this study, they compared ergotonin against synthetic melatonin, and they found a dramatic difference between the two. And this is what I think biohackers would be into because if you're gonna take melatonin, you might as well have an amplified response. Right? So in this particular study, they looked at anti inflammatory activity, and they found that the ergotonin had up to a, you know, 646% greater anti inflammatory activity compared to synthetic melatonin. It was also able to, scavenge free radicals up to 470% more. They looked in a skin cell line, and they found that the cellular health was better. The amount of reactive oxygen species was 50% less compared to the the the synthetic melatonin cell line. And then, you know, finally, if you just look at ORAC, you look at a measure of antioxidant potential, what you see is that the erbitonin is up to 10 times greater. And I think it's because what you have is it's taken from the plant in the form that it is in the plant. So it's got other things in there. It has things like lutein, zeaxanthin, carotenoids. You have small amounts of things, but in some way, it's working together very synergistically. Right. So with Erbitonin, I think it's it's a better choice, and it comes in doses that are much more realistic and safe. You know, the zero point three milligrams and three milligrams in case you need a higher dose for something like jet lag. Yeah. I mean, yeah, like, huge, fan of the herpetonin, and, the zero point three milligrams is, you know, such a good thing to take, like, on a more regular basis. You know, I might take that, you know, just for the you know, know, it's not like I have, like, sleep problems or something, but I just take it for the antioxidant and, Yeah. And aging benefits to, like, just get more of, like, a more antioxidant, rejuvenative sleep. Because I personally think that, you know, looking at all this research and, just studying about melatonin as a hormone, then you have come to the conclusion, at least for myself, that, that the melatonin is just so powerful in in your sleep. And a lot of the times, a lot of the reasons why you, you know, see, like, a reduction or you or you age slower when you're young is because of the higher amounts of melatonin. At least that's what I, you know, come come to the conclusion of. And when that drops, when you reach adulthood and when especially the older you get, then, you know, you have, like, just a small gap or you not not small, like, a pretty massive gap in your antioxidant, capacity and recovery and anti inflammatory pathways that, needs to be filled with somehow if you want to, like, you know, optimally age or, you know, reduce the aging, as much as possible. So, like, you know, I take the melatonin, the herbutone in the smaller dose, maybe, like, pretty much every night, maybe, like, not not on every night, maybe, like, five times a week. And the the three milligrams, I yeah. I'll take I'll take that only if, like, I'm severely sleep deprived if I have to catch, like, a flight super early and I need to just, catch up on that sleep or if I have, like, yeah, jet lag and circadian mismatch. So, like, the doses are, like, very good. Like, a very small dose that you would want to on a if you take melatonin every night, then, yeah, it's probably not a good idea to take, like, ten or, you know, five milligrams every night. But, you know, zero point one, zero point three is, like, the perfect amount on a nightly basis to take. Yeah. That's that's exactly what I do as well. So when I'm traveling, I take the three milligrams because I may need to just get a reset from the jet lag. Like, I'm just returning yesterday, I was on the East Coast, and I live on the West Coast Of The United States. And so, you know, just even taking that to help me. And plus travel and flying is so toxic. You know? All the radiation, you know, depending on the time of day that you fly. So like you, I take it not just for the time difference and the change with jet lag and sleep patterns and chrono disruption, but I also take it just as, an anti inflammatory, antioxidant, you know, something to help my body, especially my anti my mitochondrial antioxidants to be better fortified. Because one of the things that we noticed, like, one of the signs that somebody can be low in melatonin is that that they have low energy. You know? That's one of the symptoms of aging. One of the symptoms you know, fatigue is rampant. I mean, most people have some level of fatigue, and it could be connected to hormonal disruption. So cortisol, testosterone, melatonin. I mean, they all play together in the same biochemical sandbox. So Yeah. You know, not to say, like, you should, you know, do high, high doses again. What we're looking at is replenishment. Right? Like, let's just fill the gaps because as we get older, we just have more gaps. As we live an unhealthy lifestyle, we have more gaps. And I think too, you know, just tossing this out there to your audience, you know, blue light blocking glasses can also be helpful. Because, you know, somebody listening might say, oh my goodness. Like, I live an unhealthy life. I travel so much. I'm on the computer at night. You know? I go and work out at the gym at at night, and it has fluorescent lights. You know? All of these things. So what you may wanna do is, you know, I kinda stack it. So the first layer is really be attentive to your light in your environment. Right? Like, get that first morning bright light as best you can just for a couple of minutes. Try to measure your light. I don't know about you, but I measure my light using a light meter on my phone. So I have an app. It's called light meter. And I can just use the light on my phone, just the camera, to register a number of lux. Lux is the unit of light. So even now, like, I'm in front of a window with a lot of natural light, and that's already changing my retina. So I can't be outside because I'm inside talking with you. And so, you know, that's just one more way to get more light. Right? You gotta be smart about, like, what you're actually getting. And then in my sleeping room, so at night, I've actually measured it because you want it to be under one lux. So there are some recommendations for light exposure. And so if you don't measure it, you don't change it, I think. Like, what you don't know can actually you know, the more you know about, like, measuring the light and changing the bulbs and having more red hue is is more you know, know, it's just gonna be help you with the balance, like dimming the lights at night as much as you can. And then I think from there, you've gotta look at diet. You know, one of the questions that I get is, hey, Diana. Can I eat a bunch of cherries and just get enough melatonin? Like, can I just have a handful of pistachios and be good? You know? I mean, I don't discount having a good healthy quality diet. There's no way. I mean, I look at phytonutrient density, antioxidant levels that you get from food, quality protein, balanced fats, all of that stuff. But if you actually so I've actually cranked the numbers on this. If you wanted to get zero point three milligrams of melatonin from food, you would have to have over 2,500 cherries. You would need and I'm basing it on a study where they actually measured the melatonin in cherries, and that can be variable depending on the season. Right? So that's not always gonna even be the same. If you wanted to get pistachios, because most people say, oh, I saw this on social media. All I need is some pistachios, and I'll have enough melatonin. Well, not so much. I mean, you would need over 1,500 raw pistachios to get zero point three milligrams of melatonin. Yeah. So I'm not saying don't eat cherries and don't eat pistachios. Eat them because they have nutritional merit. But if you're trying to get melatonin from them, you'd get a stomachache having that much. Yeah. You know, you'd have to swim in it. You you would be nonstop eating, and who even knows how that would be absorbed and Right. You know, all of the the issues with with these different foods. But eat a good quality diet for sure. I mean, we all know. That's that's the basics. Yeah. And, I mean, you know, if, let's say, even if you are an adult in your thirties or forties, your body would make still, like, you know, 0.2. Maybe if you're exposed to some blue light or something, it's gonna make 0.1, for example. So your body would make, you know or your body will help you in making some melatonin, but, you know, is it enough? Like, is the three is is the zero point three milligrams per night enough? Like, as we already talked about, we I think, you know, I don't think it's enough for, like, optimal antiaging and optimal, like, anti inflammatory benefits and longevity benefits. So you would still probably need, like, a little bit more. You know? Yeah. And you and, obviously and even the zero point three milligrams you would take from herbutonin probably isn't enough. It's just it's gonna fill the gap a little bit. And you'd still want to pay attention to the other things like the blue light and the morning sunlight and the dietary components of melatonin. So if you add all those up, then you would get maybe, like, you know, zero point six or zero point five milligrams of melatonin. So and, together with the herbutonin, zero point three milligrams, for example. So, you know, it's still, like, it's not like the zero point three milligrams is gonna be enough even, like, I I would, you know, want to if if my body would make the teenage melatonin all my life, then that would be pretty good. I think making making the one milligram melatonin every night for the rest of my life, I think I would age much slower and live a bit longer. So it's not it's just, you know, for optimal end aging, you would still want to make sure that your body makes as much melatonin as it can naturally and then support it with dietary practices, lifestyle practices, light routines, and maybe some supplementation as well. Yeah. And, you know, there's there's one other hack I can give your audience as far as taking a melatonin supplement. Because some people will say to me, hey, Deanna. I, you know, I wake up at night after taking melatonin. I thought melatonin is supposed to help me to sleep the whole night. So what melatonin is really good at if you're taking it for sleep and not for its benefits to help with aging is that melatonin is a lot better for helping with what is called sleep latency, meaning that it it can help you to go to sleep faster. You know? And there have been some studies on that. And, what melatonin does too is it changes your core body temperature. So, you know, like, when you're getting ready to go to sleep and you kinda get a little bit chilly and like, okay. I'm gonna put on my pajamas. I'm getting I'm gonna put a blanket on. I mean, that is when your melatonin is going up, is what I think because it is a hypothermic agent. And so you can take it and then, you know, for some women who get hot flashes, so they're going through their fifties or their forties, and they've got perimenopause or waking up at night, you may actually need a little bit higher of that melatonin and not so much just for getting you to sleep, but maybe to help with, you know, kind of that hypothermic aspect that melatonin brings forward. Right? Now one thing is, like, when people say, like, oh, you know, I so just to step back, melatonin is both water soluble and fat soluble. So for people who want to take Erbitonin and have a more delayed response to carry the melatonin effects throughout perhaps a longer portion of the evening, what I often recommend now this is not based on science. This is just based on clinical, you know, just tips and application, but to take it with a little bit of fat. So fat will delay that, the the uptake of melatonin just because fat in general, like, lowers stomach emptying and and changes a lot of those dynamics. If you want to increase the uptake of melatonin like, let's just say, like, my husband, he he will say, well, Deanna, I get groggy in the morning. And I'm like, Mark, you're not taking it at the right time. You need to take it you know, for most people, it's about an hour before bedtime. But for him, he needs to take it. His metabolism of melatonin is a little bit different. So I told him to take it a few hours before bedtime, like, two to three hours, and take it with a little bit of, with water so that it it kind of has longer time, and then the water will move it through. Whereas the fat will delay the the kind of the movement theoretically through the gastrointestinal tract. So you can kind of work with your and, you know, vitamin d is also, fat soluble. So in theory, you know, taking your vitamin d at night might be something that you might wanna do. You know? Or if people don't wanna take another supplement and they just wanna take, like, Erbitonin, just to take maybe a little bit of almond butter, like, something that's a little bit, just just a small amount because you don't wanna disrupt your sleep by having food, but just get some fat into the body. I think that that could you know, you can kinda modulate. You can delay it with fat and accelerate it with having water and running it through your system that way. Interesting. So, yeah, like, just taking it before bed with some water actually makes it run out faster, and, you might feel more groggy because of that, or you might wake up in the night. Yeah. I mean, it you'd have to play with it on your own. Like, every person's so different. So, and this is why having coffee too close to bedtime is not only disruptive for your sleep, but it actually competes for an enzyme with melatonin. So you've gotta look at all of your nighttime behaviors. Like Right. But, yes, like, in general, you might wanna think about, like, when you're taking the supplement, like, do you need it an hour before bedtime? That's usually, like, the time frame. And you can take it with water. You can take it many times, I just swallow the Erbitonin. I'm good either way. Like, it doesn't affect me to have the fat or the water, and I just it's such a small capsule. And by the way, Erbitonin is packaged in an airtight sealed, package. It's like a a it's foiled in. Right? So it doesn't have the exposure to air and to light if you keep it in its package. Right? So you're opening one capsule at a time and taking it out. So you're preserving the integrity of the melatonin longer. Yeah. So that's just something to think about as well. Yeah. Because most of the melatonins, they're just inside the bottle, you know, sitting there together and doing Right. A 100 times a 100 times over the course of few months, then, yeah, yeah, the last melatonin are gonna be pretty ineffective, I would imagine. Exactly. Yeah. So be thinking about that. You know, some people wonder about, like, their effects from the melatonin, and I'll say, do you have other things in that melatonin supplement? Because it could actually be working at cross purposes. Like, it's not always good to have a kitchen sink formula and, like, bring melatonin together with all these other things, Right. Because it may actually change the metabolism. You know, other people that are on medication, like, a lot of medications interact with melatonin, so you need to be aware of that. Like, you could be changing up your metabolism of melatonin. Even men and women, have different bioavailability of melatonin. Surprisingly, women have a better uptake than men do, which I don't know what the reason is for that, but I just know that, you know, that that has been shown in in one one study. So you might have to be thinking about the time of the month, like, thinking about the moon and just track your sleep as you're taking Erbitonin. What is going to change your sleep? Because maybe it's not the the ergotonin. It's not the melatonin per se, but it's all these other factors that you have to be looking at. Right? So, I just think we have to look broadly. Like, if we're super stressed, you know, we're traveling a lot. We have a lot of oxidative stress. Even athletes can have a lot of oxidative stress as we know. So even for them, I think having a supplemental melatonin like Erbitonin can be really important for helping to restore that balance through the mitochondria. Right. What about, like, the safety side? Because, I mean, many people, you know, say that it's, unsafe or they're afraid of using it because it's a hormone, like you said. So, what what's the, like, what's the safety dose of melatonin as a supplement? And, yeah, like, how much is too much, like you said, like, that you you shouldn't take too much? Yeah. No. It's a good question. You know? And, of course, everybody has to ask their own clinician. This, we're not giving any kind of prescription or advice here. But in general, if we look at the studies and, like, the margin of safety, what I see out there for just overall cellular health, helping with the regulation of the mitochondria and looking at a variety of different effects, we're looking at between zero point three to one milligram. And that's just kind of like that's a low that's like a healthy endogenous physiologic level. Right? We've been talking a lot about how do we just replenish what we're losing. And for some people, they're losing it faster than others. You know? Because, again, their their light exposure is high. Their stress level is high, etcetera. They're not eating a good diet, all of those things. And then when it comes to shift work and jet lag, that's a little bit of a novel application. So there is a way to use melatonin, such as Erbitonin with shift workers. So, you know, having that low level over time to help with resetting the circadian rhythm. So anywhere between, you know, zero point three to six milligrams, you know, looking at shift work and then jet lag. You know, in general, thinking about you know, if I'm if I'm going from the West Coast to the East Coast, I usually like to think about, you know, three time zones, therefore, three milligrams of of melatonin. So I take that three milligrams of Erbitonin, and I take sometimes, you know, and and you hear this from different people. They start the melatonin before they have even left. So before they've even left their location, you know, where where their home base is, they start taking the low level of melatonin. They start to go to bed a little bit earlier every night if they can, like, three to four nights before they travel, and they take the zero point three. And then when they get to their destination, that night, they would take the three milligrams for about three days thereafter until their sleeping is back to normal, and that should help restore it or at least, you know, get them back on track faster. So when you ask about, like, margin of safety, you know, everybody is a little bit different. So, again, we have to take into account lifestyle, medication use. Does somebody drink coffee throughout the day? What's their response to light? What's their sleep hygiene like? But in general, I think you and I are saying the same thing, which is going with a more physiologic dose for kind of, like, more the the broad approach of melatonin in all of its many different functions. So that zero point three milligrams, you know, up to about one milligram is what I would say. Gotcha. Right. Yeah. I've also seen and, you know, with the natural melatonin production, that's also, like, another misconception. Like, is it going to shut down your natural melatonin production and you're, like, screwed after you stop taking melatonin, or what's the case there? Yeah. That that seems to be, like, the most popular question I get. You know, there is this fear because the reason why people are asking it, it's actually a really good question, is because with with many hormones, you know, there is a biofeedback. Right? So if the pituitary is producing a signaling hormone to the adrenals, eventually, the adrenals signal back, you know, and the cortisol creates this negative biofeedback. Right? So, like, we don't continue to produce. And so melatonin, because it flexes beyond being a hormone, it's just a little bit different in that way. So because people have asked me the question, I actually went into the studies just to look at, are there studies that look to see whether or not we impact endogenous production from taking melatonin? And there were up to four different studies that I had found that were prospectively actually addressing that question. So they found that the melatonin supplement did not impact endogenous production. And then there's also kind of, like, the lineage of studies looking at, like, three decades worth of studies looking at using it in people with cancer, and that was much higher dose of melatonin supplements. They haven't documented that effect. Now the one thing I'll mention is that you can't if if you think of melatonin in its true sense as an endocrine hormone so an endocrine hormone would have receptors on a cell that it would have to plug into. Right? And then you start to see that ripple through effect to the clock genes or all the other aspects of DNA and such. So you can get if you're taking too high of an amount, you might see a saturation of the receptors. So that's why I think if you're taking too much melatonin, you may actually just supersaturate those receptors. Right? And what I think is is healthy in the body is to have kind of, you know, the the activation and then the deactivation, the letting go. Right? And not to just have melatonin sitting on those receptors all the time. So that's just something to think about. There isn't a lot of science on it. There was you know, doctor Russell Ryder is one of the premier researchers in this whole area of melatonin science. And so these are some of his, his principles, his guidance too based on the research. So but to answer the question, does taking melatonin re result in decreased levels, we do not see that in science. And, again, everybody is a little bit different. So your level, your threshold of what works for you is going to vary. So to work with a practitioner to really figure that out or just kinda go within those guardrails of what we're saying here with that the low dose, the physiologic dose of replenishing what you're losing with age. And, you know, if you really wanna know your melatonin levels, you can get a sense of those in a laboratory test. So there are different labs out there like Dutch, which does a nice, type of cycle mapping where they look at different hormones. They look at urinary metabolites of melatonin. So looking at different times throughout the day to look at kind of that melatonin response and kind of the only thing is that because melatonin can change so rapidly because of the darkness or the light, you have to be sure that you're maintaining kind of, like, your consistent level of your activity and your light exposure because, otherwise, you may get a a skewed reading from that. Right? So but if you absolutely wanna know, let's just say you're a shift worker. You know, you're a nurse or you're a doctor. You're you're you're working maybe you work in a mine or, you know, you work in darkness. You're an X-ray technician, and you're really concerned about your light and your dark exposure, and you just wanna get clear. You can work with a clinician to look at your symptoms, any kind of health conditions. They can do your gene variants, some of them, especially if they're functionally trained. You know? So I I teach, you know, functional medicine principles, and so, you know, that's why you you really have to plug into the person. And I think if people want numbers, they want laboratory tests. You know, there are ways to look at just urinary melatonin metabolism and from that, inferring whether or not people need melatonin. I was actually pretty glad. I I did do my urinary melatonin levels, and, I was all good on you know, this was a way because I was already taking herbitonin, but when I did the lab test, it was like my urine metabolites show that they were in a good healthy range. So I was thinking, okay. I'm spot on on my dose. Right? Like, that kinda gave me positive feedback that it was like, okay. This seems to be within the range that is acceptable or at least established by a lab that I I know and trust. Nice. Yeah. I've actually seen also that in the nineties, they used melatonin as a contraceptive in, like, very large amounts, like, seventy five milligrams. Have you, like or what's, like, the research you've seen about that? Well, you know, that question often will come up about, you know, how does melatonin change other hormones? It does. You know? We are connected in kind of this hormone web. The most notable connection that we see is cortisol and melatonin. Like, they're like brother and sister. So, you know, cortisol comes up high in the morning. Melatonin comes up high at night. So they kind of, like, change guards. So with respect to, you know, looking at fertility and and seeing these changes, I think, you know, we need to be cautious with high levels like that of, you know, what we might possibly see. There is a potential that it could be connected into estrogen, progesterone, testosterone. You know? And we even see that as a child starts to go through puberty, there can be this dynamic shift. Right? So but I I think, you know, if we keep everything physiologic, what the body normally makes, then we don't run into all of these issues where where it's almost like a spider web. Like, when we have, like, such a high level of melatonin, we start to tug on that that web. Right? And we don't know where we're gonna go for the individual in terms of their respective hormones. So that could be different for a postmenopausal woman versus a premenopausal woman. That could be different for an athletic man versus a sedentary man. So I think, you know, when we we just have to take a lot of things into account and not just say more is better. Let's just talk this melatonin sounds so good. Let me just take more because, you know, as as you and I know, like, even with something like beta carotene, more is not always better beta beta carotene. You know? And we see that, you know, when we start to take things in high amounts that go beyond what is just naturally occurring, sometimes we can start to get a skewed effect or an untoward effect. Yeah. I agree. And I haven't you know, I've only seen one paper about the contraceptive effects. Apparently, they did use it in the nineties. I don't know if they do it anymore. Probably not. But, you know, the the association between melatonin use and, lower testosterone isn't isn't there either. Like, the in the start in US, at least, they've done many studies looking at melatonin use and, testosterone levels and stuff like that, and they find that, has no, association or or it doesn't reduce the testosterone levels at all. And when it comes to, like, puberty, then, you know, obviously, there's the fear that if you take melatonin, it's gonna postpone puberty in some ways. You know, some may some people might think it's actually gonna be good for longevity or something if you delay the puberty or you have high melatonin levels. But, even then, they don't find that the melatonin use in children would affect, like, the pubertal development. Yeah. Like, in most of the studies that I've seen, like, there was only one Dutch study, but, it wasn't like a randomized clinical trial, obviously. And there's many things that also could affect, those results. Excuse me. Yeah. Exactly. I I think, we need more data if we're gonna start talking about melatonin and estrogen, melatonin and testosterone. And I think too, just to circle back from some of the earlier comments where we started off where, you know, children, even teenagers, I don't think need melatonin. You know? For sure. Like, unless there's a specific indication for which we know that melatonin would be good for, you know, aside from all of the dietary intervention, the physical activity, the lifestyle environment that they're sleeping in. And, you know, I I think that kids today I mean, they're they're on devices a lot, you know, all the time. Right? Then they go to sleep with their device, and they're scrolling, and they've got that blue light. So it's like, let's just start with some of the basics first rather than Mhmm. Be thinking about, like, bringing melatonin into that population because I I just don't think that that would be, like, a first line Yeah. Approach to to helping them to have better sleep or a better, puberty experience. Yeah. Yeah. And, you know, when you look at the fatalities of the melatonin overdose in children, then most of those cases was just parents giving the melatonin to the child so that they would sleep or, you know, that they would stop sleeping or something like that, which is, you know, very irresponsible from, the parent. But, again, like, yeah, if you just optimize the basics, like the light environment and for children or teenagers, make sure that you don't just scroll the phone, which is a massive inhibitor of melatonin production and disrupt sleep and all those things. So, you know, those are the first things that you should do. And, when it comes to the Definitely. And when it comes to the babies or infants, then, actually, the funny thing about it is also that, mother's breast milk also has melatonin through Yeah. Thank you for mentioning that. Yeah. And in fact, it's thought that even, babies that have colic or, you know, bouts of crying and unrest, you know, is that connected to low melatonin and, you know, to start to stage increasing levels of melatonin just as the endogenous production ramps up. So it'd be interesting to see. I don't I'm not aware of a study in babies that are breastfed versus, given milk or, you know, different kinds of milk or formula just in terms of, like, their ramping up of melatonin. That'd be interesting to look at. There is an animal study that comes to my mind of where they gave the animals, the mothers, melatonin, and that was able to modify, I I from my recollection, the gut microbiome of the offspring. So there could be certain things that it's like we don't have to give it to the child, but maybe we can ensure that the mother and you know, is is well equipped. Like, she's tracking on her melatonin levels, you know, depending on the age that she decides to get pregnant. But, yeah, I do remember this study as far as, like, maternal melatonin supplementation was able to help to protect against a lot of the issues, like the immune inflammatory issues seen in the gut in the in the offspring. So that's interesting. We need do need to be thinking about maybe it's not the child themselves, but it's the parents and how they're coming into it with the best I mean, because that oocyte, right, the egg and the sperm, you know, are are gonna be especially the sperm is rich in in in in the, in melatonin, mitochondria. The egg is as well. And if they're both at their optimum, you know, theoretically, now we have, you know, less oxidative stress and more chance for something like fertility. Right. So I think we we need to be thinking about that. It's it's good that you bring that up. It it's true. You know? Yeah. I was thinking, you know, there's also, you know, the daily diurnal aspect to it so that, you know, the mother has higher melatonin or she should have higher melatonin in the evening. And Yeah. If she breastfeeds the child before bed Yeah. Even that she has melatonin in her system, not under the blue lights, for example, or, you know, in a dimmer environment, she would give the child this, melatonin rich breast milk, which, you know, for the child who is less than three months of age, he would get this natural melatonin supplement that would help them to sleep. And, you know, a lot of the times that infants don't sleep is that they don't get the melatonin because the baby formulas don't have melatonin. And most women, I would imagine, don't breastfeed. And, you know, especially if they do, they're probably doing it, like, either under the blue light. So the Yeah. Mother doesn't have melatonin in the breast milk or they, you know you know, pump the milk in the daytime and then feed it in the night to the child, which makes make sure that the milk doesn't have melatonin either. So you you know, if you want to make sure the infant sleeps, then you have to get them melatonin. Obviously, don't give the melatonin supplement, but give them, like, milk that has some melatonin that would, you know, give fill their gap, which because they don't make melatonin if they're, infants. I love how you connect all the dots. That that is so good, and it's often, you know, dismissed. So many people are just focused on melatonin for sleep. But if we, gosh, we can look at preconception. We can look at, you know, lactation. We can look at aging. I mean, there's so many different aspects. And and I think when it comes to ensuring that a baby is, you know, sleeping better and you know, why is it that some children sleep better than others? You know? Is that related to melatonin? Is it related to even their gut microbiome, which could be influenced by the melatonin? Right? Right. You know, one other thing I I wanna I just entered my mind that I wanted to leave your audience with is that it kinda goes back to the article that we wrote about melatonin being, like, the next vitamin d. There was one study that actually showed that when you correct and you help vitamin d levels, you actually help melatonin. That there's some correlation between melatonin and vitamin d. So think of how many people are vitamin d insufficient, deficient. And so I want everybody to, like, leave this conversation with thinking of the seasonal changes in vitamin d. I mean, just personally, I get my vitamin d measured twice a year. I get it in March, and I get it in September, October, and I just had mine done. So I kinda wanna see, like, what happens at the end of winter, like, when my vitamin d should be at its lowest. And so would melatonin would also be low during that time of year. And then what about vitamin d potentially at my highest, which would be after summer? So we need to keep our vitamin d in check. And if we're overdoing vitamin d, I would like to put out the question, are we changing up melatonin as well? Like, I think some people go a little bit too high on vitamin d as well. You know, the Goldilocks principle to me applies here. Right. And I know that one of the things, like, when people do really high doses of vitamin d, if they're not taking magnesium, they can actually lead into a potential magnesium insufficiency or deficiency because we need magnesium for the conversion to active vitamin d. Right? So and we need magnesium for sleep. So, and for so many body processes. So, I I just wanna leave people there thinking about the triangle. If you can imagine a triangle in your mind of, like, melatonin, vitamin d, magnesium. Like, there is a connection here with those three. And, you know, as you and I started off talking, we know that vitamin d is used for so many different functions in the body. It's beyond being a vitamin. I think it was mistermed. You know, it's a it's a vitamin, but it's it's doing a lot more just like melatonin is. And that's why I contend. I wanna leave this conversation by saying that I do think that melatonin can justifiably be a nutrient. We need it. You know? It's it's similar to, like, vitamin d being used for so many different things, and we need to, sometimes correct our levels of vitamin d very similar with melatonin. It's flexing to being more than just a hormone. Right. So Yeah. That's true. So so I wanted to ask that, so is the melatonin naturally higher in the winter because there's more darkness, or is it more higher in the summer where it's more sunlight? Or what was the connection there? Yeah. Theoretically, it would be higher in the in the winter months, and, we would have lower vitamin d. But, again, we're we're pulling on that. I had somebody ask me before just about you know? And and I think we need more research there because, you know, different populations of people, you know, might exhibit different characteristics seasonally in terms of their behaviors and what they do. Like, they may actually have more light during the winter. Right? Like, where they're living even more indoors. They're not getting the bright light. So one of the things that I think is really important, especially in the darker months, is to make sure that you get the bright light first thing in the morning. Because while melatonin is produced during the darkness, it also needs kind of that set of that bright light in the in the morning. So people with seasonal affective disorder, this may be a population where there's a dysregulation of the circadian tone. Right? So it's not just getting the darkness of which we get a lot of in the winter months, but it's also getting the light. So that's off during the winter months, and that could disturb melatonin in some people. Gotcha. Great. Yeah. Yeah. It was it's been great. And, yeah, super, you know, fascinating things about melatonin, and I'm glad that you shared it with us. Before I ask my last question, where can people learn more about you and your work? So, I would say Symphony Natural Health is a great website where you can find out a lot of information on the Erbitonin. So, and then there's also another website, which is just all research, and it's called phytomelatonin, so phytomelatonin.com. And then my own personal website is dianaminnick.com. And so I put together just more recently too looking at, you know, my one of my interests is in chronobiotics. So chronobiotics would be things like the melatonin, things like polyphenols, and how even, you know, time of year when you're born could determine so much of, you know, health and kind of, different conditions that could evolve. So you'll see some of that on my blogs, and, I have a number of different resources that people can download. And one of them is actually on melatonin if people want it. Nice. We'll put all the links in the show notes. Okay. And my last question is, what's the one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? Stress less. It's not worth it. I mean, it sounds so simplistic. You know, but I you know, I'm almost 53, and I kinda feel like, wow. You know, why did I worry so much about all of that stuff, like, so early in life? Like but, you know, it's all part of the process. So I I don't have this feeling of regret or remorse. But if I was talking to my younger self, I would say eat a better diet, you know, get more activity, don't stress so much. You know, kind of like all the basics and just enjoy enjoy life. I think that that's really important. Yeah. I agree. I agree. Stress is definitely something that, you know, ages everyone faster. It does. Stress ages us. And, you know, like, gray hair, wrinkling skin, you know, all the things that people are so preoccupied about. And by the way, I have this feeling with I I don't fear aging at all. Like, what I don't want is, like, when I don't have functionality. You know? Like, when I can't be independent, when I can't, like, feel a good quality of life. But, like, it doesn't matter to me if I'm 53 or 83. Like, I some of my role models, like, I just see them aging in such a beautiful way, and I just think of their brains, their neuronal plasticity, and all of those connections that they made. So, yeah, I mean, I think every part of the life cycle, we're we're learning something about ourselves. Right? And it's all relevant no matter no matter what. So, yeah, stay healthy as best you can and stay in that that coherence of, feeling content, creative, and colorful as I like to say. Yeah. Well, it's it's been great to talk with you, and, yeah, thanks for sharing all this amazing information with us. Oh, thank you so much. Oh, yeah. Looking forward to maybe a few more future studies or something like that and your future work. Thanks so much. But do you want to achieve and maintain biological youth? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to add healthy years to their life. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@siemlunge.com, and I'll send you the details.