When it comes to lithium, then people usually associate it with batteries and just technological devices. Pretty much all electric vehicles have some lithium in their batteries. But no one really knows that lithium as a compound can also have many anti aging and health benefits. In this video, I'm gonna talk about this new study that showed how lithium can extend human lifespan. Do it. So the study is very new, published 01/11/2023. Lithium treatment extends human lifespan And, they did find that among like a half million individuals, the lithium use was associated with, like, you know, life extension and better antiaging effects. We here find therapeutic supplementation of lithium linked to decreased mortality of individuals diagnosed with affective disorders. So historically lithium has been used with like bipolar disorder, mania, schizophrenia and you know those kinds of mental disorders. And, it does have like some cognitive effects as well. It can protect against dementia and just have like a nootropic effect in some sense. So in this study, they find that the analysis revealed lithium to be the strongest factor in regards to increased survival effects in this cohort of people corresponding to three point six times lower chances of dying at a given age for lithium users compared to users of other antipsychotic drugs. It's hard to control because, you know, if the individuals are taking antipsychotic drugs, then they already have, yeah, like these affective disorders and like like other like mental, you know, they're not they're not healthy in the the like, you know, best optimal sense. And just that adding the lithium obviously compared to regular people who don't have any like mental disorders then, you know, it doesn't mean that lithium could be even better for individuals who don't have any mental disorders. It apparently is better than like these antipsychotic drugs and not taking any like drugs if you have a mental disorder. So you can see from this chart the individuals who did take lithium, the they do have increased survival and reduced mortality and across pretty much all ages, but significantly more after the age of like 65. That's where the, the difference between taking lithium and not taking lithium apparently widens significantly more. And as you can see, the use of lithium was actually associated with more survival than even BMI and alcohol intake or exercise or smoking. So yeah this is definitely like one of the most significant or the significant factor what determined the survival between these individuals in this group. But lithium has also other studies showing that it has longevity effects in pretty much all animals, all species. In humans we find here an inverse correlation between drinking water concentrations and all cause mortality in 18 neighboring Japanese municipalities with a total of one point two million individuals. Next study, 2018 Trace lithium in Texas tap water is negatively associated with all cause mortality and premature death. This is the study actually building up on the Japanese study of the 18 Japanese municipalities. Using a larger dataset with several Texas counties, our study shows that lithium concentrations in tap water are negatively associated with all cause mortality. Thus, our present findings extend and reinforce lithium's purported life prolonging effects in humans. Not only just all cause mortality, but even suicide, so, lithium levels in the public drinking water supply and risk of suicide. Higher lithium levels in drinking water might have a protective effect on the risk of suicide in men. Here's the graph of the study and you can see that yeah the levels of lithium, the higher concentrations of like twenty five micrograms per liter that is associated with significantly reduced rates of suicide compared to like having zero or five micrograms per liter. So it's almost like a linear dose specific response in reducing the rates of mortality in this study. And this finding is also supported by other studies, lithium in the prevention of suicidal behaviour and all cause mortality in patients with mood disorders. So it kind of like, you know, stabilises the mind. A lot of it has to do apparently through Nrf two. So, lithium causes, like, a small hormetic effect similar to other supplements or activities and increases nRF two, which is this, you know, stimulator or activator of glutathione also which increases antioxidant defense status. So this is the reason why lithium has like it just reduces inflammation, reduces oxidative stress, and protects against, many aspects of, like, you know, aging through oxidative stress. And this is the reason why it has also effects on the brain in terms of neuroprotective effects, dementia, lithium can have with it can reduce the incidence of dementia in patients with bipolar disorder. Now lithium is one of those minerals that doesn't have an actual RDA. Like, there is no, like, dietary guideline for getting lithium from your diet or water. Usually most people get let's say your tap water has some lithium, then in general you're gonna get something around like, you know, at least one milligram or zero point five milligrams of lithium per day from the dietary sources and the tap water. If, however, you're living in a region that doesn't have any lithium in your water or you have actual, you know, you're drinking just purified water, distilled water, it doesn't have any minerals, then yeah, chances are you may be like somewhat on the lower end around like, you know, zero point five milligrams. I think that, you know, generally these studies also support that you want to have at least like one milligram of lithium per day from any source like your water or your dietary sources. However, personally, I also use like a microdosing of lithium oratate. I take like one milligram, not every day, but you know definitely like you know twice a week, three times a week or something like that. And, I use it mostly as, like, the brain predictive effects. I use it as an nootropic, but, yeah. Apparently, in microdoses, it also has life, lifespan extending effects and, reduces risk of mortality. Lithium is also deemed to be relatively safe. It, doesn't have any, like, actual toxic side effects unless you're taking, like, you know, some ungodly amounts of it. If you take, like, one milligram or, yeah, you drink some tap water that has lithium, then yeah chances are nothing is gonna happen. And they found even in people with cardiac disease, lithium is generally safe. However, pregnant women should definitely avoid getting too much lithium or taking like a lithium supplement because they can increase the risk of cardiac malformations in the baby. So yeah, like if you're pregnant then definitely don't do this. In conclusion, lithium in tap water is associated with reduced rates of suicide, homicide and reduced risk of all cause mortality as well. Using lithium as a supplement has anti aging and protective effects in individuals who have mental disorders and mental affective disorders. So yeah I think that like a microdosing lithium as a nootropic event is definitely something that I'm doing and I think could be well worth it if you take like one milligram of lithium you know a few times a week. Definitely don't do it like every day. I think it's not necessary but you know every once in a while it's probably kind of a good good strategy to do. If you are interested in reversing your biological age and slowing down aging then email me the word health to info@simlondon.com and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seam, so they optimize, they import.