We know some things can make you age faster, whereas other things slow down your biological aging. In this video, I'm gonna talk about this new study that revealed the top 10 things that are associated with accelerated biological aging, And the two things that are protective against that and slow down your aging. Do it. So the study is very new, published in March and, it's called genetic evidence for causal effects of socioeconomic lifestyle and cardiometabolic factors on epigenetic age acceleration. So they basically used two of these biological age tests or clocks, GRIM age acceleration and Pheno AIDS acceleration tests, which are based on the DNA methylation, which currently is considered one of the like gold standard ways to assess biological age. And it's based on the Horwath's clock. Steve Horwath came up with the epigenetic clock theory of aging and yeah it's based on measures like this DNA methylation patterns that gives you like a reference point in terms of what is associated with a certain biological age. And they actually used studies, the genome wide association studies of up to 1,000,000 Europeans and they pulled the summary statistics from about 34,710 Europeans. They identified twelve and eight factors causally associated with grim age acceleration and pheno age acceleration respectively. So number one, the biggest thing that was associated with the greatest speed of biological aging was smoking and it had the strongest risk factor. Number two was higher alcohol intake. Number three, higher waist circumference. Number four, daytime napping. Number five, higher body fat percentage. Number six, higher body mass index. Number seven, higher c reactive protein or CRP. Number eight, higher triglycerides. Number nine, childhood obesity. And number 10, type two diabetes. So these were the top 10 factors associated with the greatest acceleration of these DNA methylation clocks and their biological age. I think many people aren't surprised by most of them. Like smoking is pretty common knowledge that it's one of the worst things for your health and aging because yeah, it just causes a massive amounts of oxidative stress and inflammation that raises blood pressure, causes even like insulin resistance, increases risk of cardiovascular disease, cancer and yeah, it's just generally bad for you. Alcohol intake is also pretty like established to be generally harmful to your health. Although the moderate consumption of alcohol has been found to be actually linked with like more longevity and all these blue zones etc. They're drinking small amounts of alcohol, like a little bit of wine or something like that. But higher alcohol intake in this context just refers to probably someone who drinks multiple drinks per day. I don't think that drinking like, you know, one or one to two drinks per week probably has like no any significant or any meaningful impact on your longevity. But if you over drink and if you drink just, you know, too many drinks, multiple drinks per day then that will accelerate your biological age and increase your mortality as well. Next up, higher waist circumference which is also pretty known because the higher waist circumference is actually more important than the BMI because the waist circumference will reflect your amount of visceral adiposity and central obesity, which is the amount of visceral fat around the organs. That is actually much more harmful for you than the subcutaneous fat under the skin and the visceral fat is gonna cause insulin resistance and just raises inflammation and causes other harm. Daytime napping is interesting. So, you know, usually take a nap. If you need to take a nap then, you know, it just means that you probably didn't get good enough sleep. If you chronically have to take naps all the time then that probably means that you're just your sleep at nighttime is quite bad and, it's just like a association. I don't think that, you know, the napping itself is accelerating your biological age, it's just that if you need to take naps then it is an indicator for something else. Like it means that your sleep quality is bad or you're experiencing jet lag or this circadian with mismatches, you're doing shift work. Like people who do shift work are probably the ones who nap the most. So, it's a like a indirect sign of something else. It's not that the, you know, napping is causing you to age faster. I think the napping will have like some protective effects even if you do, like, shift work and stuff like that. So if you do shift work and you don't nap, then that's probably worse than not napping at all. But if you do need to nap chronically all the time and you're feeling sleepy during daytime, then it probably means that your sleep generally isn't that that good. Sucks. Higher body fat percentage, higher body mass index, those are pretty self explanatory. Obesity is gonna take at least you know five to ten years of your life if you get diabetes as well then that's additional five or ten years. So yeah like with a BMI above thirty then you're in the very kind of risk zone or a danger zone. Higher c reactive protein that's just generally like a marker of inflammation which also makes sense that yeah if you know if you have high CRP all the time then, it just means that your body is under more oxygen stress and inflammation CRP can come from smoking, it can come from the excess drinking, it can come from the visceral fat, it can come from sleep deprivation, it can come from high body fat percentage, it can come from a BMI. It's more of like a reflection of something else that is going on. Next up, higher triglycerides. So fatty acids in the bloodstream. Usually if people have hydrolycerides then they have like some aspects of metabolic syndrome which actually refers to more like an improper glucose metabolism and some aspects of insulin resistance. So eating a lot of fat generally doesn't raise your triglycerides as long as you're metabolically healthy. The triglycerides tend to rise and stay elevated if you have insulin resistance and you're also eating a bunch of carbs at the same time. So it's more like a processed food intake that generally causes the triglycerides to rise. So again, it's like a reflection of a bad diet and poor metabolic health generally. Childhood obesity, that's interesting. So, you know, if you have some diabetes or obesity in your youth then it's much easier to get some actual metabolic syndrome and heart disease. It's much easier to get it later in life as well because you're already causing damage to your metabolism. Now it doesn't mean that if you have a childhood obesity then you're like destined to die prematurely. You can always reverse that. You can always turn the tides, in your favor again and regain your longevity. Like you can easily lose the weight. You can easily improve your insulin sensitivity. You can easily improve your metabolic health and you can easily reverse your biological age at no matter the age you're at. And lastly, type two diabetes again makes sense as well, which has been shown to actually reduce life expectancy by up to five to ten years. In addition to that there were actually two protective factors that were associated with reduced biological aging and they are number one, education and number two, household income. So those make sense as well to a certain extent. If you have more money, more disposable income then you can afford more healthcare, you can afford different supplements, you can afford better food. Generally you have less financial stress, you have less socio economic stress and those kind of things. More time and more opportunity to take care of yourself, unfortunately. Or unfortunately, whichever point you're looking at. So there you have it, a quick overview of this study of the 10 top 10 factors associated with accelerated biological aging. Like I said, it doesn't matter what age you're at, it doesn't matter what your health is currently at, you can always turn the tides and you can start reversing your biological age. If you're interested in doing that, then email me the word health to info@simlund.com and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Sim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.