One of the most common questions I get asked about is what foods do I eat? Well, this is what we're gonna talk about in this video. If you want to know about the philosophy and the structure of my diet, of some of the main principles that I follow, then check out the video where I discuss about the diet and the daily routine that helped me to lower my biological age by twelve years. And it has helped me to achieve one of the slowest speeds of aging in the world, which is 0.62 based on the Dunedin pace value. So I'm here in my kitchen. I'm gonna walk you through step by step of my day of when I eat these foods and, why. So first, in the morning, I'm not gonna eat anything. I'm actually gonna have some green tea. So this is a very great source of antioxidants. It's low caffeine, and it's just a nice way to kinda start the day, in my opinion. In a few hours, I'll have actual coffee. So this is, one of the best coffees in the world. It's low toxins. It's organic and it actually has a bunch of superfoods in there as well. Theanine, maca root, raw cacao, and lucuma. So this is the brand that I'm actually working with together as well. Before my workout, I'll have some protein to help with the protein synthesis and obviously making gains as well. So the, regularly, most of the time is gonna be just regular whey protein. I'll, add like 30 grams of protein from this whey protein, and this is usually gonna be the kind of pre workout meal. In some cases, I'll also have a piece of fruit, whether that be a banana, whether that be, like, an apple or, like, an orange or something like that pre workout to help with, some aspects of, the exercise performance. And in some cases, it could also be like some, just berries, like strawberries, blueberries, or cherries, or whatever, just to get a little bit of simple carbs in there. Before the workout, I'll usually also have, together with the whey protein, some collagen because having collagen then plus vitamin c from the fruit actually is very beneficial for stimulating the collagen synthesis in the tendons and the ligaments that you're gonna train. So, definitely the best time to have the, collagen is before the workout together with vitamin c to get the most optimal effects. Let's move on with my protein sources. What kind of proteins do I eat? So, of course, eggs are a huge staple of my diet. I eat eggs pretty much every day, and, they have choline. They have a lot of other nutritious, vitamins and minerals and amino acids that are just, like I mean, they taste great as well. They're very easy to make and very quick to make. I do hunt. I hunt my own game. I hunt my own, animals. And, this is obviously one of the most nutrient dense, most nutritious, meat in the world. So like moose, elk, deer, those, game meat, these are the most nutrients and they have the least of any, like, pollutants or anything of that. So I hunt regularly. I If I hunt something, then I'll, you know, can the meat. I'll just cook the meat in the oven. This way, in this can, we have a moose meat right now. But, yeah, like, if you hunt the meat, if you hunt the moose or something else, then you can get a lot of, like, these organs as well. So, like, moose liver, that's first of all, it's very huge. Like, you get, like, two kilograms of liver and you can eat it for pretty much the entire year, like microdose the moose liver for the entire year. And, yeah, like, the liver is also very nutritious. I eat liver quite regularly. If I'm not eating the actual moose liver or if I want to change it up in a once in a while, then I'll just have some liver pate. So, buying some nice liver pate that doesn't have any, like, extra unnecessary ingredients. So this liver pate only has beef liver, a little bit of, pork meat, water, onions, carrot, and it doesn't have, like, any other oils or stuff like that. So, yeah, like, if you are choosing the liver pate, then, yeah, just check the ingredients that it doesn't have, like, a bunch of additional other stuff. So regular beef, I do eat a little bit of beef. Maybe, like, once a week, I'll have a steak. It's not, like, my favorite foods. I prefer to have either, like, wild game or fish or eggs. And, this usually is gonna be just some regular beef steak. I'll have it, like, once or twice a week at the most. Another cool food I wanna share with you is, called, like, meat jello in Estonia. It's like a traditional Estonian food. It's pretty much just you cook all the, like, tenderness meat parts, like the legs and the joints and stuff like that. You cook it in, like, low heat for many hours, and the gelatinous stuff comes out. It becomes jello. It's high in collagen. It's high in glycine. It's pretty much meat jello, and it actually tastes really nice. It's one of my favorite like meat sources and protein sources. And it's very healthy because gelatin, it's very beneficial for the collagen and the glycine content, and it's also perfectly balanced with the methine into glycine ratio. So I eat this quite regularly because it's high in glycine, and I want to get as much dietary glycine as possible into my diet. So this meat jello, you can make it at home, but, yeah, you can just maybe Google a recipe or something like how to make it. When it comes to fish, then, my favorite fish is actually herring. And herring is actually the highest source of creatine in the world. Herring has a lot, it's like double the amount of creatine than red meat and beef. So herring is hugely underrated. It's very high in selenium, very high in magnesium and creatine as well. So, certainly I like to have herring because in these parts of the world, in the Baltic Sea, herring is very common. It's like a very traditional food. I've been eating it all the time, all my life pretty much, and it tastes amazing. This one is just marinated. It has a little bit of onions. You don't wanna have, like, the herring that is inside for oils and, like, canola and stuff like that. If you do have, like, a fish, like sardines or mackerel or herring, whatever inside oil, then you can just wash it. Like, that's obviously better than eating it with oil. But I usually prefer to have just the one in marinated or something else that doesn't have the oil. Some other fish that I might have is just like regular white fish. This one is, Alaskan pollock, but, in in Estonia, we also have a lot of cod. We have some salmon. We have some trout and those kinds of things. We have very small fish as well, like local sardines. They're both like Baltic sprouts. So, yeah, I eat pretty a lot of fish. I lived in an island all my life and, we have a lot of seafood there. So, yeah, fish is great. Healthy omega three fatty acids. You get a lot of vitamins and minerals from there as well. There is the concern that, fish has a lot of heavy metals inside it because the seas are polluted. Yes, that is true to a certain point, but you also get a lot of other things that you don't get from other foods. So I think the nutritional value of the fish far outweighs any of the potential harm that you might get from a little bit of heavy metals. And the the thing with heavy metals is that, you know, you can get it from any other food as well. If you think that beef isn't polluted with heavy metals, then you're wrong. Like even regular cattle, all animals pretty much, unless you're eating wild game, then you are getting some heavy metals and stuff like that. So you don't really, you know, can't avoid it, but you can detox it. You can easily detox heavy metals with taking antioxidants, taking things like helping to detox you, and go to the sauna regularly. When it comes to some plant based proteins, then this is my baby, this is my, let's say, company that I helped to create, co found, it's Crump, it's 100% whole food based plant based protein, which is super high in protein. It is 56 grams of protein per 100 grams, which is much higher than beef and much higher than wild game even. Of course, it's a plant based protein, which reduces some of the amino acid quality, but because it's so high in the protein itself, then it doesn't really matter. So it's basically like this dry granule made of only hemp and protein. There's no other ingredients. There's not even salt. There's no oils. There's no additives. When you soak it in water, then you're gonna create this plant based alternative to meat. It's obviously not meat. It's just plant based protein. And it tastes more like some sort of gelatinous tissue. It tastes like tendon when you cook it. And, yeah, I usually make, like, minced meat out of it. I make a stir fry out of it with different vegetables, beans, and stuff like that. The last protein source I wanna share with you is cottage cheese. So dairy, I do consume dairy. I think dairy is great. It's very nutritious and it has a lot of health benefits. It helps obviously to increase your calcium intake, which is good for the bones and just overall muscle growth even. But the dairy is also associated with actually reduced diabetes and, just better body composition. So people who eat dairy generally have less fat, more muscle, because dairy binds to some of the fats that you eat, and you excrete more fat from your food and, makes you lose weight and makes you build muscle because dairy is also very anabolic. I usually have dairy after my workout. Obviously, whey protein is already dairy, but if I want to, in the evening, I want to, like, boost my protein intake, I want to make sure that I get adequate protein intake, I'll have some cottage cheese, I'll have some berries. So, blueberries, strawberries, cherries, which are perfect combo in my opinion. And, I might add, like, some nuts there as well. Usually, my nuts, the main nuts that I eat are, Brazil nuts. So they're gonna be very high in selenium, and you can just cover your daily selenium intake with one to two Brazil nuts. If I do want to have something more sweet and if I didn't eat the meat jello for the day, then, I can also just make regular jello. So just have this gelatin powder that, you heat up, you let it become gelatinous, and you can make, like, a nice dessert out of it. Like, gelatin desserts are probably the healthiest dessert in the world because it's super high in glycine, super high in collagen, and low calories. Like, there's very little calories in this in this Jell O. And you can just eat it if you're dieting. You can eat it for better sleep. You can eat it for better skin health, better antiaging. And, yeah, I eat very regularly, gelatin. And sometimes if I do want to have something more for dessert, for example, then, we have another, Crump product that is Crump cereal. So this is the healthiest cereal in the world. It's high protein and low fat, low calories, and lower carb. This, cereal does have gluten free oats, but, everything else there's no added sugar. It's low sugar but high protein. And it tastes super amazing. The ingredients are, yeah, gluten free oats, then the crumb mix a little bit, and we have some, dried cranberries, pumpkin seeds, salt, cinnamon, and a little bit of honey. This is how it looks like. It's, just, yeah, the healthiest cereal kind of in the world, and it tastes great. It's, you know, perfect amounts of protein and some carbohydrates, fiber as well, and I'll just eat with, like, some milk or something like that. Now when it comes to my actual meals, then usually it's just gonna be some protein source, some fiber source or vegetable, and, some, starchy carbohydrates to help. Especially if I worked out, then I'll have, like, a higher carb meal. So then that average meal of that would generally be, like, some sort of a carb source. You know, this is a purple potato. I chose this one right now because I I don't remember the last time I ate a purple potato. So I just wanted to kind of experiment it. It can also be a sweet potato. It can also be a regular white potato. It doesn't matter. I usually, yeah, just eat something that has carbohydrates. Then some fiber source, usually it's gonna be some like cruciferous vegetable for the methyl donors and the other beneficial compounds that help with sulforaphane and glutathione increase. That's a lot of longevity benefits from there. The vegetables can also be regular zucchini or just, you know, if it's a frozen vegetable, then I'll just have frozen broccoli, frozen carrots, frozen cauliflowers. Some of the raw vegetables that I like to eat are carrots. So, raw carrots are actually very nice for helping with, like, the microbiome, helping to bind to certain toxins in the gut. So, actually, I might have, like, this as even if I'm like just feeling a bit hungry, I'll just eat like a raw carrot in the kind of fastest state. Next up, we have another amazing source of methyl donors, especially, trimethylglycine and betaine. So beetroot. So this is some sort of a beetroot salad. It's called vinaigrette. It's like a local traditional Estonian salad. It's basically just cabbage with beetroot. Tastes pretty good. And, I do also sometimes have just regular steamed beetroot that is prepackaged. Fermented foods, I have a little bit of fermented foods as well in my everyday diet. Pretty much, this is kimchi. So, this is more like Chinese made of Chinese cabbage. And, it could also be just regular sauerkraut. And, most of the time, it is sauerkraut. But this time, here we have kimchi. I just add a little bit of fermented foods into my daily diet. And sometimes, if I'm not eating potatoes, it's like a lower carb day. Or if I want to manage my blood sugar levels a bit better, then it's gonna be like something this is a lentil pasta. So it's just a pasta made of lentils, which is very low carb and higher in fiber and lower glycemic. Mushrooms. I like mushrooms. They're a great source of spermidine and vitamin D2 even. So, yeah. Mushrooms are very nutritious, and these are just the regular dried mushrooms. But it could also be just, chanterelle mushrooms or champion mushrooms, whatever kind of mushrooms they are. Herbs. I'm a huge fan of herbs. Rosemary, I add it to a lot of the foods that I fry. So if I fry eggs, if I fry meat, I always add a little bit of rosemary because the herbs like rosemary and thyme and parsley, all those things, they have anti glycation effects. So they help to reduce the formation of these advanced glycation end products in the meat when you're frying it in high temperatures. So it makes the food a lot healthier and reduces the oxidation potential of the food that you're, eating. Plus, it also helps with the CD38 inhibition and autophagy regulation. So it's a very nutritious, nutrient dense food, and it also has many protective effects, anti inflammatory, antioxidant effects. Lastly, I'll cover some, additional supportive foods, if you will. And for example, olive oil, like I do, I think olive oil is the healthiest fat in the world. It's very high in polyphenols, high in antioxidants, and, it's also very tasty in all the ways. So I'll just have this dark bottle is the one that you want. You wanna have extra virgin olive oil that's in a dark bottle, not, not exposed to any sunlight. And you also wanna consume it relatively quickly. You don't want it to have sitting on the shelf for too long. Ghee is another fat that I might cook with and, yeah, just grass fed. Ghee from Northcote is something that I use to cook my food quite a lot. Apple cider vinegar, I like to add this to a lot of my meals because it helps with digestion. And the biggest benefit, the biggest reason I use it has to do with the fact that apple cider vinegar can lower the glycemic response to the food that you eat. So it can be up to, like, 55% lower. Seaweed, seaweed is very high as well in many different vitamins and minerals. Iodine, taurine is the highest source of taurine in the world, and, it actually tastes pretty nice. This is a dried dulse, so it's this kind of purple seaweed. And, yeah, just sprinkle it on a salad or something like that, or just eat it like this. It's very nice. Wheat germ, it's the highest source of spermidine as well as trimethoglycine in the world. So I use it like a supplement, although it's like considered an actual food. And it's just, you know, this kind of powder that I sprinkle either onto my food or I could even put it into my protein shake or something like that. It's just, like a supplement for increasing dietary spirabine intake and trimethoglycin intake. But I don't recommend taking the spirabine from a supplement because we don't have any, you know, solid evidence to suggest that the supplemental spirabine has any effects. But the dietary spyrimidine definitely does. So you can get spyrimidine from mushrooms. All many of these different foods many of these different foods already have spyrimidine. But, I make sure that I get the, required amounts from just taking, like, one teaspoon of this wheat germ per day. Dark chocolate. So this is the best chocolate that I've tasted in the world, and, I really like it. It's 90% dark chocolate by Northcote. It has MCT oils and cacao nibs. It tastes great. Usually, I'll just take one square of it before I work out. It boosts dopamine. It has, like, some health benefits as well for nitric oxide. So there we have it. These were the foods that I eat on a daily basis. And as you can see, it's pretty balanced. It includes plants. It includes animal proteins. It includes different kinds of food groups. I don't really, you know, avoid any certain food group, although I do try to avoid, like, added seed oils and extra added sugars and stuff like that. But generally, like, I'm not afraid of gluten. I'm not afraid of dairy. I'm not afraid of, whatever, lectins or oxalates or whatever because, yeah, my health is great and I don't have any food intolerances. I have, like, very robust metabolism and very robust digestion. So so far this works great. I think I'm getting a lot of results by following this diet and, yeah, things are going great. Make sure you definitely check out the previous video about the diet structure and the principles and some of the other routines I follow to slow my speed of aging. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Sim. Stay optimized, stay empowered.