There are no supplements that have been shown to extend lifespan in humans. Regardless, there are still some compounds that may have some antiaging and longevity benefits that are associated with reduced mortality risk. And in this video, we're gonna take a look at this one specific compound called spermidine and how it is associated with reduced mortality in humans. Do it. So spermidine has become quite popular over the past few years mostly because of this particular study, in my opinion, that was published in 2018, which talks about how spermidine intake is linked to lower all cause mortality. And it's actually quite a long term study in 1995 until 2015 among 829 participants between the ages of 45 and 84. It is, of course, an epidemiologist study, a food questionnaire study of assessing their dietary sperm eating intake and their rate of mortality. They divided these people into three turtles of spermidine intake. So low spermidine intake was less than nine milligrams per day. The high spermidine intake was above eleven milligrams per day, and the normal spermidine intake was between nine and eleven milligrams per day. And if you can see, then the low tertile intake was a hundred and seventy one deaths. The normal tertile or normal spermidine intake or moderate spermidine intake was a hundred and three deaths, and the high spermidine intake was only sixty seven, deaths. Now that's quite a significant difference based on just the spermidine intake where the other factors were, like, controlled for. So what is spermidine? Spermidine is a po amine. You can get it from foods. Your body can also produce it, but there are multiple, let's say, mechanisms or health benefits of spyrimidine that, we know about. But one of the main theoretical reasons why spyrimidine may have these health benefits have to do with the induction of autophagyim or the cell recycling process. And there have been, yeah, like, multiple studies showing how spirolimidin can regulate the process of autophagyim. Another 2022 study, another, like, questionnaire based study, unfortunately, did look at also spermidine intakes dietary spermidine intake and all cause mortality and cardiovascular disease mortality. And they too found that higher intake of dietary spermidine was associated with decreased risk of cardiovascular disease and all cause mortality. Spermidine derived from vegetables, cereals, legumes, nuts, and cheese was associated with reduced cardiovascular disease and all cause mortality. And the 2017 study, dietary spermidine for lowering high blood pressure, in humans, high dietary spermidine intake correlates with reduced blood pressure and decreased risk of cardiovascular disease and related death. Wait a minute. So it does appear that multiple studies, human studies, do show that spermidine intake from dietary sources is associated with some cardiac protective effects, reduced blood pressure, reduced cardiovascular disease mortality, and potentially reduced all cause mortality as well. Of course, these are all epidemiology studies, which means that they're not controlled for. Like, they're food questionnaire based studies where people just report to the, scientists what foods they eat. The higher Spermidine intake from dietary sources such as legumes, nuts, seeds, vegetables, and cheese even, that is associated with these health benefits and the reduction in all cause mortality. Some of those foods are associated with healthier lifestyle habits overall. Like, if people eat more vegetables, they eat more plant based foods, etcetera, then, they are more likely to also follow some other healthy lifestyle habits like regular exercise, not overeating, reducing their calorie intake, which are all also associated with reduced risk of, heart disease as well as reduced risk of mortality. You can get spirulina from cheese as well, which generally isn't actually considered like a heart healthy or like a pro longevity food, but, you can also get spirulina from mushrooms as well as wheat germ and spirulina and chlorella. You can get spireminin from quite a wide variety of or wide range of foods and not all of those foods have the healthy user bias attached to them. Of course, a lot of them do, like broccoli and vegetables, but the amount of spireminin in those foods is relatively small compared to something like wheat germ, cheese, or mushrooms. So what we do know is that dietary spyrimidine intake may be beneficial for longevity and it may reduce the risk of all cause mortality and whether or not the those effects are caused by the spyrimidine specifically in those foods or because of the other, let's say, correlations with the specific foods that contain spyrimidine such as lower calorie intake and healthier lifestyle. But it looks like you do want to get at least eleven milligrams of spermidine a day for the health benefits. Over these past two years, many different companies have also come out with their own spermidine supplements now because of those health associations and because of the promise of being an antiaging compound and promise of being an autophagy regulator, etc, and the spermidine supplements, at least based on this new study again twenty twenty three April, that, the spermidine supplements, even at high doses, may not be enough to cause, like, a significant rise in your actual spermidine levels. And the conclusion is that this study's results suggest that dietary spermidine is presystematically converted into spermine, which then enters systemic circulation. Presumably, the in vitro part attributable to its metabolite, spermine. It is rather unlikely that spermidine supplements with doses less than fifteen milligrams a day exert any short term effects. So it might be that there is something completely different happening with dietary spermidine compared to spermidine supplementation. And a lot of the other papers talking about the longevity and, like, anti aging effects of spermidine, they're actually, you know, these authors, they might have some conflicts of interest because these authors of these, of these papers are actually they hold equity in these, like, longevity labs. I don't know exactly what this longevity labs is but I would presume they might sell, like, some spirmidine supplements. So and this Longevity Labs, yes, they do sell a spirmidine life which is a longevity supplement and Doctor. Frank Madeo is is one of the authors of these papers that talks about the potential antiaging and longevity benefits of spermidine as a supplement. It's a trap. What I'm saying is that we don't know if spermidine supplementation has these longevity benefits. I personally am, let's say, inclined to think that it might have some benefits but the issue is that there's not enough evidence to suggest that the spermidine supplements have the same longevity and health benefits as the dietary spermidine intake, which we know based on the other previous epidemiology studies that I talked about in the beginning of this video. Based on our current evidence and based on our current knowledge, then, dietary and supplemental spermidine are completely different And, the health and longevity benefits come from dietary spermidine intake, which you get from wheat germs, spirulina, chlorella, and, things like mushrooms, vegetables, nuts, legumes, and cheese. But regardless, I'm definitely gonna pay attention more to spermidine as a supplement and hopefully we will get some future studies, more human clinical studies on spermidine supplementation. But do you want to slow down aging and live longer? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological cock. If you're interested, then email me the word health to infoseemland dot com and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized, stay empowered.