Three years ago I followed a lower carb diet. Today, three years later, I follow a very different diet. So in this video we're gonna discuss how has a low carb versus a high carb diet affected my biological age and my speed of aging. But do you want to slow down aging and live longer? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to reverse their biological cock. If you're interested, then email me the word healthtoinfo@siblan.com and I'll send you the details. It's showtime. So three years ago, the first test I did was the myDNAge DNA methylation age test that looks at your DNA methylation age. And the DNA methylation age is one important aspect of aging and it is a hallmark of aging as well. Like, with age you see like worsening of DNA methylation patterns and with the measurement of the DNA methylation patterns you can assess at least what's your biological age in terms of the DNA methylation age. But regardless, in the context of this video, we're going to use this test because it's the only test that I have two results with, especially with three years apart. So the first time I did this test was in 2020 and, the result showed that I was 16. My chronological age at that point was 25 and, three years later, obviously my chronological age has increased to 28. I'm almost 29 actually and the biological age or the DNA methylation age has stayed the same. So it's still 16 which is a remarkable result in terms of that because it kind of, points to the fact that my DNA methylation age hasn't changed over the last three years and it's the same. Based on this result my DNA methylation age speed is only 0.56 which puts me in the ninety nine percentile of my age, of people of my age. So I have a slower speed of DNA methylation aging than 99% of other people. Of course there are different tests. I've also used different tests but I don't have any of these tests measured three years apart. So that's why I'm using this test as like a reference point to, assess my results and to just, you know, it's mostly like an n equals one experiment that I hope is kind of useful for you. I'm gonna just share some insights of what I've changed. It's not anything like objective. It doesn't like really tell you a lot about the entire science of aging or whatever. It's just my own n equals one experience and hopefully you can learn something from this video. So how has my diet and routine changed over the last three years? Back in 2020, I was following a much lower carb diet. I wasn't in full ketosis. I was eating still too many carbohydrates for that but I predominantly ate just lower carb vegetables and tubers. I didn't eat any starchy carbohydrates. I didn't eat that much fruit, maybe like a few times a year. And, most of my food was just, you know, vegetables and some protein sources. And as you can see based on the DNA methylation age then it worked. Like getting your biological age eight years younger at that point or nine years younger at that point is still a remarkable result. Now starting in 2020 and 2021, I changed my diet. I started to eat a lot more carbohydrates and I switched over from a low carb diet to a relatively higher carb diet. It's not obviously like a super high carb diet, it's like like a vegan diet, it's not this very high carb ultra endurance athlete diet. It's just I incorporated a lot more starchy carbohydrates, a lot more fruit, a lot more berries and I actually kept my fat intake relatively lower. And based on the DNA methylation test, then my biological age hasn't actually changed switching over from a low carb diet to a high carb diet. And in fact, if you actually looked at the increase in my chronological age which is, you know, obviously three years bigger than it was in 2020, I have aged chronologically but my DNA methylation age has stayed 16. So instead of being nine years younger back in 2020, I'm now 12 younger in 2023 which is actually a much better result if you look at the increase in my chronological age. Even in your twenties you would expect that your DNA methylation age even and your biological age would increase over the course of three years. It doesn't matter that you're young, you would still see an increase in your biological age even if that increase over the course of three years were to be one or two years. But based on this test then my biological age or the DNA methylation age hasn't increased over the last three years even if I have switched over to a higher carb intake. And that's actually one of the biggest revelations or lessons for me and I hope to give you as well is that it doesn't really matter if it's a low carb diet or a high carb diet, you can achieve reduction in your biological age and you can effectively slow down the speed of your aging on any diet. It's just that there are some key principles that you need to keep in mind on all diets that will be beneficial for longevity and anti aging. So those key principles are that you maintain a good body composition. You don't want to get overweight. If you get overweight on any diet whether that be a low carb diet, a high carb diet, a vegan diet or a carnivore diet, if you start gaining weight, you start gaining fat mass especially, then that's a bad sign and that will accelerate your biological aging. Fat. So I hope you got some valuable information from this. The main message of this video is that yes, you can achieve an optimal speed of aging and you can reduce your biological age on any diet whether that be a low carb diet or a high carb diet but personally I what I've noticed is that a higher carb intake granted that the calorie intake is the same does give me like more results in terms of first of all like the physical and gym performance. Like I have built a lot more muscle tissue but my all the other biomarkers are also generally trending in a direction that I want them to be and the same applies to my speed of aging. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay powered.