Everything you eat is either killing you or making you live longer. Okay. It's not that serious, but food obviously has a major impact on your overall health and longevity. In this video, I'm gonna talk about the foods that are linked to increased mortality and lower life expectancy. Do it. The first food group is gonna be fried foods and there is actually one very interesting study. It's obviously an epidemiological study. Most of these studies are but, you know, it's still a good reference point for understanding what foods may increase the risk of mortality. So they took over a 100,000 postmenopausal women aged 50 to 79. They followed these women for eighteen years and found that the total fried food consumption was associated with increased mortality. So at least one serving per day of fried food consumption was associated with a thirteen percent higher risk of death from any cause compared to the women who didn't eat any fried food at all. Those women who ate fried food at least once a day also had twelve percent higher risk of cardiovascular death. Those women who chose fried fish or shellfish faced a seven percent greater risk of death and thirteen percent higher risk of cardiovascular death. Death. So the women who ate fried chicken had the highest risk of death. Those women who ate fried fish had somewhat lower, maybe like half of the, risk of the the fried chicken group but, it was still higher than no consumption of fried foods at all. So I don't think that is very, like, shocking. Most people think that processed food is unhealthy and fried food isn't considered a health food by any means. And there is also, like, other studies from 2019 as well showing that the ultra processed food consumption, which generally is fried and the fast food, it does increase the risk of death and increase the risk of diabetes and heart disease and all different kinds of chronic diseases. But there is also something specific about fried foods which is the formation of these advanced glycation end products or advanced glycation lipid end products. So basically, when protein or fats combine with carbohydrates and sugars then they cause this glycation that, is associated with heart disease and accelerated aging in terms of breaking down your skin collagen. Advanced glycation end products are the number one thing that does break down your skin collagen and cause the wrinkles. So all the fried chicken, the donuts, the french fries, generally, they are already glycated because the carbohydrates have been combined with these oxidized oils and, they are treated and prepared in high temperatures that, promotes the glycation even further. Sucks. So if there is one food that is definitely not healthy and definitely speeds up your aging in many ways, then that's fried food. Whether that be fried chicken, fried fish, fried chicken nuggets, fried fries, french fries, fried potatoes, fried meat even in large amounts on, you know, these added in flour and added sugars, etcetera, they're all becoming glycated. Another 2017 study found that fried potato consumption was associated with higher mortality risk. Obviously, again, this is not very specific or it doesn't control for all the variables. Fried potato consumption probably just means eating French fries and McDonald's. So that's the most common potato source of people nowadays. The fried potatoes in McDonald's generally have added oils, added seed oils, etcetera, that glycate those potatoes and glycate and make them much more unhealthy. If you just cook your potatoes in water or just, you know, on the oven without added oils, then chances are it's not that harmful. But if you just, you know, make it into fries, make it into French fries, deep fry the potatoes and that's where the risk increases. But the type of fat and the type of oil you use to fry the food also apparently matters. So this 2012 Spanish study, the consumption of fried foods wasn't associated with coronary heart disease or all cause mortality because in Spain they use olive oil or sunflower oil to use or to cook the food in. And Spanish people do eat a lot of potatoes actually, you know, they are in this Mediterranean diet and potatoes are actually white one of the most commonly eaten foods in the Mediterranean diet. The difference is that they cook the potatoes in olive oil or sunflower oil which is not harmful unlike, the, soybean oil or canola oil. And olive oil actually can counteract the oxidation of lipids and can also protect against the glycation. So if you ever fry any food, then make sure that it's either like olive oil. It could also be like coconut oil or these other fats fats that have a high smoking point. 48% body fat The next food group isn't specifically a food, it's sugary beverages. So, soda and other kind of beverages, drinks that have added sugar in them like Coca Cola and Pepsi and even fruit juices. Consumption of sugary beverages including fruit juices is associated with all cause mortality. The reason has to do with the high sugar content of these drinks that, can spike your blood sugar, can increase the risk of diabetes and insulin resistance. And if you are drinking multiple of these sugary beverages every day then that increases your risk of diabetes which is associated with a shorter lifespan. A little bit of, like, natural juice is probably fine. Like, if you drink one cup of freshly squeezed orange juice or something like that a day then you're also getting like all the other vitamins and more fiber from that juice than you would get from this store bought refined juice that usually actually has like no actual oranges in it, it just has added sugar. But even then, I wouldn't drink, like, any more than one cup of, some sort of natural juice per day. The next food group is refined grains. So white flour and these are refined carbohydrates that don't have any fiber and don't have any micronutrients. They're just gonna have a very high glycemic index and spike your blood sugar. High intake of refined grains was associated with high risk of mortality and major cardiovascular disease events. And again, this is like an association study. People who eat a lot of refined grains usually get it from like, the hamburger bun, they get it from a croissant, they get it from pizza. So these refined carbohydrates you get them from different kinds of foods. Whole grain consumption actually is associated with reduced mortality so whole grains that have the fiber and cereal intact, those are safe and healthy for you but the refined carbohydrates, just because they're so refined and they spike your blood sugar and increase the risk of diabetes and insulin resistance, that's what you should avoid. And the last food we're gonna talk about is processed meat. So processed meat, like sausages, bacon, and these kinds of prepackaged meats. So this 2021 study compared the effects of unprocessed meat like actual chicken meat and beef and pork and those things with the processed meat and if found, unprocessed red meat and poultry intake had no significant associations with mortality or major cardiovascular disease but a higher intake of processed meat was associated with a higher risk of mortality and major cardiovascular disease. So this is actually quite commonly known already. The World Health Organization has categorized processed meat a carcinogen. So, yeah, the bacon, the sausages that is is usually packaged and, you know, processed in some way, that can increase the risk of colon cancer and mortality. But when it comes to unprocessed meat contrary to popular belief, then, it's not really associated with increased mortality. You do want to slow down aging and live longer, then I am looking for more people who want to reverse their biological clock. If you're interested, then email me the word healthinfo. Semnan dot com and I'll send you the details. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.