Your body is telling you if this state remains at it as it is, if I have this constant state of inflammation, your lifespan would be shortened. You can't decrease the number of candles on your birthday cake, but you can modify your biological age. Welcome to the Simnan podcast. Our guest today is Raghav Segal. Raghav is a PhD candidate at Yale University who uses AI to tackle the question, can we slow, stop, or reverse human aging? He's also the creator of Symphony Age, which is a biological age clock based on 11 organ systems. Raghav, welcome to the show. Thank you for having me here, Zim. Really excited to be here. Yeah. I found or stumbled upon this paper that you recently published and coauthored, and it was about this epigenetic age interventions, which, is a pretty, like, popular topic over the last, you know, few years, this, different epigenetic age clocks and biological age, itself as a concept and how it relates to longevity. So, yeah, I'm super excited to have you on the show. So, I guess we can maybe start with, maybe you can give, like, a short overview of what did you look at in the study, what were, like, the kind of overview of, okay, what else what was our main findings? Yeah. For sure. So I'll give you some context of how we actually came about to think about this study because I think the context here matters a lot. Mhmm. So so so I come from sort of the field of epigenetic biomarkers and, a strain with doctor Morgan Levine who sort of built one of the first mortality predictors in epigenetic clocks. It's called PhenoAge. And under her mentorship, I ended I built this clock called systems age, which can measure aging in sort of 11 different organs of your body from a single DNA methylation blood draw, which is very exciting. And when we were doing sort of the validation of our our this new biomarker called systems age, one of the things that I observed was a lot of the validation of these biomarkers was mostly in context of prognosis, which is, how does, a biomarker behave in terms of, like, future disease outcomes? So I was, really curious about what about responsiveness to interventions? How do these biomarkers respond to interventions? And that was kind of my key question here, when I was thinking about the study. So so the so what I did was the question was, how do these biomarkers respond to interventions? So for that, what we really needed to do was look at clinical trials. So what I did was I went to the literature and started looking at clinical trials. And the sad story about that is that, unfortunately, when we go into literature, there are clinical trials looking at sort of these epigenetic clocks or DNA methylation aging biomarkers, but they're typically sort of looking at maybe a handful of them, one or two of these biomarkers. And that poses a problem because then you can't do like a systematic analysis of saying like, which of these biomarkers are being responsive or not responsive, so on and so forth. So we were like, okay. I guess that's where we need to solve a problem. And that problem was, why don't we systematically collect a lot of clinical trial and interventional analysis data, for a lot of different types of interventions, whether it's lifestyle, pharmacological, supplements, medical procedures, all related to longevity, and then try to see which DNA or epigenetic biomarkers are responding to these interventions. And that kind of about the study. And as you can see, the results are really astonishing and surprising as we are seeing. Right. Yeah. We we will we'll go into the results of the top, performers shortly. But, yeah, like, that's kind of interesting that, or or I I at least, like, you know, maybe we can talk about, like, some of the concept behind, like, this epigenetic age or biological age as well because, you know, many people aren't aware of what it means, and, also, some people use it differently. So, like, how do you define epigenetic age, and is it is it different from, like, chronological age as well as your biological age? For sure. So in in some ways, so chronological age, as you know, is, I would say, the number of candles on your last birthday. Right? As simple as that. Right? And that's that's how I define it. Biological age is a little more complicated. There is no quantifiable way of saying what biological age is. People use different proxies of saying what biological age could be. Right? It could be how much time you have left to dying, for example, right, which we call time to mortality. It could be how much time you have left to getting your first chronic disease such as diabetes or cardiovascular disease, right, which is, often described as health span. And so biological age is a little more complicated in that sense. But for simplicity, it's it's it's what how quickly your body is aging. Right? And we can measure it by different ways. We can measure it by biomarkers, so on and so forth. Now, when we talk about epigenetic age, what we are really trying to do is trying to quantify this biological age using sort of molecular data. In this case, the molecular data is epigenetics. And again, you could use potentially any other kind of molecular data. You could use proteins, You can use metabolites. You can use sort of gene sort of transcriptomic data. You can use sort of clinical biomarkers, any of these things. The reason why epigenetics is really interesting is because of the fact that we have seen that has been associated with aging and aging outcomes, like cardiovascular disease and and diabetes and a bunch of other diseases, as well as mortality and so on and so forth. So we, we, we have a very strong indication that it, it, it predicts biological age really well, which is why we think that it is somehow able to capture biological age at a molecular level. So epigenetic age is, is what, so we don't know what biological, we can't quantify biological age. We don't unlike chronological age, we cannot count the number of candles, right. For biological age. So we make proxies for it. And epigenetic age is in in a in a way a proxy for biological age. Gotcha. Yeah. So the epigenetics is the you know, it refers to epigenetics. So above genetics, it's everything like your environment and lifestyle, everything, you know, that's affecting your genes. And, it it it's like, you know, changes a lot between people. That's that's absolutely correct, Sim. So think about it this way. If our genome or genes define our trajectory of life in some ways, right, our previous experience are sort of how we're gonna live or what our lifespan is gonna be in some ways. Right? Because, our genes do define some of that. There is a certain part of environment, and, that can define our lifespan further. The fact that you smoke or the fact that you perform exercise or the fact that you do not do any of those things, or maybe you're eating healthy or not eating healthy or taking some interventions, you have stress. All of this can further modify whether you're gonna have a long life or a short life, or whether you're gonna have diseases quickly or slowly. Right? So genes play an effect, but there is something more than genes that can affect your lifespan or your occurrence of diseases. And what does that additional thing that is at the molecular level affecting it? It is potentially epigenetics. Epigenetics is an on a on a on a very sort of biological level, if I may explain this. So you have the DNA strand. These, these epigenetics are essentially sort of these little groups that get added on top of the DNA strand. We call them DNA methylation groups at the very simple level, which we measure in in these clocks. And these groups, what they allow to do is essentially allow some genes to be expressed more or some genes to be expressed less. And by controlling the expression of these genes, you can essentially control whether a disease may happen or not happen. Right? Or functionality of these genes. So it's it's it's it's a very complex process in some ways. But these these little sort of groups can really control, a wide amount of expression and effectively control the lifespan of a person. Right. So the DNA methylation age or DNA methylation, clocks, their their epigenetic age, clocks? Yes. Exactly. Yeah. So I've I've seen here a lot of different, I guess, companies using the DNA methylation, I guess, term for their COX? That's correct. So, again, there could be other kind of epigenetics as well. So DNA methylation is just one kind of epigenetic modification as we call them. Mhmm. And I'm not gonna go into details about that. So DNA methylation is one, DNA ethylation. There could be hydroxylation. There are histone modifications, lots of different things. But the one that we have studied in a lot of detail in context of aging has been DNA methylation, and that has been shown to be associated, with changes in, with aging. Mhmm. Gotcha. And, with age, then, these processes get, like, more dysfunctional. So, like, epigenetic alterations and stuff like that are, like, hallmarks of aging that are characteristic of the aging process? So we, we are still trying to sort of understand exactly how sort of the epigenome is controlling the, different hallmarks and the different processes. I think there is a huge field of research that is going on in this. But we do see in general, there is a dysregulation, right? That happens. Now, the question is whether this is a programmed dysregulation that is our body programmatically causing this dysregulation, right? Or is this sort of chaotic, right? Is it out of our control? Is it out of control of our body? Because if it is a program, it it's a lot easier for us to change that program. But if it's chaotic, it's a lot more difficult for us to remove the chaos, so to speak. And that kind of goes back to the idea of interventions, right? That it would be a lot easier for us to build interventions if it's programmed versus if it's chaotic, it's a lot more difficult for us to build interventions. I wanna take a quick break to let you know that you can now get my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. It contains 24 chapters ranging from the biology of aging to all the major chronic diseases such as heart disease, kidney disease, neurodegeneration, and I also cover over 70 clinically relevant biomarkers for chronic diseases and their optimal ranges. You can get the book from the link in the description. Right. And in in the study you published, you use different types of these clocks. So there's, you know, at least a dozen that I've seen that you have Horath one, Horath two, and different kinds of, clocks. 110. Right? 110 biomarkers. Okay. Yeah. So we use actually about 16 really well known of these clocks. Right? But also use sort of these 94 different DNA methylation proxies. So lot of different, we really wanted to go really deep and say, let's look at everything that's out there. Right. And, and I I'll give you a really interesting insight. We actually now have for, on the follow-up study, we actually got access to a lot, many more clocks. We might actually have three, six hundred, DNA methylation biomarker now. So we're gonna go even deeper and really do a systematic analysis of, like, how are these biomarkers really being affected? But the question is, what we are really is, are the prominent biomarkers changing and are the sort of other biomarkers changing or not? Mhmm. Right. Gotcha. Which one of those clocks tends to be like the go is is there like, one of the issues I've seen is that you have a lot of companies using different tests, and they have their different clocks. And, you know, you can do the same not not the same test, but, you know, you do it at the same time with different tests and you get different results. So, is there really, like, gold standard, or what is the, like, most accurate test or clock? So I don't think I'm I'm in the space of commenting upon which is the best test or not, because, again, each test has its own part. Right? I think in our study, we're commenting upon only one aspect of these, of these tests, which is the responsiveness. Right? Right. All of these clocks are powerful in different aspects. Some of them are more prognostic. Some of them are more, reliable. Some of them and there are different dimensions to be measured. What we're and and a lot of the times, it's context dependent. Right? So for example, I'll give you an example that if you were to, be I'll give you a really simple example, that if you were to want to be studying specifically an intervention, which is slowing down skin aging. Right? And you're looking at skin tissue. Right? A lot of the clocks that are sort of we recommend as being responsive might not be great because the best clock for skin aging is actually a generation one skin and blood clock. Right. Which has specifically been built for skin aging. Right. So again, some of this is some of the information is context dependent here. What we did was a very sort of generalized study in the human context. But, again, context matters. So I think there are nuances to this whole process. So for me, I would say though, in general, what I understand is as new generations of clocks evolve, right? They tend to become better and better. Right? So I see them as sort of four different generations right now, if I may sort of explain that to you. So we have generation one clocks, right, which were, what we call as chronological age predictors, the number of, candles on your last birthday. Right? And so they were simply predicting chronological age, which was great. They were they were kind of, kind of associated with diseases. They were kind of associated with mortality, but not that great. Right? We didn't know anything about their reliability. We didn't know anything about their responsiveness. So then came sort of the second generation clock. So the first generation clocks and the examples of that are the Horvath clock, the first clock that was made, the Horvath clock. That's that's the perfect example of it. Or maybe if you might have heard about the Hannem clock, that's that's another very good example. The second generation clock came about, and those include sort of the Fino Age and the Grim Age. Right? And I I call them the gen two plus because they predict mortality. Right? And and also sometimes more complex traits like rate of aging, like you need in pick do you need in POM, like the rate of aging metrics. Right. Which is really exciting because now they were able to sort of predict diseases a lot better, like disease outcomes, future disease outcomes, and future mortality. We were looking at seven years, ten years of follow-up. Right. And they were able to predict, health outcomes and mortality with really good accuracy. Right. So that's great. One of the issues still remain was reliability. So what happened was we tested for reliability for these clocks. And we saw that if you were to measure the same sample twice, right, you would get a lot of error. That means that, if you were to run the same sample from an individual twice through the analysis pipeline, one time you will get five year, like plus five years, like 55 for you. And the next time you'll get, 45. That's not good. Right? So to fix that, we had a new generation of clocks called generation reliable, right, that worked on improving this issue. Right? So we had GrimAge v two, you need in pace, so on and so forth. Right? And these really improved upon this issue when now we don't have, like, this really big error ranges. Right? So we are really, like, if you were to run it twice, you'll probably get, like, like fifty point one and forty nine point nine or fifty point one and fifty. Right? So not not a lot of error, which is great. But now there's, like, a fourth generation of clocks, which I call them as generation explainable, which is really exciting in my opinion, or Gen x. And these Gen x clocks, are what are really driving insights. So these include sort of what we call as the system scores clock, the ones that I built, or, the, there are other clocks called causal clocks, and their ability is really strong because what they can do is give insight to to people. So for example, till now, all of these clocks were telling you that, hey, you're five years older. Like, you go to a clinician and you get this clock measured or you get this clock measured. Right? It'll tell you, hey, Sam, You're three years younger than you're supposed to be, or you're five years older than you're supposed to be. But what do you do with that information? Not much. Right? But now you can get to know, like, oh, the reason you're five years older is because your heart is ten years older than it's supposed to be. Now that's a little more insightful. Right? You can probably act upon it. You can think your clinician can act upon it. Right? And that's really useful. And similarly, now you have sort of omic MH, which can go even further down and look at sort of proxies of proteins and metabolites. So it can tell you the reason your heart age is really high is because these proteins and metabolites are really, really changing significantly without actually measuring the proteins and metabolites, just using epigenetic data. Right? Which is which is really amazing in my opinion. Right? So I've really, like I think the expansiveness of the field is going above and beyond where you're really able to go down to the nitty gritties of why an individual is aging. And and that is the part, in my opinion, of these clocks that, but overall, what the question remains is that whether any of these clocks are responsive. So we have looked at their prognostic nature. They they seem to be more and more prognostic now, more and more explainable. Right? This we have improved upon that reliability. But the question is, are they responsive? Right? And that's what the paper really goes into. Yeah. I guess that's a good segue then to what, what did you find? So you had 51 interventions and different, results with them. So, yeah, maybe we can walk or go through, you know, what from the top performance, what was, like, the best effect in terms of reducing epigenetic epigenetic age? Yeah. So, so what's really interesting about, about the study, in my opinion, is that each of the individual interventional studies are not huge, right? They vary from tens of individuals to hundreds, of individuals. Right? So they are they're relatively small trials or relatively small interventional studies. So in some ways, the individual assessment of the of the trials, right, are not, I cannot, I cannot certainly say it right, that they are decreasing epigenetic age, right? Like for example, we saw Metformin decreasing epigenetic age quite high, which is great. I'm, I'm quite excited by it, but we did not see something like rapamycin decreasing epigenetic age, which I was disappointed by or semaglutide, not decreasing epigenetic age, which I was disappointed by. We saw that a lot of diets, right? A lot of diets decreasing epigenetic age across the board and even diets in combination with exercise, decreasing epigenetic age, but one particular exercise intervention, not decreasing epigenetic age. So I don't think we can really, like and the problem is also these trials are very different in different populations. So for example, like, Tsai study was in post postmenopausal women, and was a cohort of 20 people for for just twelve weeks. Right? So it's a very small study run for a very small period of time. Right? As opposed to some of the diet interventions were for two years. Right? So relatively a longer period of time. Right? So again, with with 60 people, and and one eighty people. So so again, different parameters altogether. Right? But what's really exciting is that even though individually these studies, right, are not able to tell us much of a story, when you agglomerate their data for a biomarker, they can tell us a story. Right? They can tell us a story that whether across all of these studies, across the board, right, across these 51 interventions is a biomarker being responsive. Right? Because what you would expect is, like, okay. Sure. And some of these things are working. Some of them are not. Some of these studies are perfect. Some of them are bad studies, good apples and bad apples. And there must be an averaging out effect. But overall, you would, you would expect that there should be a net positive effect if the interventions are longevity focused, which we show that about 50% of them seem to be decreasing epigenetic age, even if you take into account the responsive and non responsive biomarkers. So the first figure that we showed, we haven't done any analysis on which clocks are responsive, which clocks are not responsive. We just do an average out effect, right, of the epigenetic agents. They're like, hey. We're not thinking about which clocks are responsive, which clocks are not responsive. Let's just look at the average epigenetic age across each of these interventions. And just try to see, have we curated a database of interventions that are generally longevity focus? Right? And as you see from that sort of that scatterplot, which has gotten really popular on social media, about 50% of them, right, show a decrease in epigenetic age, which is a really good sign for us to say that, hey. Yeah. These interventions are decreasing epigenetic age, more or less speaking, which is not to say that any particular intervention is good or bad. Right? It is to say that generally the database that has been curated, right, is a longevity interventions database. That's kind of the focus, to in that particular figure. Right. Gotcha. Yeah. And a a lot of them I saw that were this kind of anti TNF, therapies or anti inflammatory therapies. Yep. And I guess I guess you you would presume that, in those trials that the people getting that therapy had, like, higher baseline inflammation, and you have, like, a reduction in the inflammation, which then kinda explains this kind of a big effect from the in the epigenetic age. And you you see that trend. Right? That a lot of generally, if you have high inflammation, you'll, you'll probably have decrease in epigenetic age. We see that even in the, the most effected intervention as well, which is the art therapy, which is, so if you might know this, so the art therapy is an HIV positive, it's given to HIV positive individuals. And it is typically the first line of therapy given once they are tested positive for HIV. And what it does is it really is helps them increase their immune cell count, and their t cell count in the body and counteract chronic inflammation. And without this therapy, their lifespan would be really short. But with this therapy, their lifespan extends significantly. So so it's so the epigenetic clogs are actually capturing what they're supposed to. They are capturing that the epigenetic age has gone down, and their lifespan is increasing indeed. Right. With this heart. Yeah. And significantly quite dramatically. Right. But the thing is the way it's happening is through inflammation, Right? Like, the way it's one of the ways it's happening is through sort of decrease in chronic inflammation. And, again, there are different dimensions that can be captured in in in epigenetic clocks. Inflammation is one of them. Yeah. Yeah. And inflammation is one of the biggest things that affects those clogs. I've seen, like, you know, the COVID or just physiological stress or some other, like, infections tend to increase the, I guess, the epigenetic age results if the if you do, like, some of these tests? Yeah. So I think that's a really interesting question to me as well. Right? That does epigenetic and we we need to constructively think about biological age as a construct as well. Right? That goes back to the question of what is biological age. Right? Is biologically it's something that is something that can fluctuate, right, over a period of time. So, for example, take something like COVID. Right? If you have COVID and in a period of during the period of time, you have really high inflammation, right? In some ways, you, your body is telling you that, yes, if this state remains at it as it is, if I have this constant state of inflammation, right, my bod your lifespan would be shortened. Mhmm. Yeah. If this does not get fixed, my lifespan will be shortened. That is what your body is telling you. Right? Which is what the epigenetic clock is telling you. Right? That, hey, you have inflammation in your body. You have your epigenetic age. Your biological age is accelerated. If this is not fixed, you're gonna probably have mortality sooner than later. Right? And that's what kind of is happening. Right? Which is what we see in sort of chronic COVID patients as well, sort of long COVID patients as well. That instead instead of their biological age going down, it consistently remains high. So what happens is if you recover from COVID and kind of go down, like become healthy, you your co sort of your, biological age goes down. But if you have long COVID, it kind of stays stagnant and remains low high or relatively high compared to what it was earlier. And and that to me is an example of the biological age and the epigenetic age measuring something very critical. Right? That it is telling you that, hey, your body is telling you that something's wrong. Something's off. Your lifespan is gonna be shortened if something's not done. And so it's it's important for us to think about the constructs of what it means to measure biological age. Mhmm. Yeah. So it's like a snapshot in time of the current state of the body. Exactly. And you can move it, you know, up and up or down with, the age. Yes. And so unlike chronological age, which is very fixed, right, biological age can be a little more dynamic. Right? It it changes. Right? Which is why if you were if you were unhealthy, right, and you were not sort of exercising, you were not eating healthy, your biological age would be high. But if you start exercising, you start eating healthy, you start doing the right stuff, The biological age would go down. Right? So it's a, it's a, it's a snapshot, right? It, it, it modifies. Right. Which is what we want biological age to be. Right. You can't modify it. You can't, you can't decrease the number of candles on your, on your birthday cake. Right. But you can modify your biological age, because that is how you would want it to be. Right. Only because that's how you would potentially be able to live a longer, healthier life. Mhmm. But the the chronological age is a huge, I guess, effector of the biological age. So that if you're, you know, 80 years old, your biological age will by default be, you know, higher than someone who is 20 years old. That is absolutely correct. There is no doubt about that. That if you're 80 years old, the chances of your biological age being 20 are much lower, right, than someone who is 20 years old. But the matter of fact is, right, that hopefully in the future, as we move towards more sort of innovative therapies and we're moving away. So at this point, we're we're we're at the real set of, I would say, at a revolution in some ways. Right? So we have we have known sort of lifestyle interventions work. Right? We know sort of interventions like diet and exercise, the kind that you do, the kind of stuff that we sort of prescribe clinicians, prescribe all the time they work. We also know certain pharmacological interventions are starting to show effects like metformin, semaglutide, so on and so forth. Right? We're trying to run trials, all of those things, but the real change would be where all of these are what we call as essentially, there are three things that can happen. You can slow down aging. So if you were to think about aging, right? As a rate, you can slow it down. You can stop it, or you could reverse it. Right? At this point, all we are doing is slowing it down through these interventions. How much is different? Right? So something like lifestyle will slow it down slightly, pharmacological, maybe more. Right? But what would be interesting is we are able to stop it or reverse it. Right? And interventions like maybe, like, epigenetic reprogramming, right, that are currently being developed, which I, by the way, did not have in this, in this study. I wish I did, but there are no studies right now on epigenetic programming in humans. But if we had something like those, those could really reverse epigenetic age. Till now, we are seeing, as I said, is slowing down of epigenetic age. So I in no place do I say that epigenetic age has been reversed or we have rejuvenated Right. Humans. I think we're still a step away from rejuvenating the epigenome. Right? Mhmm. When we're able to do that, that's the point where I will say a chronologically 80 year old man or a chronologically 80 year old person can actually be a biological 20 years of age. And I don't think that future is far away. Right. So it's yeah. Like, you need some more powerful interventions than just metformin or some of this anti TNF therapy. That is correct. But I I Interesting because, like, you know, one of the interventions that resulted in increased opportunity gauge was this follistatin gene therapy, which is kind of in that realm of gene therapies, but it resulted in higher age. So what what do you think about that? So, again, as I said, one off studies. Right? A small study with I think this was, if I pull up the data here and I'm looking at it. Yes. It can't be any more than maybe a few people because it's a fringe topic. Therapy was, about about how many people we are looking at? I have all the data. So we have about 25 people in this study. Wow. It's it's pretty much. Yeah. It's it's still a decent sized study, and let me see how long this was. This was about a year long study. Right? So it's not a small study for sure. Right? As you saw, right, we're looking at the effects across, across both the reliable and the nonreliable talks. Right? Sorry. The across both the responsive and the non responsive clocks. Right? You actually look at some of the just the responsive clocks. Full stack and gene therapy actually decreases, in some of the and so, and then again, if you look at specific DNA methylation biomarkers, right, for specific proteins and specific protein proxies and metabolite proxies, right, and specific systems, again, we see full statin gene therapy decreasing at the genetic age. So I think, again, the cons context matters. Right? These are small studies, different contexts, different this thing. I should also point out something really interesting here, that the fostatin gene therapy trial was done in a really, really healthy population. Right? While a lot of the other trials that we have are in what we call as people who already had diseases. Right? And think about it this way. If you already have a disease, right, you already have a lot of ailments. You already have inflammation. You already have metabolic syndrome. You already have a lot of disorders. It's a lot easier to fix you. Yeah. That a lot easier to get a response, to decrease your epigenetic age, to improve your biological age. Right. But if you're already very healthy, right, it's a lot difficult to improve you. Like, for example, right, for you, Sim, right, if we were to try you you seem like a really healthy person already. Right? If we were to try some of these therapies, right, I would say we might not see much of a response. Right? Because you're already a very healthy person. Right? And to then try and decrease your epigenetic aid significantly further would actually be really, really challenging. Right? Because you might have actually maxed out in some ways by doing everything that you can in by doing lifestyle and maybe some other interventions that you may practice, like supplements and so on and so forth. Right? Right. But with with people who may not be as healthy, who may, may be suffering through some chronic disease or so on and so forth, the scope for improvement is a lot more. Right? So again, varies a lot on population. And we actually show this in one of the analysis that we do that if you compare between healthy and diseased populations, right, so if a population of the study was was healthy a priority or the population had a disease, the effects are very different on these biomarkers. And you get much stronger effects in these epigenetic biomarkers, which makes sense. We get a much stronger response because there's a lot more scope for improvement. Yeah. So, like, you're closer to the ceiling if you're healthy. Yeah. And, yeah, if you have high inflammation, you take a really hard pharmaceutical that lowers the inflammation, then, yeah, your epigenetic gauge will, like, go down. Well, not just inflammation, but any other thing. Right? Like, you have metabolic syndrome. You have any other so there are so many dimensions to aging. Right? You have musculoskeletal aging, metabolic syndrome, call cognitive aging. Only any of those could be targeted, and epigenetic age will sort of capture that. And and that's kind of the part here. Is that the reason why some of the exercise and diet interventions didn't have, like, a mass significant effect on the score that, you know, usually, there would there would be, like, kind of healthier people doing those things. So with the diet ones, we saw massive changes, I would say, like, con consistent changes, across the board. And, again, the effect sizes themselves were pretty consistent and significant across the board, and they were quite beautiful, I would say. Like, we saw we'll and I would say this is one of the biggest studies comparing a lot of diets. We had Mediterranean diet. We had low fat diet, low carb diet, vegan diet, calorie restriction, intermittent fasting. And I think, low fat diet with exercise, low carb diet with exercise, low fat diet, without exercise, low fat diet without exercise. So just like a huge combination and omnivore diet. So just like a huge combination of diets and, this thing and exercise, of course. And with with the diets, we saw consistent decrease across the board. We also saw a consistent decrease with, sort of the systems. Right? The system scores that we had. So for example, consistently, we saw metabolic aging going down as measured by sort of the DNA methylation biomarker. We saw saw musculoskeletal aging going down. We saw chronic inflammation going down, and we also saw some stuff like cardiovascular aging going down, which is great. All things that we would expect to go down with diet. The and these were again in most in in predominantly healthy populations. What I will say is it goes back to the kind of studies that are being run. Right? So a lot of the good diet clinical trials that we had were done for two years. Right? Which is a really good clinical trial. But the one exercise trial that I was talking about was in a really small population of postmenopausal women, with, I think, like, I don't recall, like, 15, women or, let me pull that data up here. Yeah. That was about, yeah, that was about, yeah, 40 women or something, and, it was just for fourteen weeks. So it's like a very short period of time to actually observe a lot of changes and in a very specific population again. And they were, so, again, context matters here. I would say again that when you look at diet plus exercise, you see a lot of change, in in the epigenetic ages and significant changes. So so the point again, to go back here, is that the studies themselves are very different. Right? So sometimes comparing them is challenging, themselves. Right? And so the easier way that I think about that is, is, is that this is not an analysis about seeing which intervention is better. Right? It's more about analysis of saying which biomarker are responsive. Right? Rather, I would I would say that this study will help us identify the biomarkers which will be used in clinical trials that will be for eventual interventions to know which interventions are better. Right? Because, right now, for example, if you were to run a clinical trial for any of these interventions, it will take us years maybe to actually really get, an answer. So think about running an actual longevity intervention clinical trial. Right? The end outcome is mortality. Right? Or number of chronic diseases a person or a bunch of people have had in that trial. Now a trial like that would take essentially thirty years. So you start prescribing this medication or this intervention at the age of 60. You're essentially running this trial till these people pretty much die. Right? Now that's a trial being run for twenty, thirty years. That's just not feasible. Right? So what you need are proxy biomarkers that can tell you. Right? And those proxy biomarkers, as we call them as surrogate endpoints, right, need to be prognostic, reliable, and responsive. Right? We have shown DNA methylation biomarkers or epigenetic clocks are prognostic and reliable. We just need to check for their responsiveness. Right? And that's kind of what the study is really trying to figure out. Right? That are they responsive? And now we are seeing some early indications that they are responsive. And once we are able to do that, then we can actually run a clinical trial to say that which interventions are really slowing down epigenetic age. Because right now, these trials are very different. They're very small, have very different population. So doing a head to head comparison is slightly challenging. Right. So it looks like you had kind of draws back to the biomarkers of Exactly. Matter, with this clocks. So what were the kind of main biomarkers that you saw affected the epigenetic age? Yeah. So it goes back to sort of the conversation you and I were having about sort of these different generations of biomarkers. Right? So we had the gen one, which were the chronological age predictors like Horvath and Hannem, gen two, which were the mortality predictors and pace sort of rate of aging predictors, like, sort of, the first version of GrimAge, the first version of PhenoAge, the first version of Dunedin, pace of aging. And then we had, generation reliable. Right? So the next version of Dunedin PACE, it's the newest version of GrimAge, PC PhenoAge, PC GrimmAge, and then we have the generation explainable or Gen x clocks. Right? And what we have seen is there are two sets of of clocks that are, sort of, or two sets of biomarkers that are, responsive. It is sort of the generation reliable and the gen X clock. So not the gen one, not the gen two, the gen R and the gen X, right, which are responsive to interventions. And the reason for that is pretty simple, that if a biomarker is reliable, right, it will have a lot less noise. Right? And if has a lot less noise, then the errors on it would be a lot smaller. And if the errors are a lot less smaller, right, that means that, mathematically you can get a significant, difference quite easily. Right? And that's why you have kind of as soon as you started developing sort of these reliable biomarkers, you have them as more, as more, being responsive. So in general, sort of grim age v two, PC grim age, you need in PACE, systems age, all these, the system scores, the omega m h, components, all of these seem to be sort of the biomarkers that are most responsive, to different interventions. Amidst amidst these, what we are seeing is sort of PC image and and, you need in case would really, really responsive. Mhmm. Right. So inflammation is, I guess, one of the primary ones that affects a lot of these results. With met metformin, you would also predict, like, the blood sugar can have effect. Well, inflammation is just one dimension of aging, I would say. And we we see that, a lot of different dimensions are changing. So for example, when I we did the analysis with different diets, we saw sort of, like, musculoskeletal aging and, sort of, cardiovascular aging and, other sort of aging dimensions all significantly, changing, which was amazing in my opinion. And so I think inflammation is chronic inflammation is definitely a really critical angle of aging, right, which is being captured by these clocks. But I've been a proponent of the idea that aging is very multidimensional. Right? And, we need to capture all of these different dimensions to really understand, aging. And that goes when we are studying sort of the responsiveness of these biomarkers as well, right? That we need to understand the responsiveness from different angles. Right. Yeah. So you mentioned also earlier that you had developed this, like, organ system age, systems age. So, maybe we can talk about that as well. Like, how does it differ from some of these other epigenetic age clocks and, yeah, what use can it have? For sure. It's it's a really interesting, biomarker because, so I'll tell you the, the the exciting part about it. The reason we ended up developing this was the simple question that we that that plagues all of epigenetic clocks, which is a big criticism of epigenetic clocks is that they are not explainable. A lot of people come to us and say, like, hey. You tell us that you're five years older. Right? But what do we do about it? Right? You tell us you're three we are three years younger. How do we make ourselves more younger? What do we do about this information? Right? Great. It's great. You you did an amazing job telling us we are three years younger than you are supposed to be. Right? We are our biological our chronological age is 50. We are we are 47. That's great. But what how do I make it 45? Right? I don't know. They didn't know. Right? And that kind of drove us to the question that how do we give them more insight into this? Right? Oh, well, one insight is one way to do it is, of course, you can go and do a bunch of different sort of clinical biomarker test, get 20 different blood draws done, and figure out, oh, my metabolic my metabolic biomarkers are high. My my cardiac biomarkers are high. All of those things, yada yada yada. But can I can we simplify it further? Can we just link it back to epigenetic age? And that's kind of what drove this whole analysis. Right? And so what we did was very simple. We took all of these biomarkers that were associated with different organs, and we had about, 130 different biomarkers from functional biomarkers, like how much you can walk, how quickly you can walk. Can you pick up a piece of time, from the floor, to cognitive biomarkers, like how quickly you remember things, stuff like that, to, more, clinical chemistry biomarkers and stuff. And then we just predicted it using epigenetic data for all the different organs. We grouped them into different organs. Right? So brain biomarkers, heart biomarkers, lung biomarkers, kidney biomarkers, musculoskeletal biomarkers, inflammation biomarkers, so on and so forth. And then we predicted it using epigenetic data. Once we did that, it was perfect. We could just essentially predict aging in each of these different organs. And, we were able to then validate it in about 25 different diseases. So what we showed was that, for example, the heart score that we had was most predictive of cardiovascular disease, better than the other epigenetic clocks that are out there, or the brain score we had was really predictive of cognitive decline. Or the physical function score we or the musculoskeletal score we had was really predictive of arthritis and physical function decline. Right? And, or so on and so forth. Right? And we did this for 25 different aging phenotypes in about sort of 10,000, I don't know even remember how many different sample that this individual is this time. And then what we did was went even further. We went and said, okay. Well, we have these different, individuals. Right? Why don't we see based on these systems, can we group them into different categories almost of aging? Right? So we did, like, what we call a very simple cluster analysis. And based on aging, they're aging in different organs. We group them into different clusters and we saw there were nine different aging patterns. Right? Or we can call them aging subtypes. So people were aging in nine different ways based on their organ systems. And that leads to nine all different kinds of diseases. So for example, a very interesting example that came out of it was there were people who were a lot of them were smokers, and they fell in three different categories. Right? Not all of them actually developed lung cancer or cardiovascular disease. Only two of those categories developed cardiovascular disease. Right? And they had high heart and high lung aging. And that was really interesting to us. But there was one separate category separate from the smoke smokers that developed heart and lung sort of developed cardiovascular disease. Right? And that group had really high metabolic aging. So now think about it simply. Both of these groups have cardiovascular disease events. They both get heart attacks, and they go to the doctor. Both of them will be treated similarly. Right? But their underlying aging biology is very different. One of them is a smoker. They have high lung aging. The other one is probably obese and has high metabolic aging. Right. They should not be treated similarly. Right? Yeah. And and that's a important insight. They should probably be personalized in their treatments. Right? And and that's kind of the really next generation of thinking about how we should be thinking about aging and aging phenotypes and aging in general when we are thinking about clinics and in in in clinical practice. Mhmm. Yeah. That's pretty interesting. Yeah. That, you know, different different parts of the body age in different ways depending on the lifestyle and genetics. Exactly. And even, like, yeah, randomness in some sense. Yep. Is it the same as the symphony h then? That's correct. So we patented this, and then TruDiagnostics was really interested in licensing this out. And now they have licensed it out, and they're using it. They've actually now about 10,000 different patients have used it, and it's been used in about 20 different clinical interventional studies and trials. So it's really catching pace, and really pondering a lot of, attention. I'm really excited about it, that I was able to make such a contribution. And, all of this was in collaboration with doctor Morgan Naveen. So I'm really sort of excited, that this work, is able to reach the masses, honestly. It's rare, honestly, for someone like me, like a PhD student during his PhD career to get to, translate something so quickly. So it's a lot thanks to Morgan and and and TrueDiagnostics that this happened. Yeah. I've done the Symphonage test and, like, like, my anything interesting? What? Do you find anything interesting? Yeah. Well, like, my liver is, like, nine years old in the testing. Hey. Hey. Have you been drinking a lot, Sim? Yes. Well, I've been I've been not drinking for, like, ten years. Okay. So maybe that's kind of, affecting that. But, yeah, I mean, every other age is also, like, lower than my chronological age. So my the average was, like, 17, I think. I remember that it was 17. Amazing. Well, we should discuss about why your liver age is high, at at some point. I'd love to give my insights on it. Yeah. Is there anything else, like, worth mentioning about, I guess, these, clocks or some of these, epigenetic gauge as a whole? No. I'm I'm just generally very excited about the field, I would say. It's it's really at a turning point in some ways. I think as a field, epigenetics is sort of changing so quickly, and there's so much evolution happening in the field. We're really at the at the point where there is going to be, a revolution in terms of the fact that these biomarkers will be accessible to patients in clinics, and in clinical trials. And as soon as that happens, right, we will really be able to transform health care from being from having medicine as being, reactive, from having medicine being as, oh, you wait till you have a disease and then we will treat you, to having medicine being proactive, we will tell you before you have a disease. We will treat you before you have a disease. Now that is a paradigm shift in medicine, and that will be driven by biomarkers like the epigenetic clocks. And I am really excited about that. I'm just so excited that that epigenetic clocks are are sort of the heralding force of of this change. Yeah. I guess the challenge is making them more more or cheaper. Right now, I guess they're a bit more expensive than regular blood markers and stuff. That's kind of the exciting part in my opinion. I think there is there is a lot of exciting stuff coming out in that sense because, there are new analysis that are where we can do some of these analysis for as as cheap as, like, 50 to $20. And Wow. At least all these will be available to the public in the next, say, few years. So it's just a matter of time. As you as you know, sort of sequencing follows this very interesting, Moore's law, in science. It it decreases sort of exponentially in cost. And we're gonna see this exponential decrease in cost here as well. Just a couple of years ago, doing a DNA methylation analysis used to cost, like, tens of thousands of dollars. Wow. And now it's, what, a couple of $100. Right? I expect it to be a couple of dollars in the next two to two to five years. So, and that's kind of where the future is, in my opinion. Imagine in a couple of dollars, you can get thousands of biomarkers, not hundreds, thousands. Thousands of biomarkers in hundreds in in a few dollars. Yeah. Well, yeah, that's the kind of the ideal scenario for that. But, yeah, I mean, I agree that it's gonna be Yeah. Yeah. I agree that the field is, yeah, like, exciting and it's gonna keep advancing. Like, we're we're nowhere near any, like, yeah, like a gold standard at the moment or need some more advancements. Exactly. And I think that's kind of the exciting part. Right? Like, we're also at the at the point where we are defining the, the field. Right? And I'm so excited. Like, people like you are are really sort of participating in this conversation. Right. Because, it is it, it requires attention. Right. It requires people like you to spread the message that, that there is advancements going on in this field. And, I'm just honestly thankful, have these conversations with a lot of different people so that we can spread the message. Yeah. I'm thankful for as well for your work and looking forward to more of the studies, in the future. Yeah. No. For sure. Yeah. I was gonna ask, like, before I ask my last question, what's, where where can people learn more about you and your work? Well, where they can learn? They can learn about on my website, that is raghav-segul.com, and, also my LinkedIn and my Twitter. I'm guess I'll send you that link. You can post it on your, on your, YouTube and other places. But generally speaking, I do a few things other than being a PhD. PhD. I I am also sort of director of informatics at Healthy Longevity Clinic, which is a clinic, helping people live healthier lives. And I also work as a scientific principal at Longevity Tech Fund, which essentially works on investing in some really next generation longevity, companies. I work advice through diagnostics. I, help with some other companies as well, do some of my own personal investments in the longevity space. So I'm really sort of ingrained in this space and really excited about this space in general. I'm really about it. Yeah. That's great. I'll put the links in the show notes. And, my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you'd offered sooner? That I had learned sooner? Is is that the question? Yeah. Like, you know, is it some sort of, you know, you wish you started exercising sooner or whatever? Like, some people may have these kind of ideas. I think sleeping healthier. I I used to be a really bad sleeper. Like I used to sleep like, so I've as you can understand with all the things that I do, I used to be like working at all hours of the day and then sleeping at one, 1AM and 2AM. And, and that kind of started giving me really bad sort of headaches and stuff like that. And so I've realized that I think sleeping and sleep quality is such a critical aspect of maintaining good health. Sure, healthy exercise, all of those things are critical, and I practice all of that. But sleeping, my god. The the the day I started sleeping better, started sleeping at ten a 10PM and waking up at, like, 7AM, my life has changed. It's transformative. Yeah. That's a very important, tip for sure. Many people tend to under sleep. Yes. Sleeping is critical, and maintaining a good sleep cycle can be, can be really important. Something that I when I was in my early twenties, I think in your early twenties that you can really stretch yourself and be like, now that I'm starting to hit my, thirties, I'm like, no. I I think old age is hitting me. I'm joking. 30 is not good age. Better late than never. Yeah. Better late than never, though. Yes. Well, yeah. Thanks for coming to the show, and, yeah, looking forward to the few future studies. For sure. Thanks for having me, Sam. This was a great conversation. Yeah. Likewise. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Sim. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.