Brian Johnson is taking over a 100 supplements per day, or at least that's what he used to do. He now created his own supplement line that distills all those a 100 supplements into just a handful of pills and some powders. Brian says that all of those supplements have a clinically relevant dose, and they're selected for certain frontline interventions such as weight loss, antiaging muscle, sleep, antioxidant defense, etcetera. In this video, I'm going to review all of the ingredients in the blueprint supplement stack. I'll go through all the research of each ingredient to see if they're really evidence based and if the dosages are really clinically relevant. This is gonna be a pretty long video so I'm putting all the timestamps of the ingredients into the description box below so you can check out whatever specific ingredient that you're interested in. First off, I do like the idea that Braun is listing out all the ingredients in his supplements and the exact dosages. A lot of companies might use proprietary blends, which means they're using their own patented dosage formula, which is why you don't know exactly how much of each ingredient there is. Let's start with the longevity mix. It's this pink powder drink. The ingredients are vitamin c as ascorbic acid, two hundred and fifty milligrams, magnesium as magnesium citrate, a hundred and fifty milligrams, creatine monohydrate, two thousand five hundred milligrams, calcium alpha ketoglutarate, two grams, glucosamine sulfate, fifteen hundred milligrams, taurine, fifteen hundred milligrams, glycine, twelve hundred milligrams, glycine, twelve hundred milligrams, ashwagandha, six hundred milligrams, reduced gluathione, two hundred milligrams, theanine, two hundred milligrams, and sodium hyaluronate, a hundred and twenty milligrams. I wanna start with calcium alpha triglyceride or AKG because this is the star of this blend. Blueprint says calcium AKG is for antiaging metabolism, energy, muscle, and cognition. Now this is quite interesting and there are most studies showing that calcium AKG extends extends lifespan by up to 20% and health span by 40%. And the 2021 clinical trial on humans saw that taking a thousand milligrams of calcium AKG for seven months reduced the DNA methylation age of 42 individuals by eight years. Now this sounds quite amazing to reduce your biological age in such a short time, but there's almost no practical takeaway to reducing your DNA methylation age and we don't necessarily know, like, what it actually means in the final outcomes of health. What's more, the study was done by a company on their patented formula called Rejuvent, so you had to take it with a grain of salt. There's currently another clinical trial called ABLE that seeks to replicate these findings. They're using a thousand milligrams of calcium AKG for six months on a 120 people between the ages of 40 and 60 and they'll also measure functional outcomes like grip strength, aerobic capacity, arterial stiffness, inflammation, etc. For me, the secondary outcomes such as grip strength, v two max, etcetera are much more important and much more interesting. We have a lot more data about the consequences of having high v two max and some of the other effects, but we don't have that data with these biological age tests. AKG is involved in the metabolism, specifically the Krebs cycle that generates energy. AKG levels decline with age by about tenfold after the age of 40, which makes it plausible that supplementation could have health benefits. There are indeed several human clinical trials over the past few decades that have shown that AKG helps with wound healing, immunity, and faster recovery from surgeries. A 2022 review on AKG stated that a few studies published in the 1980s and 1990s in humans suggested the potential benefits of AKG in muscle growth, wound healing, and promoting faster recovery after surgery. So far, there are no recently published studies demonstrating the role of AKG in treating aging and age related diseases. Hence, further clinical studies are required to better understand the role of AKG in humans. AKG is otherwise safe but it is quite expensive. It's one of the most expensive ingredients in the longevity mix and potentially the entire blueprint stack. The problem is that it has one of the lowest amount of clinical trials when it comes to longevity. So you're spending the most money but you have the least certainty about its benefits. But this doesn't mean that I'm not excited about future trials on AKG so we just have to wait for them. Vitamin C is the next ingredient in the longevity mix. The blueprint website says it's selected for antioxidant, immune skin, hair, antiaging, and heart benefits. Usually, vitamin c is used to prevent or treat the flu. A 2,013 Cochrane review of 29 placebo controlled trials found that vitamin c at a dose of two hundred milligrams or above had no effect on the incidence of common colds. However, regular supplementation was shown to reduce the duration of cold symptoms. Five studies also found that vitamin c reduced the risk of common cold by fifty percent in people engaged in a lot of physical stress like marathon running. Overall, the review concluded that vitamin c isn't justified for preventing the cold but it might be useful for people who are experiencing higher amounts of physical stress. Regarding skin, hair, and nails, then yes, vitamin c is essential for initiating collagen synthesis. However, the studies on this are done with topical vitamin c, not the oral form. There is one study that found that oral supplementation of vitamin c and vitamin e in eighteen people increased the dose of u e v radiation from the sun needed to cause redness of the skin. The subjects also saw less skin lesions after getting sunburned when taking vitamin c and e. A 2007 epidemiological study found that people who ate more dietary vitamin c from fruits and vegetables had a lower likelihood of a wrinkled appearance and senile dryness. But that refers to dietary vitamin c and these studies are observational which means that the effects might have been caused by some other healthy lifestyle factors and it certainly doesn't mean that supplementing vitamin C would have those benefits. What about chronic diseases like heart disease? A 2007 randomized controlled trial on over eight thousand women over the age of 40 with history of cardiovascular disease and with three or more risk factors found that there were no overall effects of vitamin c, e, or beta carotene on cardiovascular events among women at high risk of cardiovascular disease. Another 2,004 randomized controlled trial took over 13,000 middle aged people and told them to take antioxidants, including ascorbic acid for seven point five years, they found that the antioxidants didn't reduce the risk of total cancer incidence, ischemic heart disease, or all cause mortality in women, but men did see a reduction in the incidence of total cancer and and all cause mortality. This could be because men have a baseline lower antioxidant status and lower intake of foods that contain antioxidants such as fruit and vegetables. And the 2017 Cochrane review of clinical trials concluded that vitamin c supplementation doesn't reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease. So supplementing with vitamin c or vitamin e doesn't provide any additional benefits that you wouldn't get from your diet. If you're eating fruits and vegetables, then you're getting all the vitamin c that your body needs. Next, let's look at creatine monohydrate which is said to work for the brain, muscles, heart, energy and anti aging. Indeed, creatine is probably the most evidence based supplement there is and it has hundreds if not thousands of studies showing that it increases muscle strength, muscle mass and sports performance. However, many people are still not aware that creatine has longevity benefits for the brain as well. It's been shown to improve cognition, better memory, reduce sleep demand, and improve glucose tolerance. When it comes to heart health, then here's what a 2021 review on the subject concluded. In otherwise healthy people with healthy hearts, creatine doesn't improve cardiac function. In people with heart failure, creatine improves muscle function which could be beneficial to counteract fatigue and weakness. Overall, creatine is safe except in people with kidney failure. So, creatine is the best supplement for physical performance and it also appears to have cognitive benefits. But the evidence for it having heart benefits is somewhat limited for people who have already healthy hearts. Regardless, a dose of two point five to three grams of creatine monohydrate is the gold standard. It's the cheapest form of creatine and it is a good dose. Next up, we have magnesium citrate for bone, muscle, mood, stress, heart, and energy. Magnesium is indeed one of those minerals that a lot of people aren't getting enough of and magnesium deficiency does increase the risk of many chronic inflammatory conditions. Magnesium deficiency is also at the center of all the hallmarks of aging. What about the clinical trials? A 2023 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials concluded that magnesium supplements can improve depression scores in people with depressive disorders. However, they typically use two hundred and fifty milligrams whereas blueprint has a hundred and fifty milligrams. Another 2021 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that magnesium supplements can reduce inflammatory markers such as CRP. A 2016 meta analysis of double blind placebo controlled trials found that magnesium supplements can lower blood pressure, but the median dose was three hundred and sixty eight milligrams a day ranging from two hundred and forty to nine hundred and sixty milligrams per day. Regarding bone health, then a 2021 systematic review found that low magnesium intake is linked to a higher risk of bone fractures and low bone mineral density. Most interventions that have shown benefits in terms of increasing bone density have used either magnesium citrate, carbonate, or oxide with a dose between two hundred and fifty to eighteen hundred milligrams per day. That's also a much higher dose than what's in blueprint. In my opinion and based on the studies, a dose of a hundred and fifty milligrams of magnesium citrate isn't the optimal dose and it is somewhat underdosed. Most people will benefit from at least two hundred and fifty milligrams of magnesium and possibly up to four hundred or even beyond. And magnesium citrate is also considered to be somewhat of a lower quality magnesium because of its lower bioavailability and because of the risk of diarrhea. There's a reason it's called magnesium citrate. The better types would be something like magnesium taurate, orotate, bisglycinate, or threonate. Glucosamine is needed for cartilage synthesis and it improves joint function. There's a bit of a controversy about whether or not glucosamine actually improves joint function or osteoarthritis. For example, a 2,000 review of clinical trials concluded that glucosamine does improve osteoarthritis symptoms to a moderate to large degree, but the results might be due to bias. The standard dose is indeed one point five grams per day of glucosamine sulfate, which is what blueprint uses. However, there is reasons to think that larger doses of up to three grams are needed and that one point five grams isn't the optimal dose for maximum benefits. Besides joint function, there's also observational studies finding that glucosamine supplementation supplementation is linked to up to a thirty nine percent lower risk of mortality and cardiovascular disease. The reason for that is thought to be because glucosamine has anti inflammatory effects. These are observational studies and they could be confounded by the health user bias that people taking glucosamine are just health conscious, but glucosamine is generally safe and quite cheap. So there's little to no downside. But, overall, evidence suggests that glucosamine works only for people who have some aspects of osteoarthritis. Taurine is next and this supplement has become quite popular recently. I made a complete video about taurine a few weeks ago and the conclusion was that the clinical trials on taurine supplementation do find that a dose of zero point five to six grams per day can improve things like metabolic syndrome, blood pressure, and even exercise performance. But these people usually have already existing poor metabolic health and the elite athletes don't see a significant benefit from taurine. So for otherwise healthy people, taurine might have some modest benefits, but it's not a large effect. I do recall that Brian added taurine to his supplement stack after a mouse study last year showing how taurine extended the lifespan of mice. The human equivalent dose they used was six grams with three grams also providing minor benefits, But blueprint uses a dose of one point five grams, which is, yes, somewhere in the middle of the clinical trials, but it's not as high as the mouse life extension study. Next up is my favorite supplement, glycine. I've even written an entire book about it called The Collagen Cure. There is interesting animal studies showing how glycine supplementation does extend lifespan of mice by four to six percent, which doesn't sound like a lot, but it's still significant. In human clinical trials on diabetics, supplementing five grams of glycine three to four times a day improves hemoglobin a one c levels and lowers inflammation. For sleep, a three gram dose has also been seen to improve sleep quality and duration. These dosages are much larger than the one point two grams in the longevity mix. When we're talking about glycine then it's worthwhile to mention how the combination of glycine and nac called glynaq has quite a lot of evidence for health benefits and anti aging effects. There are several clinical trials on elderly people done over the last few years that have shown how glycine and nac supplementation improves functional outcomes related to aging such as grip strength, walking speed, inflammation, body composition, and other hallmarks of aging. That's why I'm confident in saying that glycine and nac is really one of the most evidence based longevity supplements pretty much after creatine or omega threes. However, these studies use a relatively large dose of glycine and n e c. In fact, they have to use a dose of up to four to eight grams of glycine and n e c both to see an effect and a dose of two point five grams doesn't appear to have any significant effect in raising gluethan levels. Blueprint has a glycine dose of one point two grams in the longevity mix and their nac dose in the other pills is also one point two grams. Based on the clinical trials on glynaq supplementation in the elderly people, that would be an under dose. But Brian isn't 70 years old. He's in his forties so he might not need that large of a dose. But if he were to be in your seventies or eighties, which those other clinical trials are done on, then you would need a much larger dose up to four to eight grams of glycine and n a c alone. Glycine is also needed for collagen turnover, and the minimal requirement for collagen turnover is twelve grams of glycine per day. Your body makes three grams, but those three grams are needed for glucosan synthesis. Because Brian is vegan, he's not getting that much glycine from his diet, and the one point two grams that he gets from the supplement isn't enough for optimal collagen turnover. The longevity mix also contains two hundred and fifty milligrams of reduced gluethane. A 2017 clinical trial found that two hundred and fifty milligrams of gluethane in both its reduced and oxidized form had skin lightening effects and it reduced some skin wrinkles. Another 2022 clinical trial on five hundred milligrams of oral glulothione found that five hundred milligrams of oral glulothione improved hemoglobin a one c and fasting insulin in elderly people with diabetes. Glutathione supplementation does reduce inflammation and oxidative stress by raising gluathione levels but eliminating all oxidative stress and inflammation is actually not a good idea. You need some inflammation to actually have health benefits from things like exercise. For example, antioxidant supplementation has been seen to reduce muscle growth and is even associated with higher risk of mortality. So, yes, gluathon does reduce inflammation but how much inflammation do you really need to reduce? If you're eating an already healthy diet, you're already following other healthy lifestyle practices, then generally you don't really need to boost your antioxidant defense or take a lot of antioxidant supplements and it actually might have some negative side effects. Lysine is an interesting choice for this supplement because it's not a very common nutrient deficiency. A 2017 study found that lysine supplementation helped to normalize blood pressure in people with suboptimal lysine intake. Another 2020 clinical trial found that lysine improved glucose control and lowered cholesterol in people with prediabetes, but this was done on a patented formula called lysoline by another company. A 2011 review of lysine supplementation concluded that cell studies show it might have benefits on bone health and other chronic diseases like Alzheimer's or heart disease, but there are no clinical trials to prove it. So it looks like lysine has benefits only if you're on a low lysine diet. Because lysine is an amino acid that you get from protein mostly, then it might be that Brian is just not getting enough lysine from his diet and he needs to supplement it. There's also some evidence that lysine supplementation reduces the risk of herpes virus infections, but the doses for that should be over one point two grams. But blueprint's dosage is exactly one point two grams. So if Brian is taking lysine for herpes virus, then he's under dosing. He might also be trying to prevent getting herpes. But a 2015 Cochrane review of clinical trials found that lysine had no preventive effects against herpes or cold sores. KSM sixty six ashwagandha, according to blueprint, is for mood, stress, inflammation, sleep, hormones, and immunity. A 2021 meta analysis of of clinical trials found that ashwagandha can alleviate anxiety and stress. However, the treatment dose and the type of ashwagandha used varied greatly between the studies. The doses ranged from two hundred and forty to twelve hundred and fifty milligrams a day, which is quite a wide range. Another 2021 meta analysis of five randomized controlled trials found that ashwagandha improved sleep in adults, but the effects were larger in people with insomnia. The dosage used was over six hundred milligrams per day. There are also many clinical trials showing that ashwagandha improves testosterone and subjective sexual well-being in men. A 2021 review of clinical trials found that KSM-sixty six ashwagandha at a dose of six hundred milligrams a day does improve testosterone by 15% in young men if used for eight weeks. A dose of six fifty seven milligrams a day in infertile men was seen to increase testosterone by 17% after ninety days. And women without hormonal disturbances have also been seen to experience an improvement in their sexual health by taking three hundred milligrams of ashwagandha twice a day for eight weeks. So, yes, ashwagandha does appear to have evidence for hormonal health, sleep, and stress. And the longevity makes use as the right dose. Theanine is a classic in nootropic snacks as it has an anxiolytic and calming effect that helps with cognition. A twenty twenty one randomized controlled trial did find that l theanine at a dose of one hundred milligrams improved attention and executive functioning in middle aged and older adults. Another 2022 clinical trial found that two hundred milligrams of theanine supported mental health in people with stress related ailments or cognitive impairment. And a 2023 systematic review discovered that theanine at a dose of fifty to six hundred and fifty five milligrams a day showed promise in improving sleep quality, but a dose of over six hundred and fifty five milligrams had negative effects on sleep. So theanine has evidence for sleep and stress, possibly even cognition, and the longevity mix has the right dose of two hundred milligrams. The last supplement in the longevity mix is sodium hyaluronate. This is interesting, and the biggest reason I think it's in the mix is because it might help with dry eyes. And I do recall Brian saying that he has dry eyes. However, a 2017 systematic review and meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that sodium hyaluronate based in artificial tears were not consistently more effective than other tears in treating dry eye syndrome. This doesn't mean that Brian isn't getting benefits from using this. It just means that it's not more effective than something else. The blueprint website also says that sodium hyaluronate has benefits on skin antiaging. There is some interesting studies on hyaluronic acid at a dose of two hundred milligrams improving skin wrinkles. However, the evidence for oral sodium hyaluronate supplements is limited. The studies are generally done with topical sodium hyaluronate creams. Alright. So we've gone through all of the ingredients in the longevity mix. What would be my rating out of a scale of one to five? My rating is gonna be a solid four out of five. Some of the ingredients are properly dosed and evidence based like ashwagandha, theanine, and creatine, but some are under dosed like magnesium and glycine. And others have more limited evidence such as calcium, AKG, lysine, and vitamin c, at least for otherwise healthy people who don't have any deficiencies. Next, let's look at the blueprint pills. There are four bottles of supplements, essential soft gel, essential capsules, n a c plus ginger plus curcumin, and red yeast rice plus garlic. Let's start with the essential soft gels. The ingredients are vitamin k one, fifteen hundred micrograms, lutein, fifteen milligrams, lycopene, fifteen milligrams, astaxanthin, twelve milligrams, vitamin k two, m k four five milligrams, zeaxanthin three milligrams, and vitamin k two m k seven six hundred micrograms. So this is like a fat soluble carotenoid supplement that's good for the skin, brain, and eyes. Blueprint says vitamin k one is for bones, heart, cell maintenance, and inflammation. It's supposed to prevent uncontrolled bleeding and unwanted calcification. It's often thought that vitamin k one is for the bones and k two is for the arteries to prevent calcification. But I actually found the recent 2022 randomized controlled trial on people with diabetes where ten milligrams of vitamin k one per day was found to decrease the likelihood of developing new lesions in the coronary arteries, aorta, and both aortic and coronary arteries. However, the study used a dose of ten milligrams, whereas blueprint has a dose of one point five milligrams, which is almost 10 times smaller. Another 2022 clinical trial on hemodialysis patients found that people taking five milligrams of vitamin k one for eighteen months had a sixty eight percent lower progression of thoracic aortic calcification. So this dose isn't gonna work for the calcification part. Regarding inflammation, then this 2018 double blind placebo controlled trial found that ten milligrams of vitamin k one for eight weeks in patients of rheumatoid arthritis didn't lower inflammation or disease severity. That's interesting because you would expect that people with high inflammation that they would see a decrease in inflammation levels, but they didn't even though they had arthritis and even though they used a large dose of ten milligrams a day. And that ten milligrams is almost 10 times larger than the one in blueprint. Dietary vitamin k one intake is linked to a lower risk of all cause mortality, heart disease, hip fractures, and diabetes. A 2019 review concluded that k one supplementation does reduce the risk of fractures, but the studies are considered low quality. So getting vitamin k one from your diet does appear to have benefits, and it is associated with better health outcomes. But the same can't be said about supplemental k one. You get vitamin k one from leafy greens like spinach, kale, mustard greens, Swiss chard, etcetera, as well as natto, broccoli, and in smaller amounts from liver and cheeses. It's interesting why Brian is taking k one because he's already eating so much vitamin k one from his diet. Next, let's look at vitamin k two. They have two types of vitamin k two, m k four and m k seven, both in MCT oil, which I like. There are over 15 different types of vitamin k two, which are called menaquinones, and m k four and m k seven are the most common types. The problem with m k four is that it has a short half life. M k seven has up to 48 times longer half life than m k four. M k four also requires a very large dose, whereas m k seven is effective already with a dose of a hundred micrograms. Regarding the benefits, then there is evidence that vitamin k two m k seven can slow down and even reduce coronary artery calcification. A 2023 meta analysis of 14 randomized controlled trials concluded that vitamin k supplementation could slow down coronary artery classification. The studies used about a hundred to two thousand micrograms of vitamin k two m k seven. Blueprint uses a dose of six hundred micrograms of m k seven, which is a higher dose, and it's a good one. Regarding bone density, a 2015 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that m k four supplementation at a dose of one point five milligrams a day improved bone mineral density in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis, but it didn't improve it in postmenopausal women without osteoporosis. Blueprint has a dose of five milligrams for m k four which is more than needed, but there's no evidence that supplemental m k four is going to prevent you from getting fractures or increase your bone density unless you have osteoporosis. Next up, we have aaxanthin, which is a carotenoid you get from salmon. Azaxanthin has also been seen to have anti inflammatory, cardioprotective, and neuroprotective qualities in randomized clinical trials. A 2022 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that astaxanthin supplementation did reduce inflammation and oxidative stress mildly. Another 2022 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that astaxanthin improves markers of metabolic syndrome such as cholesterol, triglycerides, and blood pressure. That's quite a large amount of clinical trials indicating that alexanthin does appear to have benefits, especially for inflammation and metabolic health. But alexanthin also appears to have benefits on skin health. Azaxanthin is a potent antioxidant that can protect the skin from UV radiation. A 2021 systematic review and meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that oral astaxanthin supplementation at a dose of two to twelve milligrams a day was able to improve skin moisturization and elasticity. Another 2021 review of clinical trials saw a dose of three Another 2021 review of clinical trials saw a dose of three to six milligrams a day of astaxanthin having benefits for photoaged skin. Blueprint uses twelve milligrams of astaxanthin, which is a large and effective dose. The essential softgels also contain other carotenoids such as lycopene, lutein, and zeaxanthin. There is evidence that higher levels of carotenoids in the brain and blood are linked to better cognitive function, better memory, and learning, as well as a reduced incidence of dementia. Higher dietary carotenoid intake is also correlated with better cognitive function. You get these carotenoids from salmon, carrots, sweet potatoes, pumpkin, egg yolks, and different colorful vegetables and fruits. Regarding supplementation, then a 2023 systematic review found that beta carotene supplementation at a dose ranging from six to fifty milligrams a day combined with a multi complex such as vitamin e, vitamin c, zinc, or selenium was associated with maintenance of cognitive function function over the course of up to twenty years. Supplementing with lutein and zeaxanthin has been seen to improve visual memory and learning and cognitive function in people with self reported cognitive complaints. The dose used was ten milligrams of lutein and two milligrams of zeaxanthin. Blueprint has fifteen milligrams of lutein and three milligrams of zeaxanthin, which exceeds the mark. Lycopene is what you get from tomatoes, and it has been seen to influence some hallmarks of cancer in human studies. A 2020 review of studies found that in human trials, lycopene supplementation at a dose of fifteen milligrams a day improved immune function in elderly people, which is the same dose used in blueprint. But most of these studies are done on dietary lycopene intake, not supplemental. Overall, my rating for the essential soft gels is 4.9 out of five. I think it's the best product in the blueprint stack and it's something that, you know, I would consider taking myself. Mostly because I find it a very good insurance policy for getting your carotenoids and keeping your eyes healthy for the long term. And Azaxanthin and k two also have other benefits beyond that. Moving on with the essential capsules, which is like a multivitamin. I'm not going to go through all the vitamins and minerals in this supplement because it will be too long. And to be honest, I'm not a big fan of multivitamins because there could be many contraindications between all these ingredients that we don't know about. It's also hard to look at the health effects of multivitamins because different multivitamins use different amounts of vitamins and minerals so there's no specific gold standard dose for multivitamins. I'll say this that there are several randomized controlled trials that have shown how multivitamin and mineral supplementation is linked to better cognitive performance and memory in elderly people. What about the other ingredients in essential capsules? Nicotinamide riboside is an NAD booster that raises NAD levels. Human clinical trials find that n r is safe and it raises NAD in a dose dependent manner starting from a hundred milligrams with no reported side effects. N r is relatively new and we don't have that many clinical trials on it. Here are some of the things we do know related to longevity. NR hasn't been seen to improve insulin sensitivity even at a dose of two thousand milligrams a day in obese subjects who are prime targets for getting those benefits. A 2023 randomized clinical trial on Alzheimer's disease patients found that a cocktail of supplements that included a thousand milligrams of NR improved cognitive function and increased hippocampal volume and cortical thickness. However, there were several other ingredients in the cocktail besides NR. Another 2023 trial on NR supplementation at a dose of fifteen hundred milligrams twice a day in 10 Parkinson's patients resulted in improvements in cognition scores. Overall, NR has very limited evidence that it has benefits and even the blueprint dosage is much smaller than the one used in clinical trials. Spermidine is another popular supplement but, as of now, there's almost no evidence that it works. A 2023 randomized placebo controlled study on healthy adults found that fifteen milligrams of spermidine a day as a supplement for five days didn't increase blood or salivary spermidine levels. A 2022 randomized controlled trial found that long term spermidine supplementation in people with subjective cognitive decline didn't modify memory and biomarkers compared to placebo. So, in my opinion, there's no evidence that you would want to take spermidine as a supplement. The hype about spermidine having longevity benefits comes from observational studies that find how spermidine intake from foods is linked to lower mortality, blood pressure, and heart disease. But that applies to dietary spermidine intake, not the supplements. The lowest risk is seen with an intake of eleven point six milligrams a day from dietary spermidine and Blueprint has a dose of ten milligrams, so I think they're trying to target that amount. But based on evidence, it's not going to even raise your spermidi levels. Lithium is an interesting and thought provoking ingredient. Historically, lithium has been used to treat bipolar disorder. However, there's an interesting link between lithium and brain aging as well as mental health. A 2015 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that lithium treatment could reduce cognitive decline and be beneficial in people with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's dementia. There are also observational studies linking lithium intake to lower rates of dementia and cognitive impairment in elderly people. Overall, lithium has mood stabilizing benefits and it also might have some neuroprotective effects but the evidence currently suggests that it works mostly for people who have dementia or mild cognitive impairment. Rhodiola rosea is an adaptogen that has been seen to have benefits on stress in clinical trials. However, the dosages in those studies are usually around three hundred forty to six hundred milligrams a day, whereas Blueprint has a dose of three hundred milligrams. CoQ ten is considered a mitochondrial supplement that supports energy and heart function. A twenty twenty two meta analysis of randomized controlled trials concluded that there's evidence that CoQ ten could reduce fatigue. Another 2022 meta analysis of clinical trials found that CoQ ten at a dose of a hundred to two hundred milligrams could improve glycemic control, especially in diabetes. A 2024 meta analysis on sports performance found that CoQ10 reduces muscle damage and oxidative stress but with a dose dependent manner over a hundred milligrams a day. However, Blueprint uses a dose of fifty milligrams which appears to be underdosed. Overall, I'm going to give the essential capsules a rating of 2.5 out of five. I think it's the worst supplement in the stack. Yes. There are some interesting ingredients there, and you could cover your daily vitamins and minerals with it quite easily, but the other ingredients appear to be almost like extra fluff with, not much evidence. Next, let's cover NAC plus ginger plus curcumin. It's got twelve hundred milligrams of NAC, four hundred milligrams of ginger and two hundred fifty milligrams of curcumin. I already talked about NAC in the longevity mix. Basically, a dose of twelve hundred milligrams might not be enough for the elderly people, but it might work for someone like Brian who is in his forties. A 2020 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials concluded that NAC significantly decreased some markers of oxidative stress like homocysteine and MDA, but it had no effect on some other inflammatory markers like CRP or TNF alpha. The mean dosage in these studies was five hundred to two thousand milligrams, and the participants were 30 to 70 years old. A 2023 meta analysis of clinical trials also found that NAC can improve metabolic markers such as blood glucose and lipids in women with PCOS. So overall, NAC works, and blueprint has the right dose. Curcumin is a polyphenol found in turmeric with antioxidant and anti inflammatory effects. Three meta analyses of randomized controlled trials from 2021 and 2023 saw that oral curcumin supplementation reduces markers of inflammation such as CRP, IL six, TNF alpha, and IL eight. The dosages used in these trials were between three hundred to nineteen hundred milligrams a day. So there is quite a lot of evidence that curcumin might have benefits for lowering inflammation. However, a lot of these studies also use piperine to improve curcumin's absorption because curcumin alone is with very bad bioavailability. Blueprint doesn't contain any piperine or even fat that could improve absorption, which is a negative. Ginger is another herb with anti inflammatory benefits. A 2022 review found that human studies show how ginger does improve inflammation. A 2024 meta analysis of 27 randomized controlled trials showed a significant link between ginger supplementation of two grams a day and weight loss, waist circumference, and body fat loss. A 2022 meta analysis concluded that ginger supplementation lowered blood sugar and hemoglobin a one c in people with type two diabetes. However, the dose used in these studies was twelve hundred to three thousand milligrams a day. Blueprint uses a dose of four hundred milligrams milligrams a day which appears to be underdosed. For n a c plus curcumin plus ginger, I'm going to give a rating of 3.5 out of five. Yes, these ingredients have benefits for specifically inflammation but some of them appear to be slightly underdosed. And again, the question is how much inflammation you need to reduce if you're already eating a healthy diet and you're already healthy. The last supplement on the block is red yeast rice plus odor free garlic. It has five hundred milligrams of red yeast rice extract and a hundred milligrams of odorless garlic. Red yeast rice is a commonly used supplement for high cholesterol. It's over the counter and generally recognized as safe. A 2022 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that red yeast rice extract at a dose of two hundred to forty eight hundred milligrams a day improved lipids, especially triglycerides. Now the effect sizes for cholesterol and ApoB probably aren't as large as you would see from lipid lowering drugs so you shouldn't replace your medication with these kind of supplements because they're not as effective. Next is garlic and I think now we have proof that Brian isn't a vampire because he's taking garlic. In random post control trials, doses of three hundred milligrams up to six grams of aged garlic or garlic powder twice a day for four to twelve weeks has been shown to reduce total cholesterol, triglycerides, and LDL C. A 2019 double blind placebo controlled study on patients at high risk of cardiovascular disease showed that twenty four hundred milligrams of aged garlic extract per day increased microcirculation and triggered wound healing in the blood vessels which protected against atherosclerosis progression. Now, I don't know how to convert the odorless garlic extract into actual garlic powder or some real garlic but at least based on the studies any amount of garlic appears to work, at least in terms of lowering your cholesterol. Overall for this red yeast rice and garlic supplement I'm gonna give a rating of 4.2 out of five. It's hard to mess it up because you have only two ingredients and these, ingredients do have appeared to have benefits especially for triglycerides and cholesterol. Let's quickly talk about the berry powders and cacao. And I think we should cover these because they're just food powders and yes, you should try to get most of your fruit and vegetables and berries in whole food form but the freeze dried powders are also quite useful. And there's plenty of evidence that berries are good for you. Alright. We've gone through all the supplements and all the ingredients. Yes, a lot of these ingredients do meet the clinically relevant dose, whatever that means, but a lot of the other supplements or the ingredients don't meet that. Here's the conclusion about my ratings for these supplements. The longevity mix, four out of five. Essential soft gels, 4.9 out of five. Essential capsules, 2.5 out of five. NAC curcumin ginger, 3.5 out of five. And red yeast rice and garlic, 4.2 out of five. In total it's 3.8 out of five which isn't that bad. I'm not making this video to trash these supplements. I think actually the blueprint stack is more evidence based than most other companies out there and they're more transparent with their ingredients. So yeah I'm happy that they are being so transparent and I just believe that people deserve to know okay what is the actual evidence and is there any evidence at all. If you want to know what supplements I'm taking then check out my free supplement list. Link in the description. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like and subscribe to future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Si. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.