A recent study on intermittent fasting claimed that those who ate within eight hours a day had a ninety one percent higher risk of dying to heart disease. A lot of people have also asked me what do I think of this study. So I decided to make a video about it. So make sure you click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. First, the study isn't even out yet. The findings were prematurely presented at the American Heart Association session as a poster. The study isn't peer reviewed and it's not published in any scientific journal. Second, it's an epidemiological study based from The US NHANES data from the years 2003 to 2018. So it obviously has a lot of limitations in terms of causality between interval fasting or eating within an eight hour window and increased risk of heart disease. And they didn't even actually measure the people's eating window directly. The participants completed two phone based interviews less than two weeks apart about what time they ate the previous day. You just take two days of the week within two weeks and then you asked, when did you eat yesterday? Now, that could be completely random like there might be some other variables that affect the person's eating window. The eating frequency and how long the person eats obviously changes quite a lot within five or six years. But regardless what they defined, the study included 20,000 people from The US. The analysis found that those who ate within an eight hour window had a ninety one percent higher risk of dying to heart disease than those who ate over a twelve to sixteen hour time frame. Now that is quite a big risk, ninety one percent, and it is concerning for people who are doing intermittent fasting including me. However, there are some major limitations with this data. When you look at the groups, you can see that there are only 440 people who ate within eight hours, whereas there's 11,831 people eating within twelve to sixteen hours. Those 414 people make up only two percent of the total sample of 20,000 people, yet eighty five out of those four hundred and fourteen people died. So twenty percent of the people in that group died. I think that's a pretty big limitation in this study because you have four hundred and fourteen people in one group and twelve thousand people in the other group. The people in the eight hour reading window were also less educated, have lower incomes, less access to food, and more likely to smoke. From the data, you can see that twenty seven percent of the 414 people smoked, whereas only sixteen point nine percent of the 12,000 people in the twelve to sixteen hour eating window smoked. So the people in this study who had an eight hour eating window, they're not your healthy user bias. They're actually kind of the unhealthy user bias because they're not people who are doing intermittent fasting including all the other healthy lifestyle habits like exercise, eating a good diet, getting enough sleep, etcetera. These people have the unhealthy user bias as I would like to call that they're more likely to follow other unhealthy lifestyles And the reason why they ate in a smaller time window had nothing to do with the fact that they chose to do it. They probably didn't practice innovative fasting because they think it's a healthy thing to do. They ate in an eight hour window because they might have had some health problems, you know, they smoked, they might have had some other issues related to access to food and income that prevented them from eating more frequently. Now the groups did have a similar percentage of self reported health conditions such as heart disease and cancer which ranged from seven to eleven percent. However, that's based on self reported data and given the fact that the people who ate in a smaller window also had lower income and less education, then they were probably just unable to get access to medical examinations that would diagnose them with their health problems. As a disclaimer, this is me just speculating right now, like, the people who had a smaller eating window, they had, you know, lower rates of self reported heart disease and cancer, but they probably didn't know they had heart disease or cancer because they were lower income and they weren't able to get access to doctors who would tell them you have heart disease or cancer. So the keyword here is self reported health problems. These people self reported themselves of having heart disease or cancer but they didn't actually know if they did have it. The authors of the study did say they control for these confounding variables such as age, sex, race, total energy intake, education income, food security, etcetera. However, as we just discussed, all the confounding variables were based on self reported data collected over two phone calls within two weeks. Besides the epidemiological aspect of collecting self reported data, there's also the problem of imbalances between the amount of people in these different groups. It's also just one single study which, you know, never is conclusive. So we also have to look at some other studies. So what do the other studies say about eating in a smaller time window? A 2020 study on 2,000 cardiac catheterization patients followed up for over five years found that those who deliberately practiced intermittent fasting had a forty six percent higher survival rate than those who didn't do fasting. This study was also done on self reported data, so you have to take it with a grain of salt. But the key word here is that they deliberately practiced intermittent fasting. So these people actually chose to do intermittent fasting. So it might be that they chose to do intermittent fasting for the proposed health benefits. So these people might suffer from a healthy user bias, but the people who did intermittent fasting deliberately had actually lower rates of death. There are also many randomized controlled trials where people are properly randomized and other factors are better controlled for. In a 2023 meta analysis of clinical studies, intermittent fasting combined with exercise resulted in a greater reduction in cardiometabolic risk factors such as body weight, LDL, and systolic blood pressure compared to a controlled diet plus exercise. Intermittent fasting isn't superior to regular calorie restriction as shown by many randomized controlled trials where the calorie intake is equated for. However, in free living people who don't count calories, intermittent fasting tends to result in lower calorie intake and because of that, greater weight loss. Intermittent fasting doesn't lead to greater muscle loss either as long as you do resistance training and eat enough protein. A brand new 2024 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials on obese, middle aged, and elderly people without metabolic disease found that intermittent fasting reduced body weight, body fat, and triglycerides more than the regular diet without causing muscle loss. So overall, this study that claimed that eating in an eight hour window increases your risk of dying to heart disease by ninety one percent is something that you don't really have to worry about that much. And there are plenty of other randomized controlled trials that aren't epidemiological studies showing that intermittent fasting has health benefits. So thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click the like, subscribe, notification bell as well. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.