Only advice I'd give people is just go, you know, go get a test, get a blood test, see where you're at. You know, otherwise, you're just guessing. Don't do exactly what I'm doing because the things I'm doing, I'm trying to do specifically to address polls or issues in my tests. Welcome to the Seamless Podcast. Today, we have a special panel discussion with me, Dave Pascaux, and Julie Gibson Clark on the Adam Fiskars channel. We discuss things related to health, longevity, and our routines. Let me introduce today's fighters. In the red corner, at 55 years of age, with an ease of 0.65, she could be your grandma by age, but your girlfriend by looks, Julie Gibson Clark. Yeah. The blue corner, the ultimate biohacker donning 170 peers a day, 61 years young with a Dunedin pace of 0.66, David Pascoe. And in the green corner, the rookie challenger who got everything a man could wish for. Youth, health, and fame, ranked fourth in the rejuvenation on Apex leaderboard. 27 years old with a Dunedin pace of 0.62. Seemland. Welcome. The very first panel conversation of the immortal combat. I thought so. I'm only gonna go by our epigenetic ages, not our chronological, but that's okay. I'm actually 30 almost now. So in in a few weeks, I'll get 30. So You're so happy birthday. Happy Anna's birthday. When is now? It's in, sixteen September. Oh, okay. October 12, I'll be 56. Nice. K. So we have to have parties on both of those days. Well, I was gonna say Dave just had a birthday. So yay. Just last week? Mhmm. Right. '66. Billy. You're great. You too. Looking good. Well, Brian Johnson is celebrating his birthday based on Dunedin pace. So it's not every year. Don't you guys want to do the same? Kind of hard to count it or, you know, how do you track that? Right. It's like a lunar calendar kind of thing trying to track that. That would be crazy. Well, it's even harder because your pace of aging, it changes in every, I don't know, maybe moment, but definitely every day. So, so that's, that's, that's hard to count, for sure. Mine is certainly all licensed for sure. Okay. Let's get down to business here. I want to start with, with an insightful question. And please answer in any order you find your own answers to this. The same question to everyone. How much time do you think you have left? Oh, how much time do I think I have left? Well, I'm hoping for fifty more years at least and solid years, you know? I mean, I don't want fifty years and twenty of them to be completely frail. So I'm hoping. That's what I'm training for fifty more years, at least. According to my grim age, I'm I'm going to check out on Friday. I have I have no idea. Yeah. I just want to live as healthy as possible until the day I drop, whenever that's gonna be. Right? Yeah. It's like you you never know when or is it like, I think wrong focus to have, like, how much time you have left because you never know when it's gonna happen. And even if it does happen, then, you know, it just everything disappears. So you don't even have the recollection of the past memory. So you literally don't have anything else left. So you don't even know that it had happened. So like, you know, you could happen, like, you know, every second, and then there's nothing even to interpret that it had happened, if that makes sense. So, I think there's nothing like really tangible to, like, think about it because a lot of it comes to like, I'm afraid of, like, the death or that there's not enough time left. But the reality is when it happens, then you don't have no idea that it had happened. So it just stops existing this idea of yourself. So there's nothing like really scary. There's no nothing to be scared about it. Actually. I was just saying, like, you know, plan for the worst and hope for the best. I mean, you know, the worst that could happen is that I live another fifty years and God forbid I'd be frail. But, you know, I'm gonna hope for that. But unfortunately, I know all too well that I could walk out tomorrow. I could be out walking and get by a car. You know, these things happen. So it is kinda silly to put any sort of numbers on it, but, you know, I'm gonna work out and eat as if I'll be healthy for the next fifty, fifty years. Yeah. I'm not gonna focus on don't die. I'm gonna focus on live life. Yeah. I like that. No one, no one had a very ambitious, ambitious response here. I wanna pick up on something that seems said here that, the fear of non existing, right? Like how do you imagine not existing? It's, it's it's kind of like what came before you, right, before you born. Well, depends on your religious beliefs. Right? But, well, I see Dave wanted to wanted to add something to that. So go ahead. I don't know. I just think at some point, we return to our source, whatever that is, whatever you believe that to be. And I don't know if that's conscious or unconscious. I I don't know. I'd like to think it's conscious. Well, there is something that's less religious about the fear of death, which is not the, not your, your existence, but it's about the events leading up to your death. That's what many people are fearing. How do you guys think about that? Are you guys fearing your death in that sense? Yeah. Like I said earlier, like, I've had this thought of past few weeks or something like, so what is like when you die? So usually, my people might have this kind of idea that they die, and then they kind of exist in this, I guess, memory chamber that, like, stores their previous life memories and they suffer because they can't continue or they're, like, stuck somewhere. But, you know, the reality is when you're dead, then you don't even have your memories. So you don't have anything. Yeah. Like you said as well, like, you we we had no no idea what it was like before we were born, and we have no idea what it's what it's gonna be like after we die as well. So it's literally like it's almost like, yeah, you have nothing to kind of fear because you're not gonna be there to kind of experience it. So if you don't have, like and it depends again, yeah, like, on your religious beliefs, you know, what happens to your consciousness after you die or whatnot. But, at least, like, you know, this kind of idea that death is something to be scared of. If you'd like to really think about it in in a deeply way that then because there's nothing that would, like, experience death. We don't know what it would be fee what it feels like to experience being dead. Because then there's nothing that is going to be there to experience it. At least that's my view that it's just, you know, you're dead and there's nothing there's nothing like that that kinda happens. So there's not yeah, like literally nothing to kind of be, afraid of, either in my in my eyes at least. I don't see anything to be afraid of either. And I just I know, when my brother died, that was, like, eleven, almost twelve years ago. And, it was very tragic. And I just remember after he died, like feeling like very powerfully that he was sitting next to me every morning. Like I was, you know, having tea every morning and just I always got up very early so I could have some time before my son woke up. And I just kept getting the sense that he was with me. And it was like, always like, oh, this is your life, you know? And it but there was always this sense of, like, like, I'm not gonna be here forever. Like and I just kept being like a, I don't know, a physics person. I kept thinking like, I wonder if, like, our solid form is this life. And then we sort of go up to this, you know, almost like ice cubes. You know, you become an ice cube and then you melt back into, like, like the water of the ocean. I just kind of wonder if that's what there's sort of this weird thing up there we call conscious consciousness or whatever we call it, but that, you know, for whatever reason, our soul, for lack of better way of saying it, like returns to that. And almost like, I just, I, again, I keep thinking of, like, water and ice. Like, we're, you know, becomes ice cubes is, like, our life. And then we sort of melt and become this gaseous whatever and join this other thing, whatever that is. And I don't think any of us really know any of that for sure, but that's just kind of the way I put my head around it and, continue to feel my brother around me when I, you know, miss him. But I know, I know he's not there. Like he used to be like right after he died. He was very much next to me. Let, let, let me pose the challenge here. What Julie was moving on to is not your death, but the death of others, because you guys are in a prime position of out leaving most of your peers and friends and family if you continue on the path that you taken upon. So, so how does that make you feel? Yeah. I'll take this as the only person I don't wanna outlive is my son. That's the only, you know, like everybody else I don't like, I love the challenge of meeting new people. I mean, I'm that person that can just, you know, drop me in a a village where I know nobody and I don't even know where, you know, like, I will end up knowing people. And so I love that challenge, because I I think that that would be the only thing I would be concerned about is, you know, in that sense of losing long time friends and family members. But, I hope that, like, along the way, I'm still continuing to build relationships with the people very much alive around me. The only like I said, the only person that would just be so unnatural is to lose my son before before me. Yeah. Well, he's, fortunately, like young enough that he's he'll probably reap the most benefits from this future, technology. So. Yeah. Yeah. He's 17 and already kind of starting down this health path with this brilliant. So Yeah. I think, you know, for the, for the for your, like, family members is much worse. So if you die or, you know, because, like, we don't know what it's like being dead, but we know what it feels like if someone in our family or for friends has died. And so that feeling is probably much worse than the feeling of like being dead. Because yeah, like, you don't really like, you know, feel it kind of. Let's move on to a bit, bit, lighter topics, which is, which is about maybe your, the dynamics in between you guys. And Julie, you mentioned you have a son and you might have some experience in, in raising him. And here is someone who is 30 years old, who could be your son. So I was wondering if you have some advice to give to Sam. Right. Like as if you were my son. Oh, gosh. I mean, that's I I don't know Sam yet. So that's gonna be that would be hard. I'd have to base that on, you know, I know of it. Like with my son, I'm always telling him to, you know, relax. It'll be okay. You know, Tomorrow's another day. What you worry about today, he'll have forgotten a little bit later. You know? So try not to stress the and don't sweat the small staff. That's what I tell him, but he needs that. You know? He's he tends to be more on the anxious side. So I bet Sim is like this, but, you know, he pushes himself really, really hard. So, you know, that's always my advice to him. But, this goes to everybody. It's just to, be be good people. Like, work to just love the people around you. And I think that's, you know, the universal law. All right. Maybe after this conversation, you will have some more context on things. Another, another interesting thing is the relationship between you, Juliane and Dave. I know you guys have talked about it many times before, but this is the first time you are in the same podcast. So it might be worth reiterating how you guys are connected. Well, I think I've mentioned Julie on every single podcast I've ever been on. So this is the first time I don't have to mention you. You're right here. So it's it's awesome. Thank you for that, Dave. I appreciate it. Well, I'll I'll share. So, after my podcast with Ben Greenfeld, I think, Dave, you were in Italy, and he reached out to me on Instagram. And, it was so nice to just like I said, I I think I've said this on other podcasts, but I've kind of been alone on this journey as far as health is concerned, and most of my family and friends think I'm completely nuts. You know? Like, you just shut up already about all the little things you discovered. So, it's really, really nice to be like, oh, hey. What do you think about this? Or, like, like, I know Dave's done exosomes. Like, I haven't picked your brain about this yet, Dave, but I'm like, I'm wanting to return to running again. So it's like, oh, you know what? Maybe that'll help my hip, and maybe I can start running again. I kinda gave it up because of my hips. And anyway, it's just nice to have, somebody to bounce something off. And I hope Sim and I get to know each other a little better too. And, I'm sure the times that'll make it a little difficult, but, I do plan on spending more and more time in Europe as soon as my son graduates. So be over your way. Yeah. And I felt the exact same way because, you know, my my friends, they just kinda glaze over when I talk about any of that stuff. If they hear about something, they're like, oh, is it that weird thing that Dave does? And they'll be like so Mhmm. Yeah. I don't really have people I can talk to about it either. So finding you and just being able to just talk about good food and clean living and, you know, and rucking and just I don't know. It just it was great. It was just it really felt like a kindred spirit. Yeah. Yeah. Likewise. And I have a feeling that most of the longevity leaders on the leaderboard are going to have that in common. So I think that's awesome that we're all getting the chance to get together. Yeah. So how is it for me? Like, do you have lots of friends that, like, do you talk with this stuff? Like, is your circle of friends kind of all into longevity? Are you sort of the one leading the pack and they're rolling their eyes? Well, I mean, you know, I'm married to like a longevity enthusiast as well. So that's, that's a good thing. So like, we're actually at like our second anniversary winning winning our anniversary in in a few days. So yeah, I mean, that is very easy in that sense that we both, you know, like healthy food, we both exercise, we both go to bed at early at the same time. I remember like two years ago or something we had like a trip to Tenerife, just like a vacation. And, in the hotel, like, we were already in bed at like, you know, what is it? Like 09:30 or 10:10PM. And, you could hear downstairs that stairs that the all the pensioners, the seniors were preparing for the bar and the the music in the in the hotel. And, so yeah, we were already going going to sleep before they were heading out to, like, the bars or whatever. But, yeah, I mean, I think it's very convenient for both of us that we're both, like, you know, interested in health and, want want to take care of our, like, longevity in the future. With with, like, regards other friends, then I guess I'm also, like, in a this position where I know a lot of people, who are also, like, into, like, the longevity side. So I always have someone, like, to talk to about these things. But, yeah, even then, like, it never, like, fazes me in that sense. Like, I've always, you know, done what I want to do with my own health, regardless of what other people think. Yeah. Me too. Me too. I mean, I just I just feel like I've been siloed though, you know, as far as, like, well, I have this question or that question, and it's just off to search Google. So it's nice to be able to bounce it off people that may have that experience already. And, like, oh, I tried that, or this wasn't so effective. Like, I was speaking with somebody yesterday who had done like over fifty sec sessions of H bot. And I'm like, well, did that work? And, you know, they said, yeah, it was great, but long term, not so much, you know, wasn't necessarily worth the investment, because the effects seem to have worn off, you know, the kind of feel good effects, I suppose. So it was just nice to hear that like, oh, okay, well, that might be something I could put lower down on my list. I've actually got a series sessions lined up. I'm I'm going to LA here next week, and I'm going to RadFest, the conference. Right. And then while I'm there, I'm getting a PRNUVO full body scan, and then I'm going to doctor Joy Kong's clinic and getting stem cells. And so it's after the stem cells, I've lined up, you know, a series of HBOT sessions because they help the proliferation of the stem cells through my body. Well, what does that do? The stem cells? The stem cells? Regenerative regenerative properties, bringing more to a more useful state. I'm doing it as a therapeutic thing, not a longevity thing, because I have rotator cuff issues in the shoulder and, injuries in this elbow. So, yeah, I'm getting a therapeutic out hopefully to heal that up. But I've never done have you done it before? No, this would be the first time. I did exosomes, gosh, just a couple of months ago. And I felt terrific. I mean, immediately I was able to sleep on this shoulder for the first time ever, which was great. But then I felt so good when I came home. I have a set of Olympic rings, like gymnastic rings in my backyard hanging from my tree. And I like to do like inverse chins and tips and things on those. I felt good enough that I could do that. Of course, I went out and started playing around and screwed the shoulder up immediately Because even though it felt great, it still takes weeks for the healing really to set in. And I did it way too early. So, I was dumb. Live and learn. I seem to keep having to learn the same things over and over again through gliders. What about high voltage? Yeah. Get me in bed with a baseball bat. Someday I'll learn. So I'm gonna go really easy after getting stem cells and try to do everything correctly. But we'll see. I'm pretty dumb sometimes. Go hard or go home. So, the thing that brought us together is the rejuvenation Olympics. And, Dave and Julie, you guys have been well known since you achieved good places on those leaderboards. How did your life change? You wanna say? I mean, not much, except for just in this positive sense, like, having so many different people to talk to about them as well as I've always had this conviction of helping the people around me, you know, which was always my reason to just sort of share, like, hey. There's this. There's that. Like, to help people feel good. And so, it's nice now that, you know, they say, like, never offer advice if people haven't asked for it. And so, you know, if your friends aren't asking for it, you probably should just you learn to just kind of be quiet. But if people reach out to me, I'm more than happy to, you know, share my experience or some insight that might be helpful to them. And so it is nice to have a place to direct that energy so that it's, it's, it's all been very, very positive, I guess, for me and creating more relationships that around a topic that I care so much about. Yeah. For me, I mean, not much has changed in my in my day to day life. The routines are still pretty much the same. I'm just I'm still floored by the fact that anyone at all is interested. You know what? And just based on the friends and the people in my life who, like you said, we do the eye they do the eye rolling or it's like, oh, it's that weird stuff that you do. The fact that people were interested and wanted to talk to me or or do an interview is just it just boggles my mind. So I love that. But I think my life has been far busier lately because of, you know, all the interviews and setting up the website. It's it's turned into a whole another retirement career that I never expected. So it's it's a good thing. I'm just trying to deal with it because I don't usually like being the center of attention. Actually kind of shy. People have told me that this doesn't come off in interviews because I probably talk too much. Yeah. This is just a really weird feeling for me. So I'm still trying to slowly get acclimated to it. I guess you noticed, and actually this is for everyone, even for SIEM. So even I noticed that people are asking me things, what to do, how to do it. How do you guys handle the responsibility there that you are giving them advice? The way I frame it is that I, like, kind of route everything I say on like some evidence in some scientific, like studies or something like that. So like, I don't really go out of my way to say some like crazy things online, regarding like food or supplements or something like that. So I've tried to make a make a more, you know, like evidence based content in that sense to not jump to conclusions regarding supplements or not yet promote some sort of, I guess, extreme views on, you know, diet or exercise, like nowadays, you can find extreme opinions about like, everything like, is sunscreen bad? Or is the sun light bad? Is our carbohydrates bad? Or is meat bad? Is dairy bad? Are seed oils bad, etc. So like, they all tend to have like a very this binary view. So like, you're either pro sunscreen or your anti sunscreen. So there's no like middle ground almost, or you're pro seed oil or you're against seed oil. There's like, like, no common sense ground in there. So yeah, I've, yeah, I've tried to make it more I share what I do, obviously, a little bit. But I in the content, I always, like, you know, share the evidence as well for whatever I'm claiming. And in, like, my books as well, like, they're kind of heavily referenced to, like, studies, so I never, like, make things up. So and in some sense, it makes it a bit more boring, because it there's no like this, like, spicy take. So there's no like very crazy opinions that I have. That's because there's very rarely that you can find, like, this very conclusive, proof to something. Like, even, like, smoking, the the evidence that smoking is, you know, causally linked to cancer and heart disease. It's not, like, a 100% proven, but it's the link is so strong that it feels like, you know, kind of common sense to say that it is causal. And with everything else, they're kind of the, I guess the, Assurantin is much, much weaker. So, like, the evidence between, like, meat or heart disease or longevity or seed oils and longevity is much weaker than it is for smoking. So there's a lot more like nuance there than it is with, smoking. Yeah. I would say, I mean, I'm pretty certainly do not go offering or making claims that I would, like, Sam says, like, would need evidence based type of claims or, you know, I've had people reach out to me, a lot of women, like, what about hormones or this or that? I mean, obviously, I can't help them with that except for to just say, you know, here's how to find a functional medicine doctor or I'm just trying to stick to the stuff that's generally agreed upon as safe. You know, like, I mean, I don't think anybody's going to get hurt by eating vegetables and, you know, keeping their diet pretty, like, even keeled, you know, like, I'm not a vegan or anything. Like, you know, I keep everything pretty balanced. And so I'm more into helping people find the motivation and the, the way to implement whatever health things they want to implement. But I I can't I mean, I can't say to how many times I've referred people to, like, hey. You should check out this study or you should check this out or, you know, and let them make their own opinions. I think that's important because I think that we all have an internal compass, for lack of a better way of saying that, but, like will guide you to like, I think like for instance, for me, like I I'm sure the studies will all say that coffee is super good for you. And I, and I imagine it's very good for your brain, but for my body, it's not good. It's very hard on my joints. It causes all kinds of same thing with dark chocolate. So, you know, and it just took me kind of trial and error to figure that out. So, I can't imagine ever saying, well, you should very much be on this or do this because everybody's biochemistry is different. Everybody's, you know, genet like, their genetics or epigenetics, where they're at in their journey is different. So I think it's just kind of learning how to meet somebody where they're at and help them find whatever it is that they're looking for. Not so much offering blanket advice as, you know, you should do this and you should do that. Mhmm. Plus, that just adds more stress. I feel like that just makes people more stressed out and that's just not, you know, not helpful. Like, like with my son, he's 17 and he's asking me for this or that. I'm like, okay, well, you're 17. You know, there's only so many things he's gonna implement. And, so, yeah. Yeah. I tell him he's in a natural steroid cycle. So hit the gym. Exactly. It's like this just for me would just work on your sleep, you know? And so anyway, we're gonna start going to the gym together at 04:30 in the morning. I'm so excited. Anyway, Dave, what about you? Well, I was gonna say the only advice I give people is to go, you know, go get a test, right? Get a blood test, see where you're at because, you know, otherwise you're just guessing and don't do, don't do exactly what I'm doing. Because the things that I'm doing, I'm trying to do specifically to address holes or issues in my tests that reveal something that I need to do, you know, work on. A guy once, on Instagram sent me a photo of, like, his kitchen countertop with all these supplements on it. And at first, at first glance, I thought it was a picture of, like, my kitchen, because this was, like, all the supplements I take right to the brand. And it turned out he bought everything that he saw on my website. And I'm looking at this and I'm going, oh my God. I was horrified. I said, what? I see DHEA. I see Pregnenolone on here. Why are you taking those? You don't need you probably don't need those at your age because he was a young guy. I said, I'm taking those specifically because my levels were low. You don't need those. So he was getting ready to go see his doctor. And I said, you know, please discuss this with your doctor, ask him for some, you know, some tests. If he won't run them, then, you know, go to Life Extension, go to, you know, Ulta Labs, go to any of these at home lab companies and go, go pay for your own test and find out what you need and address that. But other than that, I just tell people don't, don't just copy and do what I do because, you know, I'm still learning myself. So I still could be making mistakes. You don't wanna just copy my mistakes if they are mistakes. Just go find out what's right for you. Let's talk about big picture, longevity as a sport. So this is quite, development that that wasn't really talked about, a couple of years ago, right? Like longevity is a sport. What the heck? We are doing mouse studies and, and figuring out that way and randomize control trials, not, not sport. Or would that even work. Do you guys have some some insights on why or is it even longevity as a sport a good idea? Well, yeah. Like, every professional sport is, like, bad for you or tends to be harmful to your health at some point. So I don't I don't think it's it's probably not, you know, even physically the healthiest, not to mention, like, for your mental health to try to, yeah, like, turn longevity into some sort of a sport. And, even then, you're, like, you're using a metric that has very big flaws and shortcomings to assess that. So then you might, you might be doing some random thing, which is, you know, the kind of the test score without even knowing if it's actually going to be good for your longevity. So it's it's not easy. It's not really like, you know, a healthy thing eventually probably. Yes. Health, the ultimate goal. I mean, if you're only, you know, talking about longevity, then I guess it needs to have have a certain component of health. Like aging is pretty much the kind of deterioration of health over time. So, maintaining like the health for longer, that's kind of just the definition of, longevity in my in my eyes. So, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Vitality. I, I, it is sort of odd. I mean, I love that it's brought a lot of attention to the topic. And I think that that's what, I say that the only, not the only, but, you know, one of the main positives to having this be a quote, unquote sport sport. I mean, I'm not sure I can't think of it as a sport as much as just a way to compare results and people to, like, learn from each other. You know? Like, Dave is able to do whatever. Like, say you do this HPOT sessions, and those are the things that now slow down your pace of aging by 10%. Well, that's something worth try. Yeah. I mean, I know, but, I mean, let's just say that, you know, there's something where a person's protocol slows their pace of aging down considerably, then that might be something another person might wanna try. So in that sense, I think it's, really helpful to con quote, unquote compare results, but I don't see it as if we're all kind of running races against each other. I think we're all, at least, I would think competing with ourselves. I I mean, that's the way I take it. I'm always just like, I just the way I've always I've never, I mean, I've swam for, I don't know what, ten years or something. I don't think I ever actually competed against another person. It was always my mindset was always like, I want to get a better time in this. I want to, you know, make myself better. And then as a byproduct, you know, you're you finish, finish well or, or whatever. Yeah. The way I look at the, the longevity numbers in this, this whole competition, it's, it's just one measure, but it's not the entire picture because you can, you can live a really long life and then still end up going blind or losing your hearing or have hardening of the arteries. So you might have very slow pace of aging, but you might not be at an at an organ level. You might not be optimal. And so you could, you could end up being sick for a very long time. And that's what I'm not into. I don't want to be sick for a very long time. So I want my health span to equal my lifespan, if that makes sense. And speaking of the HBOT, you know, I did try the the HBOT and the plasmapheresis and tested after a session of a long duration of those to see if it made any difference at all to my pace of aging. No. None. Didn't move. I wouldn't think it would. I wouldn't think it would. But But I just use as an example. You know, it's like Yeah. We all do different things that we're all trying. I mean, I don't vary my protocol too much, but, you know, if I add something, be interesting to see what happens. So But I do those things for rejuvenation more than longevity. Mhmm. That makes sense. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. One could argue that the sport of longevity is the only the one exception of a sport being bad for your health because that's the objective of a longevity sport to improve your health. What do you think about that? Yeah. I guess, you know, yeah. If the goal is to be healthy, then, technically, if you're taking the sport too far and it becomes unhealthy, then usually, yeah, like course correct automatically in some sense. But, yeah, it's hard to say. It's just very it's very innate in human psychology to, like, try to do more. And, yeah, in the in competitions in a competitive competitive spaces, especially our frame, you're, yeah, like trying to do more. And that usually ends up backfiring somehow. So you're like, okay, I'm gonna do more exercise or something, and then your results go worse, or I'm gonna, you know, take this supplement, and then results go worse. So it's almost like, no matter what your result is, with this sport, it's never enough. You're always gonna be okay, I got this score, It might be your best score yet, but then you're like, okay, how do I get it even better? And that makes you want to okay, tinker with your protocol somehow. And, that in in in all of cases will just make it worse. So you don't know if if, what you have right now is the best, like, routine, because you're always thinking that, okay, there's a the, like, the grass is always greener on the other side. So I'm gonna try to, like, mess it up with a with a protocol, not deliberately, but because you're trying to get better results. And it's so engraved in the psyche, I guess, of the competition in the spirit of competition that you you'll always want to improve it, you'll always want to do something. Because it's a competition. Even if you're number one, you're like, okay, I'm gonna try to still get even better results. And then, you know, you might get worse results because of that. Yeah. It is kind of figuring out which things are that u shaped curve. Right? You know, it's like like like running is good for you, but if you start running, like, all day every day, maybe not so much. You have same thing, power lifters, like, weightlifting are good for you. But, you know, at the end of your life and you've been powerlifting your whole life, maybe maybe not in the best of shape. So, you know, it's figuring out which one of those things, you know, more is definitely not always better and figuring out that sweet spot is very person dependent on certain things. So, I mean, we're all just kinda sorting it out as we go, I think. Yeah. Mike D'Luskard and I were talking about that last night, actually. And, you know, cause we both like to experiment with moving different markers and sometimes you move one marker and it can affect a whole bunch of other ones in a negative direction. So at least a thing that we both try to do is measure often so that we can course correct early. Yeah. I guess, yeah, the most important thing is that you compete with yourself somehow. I think that's the healthiest approach because yeah. Then, then you're like, you'll be more like easier on yourself as well. I guess if you're just competing with yourself. It does seem to me that you guys are on the right track here, that competition changes the game because now I want to I want to beat Dave, right, to get more street cred. And in order to do that, I'm going to do stem cell therapy inside the hyperbaric chamber. And even though it might, there is a chance that it might make it worse. I'm going to take that risk because I need that strict crap. But that's the that's the beauty of the thing, because if it works, then the word learns. And, yeah, I want you guys to do exosome therapy and whatnot. It's, that's how we learn. So we learn. I do a lot of my testing after negative life events, because I wanted to see how those impacted me. You know, after the thirty days in Italy of eating a completely different diet than I normally eat, that was that was pretty eye opening for me. And I tested after having been sick most of the December, like, all of January, most of February. I wanted to see how that would impact my pace of aging and epigenetic age. And it did. I I gave those numbers all to Mike, so he's gonna talk about those in a future YouTube. But, yeah, I I like to see the things that are going to impact me and learn from those. I went through a self imposed stressful stent here the past couple months, and I saw my pace of aging just hang. My telomeres actually got shorter. So now I know I have to really focus back more on recovery and and getting my my mindset correct so that I'm taking the pressure off of myself and not just running myself ragged. So there's a big mental portion of this that goes with it. Yeah. I know. I'm having some changes to my, my hormone replacement therapy. And so I've been reluctant to test because I'm like, oh, we're still figuring it out. And I don't really wanna do a pace of aging test in the middle of this because it's just been a pretty sleepless summer. So I don't think I've slept since, I don't know, maybe, like, April or May. Like, I mean, I have sleep, but not like I was before. It's just like getting up two, three times a night. I'm like, well, I'm not gonna test my pace pace of aging now because I know it's gonna be horrible. So, Oh, anyway. Yeah. It does seem like a recurring theme that the competition athletes are holding back on their usual schedule of what they would normally do on when to measure their pace of aging because they wanna get, get a better, better place. Right? So you're not gonna do it when it's so low. And that might actually foreshadow some some ways to improve the reach of a National Olympics. Right? Maybe maybe it would be better to to actually always the low or always your lowest pace could be the one that ranks you. Right? It's, then you wouldn't have to, like, try to figure out when you get the best one. Right. Yeah. I mean, for me, I'm not so much concerned about that as much as, like, I really I don't have the budget to test again and again and again. So it's like, well, I'm not gonna test this when I know it's not gonna be good. So it's not so much because of the rejuvenation Olympics. It's just I know that. So it's like, I'd rather wait until we have everything kind of because we're in the middle of changing it all and it's not set yet. So it's like, once it's set, then I can see, like, okay. Is this new, I don't know, protocol for hormone replacement therapy, is that, you know, better or worse than what I had? But I just want it set, and I wanna be sleeping. And, because I just, I mean, it's like I wanted two twenty a test. So it's just, that's just not for like, I got a kid going to college, so that is not something I can just do multiple times a year. I know I can do it like once a year. So I'm just going to wait a little bit while things settle down. So I think what could work is that, the rejuvenation Olympics or a longevity competition, the immortal combat could restart every year and always your lowest test could be the one that that counts. Right? So if you are Peter Diamond, Deese or Brian Johnson, then you do a test every single day and then, your lowest test is going to be the best. But if you're Julie Gibson, then you're only do one test a year when you think it's going to be the best. And then you could still compete with Brian Johnson Because what do we have right now? You have to have, do you guys completely understand the current rules? Is there someone in this school who completely understand the current rules? I think it's three tests within two years. And so to be on the, the verified leaderboard, but you can still be on the board like me. So that's why I've fallen way off because I don't, I'm only testing once a year, at least right now. So It'd be the average of your three best. Yeah. And it's the average of your three best. Are they only are they taking the that's the only thing I don't understand. Are they taking the average of your, your last three tests or are they taking the average of all your Of all of your tests within the three years? The three best. Three years to three, I believe. I thought it was twenty four months. Oh, I'm sorry. Yeah. I'm I misunderstood what you're asking me. The three best test within the two years. Yes. Twenty four months. Yeah. Yeah. Well, another thing that changed with the new update of the rejuvenation Olympics is that Simland got to the top of it. Well deserved. It was about time because you were you were at the top of that for, like, many, many, many months before you actually got listed. So Yeah. Good to finally see. How long? It took them a long time to make those changes, I'd like to argue against it. You know, because I'd like to argue against it because so what we had before is an absolute leaderboard where your rejuvenation, your score, your rank would be weighed by your age. Right? So if you have a Dunedin pace of 0.7 and you're 100 years old, then you're going to rank better than a 0.6 and a 30 year old. Right? So that's changed. And now young people, I mean, it is good to see who has really low rejuvenation than Eden pace. But on the other hand, the people who are really old and get good than Eden pace, they are really interesting. Right? Yeah, I agree. I mean, I feel like, I wish they would at the very least, if they're not gonna wait for their chronological age, I wish they would, at the very least, list it because I'm just not as interested in a 17 year old with a 50% pace of aging versus, like you said, a 100 year old with a 70%. Like, yeah, I wanna know what that 100 year old is doing. I'm not so concerned about the the teenager. So I think it it's more useful information. It it's okay if they don't wanna wait by chronological age. It's their game, but I think it makes the whole the information more robust. Yeah. Previously, there was a 15 year old that held the third place spot for almost a year. I just thought, no. Yeah. I guess it's hard to because I don't know even how do they make those calculations. So it's their own some sort of formula. So I don't because there's no, like, you know, gold standard method to measure this. So they're coming up with a formula by themselves anyway, or these adjustments for the the eight and stuff. So it's, you know, hard to say, okay, which method is, you know, more accurate, or which test is more accurate. So that, yeah, I wouldn't like make any, like, broad conclusions from this test. Because like Dave said earlier, like, if you have good score with this test, but you have some other like disease or something, then you know, you're still worst off than the one who has slightly worse of this biological age score, but no no of this, comorbidities or something like that. So I think the outcomes are, you know, more important still. Like, like, longevity isn't about so, like, let's actual actual longevity, actually living longer isn't about this, low score with this test. It's, you know, actually actually living to a 100. And, the way you do that is mostly not having comorbidities, not getting chronic diseases like heart disease and diabetes and kidney disease. So those are the like more functional outcomes that actually matter or they're the ones that actually have been proven to result in longevity. Whereas with this test, it's, I guess, it's very, like, experimental in that sense. It would be nice if they they had, like, a combination of tests, like, something that would capture. So, I mean, I know they have this whole organ age thing that's coming up, but it would be And I don't know what it would be. You know, like David and I were talking about like, oh, maybe they had a VO2 max. It's like, well, then, you know, all the athletes would rank high or, you know, but it would just be interesting if there was a way to come up with a combination of tests and, you know, because it is it is curious to see how certain people age and what's possible. I mean, I think it shows people what's possible, and redefines, you know, aging stereotypes, I suppose. I mean, if so it is nice to see, but it's it would be a I don't I don't, you know, I'm not medically astute enough to even figure out what those combination of tests would be, but I think, you know, the whole competition would be more, credible if they came up with, you know, at least three different, three different measurement, you know? Yeah. And it's hard to say too, like how much of it is being driven by genetics and how much of it is, you know, the actual lifestyle changes that you've made. So to Brian's credit, I think at one point when he originally tested, he, his pace of aging was above one. So to be able to move the needle that far from above one to something so low is I mean, it tells you right there that his low score is not just from genetics. It's really from the things that he's changing. So I think that's even more interesting to see when people start off with a high score and bring it down. Because just, like I said, it just eliminates that whole, oh, that's, it's only genetics kind of argument that people like to toss out. Okay. There is the Dunedin pace, which is a pace of aging, But which is probably the best biological aging clock. I think that's fair to say, although I am pretty much in the, in the marketing, in my mind, pretty much all the marketing information of true diagnostics. So I do believe that's the best, but I acknowledge my bias on this. But, from a conceptual point of view, for a longevity competition, it would be better to actually have a aging clock that is telling you a biological age rather than a pace of aging. What's the best aging clock? What do you guys think? I don't think we have one yet, but anyone would agree. At least that's my understanding that there's not one out there yet, but any, you know. A majority of people say, oh, this is the best one, so I don't know. My understanding is they're all using the same base assays, and it's just their interpretations that make them vary. And it's the algorithms that they run on the results that differentiate them. Look at some of the studies and the Horwath two clock, appears to be one of the best ones. And the pheno age is also pretty good. And the do not end pace. It's not very good for biological age, but it's good for all cause mortality risk. So, a lower score on a donor and pace would or in in a few of studies, they do find that it, like, correlates with a lower risk of mortality, but it's not, like, the best for the biological age perspective. And then you might think, okay, which one is more important? Is it better to have a lower biological age, or is it better to have a lower risk of mortality? And and the the problem is, yeah, like, we don't know if a lower biological age would reduce the risk of mortality, so to say. Like, you could still have heart disease with a low biological age. And, you know, I think, it's important to, like, I guess you have to have a lot more, like, research about about these things before making any, like, yeah, conclusions, which one is the best or something like that. I was just reading a white paper the other day that was comparing, like, the Vorovath clock to, PhenoAge and, and and the other. And each one of them had their strengths and each had their weaknesses. So you almost need to combine them all together to be able to get a total picture. So I do try to do that. I test with all of them. And of course, you know, they they they don't always do. It's interesting. Yeah. And you definitely need to look at all the biomarkers or the blood markers as well, the traditional ones, like, you know, lipids and inflammation and immune cells and, the kidney function and liver function, etcetera. So the the biology age tests are I always think of them like, yeah, it's kind of interesting and nice to have, but I would never, like, start with it. Like, I would I would just yeah. To do a comprehensive blood panel and start with that because, you know, the information well, like, so the practical information you get from that is way more actionable. So, like, you know, when I got my this do not in pace results, so, like, my my routine really didn't change between the tests because, you know, I was already doing the same things pretty much. And, so, yeah, like, you get the test result, so you don't really know what you need to do with this single number. Whereas if you do a blood panel, you can see, okay, your, you know, kidney function is suboptimal or your liver enzymes are too high. You can do more specific action steps to improve those results. Whereas with this, you know, you get 0.7 or whatever. So, like, okay, now what? You probably will still do the same things that you did that we know is like, you know, okay, don't eat too much exercise, get more sleep and and, etcetera. So, like, the practical takeaway from this Dunedin based test is, like, not very, like, big. So and especially, like, the more advanced you are with health or, you know, you're already doing exercise three, four times a week. You're already eating a very good diet. You're sleeping enough. You're taking a bunch of supplements and you get this test result. So okay. Now what? I'm already putting, like, so much effort in, so I don't know what do I need to do to get the the better duality based score. Whereas with a blood panel, you can see, okay, You know, my immune cells are a bit off, and there's a specific things you can do to improve those results based on a ton of other studies. And, or, you know, your lipids are too high. You know exactly what you need to do pretty much. And, your, CRP is high. You you have, like, so many studies that actually show how to reduce CRP. Whereas with, you know, the the Dunedin Paste Test, it's, you're like, okay, what do I do now? What about systems age slash symphony age that makes things actionable, wouldn't it? Assuming it works. Potentially. Maybe. Yeah. We'll we'll see. I haven't paid for mine yet. I haven't seen, like, my full results yet. Have you guys done yours? Symphony age? Which one? Symphony age? That was they they had it on there in the first day or something when they updated it. But, it was, removed then. Adam has those numbers. Right? He he screen captured the Bob is gonna say. They can yeah. I haven't taken that test yet, but eventually. For the record, Dave, you have seen your full results. The rest is just I don't know, some generic generated text. Nothing special. I just focused on the worst of them that you you were forewarned me about. So I didn't really look at the rest. What about what about the old school biological aging clock, the telomeres? Are they still relevant? If yes, how much? I don't think they're the be all, end all, but I think they're at least a clue. I think they're part of the They're a signpost. Yeah, I agree. Sorry, Dave. I didn't mean to cut you off. No. Yeah. Just I agree. Figured Seem probably had more insight into that than I do because you know the science better. But Yeah. Yeah. Take it away. See the well, the shortening. So accelerate the telomere acceleration is like more relevant to mortality risk, whereas the total length is kind of not that important. And in some cases, like, you know, excess telomere growth, is also like characteristic to cancer cells as well. So it's kinda hard to know. Okay. Or at least right now, we don't know, like, okay, what's the optimal length and how do you optimally increase them and etcetera. So it is interesting for sure. And, you know, at least I've seen some cases of, this, telomere changing. So, like, I did the first Dunedin Paste Test, and, it also gave you the telomere length. And, it showed that, you know, I had very long telomeres for my age. So So I guess my telomere age, which they gave the number was like four four years old. But then I did the two I did the two following tests as well. But I did them after I had COVID, and that accelerated the attrition of the telomere. So my telomere age was like thirty and thirty three. So that, like, literally three decades after COVID, it accelerated my telomere age, from from that. But and I didn't even have, like, very serious COVID. I was, like, with the fever a few days. But, yeah, it's like the test is very sensitive to, like, those kind of things. And it at least it showed as well, like, the telomeres, they can, you know, experience, shortening when you are experiencing some sort of, like, you know, stress or, illness or infection. Now I did do the test as well a few weeks ago, and I should get my results. You know, the the email said that it's tomorrow where I'll get the results, but we'll see. And, you know, it's been a year since I have COVID since I do data tests. So it will be interesting to see, okay, what's what's my tailor meds right now? And what's my the do need in pace as well after after one year from, the COVID. So we'll see how it goes. Yeah. I'm curious. Thought about that. I had COVID this summer, so sorry. Go ahead, Dave. No. I'm just was just saying I'm curious to see how quickly it snaps back because I just got my latest test results back and my telomeres were the length of a 72 year old now. Oh, okay. Yeah. What was it? What was it before? So back in like 2012, it was of a 68 year old when I was 50 and that shocked me. And so I wiggled them all the way down to about a 52 year old. So now the fact that it says it's like 77, 78 year old is like, or like 22. It Yeah. It might also be very fluid. Yeah. It might be. Yeah. And I'm so I'm very curious to see when I retest how quickly or how not quickly that comes back. Yeah. So you need the teach both sessions, don't you? Yeah. I don't even know if those will have any effect, but it would be curious if they were. I thought they were supposed to on telomeres. I could be wrong. I mean, there was some very good marketing about some Israeli research. Yeah. It's Marketing. I mean, there's all kinds of stuff. I think about a lot of things. And so that's why I test because a lot of things are supposed to do stuff. And then for me, they don't do anything at all. So, but they might for some people, you never know. But for me, no. So I don't know. I wanna take a quick break to let you know that you can now get my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. It contains 24 chapters ranging from the biology of aging to all the major chronic diseases, such as heart disease, kidney disease, neurodegeneration, and I also cover over 70 clinically relevant biomarkers for chronic diseases and their optimal ranges. You can get the book from the link in the description. K. So I wanna bring you two dilemmas I have or thought exercises, let's say. So firstly, I am sad because while I was doing Bitcoin development every year, I sent him one question to rlongevity subreddit. How long can scientists keep a mouse alive in a laboratory? And why I'm sad is because the answer have not changed for the last four to five years. Like 30%, maybe 40, maybe 50, but it's nothing impressive. So if we can't even make a mouse live, like, impressively long enough, then what's what what hope there is for us humans? Yeah. I think the the longest is the 65% with calorie restriction. And that was the one of the first studies in the field back in, yeah, like the sixties even or seventies or eighties. I'm not sure exactly. But yes, it's been like, yeah, forty or fifty years since the record was, set over one of the longest life extensions in, mice. But, yeah, I mean, you can make it you can make the argument, like, both ways. You could, you know, make it that, you know, is is gonna happen any moment, and it's gonna be exponential, which is the longevity escape velocity argument that, you know, in 2030 or something. That's where the magic happens with life extension because of some breakthroughs in AI and stuff like that. Or you could make the argument that, yeah, this is this is pretty much it. There's there's gonna be, yeah, like, a small increase in life expectancy, like, a few years because of just better health care and the things of that. So you'll, you know, live maybe, like, a few ten years longer or something like that. But, you know, I think in either case, the best thing to do is to just, yeah, still or depends on your goals, you know, like, if you don't want to spend a lot of time and, effort trying to be healthy, then you can just live, like, a regular life and not really worry about it and see how long it will take you. Or the other option is if you enjoy this, like, you know, I think we all here here enjoy being healthy and enjoy exercise and and, eating healthy foods, etcetera. So we get more enjoyment out of that as opposed to whatever the alternative is of being careless with your health. So either it's, in other cases, like, win win for us at least. And if you're like a health conscious person who would just enjoys these things, then it's a win win scenario for you anyway. So because, you know, if there is no breakthrough and that's it, this is the longest we'll ever live, then you'll still have a longer health span. Your quality of life is better and, you know, you're enjoying the time as well. And the other version is that, you know, we do actually have this breakthrough, then you're the then who's laughing then? So so, like, in both cases, it's a win win for us, I think. Once the launch of ETS skip velocity? Yeah. It's like this idea that, with every year that goes par goes by, like, the advancements in science and technology will keep you alive for longer than a year. So your life expectancy increases more than one year with every year that it goes by. So like, you know, one year goes by, but your life expectancy goes up by two years ad infinitum. So you're like just continuously being kept alive with some sort of, breakthrough in science. And when is it to expect that to happen? I mean, funny, funny, right? Ray Kurzweil, who the guy, one of the one of the, like, pioneers in this field, he says it's, like, 2030, or he uses the singularity where humanity merges with AI, but it's very like, they use it interchangeably, almost like this, the singularity and, longevity. Aubrey de Grey, who's the who coined the term, I think he says it's, like, 2045, 2040 or something like that. So, yeah, it depends which person you ask. We have a problem there because what I noticed what I realized is that people don't really care about the longevity escape of city. So there was a post of Brian Johnson when he posted a picture of his green veggie thingy, and it's the breakfast of champions. And that green veggie mashed together thingy looked like that came out of some, I don't know, vegetarian animals or something. So many people have realized or commented that, well, say one thing that's worse than death. You know? So so but why? Well, this longevity escape velocity concept is nice and all, but the real thing is the hedonism escape velocity. Isn't it? Yeah. Yeah. Fair enough. I, I find it a bit, I don't wanna say egotistical to think that you're gonna live forever, because I do think that we will eventually figure out how to do that. But, but I, I think as humanity, each one of us will have to come to the choice to whether we want to live forever. You know, do we wanna just keep the party going? Because at some point, maybe the party's over and you're just like, maybe not so much. You know? I I don't you know, who knows what the future will hold? I I think we could all bet that eventually we will figure out enough science that we could live, if not forever, such long lives that it will feel like forever. I mean, life, you know, under the best of circumstances, life could be still very, very stressful. And how many, I mean, I certainly know in my life, I've faced many periods of significant hardship and stress and, you know, emotional hurts. And so how many I mean, I I just have to project forward that if I go to live another two hundred years, then I would have X amount more of those. I mean, hopefully be wiser to get through them. But, it'll be interesting to see, like, what kind of choice we'll be faced with, you know, whether that could happen or not. Should suicide be legal? Oh, I think like, I think, I like, I like the idea of, you know, being, immortal by default, but then, you can choose if you want to die. Like, because right now there's no choice. You're like, everyone has no choice. They will die, which is, you know, kind of unfair from, like, ethical perspective in that sense. But if you have the choice of, okay, you if you want to die, then you can die, but you also have the option to, like, you know, stay alive. I think that kind of I think that would be, like, the goal of I think if humanity would reach immortality, then it's also humane to allow, death for people who are like, want it. Pretty interesting how that would shift because, like, I think a lot of us, I know I mean, for my my own personal experience, again, after my brother died, it was like the the lust for life, the pleasure and enjoyment that I had for life, like, increased immeasurably. And so knowing that literally any day it could be over, you know, the whole seize the day kind of thing. So if if this were switched around so that we knew we were going to live forever, but you get to choose like, I wonder how that would change our our appreciation of life. Like, would it flip it to a positive? I I don't know. I mean, it'd be an it's an interesting thing to think about. I don't wanna be the Bitcoiner who ruins this conversation. But but in Bitcoin, there is this concept well, not in Bitcoin in economics, but in Bitcoin, we talk a lot about this concept of high and low time preference. So when you're living in your little fiat words, like you three guys, you are trying to spend your money as fast as possible because the they are gonna inflate their value away. But if you're living in Bitcoin standard, so you opted out of the existing political system, then now you have like an appreciating asset in terms of Bitcoin. So your time preference changes because now you are planning for much further down the road and not just trying to, to figure out how to, what to spend this thing before they inflate it away from me. Right? So, so very similar thing to time, right? If you have a lot more time, then your time preference changes on what you're spending and what you're planning. It's suddenly not retirement and dying anymore. It's well, a third or fourth or fifth hundredth career, you know? Yeah. It's like it was one one argument is, yeah, like without death, you wouldn't have urgency to do, like, things, to start project or something like that. But at the same time, if you have, like, infinite amount of time, then you'll start, like, you'll have the time to start them all as well. So to say like, so like, yeah, if if your life is finite, you know, you're gonna die, then there's always this push and pull between like, okay, am I living my life to the fullest? Should I like go out and party? Or should I go travel more? Should I do spend more time with my friends and family or something of that? Because, you know, like, okay, if I work all the time, then, I might regret it in the future because of, you know, having wasted quote unquote by society standards, by being too healthy all the time. But but at the same time, if you have, like, infinite amount of time, then you wouldn't feel that either because, you know, you'll have infinite amount of time to travel and you have infinite amount amount of time to do everything. You'll have infinite amount of time to work on all the projects, to learn all the instruments or some something like that. And it's never even even then you'll never have experienced everything. So, yeah, like it wouldn't like remove the kind of, I guess, the finiteness of, life in that sense, because you'll be able to do like everything. Does that make sense? What would be interesting too is like, I mean, we're all talking about, we would do a 100 different things over the course of a life. Like, what if somebody just decided to go deep, you know, and long, and then you have that continuation of wisdom, you know, so much, like, I feel like sometimes we rehash, like, I don't know, maybe you're reading Seneca or you're reading some old philosopher. And it's like, wait a minute. We already kind of figured that out. Like, to a certain degree as a society, sometimes we're maybe reinventing the wheel. So, you know, if we have these very long lived people with that continuation of wisdom, like, would it change how we how we grow as a society, how we exist as a society or or any one field? I mean, just the field of longevity, if you had, say, Aubrey de Grey or, you know, some other scientists that now, like, they're gonna be able to devote four hundred years to that. Like, not that you'd want to, but I'm just saying, you know, it'd be interesting that you wouldn't lose that that wisdom that would, you know, eventually die off, then you'd kind of be able to continue. You know, that's person being like, oh no, we did that two hundred years ago. We already looked at that and here go here for these results or, you know, that type of stuff. Interesting. Yeah. I think it depends a lot too. And whether you have a, you know, a growth mindset or not, because I'm, I'm convinced that there's some people that if they could live forever, they would just go on partying forever. They wouldn't, spend any of that time learning and growing and expanding themselves. I don't know. I think, I think eventually people, everybody wants to, maybe that's just my bias, but I think eventually the part. Yeah. I was gonna say, like, I would have a season of like, just travel, travel, travel, and then I'd have a season of like, oh, I really am into this and I wanna do this. And those seasons would instead of being a year or a decade, they'd be, you know, several decades long. It'd be really cool. Well, I think we'll figure it out with, like some other animals first, like mice and Well, not completely, but, you know, we'll be able to, like, extend, animal lifespan by, you know, x percent, way before than, humans. So we'll be able to, like, learn from that. Has anybody ever tested doing, calorie restriction and rapamycin together on mice? Do you know that? Like in combination? I don't know. Not that I remember, but but, yeah, rapamycin has like almost equal effects in, life extension. Yeah. I was curious to know if it wouldn't, you know, I doubt it'd be additive, but would it increase one or the other? That's actually one of the points, one of the thing that people bring up against my mice dilemma that, hey, we are testing mice, but we are only testing always one specific things. But here we have Dave Posco who's doing hundreds different things, and we are not testing a 100 different things on mice. So that might be the reason why we are expected to live longer than the mice itself. According to ancestry, I have mouse lineage in my DNA, so I'm I'm pro mouse studies. So Alright. Alright. Well, let's talk about how do you guys move. What's always interesting is is the differences in between people. So you are all high level competitors. So one of you pitches their way of how they are moving, exercising day to day. And then the next one is going to give his own protocols, but in a way where he highlights the differences of the previous one. Boy. Okay. Caroll bike, P90X, running. Those are the primaries. I like to do, yoga and Pilates at, at various times. K. So what's the difference between caroll bike and running r and a boat cardio? Yeah. Yeah. Carol bike would be rehit. So it's, you know, it's those two twenty second all out sprints. I could do sprints outside when I run, but it's, it's a lot more convenient to do it on the carol bike. Your p nine t x, how much is it resistance training or what what kind of training is that? What kinds of training? Yeah. It's a mix. It's a fourteen day program with something different each of those days. So there's weight bearing exercises, say, like, you know, Monday, Wednesday, Friday. And then there would be cardio exercises Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday, and then recovery exercises on Sunday. So, it's constantly mixing everything up. So, you're, you're hitting all muscle groups and you're like just terribly sore in the beginning everywhere. All right. It's terrible. Yeah. I mean, it is in the beginning. Yeah. That's why they call it extreme, right? That's the X is for extreme. You know, if you can make it through the first two weeks, I always tell everybody, you know, because most people quit, they quit in the first two weeks because it's too much. You don't have to kill yourself in the first two weeks. You can do the same routines, but you can use lighter weights. You know, you don't have to pick up the heaviest things you can find right off the bat. But if you make make it past the first two weeks, that's awareness goes away. Your muscles adapt and, you feel pretty pretty good about it. And then you find that you can start adding more weight or add more reps, but it's totally up to you. Julie, how's your exercise routines compared to Dave's miserable protocols? Well, I'm in flux right now. I've, I had like a pretty set routine and now I'm like switching it around to actually lifting heavy, like a lot heavier stuff. I was only doing like two days full body resistance training, but now I'm doing I think I'm gonna split it up to three or four days again, kind of go back and forth. But and I'm really upped how much I lift. And I was doing, like, three sets of 12 that, you know, whatever weight I could get through all those three sets. And now I'm like, you know what? I'm dialing the sets down to or the reps down to, like, five and doing, like, five reps and increasing the weight, just based on new information I'm learning. And so I'm doing that. I'm adding plyometrics at least one day a week. I was doing mobility training last night and, and then, of course, cardio, you know, the VO two max, and I'm gonna try to add another hitch or something like that. Like I said, I'm trying to start running again. I I went in for a VO two max test, and unbeknownst to me, it was actually a day before I officially developed COVID too. So I didn't get a very good score on the test, and I was very, like, it was only, like, one point lower than what I had, but I was expecting to get higher. And it was on the treadmill, and it just pissed me off that I didn't get a good score. And so I really I was like, this isn't. So I was like, I need to, like, learn how to run again, because it like, it kind of made me out of breath. And I was like, okay. I don't like that feeling at all. I don't like, so I'm adding running back. Hopefully, my hip will, cooperate. And if it doesn't, I'm definitely looking into exosomes and stem cells. So, but I'm still doing, like, the other cardio machines as well and trying to get outside. And I like to do it's funny, kind of like you, Dave, like, I don't like to go out and do my sprint outside. I was thinking, oh, I could like go sprint on this grass field or whatever, but somehow I feel like I can push myself harder on a treadmill where I can, like, see, you know, like, oh, just just one more point, one more point, one more point. You know? That feels more ambitious to me than just trying to go as fast as I can in timing myself. I don't know. I can do sprint pretty well in the pool too. But, yeah, it's just from my training. I'm just kind of, I'm just so sick of the pool. I can't do it. So at least on the treadmill, you can keep all things equal. You know, you don't have to worry about the weather being a variable or, you know, bugs flying in your mouth or your your eyes while you're running as a wrap. Yeah. Yeah. Or a 114 degrees. Exactly. What is that over there? Like, 40 something? I don't I don't even know. Like, it's something crazy. Long story short, I'm doing the cardio. I'm doing resistance, but I'm trying to add the plyometrics and I'm and adding mobility training. So, and then I I do, like, yoga. That kind of stuff, I just kinda naturally do every night. I stretch before bed, and it's usually some sort of little yoga poses and stuff like that. And every once in a while, I'll do hot yoga in my garage because it's again, a 114 degrees. So It's a mattress. Tim, before we get onto you, could you explain your understanding of, Julie's and Dave's protocols? Well, Dave does, I guess, more like functional training, like p 90 x and running and the kinda hit intervals. And, Julie tries to do, yeah, like, similar things, but she's, you know, focusing a bit more on strength right now and yoga and balance as well as, try to work on, VO two max and, cardio. Alright. So was that close enough, guys? Yeah. You didn't you didn't tell your test, did you? Yeah. Right. And I I didn't say it. My strength is definitely my priority. VO two max is second. Although after that score, I'm gonna kinda maybe a little better. So And how's your protocols are similar or different to theirs? I think, everyone would want to do both, you know, strength and cardio. So I think we're like on the same page with that. So that doing some form of resistance training and cardiovascular exercise, you know, that's the most beneficial way to go about it. I have like, you have a similar like that I do weightlifting or calisthenics a few times a week, and then I'll do cardio as well a few times a week. So, yeah, I think it's quite, quite similar. K. Let's move on to sleep, and let's do the exact same thing, but without my annoying interruptions. You go, Dave. Can you start? Oh, geez. My sleep could be a whole lot better. My sleep is all over the place, especially now that I've been retired only because I'm not forced into the, the nine to five routine and having to be up at a specific time to do something. So now if, you know, I wanna go out to a concert with friends and stay out a little later, I could do that. But my sleep scores have been all over the place. So I it's one thing I need to get back and get serious and start focusing a little more on getting a more set routine. And my scores aren't terrible, but they they they could be better just because I have no consistency. Okay. Well, so I'm probably different than both of the other guy. I don't track my sleep. I don't have an Oura ring or any of that kind of stuff. I just know if I wake up and that and then lately, it's just been like, oh, waking up two or three times a night, like I said, because they're changing my hormone replacement therapy. So it's not been very good right now for sure. I mean, I think I I think I went through years of, like, really great sleep. And so now I just try to make sure everything that I can control is, you know, I'm in bed by I'm actually in bed by 08:30, you know, lights out by nine. The alarm's not set till, like, five, 05:30 depending on the day so that I I'm sure that and I usually wake up before my alarm, but I just, you know, set it so that I know just in case. But, unfortunately, I'm waking up and not so much hot flashes, but just, just not been good. But I've got, you know, like I make sure I don't eat three hours before bed. I take a walk after dinner, you know, certainly no sugar, no alcohol, because all of those things impact my sleep. And I make sure that I'm meditating every day. All the things that I know, in the past have have impacted my sleep. And I know that from other peep you know, other information out there, I just make sure that those things are dialed in. But no Oura ring, no whoop, none of none of that yet. Soon, though. When when you get one, you can join my whoop community because I just started. I needed accountability. And so now I've got like 16 people in my my little whoop. And, they're all but it's great. I'm looking at it for my 50 birthday. I'm gonna do one or the other. I'm like, either a whoop or an or a ring. So I think everybody's praying about that. What about you, Sam? Yeah. I have, pretty, like, regular sleep schedule. So go to bed, use it at 10PM, and I'll wake up, you know, 05:30, 6AM, something like that. Yeah. I I don't like deliberately track my sleep, at least not right now. I'm not like, I don't check it, I guess. Like, I track it, quite often. So I have a few different trackers, and I have, like, the mattress as well, like, tracks the steep, but I don't, like, check it. So it's like, I don't really care that much about the the steep score. So I'm just, yeah, like, okay, how do I feel? And, sometimes it's good to say, okay, see, like, okay. How's your heart rate or HRE or something like that? And then, like, make some, like, adjustments to your recovery or or yeah. Like, if you can, detect some sort of a some sort of a cold or something like that, you can use the HRE for that. But, yeah, other than that, I don't, like, really go crazy with the sleep tracking in that in that sense because yeah. With sleep, it's, you just need to have, like, yeah, the so solid seven to eight hours and, make sure you don't have sleep apnea and things of that. So, chances are, like, you're you're getting the right amount of sleep, with that already unless you have a sleep apnea or unless you're, you know, waking up to go to toilet five times per night. Yeah. I also question the, you know, the validity or the accuracy of the data that we get from these devices too, because, you know, like you said, I've got the, the Eight Sleep mattress, the same as you got the Oura ring. I've got, you know, the Garmin and I've got the Whoops. I've got four different devices that track my sleep and they all radically disagree. And they never agree. Yeah. They don't tell me I completely different amounts of REM, completely different amounts of deep sleep, different awake times. Yeah. None of them agree. Even, like, the heart rate variability variability would not be the same from as far as heartbeat goes, they're all on complete agreement because that's a pretty easy metric. Heart rate variability, I think they're a little differently algorithmically. But where they do use the same algorithm, then yes, they do. They do pretty much correlate. And they do different things with that data, you know, to tell me whether I'm recovered well, or one might say, oh, you know, you didn't recover very well today. You should just kick back and take it easy. And the other one say, you know, will tell me, oh, you're great. You're ready to go. Go have at it today. You know, so it's like, well, what do I do? Right. That'd be based on how I feel, I guess, because I can't can't depend on the advice I'm getting. Well, now Dave, you're talking me out of buying one of these. Thank you. Well, I think what I'm trying to say is just pick one, right? Yeah. Don't confuse yourself with a bunch of different ones because you're just gonna get different information. May may I ask some clarification there? So, so what, what, what you're saying is that, when, when we're talking about some metrics like heart rate variability or resting heart rate or some some basic things, then they tend to agree. But when we start talking about some software development invention, then then they start to disagree. Like how. Mhmm. And it's the same with the epigenetic age clocks. Right? Again, the base assay of how they're getting the data is the same. It's the interpretation of the data that varies. Yeah. It's important to have, like, some sort of baseline. Yeah. And then make, like, conclusions are from that rather than, some, like, overall number. It's more well, yeah, like, what's the baseline for you right now? So workouts workouts exercises are are are pretty similar. Sleeps are like, okay, you have to sleep well, but you can't sleep like champion, be a sleep champion. But when it comes to nutrition, I feel like that's when the rejuvenation Olympic athletes are really different in. So let's not start with Dave this time. Tell me a summary of your nutrition. And the next one, tell the other guy where he what he's doing wrong and why you're doing right. So who wants to start, Julie or Sim? Sim wants sister. I think, the the yeah. Like diet, to, like, I don't think any particular food is, like, solely responsible for, like, good health or something like that. The food is, you know, you need food to eat and, or you need food to, like, survive. And, what food does is that it can affect, like, your biomarkers, which then ultimately determine whether or not you get diabetes or something else or or you live a long time. So it's the biomarkers that are, like, the more important parts here in my opinion. Because, yeah, there's so many different diets out there and you can be healthy on many different diets. You know, you can you can have optimal blood work on different diets. And there are certain foods that tend to improve your blood markers, whereas other foods tend to worsen their blood markers. So I think that's that's why there's a lot of, like, confusion online about nutrition and so many conflicting opinions. Because, yeah, people put too much emphasis on the diet without never having measured their blood work. So, you know, how do you know that what your diet is good for you if you've never actually measured your blood work? Like, you can't say that just just by virtue of the food because, everyone some people might react different to to different foods. So, like, you know, some people say that, oh, I can't eat a banana. It's gonna spike my blood sugar and, you know, makes me feel bad or something like that. Whereas, you know, I I never get that. And the same with, like, some allergenic foods, like, I can eat anything. I don't have any, like, allergies. I can eat all the bread and and the lectins and all the legumes and all the nuts and, seeds and the all the dairy. So I don't have, like, any food intolerances or anything like that. And my blood work is also, like, great on what like, almost any kind of diet that I eat. Well, actually, they're not true. Like, you know, if I eat a lot of, like, fat and, you know, like a low carb keto diet, then my, you know, cholesterol was higher, than it is right right now. Whereas at the moment, I'm eating more carbs, less fat, and more like yeah. Like, these, fish show like, omega threes and those kind of things. So my, you know, blood work is better than it was in the past. And that was because I changed my diet and I changed some of the foods and, I was trying to improve the blood markers. So, theoretically, you could be, like, healthy on any diet, but it matters. Yeah. Like what kind of, blood work you have, if that makes sense. Yeah. I'm I'm gonna not necessarily point out what's wrong. But I think, I agree like, I would agree because I think that every not only is every person different in what they need, but also we have different parts of our lives that need different things. And, and and I think I've spoken this about this, in the past, but, like, I was on a vegan diet and, you know, much like Steve said, like, I was having my blood tested at the time, and my doctor was just looking at, you know, all these different nutrients and going, you're this is not working for you. This is, you know, you you need to switch that. So even though I I felt decent on it, I was tired. So anyway, when I switched, all my markers went in the proper direction as well as I felt better. And, so I don't think there's any one diet. Like, you know, a ketogenic diet might be really, really, useful for, a person at a specific point in time, but maybe that's not something they should do the rest of their lives. And maybe for another person, they might need to kinda have a vegan heavy diet. And I'm talking, you know, maybe it's like two weeks or something like that. Or, but I think that it's so specific to the individual and where they are in in life. But my diet just so like, the only things I prioritize are a pound of vegetables and a 100 grams of protein because that's what I need right now to, you know, get through menopause. I need all that fiber as well as I need the greens for all the different wonderful things that it does for you. And then the protein is set like that so that one, I can build muscle and, keep that muscle as long as possible. So, you know, that's specific to me. I mean, I with my like, for instance, again, I'm just gonna use my son, 17 years old. I mean, he tries to prioritize protein or this or that, but I think given his metabolism, he has a little bit more room to kinda, like, I can't have any sugar, for instance. Like, if I have sugar, it's like, I will have hot flashes all night long. It's it's absolutely horrific. And, but, like like, he can have ice cream, you know? So every human is a little bit different in where they are at, in their lives. Whereas, like, you know, like, even this ten years ago, I could have had a very different diet. So I don't know. I I just I think it's so individualized. It's hard to speak the praises of anyone specifically. Yeah. They might destroy them. Right. That was gonna happen. Right? No. I mean, I I definitely can't say there's anything wrong with either one of those two approaches. They make complete sense to me. I think for me, I was initially trying to supplement my way out of a bad diet. I used to, you know, I used to eat pretty crappy food, not realizing what effect that had on me. And then when I did figure out the effect that it was having on me, I had no control over it because I had moved back in with my parents around 2001 to take care of them after they both came down with cancer. And at that point, mom was still cooking. So she was in control of the meals. I was not. She was still using vegetable oils for everything, you know, the soybean oil stuff and, you know, making a lot of the stuff out of that, you know, the hamburger helpers and the, you know, the hot pockets and all this stuff that you can instantly heat up in a microwave. So I was trying to supplement myself, you know, out of the bad diet. But as time progressed, I was able to start focusing on getting more healthy foods into them, especially as they got more and more infirmed and couldn't couldn't get out. So, I was the one doing the grocery shopping. So, now I started having some control and some influence over what we were eating. And, I started feeling better. I think they started feeling better, but they still insisted upon their their crappy stuff too, because that was their habit, right? Couldn't get them to give up the hot pockets or the craft American cheese slices and, you know, all the fake stuff. I'm a push back on you, David. I don't think it's the habit. I think it's an addiction. I actually think that there's addictive qualities to those foods that people, you know, crave them. That's that is true. That's fair. I completely agree there. Yeah. So after they passed, I started eating healthier to a point because I was going through a process of where I was remodeling this entire house and I wasn't always able to cook Half the time, I didn't have a kitchen or a bathroom, which is a whole nother story. But, yeah, having to run down the block to use the bathroom every time was not fun. So when I stopped eating pizza or running to Taco Bell occasionally for a quick meal, that's when I noticed my, my pace of aging took a huge dip because it was about point seven seven, somewhere around there. And when I finally cut out all the other processed crap and started eating just clean natural food, that's when I got the 0.66 and was able to keep that for quite a while. Interesting. So, in my case, it was the things that I removed from my diet that improved my pace of aging, not necessarily the things that I added to it, if that makes sense. So I I could still learn a ton from Julie because I've seen like some of your Instagram posts where you're preparing your vegetables. And I I don't really I don't I like to say that I don't really know how to cook. I've kind of figured out how to make certain meals that I enjoy, that I like the way they taste, and that are easy because I'm super lazy. But I think there's a ton that I could learn about making good, delicious and nutritious food by watching you. Yeah. I'll have my own little cooking show on Instagram. That'd be nice. Absolutely. I just love food. So like, I mean, I, you know, like, I've I think it was somewhere and my mom won't be watching this so I can say this. My mom was horrible, like, horrible. Like, for one Thanksgiving having this turkey, and it was just so dry. And I went to a my, at that time boyfriend, he eventually became my husband, but to their to their house for Thanksgiving dinner and eating the turkey being like, oh, this is what it's supposed to taste. Like, it was so good. And so from then on, I was like, mom, I got this. I'm gonna come. And then I just really got into it. And I just I absolutely love, love, love being in the kitchen. It's the place I go when I'm stressed. It's the place I go when I'm happy. So I feel grateful in that sense because it definitely makes the that component of longevity very not only easy, but it's something I look forward to. And, I think it's probably a critical play player. I don't think you can do this on pack packaged food. I just don't think that that's possible. I could be wrong, but I just feel like we're meant to, I don't know, live within the environment that grows around us to a certain degree or the plants and the herbs and those things are are meant for us to be partaking in somehow. Alright. Let's build a supplement stock. And let's start from the leanest. Julie, what are you taking? Yeah. Not very much. Thank goodness. So I am let's see. I've got my hormone replacement therapy, which is in the course of changing. Part of that is DHEA and it there was some pregnenolone in there, but we're taking that out. So I don't take that. And, and like Dave said, don't just because somebody's listening to this, don't go doing that because you can really mess up your hormones and cause some, you know, I was I've had a fibroid tumor. So don't like, do not mess around with that, those supplements without blood work, and the help of the doctor, and then some other, you know, estrogen, progesterone, and, testosterone. So we're adjusting all those levels. Oh, and then as far as supplements, I am what is it? Usually, I have this all written down, so I apologize. But a b I do a b complex. I do, the fish oil. I do, magnesium, quite a bit of magnesium every day, and feel like I'm forgetting why I do the Novo supplement, which is a conglomeration of different things. What am I forgetting? Oh, vitamin d three k two. Do that every morning. And, oh, I've added, quercetin this year. So I'm curious to see if that changes anything in my, in my metrics. And then I have been experimenting with, like, if I have something sugary, I'll have some berberine after it to just try to mitigate those effects, but I haven't really been taking it cause I haven't been having anything sugary lately. So I think that's about it. I don't think I'm missing anything. I'll pipe in if I do. Sim, if you would have to remove something, what would you remove and why and what would you add and why? I think, Julie's protocol or in his own? Julie. Now we are onto authorizing Julie. I would, you know, I think with quercetin, like, there's not a lot of, like, evidence right now, and that applies to all the other analytics as well. So, like, fisetin and and stuff, you know, theoretically, they might work. But, yeah, the problem is that, you know, you know, we don't know right now, okay, what's the correct dose or how much you need to use them to remove senescent cells. Yeah. Because we don't even have a reliable biomarker to measure senescent cells either. So it's like, okay. You don't know if it's working. So, right now, at least, I wouldn't like there's a few clinical trials that are being done on on this analytics, but, they're they'll come out in a few years. So, like, you know, I think it makes sense maybe for you, like, if you're battling some sort of infection or a COVID or something like that to use quercetin or some fisetin or stuff. But, as a, like, a general purpose longevity supplement right now, I wouldn't like, that's why I'm not taking it myself, either. What to add, like, I think, the the generally, like, very good supplements, maybe creatine and glycine and NAC are, like, the top ones, I think, for anyone over 40. So, they'll definitely be very beneficial for multiple, like, things like muscle and, body composition and and strength and, antioxidant defense and things of that. So I gotta just gonna tell you my experience with creatine. So and I know everyone tells me that this didn't happen, but because I don't vary my protocol, I did add creatine, and I had a significant amount of hair loss. And, you know, I've been told again and again that that's not true, but I'm like, well, I don't do anything else. So when I took it out, you know, the hair loss stopped. It was more than just, you know, your average shed. So for, it sounds like there might be a genetic aspect to that, or it might mean a signal to I'm still kinda trying to figure that out because I would very much like to take that. I think it's a a valuable, supplement when I look at the the data on it. But, that was not a positive experience that I am interested in repeating, so I wanna figure out why, whether it's a genetic thing or if it's, you know, another signal of an not having some other mineral that I need to properly process that. But, yeah, that was unfortunate. And I would never not recommend it to people based on my own personal experience. Big muscles are more important than hair. Oh, and not as a lady with long hair. No. I would, I would argue the opposite. And what do you take, Cin? Yeah, I take omega threes, glycine, trimethylglycine. I take, hyaluronic acid, collagen, and creatine, and that's pretty much it, I think. Yeah. I take berberine as well occasionally and melatonin occasionally as well. Dave, what would you remove and add? There were things like, maybe nicotinamide riboside that might be interesting for him, but I don't think he's to an age yet where he needs that. Well, that's right. I do take that. I take NR as well. That's what I'm forgetting. Next. Deep. So very quickly, everything that comes to your mind, just just say, and you guys pay attention. Uh-huh. Pay attention and try to spot the stupidest thing that he's taking. Might be a shorter list to list the things I don't take. I mean, Sim did what an hour long YouTube on my supplements. I mean, it's like not something I can just quickly rattle off, but gosh, I take so many things. I don't know where to begin. NR is one thing I definitely take because I noticed a huge difference when I began taking NR. So that was true NIAGEN. I do take a lot of glycine, NAC to creatine Cause those are things we just mentioned. So they're, like, top of my mind. I take a lot of things for, like, my eye health, for brain health, for heart health, cardiovascular health. So, yeah, usually I'm taking I'm taking myself, miss, to target different organ systems, basically. Or I might be taking things to, you know, push autophagy at the time or, or for joints, like I take glucosamine for the, my joints. Yeah, I'm just going to, could go off on a tangent there, but I'll, I'll not do that because that's a whole different story. So, yeah, I mean, that's I that's a brief very, very brief summary as I could go on. Certainly be a huge, huge tangent to go through your supplementaries now. Do you guys have any anything to to say about Dave's Dave's approach or or supplements? Or did you notice something that might be counterproductive? Yeah. Well, I don't know, yeah, like, what changes he made right now to his, the the the supplements on his website. But, yeah, I guess it's important to or at least with supplements, like, the way I approach is is that, you know, okay, does this supplement actually have any clinical trials in humans, to show that it has a particular effect or something? Because, you know, you could you could find some results for almost any compound in animal studies. And then you're like, left with like, speculation, like, okay, is this gonna actually translate over to humans? And, you know, a lot of the companies might use that as well for marketing, to, you know, make their product sound more appealing than, or more evidence based than it actually is. So, you know, I guess the the the biggest issue with supplements is that, yeah, like their cost, like, I think if you're taking, like, dozens or hundreds of supplements a day, then, you know, you're spending a lot of money every month on on the supplements and, you don't necessarily know if, if they work. So, yeah. Other than that, like, I I I have no, like, like, fears about taking supplements, even if you take, like, hundreds of them. The biggest problem is that, yeah, probably, like, the cost side. And, even if they work in isolation, we don't know if they work if you take them all together. So that's just very, like, a complex complex problem we don't know, like, answer to. Yeah. I I took to heart your evaluation that you did in your YouTube, and there were some great suggestions that you offered based on the the timing of certain supplements. I switched those out. I think surprisingly, you actually encouraged me to increase the amount of some of the things that I was taking because the dosages weren't, they weren't in the range of what the studies showed were effective. And so to that end, I I believe I increased my glucosamine, ended up doubling that dose so that I was more in line with what the the studies showed was optimal. And I think I did I might have done taurine as well. But much to my surprise, I I found that that was, not within the range of my bowel tolerance. And I ended up with a a a bout of diarrhea for quite some time. And it took me the longest time to figure it out as to what it was that was causing it. And so I ended up having to back those dosages down a little bit. And now everything's fine. But so sometimes even, you know, a study that recommends, you know, what you should take is not always going to be, it's not something that you might be able to tolerate either alone or in combination with a bunch of other supplements. Yeah. For sure. Alright. Let's leave our listeners with some immediately actionable value. So I wanna go around of answering one question. Pitch one low hanging fruit biohack of yours that that's like easy to do. You're doing it and it actually made a difference. I think, you know, exercise is the best, best way, or maybe like sauna. I think the sauna will also have very good cardiovascular benefits. So I like to say, yeah, like, exercise number one and sauna is probably number two for like, overall health. I'm gonna look here. I hate to agree. I mean, I I mean, aside from a a healthy diet, you know, full of vegetables and healthy meat sources and or protein sources, I'll say, only because I know like, I was already doing that before I had my zero, like, my zero month pace of aging score. And, at six months is when I added, you know, a serious exercise and sauna routine, and that made a 3% difference in my pace of aging. So I would agree that those two things together especially can move the needle significantly, and they're just easy to do. And it's fun to just, you know, get out, move around, make it fun. And then, you know, the sauna, I definitely think it's great, but if you can't get to it, just, you know, at least prioritize the exercise. And then, of course, I mean, sleep, but if you're going to do one thing exercise. Yeah. I think my, my sauna made a huge difference for me, just in how I look and how I feel. Nicotinamide riboside made a big difference in my energy levels. My carol bike made a noticeable difference after some time in, my run performance. So those those would be like the top three that I think were the most noticeable for me. Let's try this again. So it has to be a low hanging fruit. It has to be something that's practical and very small. It let let's let's let's just relax the criteria. It has to make a small difference. Alright? So maybe maybe I would put my, let's say let's say I have this, this this whatnot. I put it on and turn it on. And every morning, when I'm on the computer, I put this thing on and it beams blue light into my my eyes, and it has zero cost to me. And it might make a difference. I'm actually not sure. Your turn. Well, I I can pick one. I've got, just putting on a red light in the evening or putting on blue blocker glasses. It's pretty very, very simple, and it helps me to, start getting sleepy. And I I sleep better when I do that. Okay. Well, so, yeah. Let me if you wouldn't really like, I a walk every evening after dinner, not only are you getting the the light, but, turn on some really calming music. And it's just, like, I don't look at my phone anymore. It's a signal like the day is over. It's just become this very relaxing addition to my day. So, I would say even if it's a ten minute walk, I don't think that costs people very much time. Most people can come up with ten minutes and and find some very relaxing music. We don't talk about this enough, but I do think that that has an impact on our on our stress levels. And, you know, whether you want to amp those up or down depending on what music you put on. So I think, yeah, that's what I would choose as a low hanging fruit. I would, yeah, put, like, morning sunlight, probably. That getting exposed to this morning bright light is gonna be for the circadian rhythm beneficial and that, you know, with the synchronized circadian rhythms, you'll your body will also just, you know, be healthier. Those answers do satisfy me. So thank you guys very much. At the end, I would like to do something that I've never done before and I'm not planning to do. But, every YouTuber are doing it. And I right now, I really do need you guys' feedback. How did you find this episode? This was an experiment trying to bring together rejuvenation athletes. What did you like? What did you not like? And, and how can we improve for next time? But thank you guys. It was really great. Thank you. Thank you. Let's do it again sometime. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Siim, stay tuned for the next episode, stay empowered.