Death from any cause, death from cardiovascular disease, death from cancer, death from all remaining causes, and we're seeing the higher the omega three level, the lower the risk of death. But the omega threes are protective across a wide variety of, outcomes, which all manifest at the end of the day in lower risk for for dying. Welcome to the CMON podcast. Today, our guest is doctor Willem Harris. Doctor Harris is one of the world's leading experts on the health benefits of omega three fatty acids. He has a PhD in human nutrition from the University of Minnesota, and he has authored over 300 publications on fatty acids, omega threes, and fish oil. Doctor Harris, welcome to the show. Thank you very much. Great to be here. Yeah. I'm happy to speak with you and, you've you've done a lot of research about omega threes and you're very well known in the space. So I'm happy to discuss with you about all things omega threes because, you know, I think, like, fish oil and cod liver oil were one of the first supplements that I, as a child, knew about in terms of, like, okay, these things have health benefits. And I always like to say that even, like, you know, even your grandma knows that, fish oil or, like, omega threes are good for you or that they have health benefits. So That's right. So, yeah, I guess we we could start, like, you know, this knowledge has been around for, like, decades. We can start with, like, okay. What's the understanding about the health benefits of omega threes, you know, now in the early twenty twenties? And Yeah. Well, I we thank you for mentioning grandmothers. Back in the day when kids used to be given cod liver oil, boy, it went back into the easily in the nineteen forties, and before. They didn't know anything about omega three. They knew cod liver oil was good for vitamins a and d, and that's why they gave them. They didn't realize they were also given the benefit of omega threes, which were discovered some twenty years, thirty years later. Mhmm. So, anyway, there was an upside. It still tasted rotten, but, you know, that's part of being a kid, I guess. You you gotta suffer through that. So where we are today, 2024, on the health benefits of omega three, they are as you know and as you've talked to your your audience before, there are many stretching from cardiovascular disease, which is a large field, and endothelial, the the health of the blood vessels throughout the body. We've looked at risk for death. We we do a lot of studies nowadays looking at blood levels of omega three and how they relate to future disease outcomes. And so we've been looking at, the the big one, dead, death from any cause, death from cardiovascular disease, death from cancer, death from all remaining causes. And, we're seeing the higher the omega three level, the lower the risk of death. Of course, everybody dies eventually. So you you you you gotta say risk for death in a window of time, you know, certain between this time and that time, between this age and that age. But the omega threes are protective across a wide variety of, outcomes, which all manifest at the end of the day in lower risk for for dying. Cognitive benefits, we we're seeing, again, people with the higher omega three levels are lower risk for developing dementia, which is a big deal these days, and just a variety of other diseases. So high omega three is really good for about every system you can think of. Right. And, why is that so? Like so as I, you know, understand, then some of these omega threes, they're not necessarily considered essential, or they're more, like, conditionally essential. But, like, what are some of the, like, reasons why you see such, yeah, like, a consistent finding that, you know, people who have higher blood omega three levels, they have lower risk of, you know, heart disease and mortality. So what are, like, I guess, the mechanisms that give those effects? Right. And that's that's always the next question down. You know, I suppose we should define omega three. When when I'm talking about omega three, I mean, the long chain marine derived EPA, DHA. Those marine excuse me. Those omega threes, not so much the plant ALA, which probably is the essential omega three fatty acid. EPA and DHA are, as you suggested, conditionally essential, meaning they're nutrients that you don't have to have in your diet to live and reproduce, but they are nutrients that when in the diet at higher levels give you better health outcomes. It's a little bit different than the classic meaning of essentiality in nutrition, where where if you haven't got it, you'd you're dead. And that's not the case. If you haven't got it in your diet, you're dead. Yeah. Because we can make EPA and DHA to some extent and probably to a sufficient extent to allow you to live and reproduce. And and the best evidence of that is simply looking at cultures that are vegetarian or vegan where they consume no EPA and DHA preformed, but they consume ALA, and they're still with us. So, anyway, just to clarify, EPA and DHA really are give additional health benefits when they're higher levels, but they are not considered classically essential. What's their mechanism of action? That's probably easiest to boil that down into anti inflammatory if we wanna pick one one mechanism, there are others because the omega threes, have an interesting effect on heart rate, for example. They actually lower the resting heart rate a couple of beats a minute, because they affect the affect the autonomic nervous system, the balance between the sympathetic and the parasympathetic, which drives your heart rate. And, you know, if if if people are allotted a certain number of heartbeats per life and you slow down the heart rate, you see how you might extend your life. That's a very simplistic way of looking at it, but the the effect on heart rate, is kind of underappreciated and is not probably driven by any inflammatory or anti inflammatory effect. It's more about how the cells respond to the sympathetic and parasympathetic input to the tissues. So that that's another part of the mechanism, I think. They lower triglyceride levels, which has been known for many years, when in high doses. Doses of two, three, four grams a day of EPA and DHA. That's not probably the the primary mechanism by which most people derive benefit from omega three, though. Two primary, lipids. We talk about what's your lipid levels. We're talking about triglycerides and cholesterol. And within the cholesterol family, we're talking about, you know, the good cholesterol, the bad cholesterol, LDL, low density lipoproteins, high density lipoproteins. And the omega threes don't really lower the the LDL, which is considered the the the bad particle. They can have a little effect on raising the good particle, but we don't really know if that's part of their beneficial effect or not. So the heart disease, risk reduction comes down to most of the anti inflammatory effects and lowering triglycerides and endothelial effects on the blood vessels. Right. Anothelial effects on on blood vessels, relaxing them. The blood vessels are are a little more relaxed. They're not as stiff, reduced risk for hypertension, which is one of the major risk factors, of course, for heart disease. So they play play a pretty deep role in biology. Down in the cell membrane is is where a lot of the action happens, which is hard to for people to picture sometimes, which I understand. But cell membrane is an extremely important, part of the cell. We think of the nucleus and the DNA and all that stuff is really important, But the cell membrane is what determines what goes in and what goes out. And, just like at your house, if the trash builds up inside the house, it's a mess, and that can happen in a cell too. So the omega threes help move things in and move things out appropriately. I wanna take a quick break to let you know that you can now get my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. It contains 24 chapters ranging from the biology of aging to all the major chronic diseases such as heart disease, kidney disease, neurodegeneration, and I also cover over 70 clinically relevant biomarkers for chronic diseases and their optimal ranges. You can get the book from the link in the description. Well, even if it if it's not considered essential, it still has so many, like, you know, health benefits that you would you would be foolish not to, like, you know, consume it or, not consider it, quote, unquote, essential in that sense because Yeah. I think a good term for it is bioactive. They are they are active biologically, and that's important. But there are a lot of molecules that are bioactive that are not necessarily essential nutrients, which is maybe a fine line for some people. But, when you're when you're trained in nutrition, you learn to think about those words in in that light. Gotcha. So, yeah, you also you mentioned this, omega three levels in the blood, which Mhmm. Which I think is, you know, called omega three index. And you've been also one of the pioneers in, I guess, popularizing this this, biomarker. So, yeah, can you talk about what it is and what does it reflect? And, yeah, what's, like is there any, like, optimal levels for it, and how do you measure it? Sure. Well, a lot of good questions. Yeah. The omega three index is a a metric or a blood test that we developed about twenty years ago now. And we originally proposed that the omega three index was a risk factor for death from heart disease in the same sense that high cholesterol is a risk factor, high blood pressure is a risk factor. We said high a low omega three is also a risk factor and that people should be measuring it. So So we came up with this thing called the omega three index, which is the amount of EPA and DHA and the sum of those two in red blood cell membranes. So red blood cell, of course, is the easiest cell to get a sample of. It's in your blood, obviously. So any any blood sample is gonna collect red blood cells, and they are when we analyze the membranes of the fatty acids, the membrane fatty acids in red cells, we can create a ratio of EPA and DHA to all the other fatty acids, and that's so that's a percent. So the omega three index is expressed as a percent of the total fatty acids in a red cell membrane that are EPA and DHA. And typically ranges from a low of maybe 3% and very low, three and a half percent. We see that in vegans, up to, Japanese, older Japanese people eating very traditional diets of 10%. So that's the range, three to 10 to we we we like to think that the optimal range is between, 812%. Somewhere in that range is is really optimal. The average level in The US and Europe is roughly five, five and a half maybe. Mhmm. And then, again, as I mentioned, cultures that eat very little fish have very little very low levels under 4%. So, that's the range of the omega three index. It's a test that's that we can run on a dried blood spot so people can prick their finger at home, put a drop of blood on a card, and mail it to the laboratory, and then we'll give them back the the their omega three index and a variety of other fatty acid measures, we get from the blood. Gotcha. Yeah. So I I like to get, like or it's it's it's fortunate to have, like, a biomarker for, you know, a supplement or, like, a a food that you're, like, eating because most supplements, you don't know if it's gonna work. You know, you take whatever supplement that's out there, like, I guess, like, you know, these other popular antiaging supplements like resveratrol or NMN or something like, you know, you could measure, yeah, like, your NLD levels and see if it works. But but, most other supplements don't have a specific biomarker to track, okay, are you in the optimal range and, if it's working. Whereas with omega threes, you actually have, you know, a biomarker that you can track relatively easily and see, okay, how do you pair up with, you know, what we know is associated with, like, reduced risk of mortality and what's better for, overall longevity. Right. Right. That's that's, I think, the the real value of the omega three index is that it's a very well documented and validated biomarker of your omega three status, which is largely driven by how much EPA and DHA you eat, but not not a 100%. There's certain some there's some biological variability underneath it because you do synthesize a little bit of it, yourself. But, and there's probably differences in the individual people's people's rate of absorption when they take an omega three supplement or they eat a piece of fish that's got omega three. I'm sure there are genetic factors that there's a long chain of events from mouth to cells, that are mediated by lots and lots of different proteins. And, there are undoubtedly genetic differences in how people respond in terms of the omega three index to a omega three supplement. So right. To your point, you if you only want if you wanna know what your level is in your situation, you measure the omega three index. And if you're low, you increase your omega three intake, and the index will go up. Mhmm. Is there any risk for this, like, healthy user bias with this, marker? So what I'm saying is, like, you know, if you generally eat, you know, non westernized diet or, like, you they eat less junk food and you exercise a little bit more, is do you have would would you have, like, a better omega three index result, which would, you know, then, I guess, make it less Well caused by the omega three index. I'm just playing, like, devil's advocate because, yeah, some some of the, like, other markers, like, you know, if you just are healthier overall, then your biomarkers will be generally better. And, if you what I'm asking is, again, the, like, does the omega three index is it only affected by your omega three intake, or is it affected by, like, other, like, healthy lifestyle habits as well? Not that we know of. Not really. It's it's driven by I mean, the the question that you're asking is a good one, and it's one that comes up a lot in research where we're looking at omega three levels predicting certain disease outcomes. And people will say, well, having a high omega three, that's just a a marker of a healthier diet. So it really is the healthy diet, not the omega three that's doing the action. That's actually the mechanism. Well, I don't think that's true. We've we've adjusted many of our analysis. We adjust for healthy lifestyle. We adjust for the intake of other nutrients. We adjust for exercise. We adjust for smoking, alcohol intake, all these things, body mass index, things like that. And still, the omega threes are predictive. So it's not they're not operating via these other healthy lifestyle factors. And so, yeah, you can eat a very healthy lifestyle. And if you don't need any more omega three than you're eating in a crappy lifestyle, your omega three index is not gonna be higher. Yeah. Like, I've I've seen that from my own, example as well that, you know, you know, so I've, you know, never been kind of overweight or anything like that. I've been healthy pretty much for, you know, ten years or something. And I measured my omega three index first time, like, over a year ago, and it was something like maybe 6.6 or something like that, which, you know, isn't, like, inherently bad or is not is not very bad, but it's not like the opt it's not in the optimal range either. So I started taking, like, larger amounts of these omega three supplements, whereas in the past, I actually haven't taken them, you know, regularly. And it got up to nine percent, so which is, you know, more optimal from what we know. So, yeah, like, the only difference that or the biggest change I did make was just increase the omega three intake, whereas, you know, my other lifestyle factors were pretty much the same as as before. Yeah. That that's a very common story. But is it right? Very simple story. I mean, it's you know exactly what to do. If your omega three index is low, you you just eat more. Yeah. But is there like, how far do the benefits go? Like, so you mentioned that, you know, eight to 12% is kind of the upper end. And I would imagine that, yeah, Japanese people might have, you know, 12%. So is there because, you know, when I've looked at some of the studies then then, I I didn't find a lot of, like, studies about, 12% and the health benefits. So so, like, do people who have twelve percent, do they already have lower risk of mortality even compared to people who have eight percent, and ten percent? Or is it, like, does it peak at eight percent to the benefits? It's a great question. So do you really kinda max out at say say you're at ten percent. Do you get any better benefit of being at 15? Mhmm. Short answer is we don't know because there are, you know, count them on one hand. How many people in this world have omega three levels that are that high? Very little study has been done of those people. So we even up to twelve percent is very, very uncommon. Actually, oh, just over eight percent. Maybe ninety five percent of Americans and Europeans are are below that eight percent target. So asking what's going on at twelve percent or fifteen percent is is a question that's it's not beyond potential research, but it's there's no research that I know of at this point that shows that you'd get even more. I think you're you get diminishing benefits, diminishing returns, as they say. There's a point beyond which more omega three is not gonna help. You you've done all you can do in that regard. That would be true for any nutrient. Gotcha. So if someone is, like, you know, 8%, then, they can feel pretty good about it. You feel pretty good. Yeah. Now there there is one study from Japan that, we looked at some years ago where they looked within a you know, basically, looked between eight, ten, 12%, in a a cohort of older Japanese. And there was a actual reduced risk for some cardiovascular outcomes in people who are eleven percent on average compared to eight percent. So I I think there is I think it's, again, it's a diminishing return. You get most of the bang for your but going from five percent to seven or eight percent. And then you get a little bit more a little little bit more each additional prep, but but it isn't much. Okay. Yeah. That makes sense. And, yeah, like, you know, if it well, at least, like, with the supplement, it doesn't require that much effort. So, you know, whereas with exercise, you you see the similar thing that, okay, you get most of the benefits by just going from sedentary to some physical activity and, and doing a bit more than that, but, you know, being very, like, pro athlete already starts giving diminishing returns. Whereas with the omega threes, I would imagine just taking a supplement, you might increase the dose or something. It might it might be like doesn't require extra effort in that sense. You might just Yeah. Take a double dose. Or Right. Right. Yeah. And there's and as far as we know, there's really no no substantive risk to health from having an omega three index of eight, nine, ten percent. Right. So that's that's a good thing to Yeah. But what about the opposite on the lower end? So yeah, if you have three to four percent, then, what does it mean essentially? Well, that that's always the place you don't wanna be. When we do these studies comparing the highest levels to the lowest levels, the lowest levels are always around that three and a half or four percent. Those are the people that have the worst outcomes, whether it's total mortality, whether it's cardiovascular mortality, whether it's dementia. Any of these outcomes are worse. We always compare to the lowest level, and the lowest level is always worse off of anybody. So that's definitely where you don't wanna be. And, how how much of that effect is because, you know, people who have lower omega three index, they are generally gonna like a worse diet. Well, again, we we we do our best to control for that, just to say this is independent of all these other factors. So, statistically, you can do that whether it you never it's never perfect. The best way to do it was with a, of course, a randomized controlled trial, but nobody's gonna do a randomized controlled trial with a placebo in in people and and give it to them for twenty years and see, you know, or does this help? Because some of these studies that will conclude that omega threes don't work are maybe four or five years long, and they started when people in their mid sixties. And so to conclude that omega threes don't work for a, b, or c, whatever outcome you're talking about, is, is an incorrect statement. I mean, it's it's correct in the context in which it's made, but that context is always lost. The context is, okay. Maybe one gram a day of omega three doesn't help. If you're 65 years old, you've already got heart disease, you've already got diabetes, and we're gonna see what it does in four years. And it it it doesn't change your health like well, okay. No surprise. Okay? But that doesn't mean, writ large, omega threes don't help in in decades of of life where you keep your omega three index high, and you never develop these diseases. That's the important point. We're not treating omega threes as a drug. We're treating them as nutrients. Right. Yeah. Like, you would just always be better with, 8%. Yeah. Right. Exactly. I mean, the Japanese, on average, live about four and a half years more than Americans do. And they have the higher you know, omega three index is roughly 80 to 90% higher than the average American. Now is that the only reason? I can't say that's the only reason they live longer. But it's interesting to think because the Japanese also know are known to have higher, rates of blood pressure, higher high blood pressure. They smoke more. They're under more stress, and yet they live longer. Oh, really? Wow. Yeah. So is it the omega threes? Well, I think omega threes are the least part of the story. And Europeans as well. Like, I do know that Europeans smoke a lot more than Americans, but I didn't know the Japanese smoke a lot more than Yeah. Hell yeah. And, you know, Mediterranean diet is pretty high in fish as well. Well, it certainly can be. There does there are versions of the there's so many versions of the Mediterranean diet. It's a it's a little hard to say exactly what diet that is, but, yeah, you're right. In general, you would think that fish would be high in the Mediterranean diet. Yeah. But what about, you know, if a person is generally healthy? Like, you know, they exercise, they're lean, they don't have blood pressure and diabetes, those things, but they have a omega three index of 6% or, you know, four or 5%. You know, I guess the answer is still that they would be better off by having it at eight percent. But is there, like, any any studies about, what do do do what's the what's those people's, risk profile? Yeah. We're just starting a study right now, in looking at the health risk in a group of of vegans, of vegetarians, of pescatarians, which pescatarians are people that are vegetarian except that the only meat they eat is fish. Mhmm. And then what we call omnivores, you know, people who eat anything. And the omega three index goes the it's the lowest in the vegans, next to lowest in the vegetarians, next in the omnivores and highest in the pescatarians, which makes perfect sense. And so we're gonna be looking at long term outcomes. So the the the question you're kind of asking and the question we're interested in too is, let's say you're eating a vegan diet and you're you're healthy in a lot of ways. Your your your body weight is normal. You exercise well. You have low blood pressure. Is that enough to protect you from dementia, cardiovascular disease when you get older, or do you still need higher omega three to protect you? We really don't know. Yeah. That would be interesting to find those results. So, yeah, how do you then increase the, we know the optimal level to, you know, you know what to you what to measure and what's the optimal level. So how do you, increase it? So, like, first, is it possible to reach an omega three index of 8% with, just diet? And, if you do supplement, then, like, what are some of the doses, people use? Yeah. It's answer first question, yes. It's possible to do it with diet alone. If you just ate, oily fish like salmon or or mackerel, herring, sardines, albacore tuna, all these types of fish that are high in omega three. If you had, you know, one serving a day, that would definitely give you it would probably give you on the average of about a a gram, gram and a half of EPA and DHA per day, which would put you in the and that's what we've seen in general. To move from a 4% omega three index to 8%, on average, takes about fifteen hundred milligrams of EPA DHA. And so that can be done with supplements. That could be done with fish or a combination. So it's it's very achievable. It just doesn't take heroic measures to get, up to 8%. Mhmm. And, fifteen hundred milligrams per day. So how much DHA, DHA. Not not a fish oil. Right? Right. Right. How much how much are you getting from, let's say, a 100 of, you know, salmon or something like that? Oh, you're getting roughly a gram, thousand milligrams. Okay. So But that's not that much. Do it. Yeah. Well, it depends on the obviously, a lot of things. Salmon used to be farmed salmon, which is more and more of the most common, used to have higher omega three. Now it's down to, again, a gram or gram and a half per serving, because they're switching out fish oil in the food for salmon for other oils. Still, salmon is still a very good choice. Just because it used to be better doesn't mean it's not good now. Yeah. And, from the supplemental sources, then, yeah, like, the EPA, DHA combined, fifteen hundred milligrams per day. Right. Right. And we like to we like to recommend both of them together because they come that way always together in nature. Mhmm. Some people wanna just take DHA or just EPA, and I don't really recommend that. I don't think that's the optimal way to go, from a nutritional point of view. Do these, EPA and DHA, do they have, like, distinct effects on the body, like or do they have synergistic effects? Or Pretty synergistic. When they when people have studied EPA alone or DHA alone at the same dose, the same grams per day in the same people, actually, DHA is probably a little bit better as an anti inflammatory and a lipid lowering, triglyceride lowering agent. It's it's not a huge difference, but it tends to be a little better than EPA. But EPA is good too. So Okay. I think together is what you really need to look at. Mhmm. Yeah. And, if you are taking supplements, then there are, like, a few different types out there. You know, there's fish oil, coliver oil, even, like, some of the plant based ones, algae oil. You have krill oil as well. So, yeah, like, are they all equal in terms of, raising your omega three index and, like, the health effects, or the or do they have, like, different different, like, effects? Yeah. The and you mentioned cod liver oil and fish oil. Those both are triglyceride based. Or the the the omega threes are contained in in we call triglycerides or molecules that have three fatty acids per molecule, one of which is usually omega three. Those oils are the best absorbed. There's also a lot of supplements now that are called restructured or re reesterified triglycerides. They are more concentrated in omega three, but they're the omega threes are still in the, chemical form of a triglyceride, and those are the best absorbed. Omega threes and in phospholipids, like in krill oil, are also very well absorbed. It's the the one that's not so well absorbed is an ethyl ester, omega threes, which is what the pharmaceutical products are. Mhmm. Vascepa and in The US, Lovaza, Omacor, and the and the rest of the world. Those are ethyl ester products. It's not that they're not good. They're fine, but they just need to be they're best taken with food. So you have some, food in your stomach and in your intestine that will stimulate all the absorptions, all the all the systems for absorbing fat, or or stimulate it after a meal. And that's what you need to absorb the ethyl esters. Right. So the triglycerides triglyceride form is the best. And I think it's the best the best form. Right. Gotcha. How how does one know which, type of supplement it is? Well, it's a good question. Usually, it'll say somewhere on the label. If it's an ethyl ester, it'll say it. If it's if it's a krill oil based product, it's gonna have it's gonna be phospholipid based. Phospholipid and some triglyceride, kind of a mix. And it's krill oils is less refined in a sense. It's a more of a mixture of lots of different chemical forms. And if it's a restructured triglyceride, who the the producer, because it costs more money to actually produce that product that takes more chemo more chemistry, they're gonna be charging a higher price typically than the standard fish oil. And they'll wanna put on their label, you know, this is a re reesterified triglyceride or restructured, highly concentrated triglyceride. So that should be on the label. Gotcha. You've also heard a lot of, you know, a lot of talk about this, fish oil and omega three supplements being, rancid and, oxidized because they're, like, these volatile and saturated fats with, very, vulnerable bonds. So, like, what what do you think about that? Like, I know there's much of it. I I I don't think that there's I think people are really trying very hard to, scare consumers into buying a higher purity product when the standard products are not gonna hurt anybody. They're not they're not so oxidized or so rancid or anything that it's gonna cause any adverse health effect. The omega threes and even the cheapest, what we call an eighteen twelve product, a 30% omega three, those products still raise your omega three index just fine. You just need to take more pills. It's just lower concentration of omega three per capsule. But I'm not worried about, all the hype about about oxidized or rancid. I I think that's and it's true that the omega threes are what we call highly polyunsaturated, meaning lot they have lots of double bonds in the molecule. But that doesn't in in in a test tube, they will oxidize pretty quickly. But you're you're not putting them in a test tube. You're putting them in your body. Mhmm. And your body has a myriad of antioxidant systems to protect, these important double bonds. And and so those in vivo in your life, in your body, the omega threes are not susceptible not not highly susceptible to oxidation, any more than other fats. Yeah. I've actually actually see, yeah, like one study from 2012, like a randomized controlled trial, where they gave this highly oxidized fish oil for a week and, it didn't change inflammation status. But it did raise the omega three index. So, yeah, like, you know, that even if it's, like, super oxidized, the fish oil, it doesn't appear to, in the short term, at least, you know, cause inflammation in the body. And if you look at the, you know, broader amount of evidence, then, you know, omega threes are pretty known to just be anti inflammatory in a lot of clinical trials. Right. Right. Yeah. But you you would, you know, generally still want to opt for, like, the best product that you can, like, afford and what you think would be, say, the most suitable for you. So, like, yeah, like, what are your, like, recommendations if someone is looking for, okay. Well, I wanna try to get omega threes as a supplement. I wanna try to increase my omega three index. So, what are some best practices from, like, yeah, choosing the best product? I guess my advice would be look for a triglyceride based product. Look for a product that gives you, excuse me, somewhere five hundred to seven hundred milligrams of EPA DHA per capsule, not per serving. Sometimes per sometimes the fish oil manufacturer will define a serving, and they'll define it as two or even three capsules. Now they'll put how much omega three is in that serving, but you need to look at how much is in each capsule. So if you're aiming for five to seven hundred milligrams VPA DHA per capsule, That's that's a very good product. And so and there are several out there that are like that. Gotcha. And you wouldn't, like, care that much about the form, the triglyceride or ethyl ester or or also, yeah, like, if it's contaminated with, like, heavy metals or anything like that. Yeah. Heavy metals are not a problem for fish oils because the heavy metals are are found typically associated with proteins, not with lipids. So when you extract the lipids or the fats from fish or from fish oil, from, cod, like liver oils, things like that, you leave all the heavy metals behind and the lipids go over because it's like water and oil don't mix. Okay. And the heavy metals tend to be in the water part. So I I'm not concerned about heavy metals at all in in fish oil supplements. Gotcha. Right. What about fish in general then if you're eating fish from the sea? Yeah. I mean, that's that's a more complicated question. I think people have been far more concerned about mercury than it needs to be. We've people are are are very scared or, of course, some people like like to scare people. Some agencies will enjoy this. By getting giving you the idea that all fish is contaminated with mercury, it's not true. There's maybe four or five different species that are relatively high in mercury that pregnant women should avoid, and babies. But in general, most of the salmon, mackerel herring, sardines are all very, very low in in, mercury. And the studies we've done, we've looked at, a wide variety of meta analysis of studies that looked at fish intake, reported fish intake in pregnant women all all around the world, twenty, thirty, 40 different studies, and then they looked at the outcome for their children, mental health outcomes for their kids, like IQ, things like that. And we found that the across the board, the more fish the mom ate, regardless of how much mercury was in the fish, regardless of how much mercury was in the fish, the higher the fish intake, the better the cognitive outcome for the baby. So it's mercury does not counteract the beneficial effects of omega three. And it's it's it's it's it's I think it's just way overplayed how much fear peoples are you know, I mean, pregnant women are the people the ones that should be eating fish, if anybody. And they're scared away from it by, these concerns about mercury that I think again are overblown. Yeah. Because, yeah, you know, fortunate, you can also measure your heavy metals from the blood if you're concerned with with that. Right. Right. Right. What do you think about algae oil? So, I've seen that it also is effective in raising EPA and EHA. Yeah. Algal oil is is it's a triglyceride, ultimately. It's it's algae, for certain specific species of micro one one celled, unicellular algae, not seaweed. We're not talking about seaweed. This is about very small microalgae, that will make naturally make EPA and DHA. And those are isolated, and they they grow them, in big vats or big open ponds anyway, isolate the oils from them and sell it as an algae. And that's fine. That's pretty much what fish eat. It's more expensive because it's a lot more work, but there's nothing it's they're very good sources of omega three. Yeah. So vegans should should definitely take all due well. Yeah. And b twelve. Yeah. The other standard vitamin that's found just in animal products. Yeah. Maybe we can talk a little bit more specifically about, you know, some some of these various chronic diseases that have been seen to benefit from omega threes. So, like, heart disease, obviously, is one of the, you know, leading killers in the world. Right. And, there has been, you know, like, a pretty long history of, you know, fish consumption being linked to lower risk of heart disease as well as, these, clinical trials on omega three supplements as well. So, yeah, like, how effective is or, like, how effective is, yeah, omega threes both from, like, the dietary source as well as supplemental source for, I guess, for for people who have or who are, like, of like, who want to prevent heart disease and also if they already have, you know, some some elevated risk factors. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's hard to put a number on it. We certainly see that risk for death from cardiovascular disease is about twenty percent lower in people who have a well, actually, thirty five percent lower from one of our studies, and one meta analysis. Thirty five percent lower risk for dying from heart disease, if you got an omega three index over eight compared to under four. So, you know, what does that turn into? What's your absolute risk? Off top of my head, I don't remember absolute risks. Relative risk is what we like like to talk about. When I say thirty five percent lower, it's all things all else being equal. The people who have the higher omega threes are at lower risk. But it's important to look at absolute risk too. And absolute is really what what what are your chances of dying of heart disease? Well, it's probably probably one in four people will die of heart disease. How many people will die prematurely of heart disease in the sense of, like, in their fifties or sixties? You know, maybe one in twenty, one in thirty. Those are absolute risk values, and, the omega three reduces both absolute and percent risk, relative risk. But it's it's it's a little hard to put a specific number on particularly, you know, fish eating versus non fish eating. That's a little more complex because when you're eating fish, it's there's other things you're not eating. And it is it is it just the benefit of the eating the fish, or is it the benefit of not eating what you would otherwise have been eating instead of fish? Those two factors play together and are both both good for your health. But it it's much clearer to look at omega three supplement studies. And in the you know, still the meta analysis when you look at all the data over all the last four years, omega three supplement use still is associated with the lower risk for death in cardiovascular, lower card lower MI rates, lower total mortality. So all all of that's still good. Gotcha. Yeah. Like, so the effects have, you know, anti inflammatory, reduces triglycerides, and endothelial, function support. Mhmm. Right. What about I think I've even seen, like, the smokers who, have a higher omega three index, they have a lower risk of death, if they have a higher omega three index. Yeah. Yeah. We we we published that in Framingham, a large observational study in The US. We found that people who who are the most at risk for death, so between age of 65 and 75. Take that window of time. People at most risk for death, were the people were the people who reported smoking and had a low omega three index, like, three or four percent. The people who are the least likely to die in that window are the people that did not smoke and had the highest omega three index, which makes sense also. And then if you were one of those crossover people, you smoked, but you had a high in omega three or you didn't smoke and you had low omega three, they were in the middle. Their risk was was not as bad as the smokers with the low omega three and not as good as the ones who had the high omega three and didn't smoke. So that all makes sense. It it doesn't mean that omega three if you're a smoker, you can take omega three and erase the effects of smoking. I wouldn't wanna propose that. I think it's obviously far better to quit smoking. But at the end of the day, if you can if you can get your omega three up, it's gonna help even if you're a smoker. Right. And the the is there, like, a higher dose for people who have heart disease, or is it, the same? You mean do they need a higher dose to get a same omega three index? Not necessarily. Uh-uh. Not not for the omega three index, but for, like, what it's like if they take a higher dose, do they have a lower risk, compared to, like, a lower dose? Yes. Again, nobody has done that kind of study where you actually give, you know, two or three or four different doses of omega three to people and look at the that that would be a that would be a very long, hard, expensive study to do. Typically, you get omega three or nothing or placebo. The and not a there's no dose response studies. We do know there's dose response on the omega three index. The higher the dose again, it it it levels off after a while. There's a point beyond which you really don't get much more impact on the omega three index once you're up to probably four or five grams a day, which hardly anybody takes. Yeah. How about what about, like, Alzheimer's and neurodegeneration? So omega threes are very important for the brain as well, and there is a link between higher omega three index and reduced risk of dementia. Right. So, yeah, what can you tell us about that? Yeah. That's an interesting story because it also brings in another nutrient, basically, b vitamins. Because if you're low in b vitamins, folic acid, b twelve, b six, you tend to have a higher level of of another chemical in your blood called homocysteine. And high homocysteine is also a risk factor for dementia, and people have seen in a couple different studies that omega threes will lower risk for dementia if you have a low homocysteine. If you have got a high homocysteine, the omega threes don't work. So you really need a good nutrition in on your your b vitamins and the omega three to get the the total benefit. Gotcha. And do, like, people who have already, like, some aspects of neurodegeneration, would supplement the omega threes, like, alleviate any of those symptoms, or, would it, like Probably not. Probably not. No. I I that's very it's very tough to turn back dementia. Mhmm. Just more of a preventive side. It's prevention. We're talking about prevention here. Yeah. Right. Makes sense. Right. So, another, you know, essential fatty acid as well or essential fatty acids for, you know, overall health, and it's considered essential, like, omega six fatty acids. And, they also, like, have interesting story with omega threes. So, yeah, you've you hear a lot that, okay, omega sixes are bad for you, and omega threes are good for you, and you always need to eat more omega threes and less omega sixes. So, yeah, What's the story then? Story. I don't believe it. I think the, studies we've done and many other people have done with the the primary omega six fatty acid in the diet is called linoleic acid. It's an 18 carbon two double bond omega six fatty acid. It's it constitutes roughly 50% of of, like, corn oil or soybean oil would contain roughly 50% linoleic acid. It's and it is, unquestionably an essential fatty acid in the real sense of the word. And so we we really need linoleic acid. The the argument is how much do you need. And it's true that there is some competition between the omega six pathway and the omega three pathway. But at the end of the day, if you actually look at relationship between blood levels of omega six fatty acid, linoleic acid. So if you just measure the linoleic acid levels in the blood, it varies across people. We've looked at that recently, and just published a study on that. And looking at the the people with the highest blood levels of linoleic acid, meaning the highest intakes in the long run because you can't make it. You can only eat it. So people who have the highest levels in their blood are the people that have greatest intake. They are, significantly lower risk for total more death from anything. Death from total more total or from cardiovascular disease or cancer. And, again, that was just published. It's being published right now. And and that's a study we did in the UK Biobank in about 250,000 people where, we we knew the omega six levels, the linoleic acid levels. And this has been disconfirming what's been seen by other people in other settings, because we had done a study, in collaboration with 20 or 30 other groups, looking at omega six linoleic acid levels in many, many different studies and pooling altogether, not just doing in one cohort like the UK Biobank, but all around the world. Same story. The higher the linoleic acid levels in the blood, the lower the risk for cardiovascular disease and lower the risk for diabetes, which is very interesting. So I I don't buy the, linoleic acid is bad for you story. I don't buy the omega six omega three ratio as a being a meaningful metric for anybody, whether it's in your food or in your blood. I think the the problem with most most people in the West is they haven't got enough omega three. It's not an omega six problem. It's an omega three problem. And so to get distracted and thinking you can contract you you can, reduce your risk for these bad diseases by fixing your ratio by eating less omega six, that's gonna be counterproductive. It's going to increase your risk for these adverse outcomes based on studies we've done. Mhmm. What you need to do, if if you wanna correct your bad ratio is to take EPA and DHA. Mhmm. That will correct your ratio, but that's the right way to do it. And that's why I think we'd like the omega three index is about EPA and DHA. It's not about omega six fatty acid because what's missing is EPA and DHA. It's the linoleic acid of the omega six is not something you need to worry about. So that yeah. That's very interesting because, you know, I would imagine most people's biggest dietary source of omega six fats are, you know, processed food, I would imagine. Got it. I don't think, you know, most people are eating cold plus cold pressed, canola oil or some nuts and seeds and those things. So, like, yeah, how do you, like, reconcile that because or did you control for that? You you you can't blame the omega sixes for the adverse effects on health of processed foods. Right. Right. I mean, there's other problems with processed foods, and what you basically, what you're not eating, is part of the problem. But just because omega six fatty acids are in processed food doesn't mean the omega six fatty acids are harmful. In fact, it looks like they're helpful. But I I wouldn't I'm not advocating eating lots of processed foods. I mean, I don't have to advocate people do it anyway. Right? You know, but it to the extent that a diet high in processed food is harmful, and I think there's good evidence that it is, that doesn't necessarily mean that it's the omega six fatty acids that are doing it or even contributing to it. Yeah. What I mean is that, you know, if if they found in a study that higher linoleic acid in the blood, and I think it's also in they found that in adipose tissue are people who have higher linoleic acid, they have a lower risk of mortality. But, you know Right. Because most people get the linoleic acid from processed food. So how how how can that result, make sense? Oh, well, it it it it it makes sense because if if people were eating processed foods without the linoleic acid, they'd be even worse off. Mhmm. Okay. So the omega the omega six in the processed food is one of the good things that they're getting from their processed foods. They're but it and it's counteracting whatever's the other things, the bad things, whatever they are, which are dragging you down. The omega sixes, I think, are lifting you up so that at the end of the day, you get a mixed effect. It it it's it's best, of course, to eat a healthy diet and to get omega sixes from, like seeds, nuts. And I don't mean olive oil and canola oil because they're very low in omega six. Nowadays, safflower and sunflower are very, very low in omega six. In order to get rid of trans fats, people have gotten created low omega six oils, which when hydrogenated, produce less trans fats. And that's a good thing to get trans fats out of our oil supply. But if we do it at the at the expense of lowering our little like acid intakes, there may be a a net no. It might not be a net good effect. Right. Yeah. So is there any, like, amounts? Like, we know the the kind of approximate amounts for omega threes, and we have a marker to measure. So, with omega sixes, like, is there too much? Like, could you get too much? And, and what are, like, amounts to, eat Probably I think the average, American or maybe European is eating about six to 7% of their calories as linoleic acid. Most most health health organizations recommend somewhere between 510% of your calories come from linoleic acid. Well, people don't know how to calculate that. You know? You know? That that's very difficult to do. So, you know, you look at how many grams of linoleic acid is that per day. And then for men, it's something like 16. For women, it's something like 12, grams, and even that's hard to know where you're gonna get that. There have been studies giving thirty, forty, fifty grams of omega six linoleic acid, and that's that's too high. There's no point in doing that. That that's way beyond anybody's recommendations. And if there are adverse effects in diets like that, that's fine. I I agree. That's not anything like what's any being recommended. Going up to 10% of calories, is probably the best place to be. We haven't, we've thought about at Omega Quant, which is the company we have that measures, you know, make the the fatty acids. We thought about putting out a a or making a linoleic acid index in a way, because we think it's healthy. We we think that, the evidence lot of evidence together shows that people at the highest end of linoleic acid levels in their blood are doing better in the long run health wise. So it makes sense to have a test for that. We've we keep running into this problem that you raised is this this unfortunate urban legend that linoleic acid is bad for you. And so we're we're still kinda dancing around whether it makes sense to offer this test because of the pushback of what I think is uninformed, critics, could be an unpleasant self. Anyway, that's that's ongoing discussions. Right. Yeah. I think it's one of the problem of mechanisms versus, you know, outcomes that Yeah. Mechanistically, the the fish oil is oxidized, then it can cause inflammation. But in the real world, yeah, like, even the very oxidized fish oil doesn't cause inflammation in the human body. And I guess, yeah, with the linoleic acid as well, it can get something like that that you have Same story. Yeah. Mechanisms. And if you actually look at the outcomes, and then it's a bit of a different story because you That that's the thing. When people will look at mechanisms, they'll look at inflammatory markers and things like that. What they're not looking at is a whole host of things they don't even know to look for. Yeah. It it's a big black box in there. And if you measure five things that, you know, higher little lake acids and maybe linked as five bad things. What about the FEP 45 other good things that you didn't measure? You don't know. You just don't know. So that's why we think looking at outcomes is the important question. Are you living or you're dying? Do you have disease or you do not? And we don't care about the mechanism at this point. At this point, we wanna say, it looks to me like the higher levels of these omega threes and linoleic acid all point to a healthier, longer life. So let's do it. And we'll worry about mechanisms later, but we're not gonna be able to really explain every every mechanism that the omega threes or omega sixes are involved with because it's far too complicated. Yeah. But but omega threes are more important in that sense that most people are deficient. Right. We're Deficient. We're we're more deficient. We'll put it that way. Far more deficient in the omega three EPA DHA than we are in omega six. Yeah. Most people probably don't need to, like, deliberately start increasing their omega six. They're probably getting Most people don't. I I think they should not intentionally reduce their omega six. Mhmm. But whether that means intentionally increase it, probably not. As you say, most people are in in kind of that five to 10% of energy level, which is which is good. The big problem for them is the lack of EPA, DHA. Mhmm. Yeah. And don't don't get distracted on the omega six side when the real problem is the omega three. Gotcha. And there's also, like, omega nine out there. So Yeah. Yeah. What's is there any research about that? Well, omega nine fatty acids are, you know, there's a lot of it in our diet. And then oleic acid is the name of the primary one. But we make that. We can synthesize that from sugar or from protein or, there's no no dietary necessity for the omega nine fatty acids. Okay. Gotcha. I've seen, like, in some of the, I guess, food products they have made with high oleic, whatever oil. Sounds right. Right. And, even, like if I'm not mistaken, then the oleic acid actually increases the antioxidant, if like, antioxidant potential of the oil. So, like, high oleic acid, olive oil is more protected against oxidation and, heat and those things, if I'm not sure. And and that's fine. That what what's missing there is the fact that it's high oleic, means it's low linoleic, low omega six. So whether that makes it a good oil or bad, I think, is debatable Gotcha. In the long run. Right. Yeah. And and olive oil as well. We can talk a little bit about olive oil. It's not directly related to omega threes or anything, but, yeah, it's also one of the fats that's, you know, very common leading to lower risk of heart disease and mortality. Yeah. And I'm not you know, that that is debatable, but that's probably beyond what we wanna talk about today. And whether it's the omega nine fatty acids in olive oil, there's very little omega six, or the 50 other compounds that are buried along in olive oil that are beneficial. We don't know. I mean, I'm not olive oil is fine. It's a good thing to take. But we don't know exactly which are the you know, is polyphenols that are in the oil or not. Maybe that's what's beneficial about it. Not not a fatty acid, more other comma compounds. So it's dangerous to be labeling one food healthy without knowing all the components that you're talking about. Mhmm. Yeah. Right. While we're talking about, yeah, like, the inflammation or, like, yeah, protecting against oxidation, so, like, storing omega threes, we should mention that a lot as well. Like, you know, you should store it ideally, like, in a fridge. Right? No. You don't have to. It doesn't hurt to store it in the fridge by any means, but the the gelatin capsules that encapsulate them are impervious to oxygen. So there's not gonna be any oxidation that happens. I mean, you don't store them out on a dish in the sunlight. That doesn't make a lot of sense, in your windowsill. But keeping them in a dark bottle just on on on, at room temperature is fine. Gotcha. Okay. Yeah. Well, it's been great talking with you, and, we got a very good, like, a master class on omega threes and omega sixes. So, yeah, where can people learn more about you and your work? I think you can, you can just look up my name and go to my go to just William s Harris, and you can put that in a Google search or it'll go to PubMed, and my papers are all there. Plus, if you can look at Omega Quant, that's our our company that does the blood testing, omegaquant.com. There's stuff about there. And, also, we have a I started a fatty acid research institute about four years ago. And, if you look up the fatty acid research institute, there's a lot about me there as well. Nice. Great. We'll put the links in the show notes. And my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you I wish you adopted sooner? Well, if if I hadn't gotten to omega three when I was, you know, in my when was it? My early thirties, that's something I'm I'm glad I did. So I'm 75 now and still feeling good, still doing work. Can I blame it on the omega threes? I don't know. I'll I'll take it. I've got an omega three index of 10 and have had for many years. Okay. So that's, something I try to keep up. Probably, if I if anything, I would have started exercising earlier. I was a little bit averse to it for many years, but picked it up the last twenty years. Wow. That's good. And how much omega three they're taking for the ten percent? I take, I take about fourteen hundred milligrams EPA and DHA per day. Okay. That's enough. Capsule. Then eat eat fish periodically. Not as often as I should, but pretty often. Okay. Alright. Well, yeah, thanks for coming to the podcast. Yeah. You're welcome. Good talking with you. Good questions. Yeah. Thank you. Looking forward to more studies in the future. They're they're coming. Alright. Have a nice day. I'll see you around. Thank you. Take care. Bye bye. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, the longevity leap on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Sim. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.