Plaque buildup in the arteries is one of the final stages of atherosclerosis. This will increase the risk of heart attacks and strokes. It's often said that you can't reverse arterial plaque, but there are some ways that you can actually do it. And more importantly, there are ways to halt plaque progression, which is actually more important than eliminating plaque that's stable. So in this video, I'm going to tell you about six over the counter supplements plus an additional bonus one that hasn't seem to achieve that. Number one. Pycnogenol. Pycnogenol is a compound from maritime pine bark extract. It's very high in proanthocyanidins which have antioxidant effects. In a 2015 study, they took eight hundred and twenty four subjects aged 45 to 60 with stenosing atherosclerotic plaque with over fifty to sixty percent narrowing. And they divided them into six groups. Number one, control group with no given supplements. Number two, piconol fifty milligrams a day. Number three, piconol a hundred milligrams a day. Number four, aspirin a hundred milligrams a day or ticlopidene two hundred fifty milligrams a day if intolerant to aspirin. Number five, aspirin a hundred milligrams a day plus piconol a hundred milligrams a day. And number six, piconol a hundred milligrams a day plus an extract of Gotu Kola a hundred milligrams a day. All groups were also prescribed to exercise, improve their diet, and make healthier lifestyle choices. They were followed for up to forty two months or three point five years. Carotid plaque ultrasonic scores were seen to progress significantly in groups one, two, and four by over one percent, but not in groups three, five, and six. The commonality among the groups seeing decreased plaque scores was the one hundred milligrams of Pycnogenol as aspirin without Pycnogenol resulted in greater plaque progression than with it. In another 2012 randomized controlled trial, patients with stable coronary artery disease taking two hundred milligrams of Pycnogenol a day for eight weeks saw improvements in their endothelial function, which means that their arteries would be less likely to progress further in plaque buildup. Number two, Gotu Kola. The second supplement, you guessed it, is Gotu Kola because it was already used in the first study. In another 2015 study, they divided four hundred people with the nursing atherosclerotic plaque into three groups similar to the picnoginal study. Number one, control group getting only healthy lifestyle tips. Number two, picnoginal a hundred milligrams a day. And number three. Pycnogenol a hundred milligrams a day plus Gotu Kola a hundred milligrams a day. Again, all the groups were prescribed to exercise and eat healthy. By the end of the study, both supplemental groups saw significantly reduced progression in arterial packs and less progression to clinical stages. Number three, Berberine. Berberine is a plant alkaloid that's been seen to reduce atherosclerotic plaque size and vulnerability in animal studies. A 2021 study on 21 patients with already existing atherosclerosis showed that berberine supplementation at a dose of five hundred milligrams a day for four months resulted in a three point two percent average decrease in PEC scores. The caveat is that this study wasn't a randomized controlled trial and the researchers used a method to assess atherosclerosis that's only eighty three percent accurate. That's not the end of the world, but it's still something to keep in mind. However, berberine has been seen to have atheroprotective and anti atherosclerotic properties. Berberine lowers serum lipids like triglycerides, cholesterol, and apo b. It improves endothelial function, which is a thin lining in blood vessels. It reduces the formation and migration of macrophages and vascular smooth muscle cells that start the accumulation of plaque. And Berberine also reduces platelets that can promote clotting as well as modulate the gut microbiome in a way that reduces the formation of TMAO, which is the byproduct associated with atherosclerosis. You have a lot of clinical trials showing that berberine supplementation at doses of nine hundred to fifteen hundred milligrams a day lowers total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, and triglycerides compared to placebo. Having lower lipoproteins in the blood reduces the progression of atherosclerotic plaque accumulation, especially if the atherosclerosis progress has already begun. Number four, nattokinase. Nattokinase is an enzyme in a fermented soybean dish called natto. A 2017 randomized controlled trial on eighty two patients saw that nattokinase at a dose of six thousand fibronelytic units per day for twenty six weeks resulted in a 36.6% decrease in carotid plaque size and carotid artery intimal meter thickness compared to baseline. There was another group that got twenty milligrams of simvastatin, which is a statin, and this resulted in an eleven point five percent reduction, which is three times lower than the nattokinase group. In another 2022 retrospective trial, nattokinase supplementation at a dose of over ten thousand eight hundred fibroneurologic units per day was seen to result in 66.5 to 95.4% reduction in carotid plaque size. A dose of thirty six hundred FUs per day was ineffective. So it might be that you need at least a dose of six thousand FUs per day to see effects from nattokinase. Small doses aren't effective enough. I wanna take a quick break to tell you about the bond charge infrared sauna blankets. My go to way of getting twenty minutes sauna sessions on the go without needing to spend an hour to warm up a regular sauna. Taking the sauna is in my opinion one of the best things for your overall health and heart function. Studies show that taking a sauna regularly is associated with sixty three percent lower risk of sudden cardiac death, sixty three percent reduced heart disease mortality, forty six percent lower risk of hypertension, and forty percent reduced all cause mortality. This is mediated by an increase in body temperature and increased heart rate that mimic a cardiovascular workout while at the same time improving arterial stiffness, endothelial function, blood flow, immune system function, blood pressure, and metabolic health. It doesn't matter if it's a traditional wooden sauna and infrared sauna and infrared sauna blanket or anything else that elevate your body temperature above what's normal. Boncharged infrared sauna blankets have the advantage of shining far infrared light that can penetrate deeper into your tissues than regular saunas can. It warms up in two minutes to the optimal temperature of 70 degrees Celsius and it's low in e m f. There's also no plastic in the material so you're not swelling in plastic. You can get a 15% discount by heading over to boncharge.com/seamlund and use the code seam for 15% discount. Alright. Back to the video. Number five. Garlic. Garlic is a herbal food that's got antihypertensive, antiplatelet, anti diabetic, anti atherosclerotic, and anti dyslipidemic effects as shown by mechanistic studies as well as human clinical trials. It's incredibly versatile and it appears to specifically improve metabolic health and lipid metabolism. But does it actually help with atherosclerotic plaque? Yes. There are a few randomized controlled trials where aged garlic extract supplementation lowered coronary artery progression even when controlling for other variables. In a 2020 clinical trial, aged garlic extract at a dose of twenty four hundred milligrams a day for one year stopped coronary artery calcification progression, lowered inflammation, blood glucose, and blood pressure in patients at increased risk of cardiovascular events. But wait, there's more. A 2019 double blinded placebo controlled study on patients at high risk of cardiovascular disease show that twenty four hundred milligrams of aged garlic extract a day increased microcirculation and triggered wound healing in the blood vessels which protected against atherosclerosis progression and resulted in increased blood flow. Another 2018 randomized trial demonstrated that two hundred and fifty milligrams of aged garlic extract for twelve months slowed down atherosclerosis progression by reducing fat around the heart. One of the main bioactive compounds in garlic is allicin, which has specifically seen to reduce aortic lesions and atherosclerosis through reducing TMAO production. You can also take allicin as a supplement. So not only does garlic improve the risk factors of heart disease like blood pressure, dyslipidemia, and high blood sugar levels, but it can also positively affect plaque progression. Positively meaning that it reduces the plaque. Number six is an o g supplement in plaque prevention and it's vitamin k two. Vitamin k two has anti inflammatory and anti atherosclerotic properties. High dietary vitamin k two intake is associated with reduced coronary artery calcification. When it comes to supplements, then a 2023 study saw that vitamin k two supplementation at a dose of seven hundred and twenty micrograms a day combined with twenty five micrograms of vitamin d three resulted in a trend towards plaque regression. The effects were more significant in patients with a calcium score of over 400. This might mean that high dose k two supplements are more effective in people with much higher calcium scores. A 2023 meta analysis of 14 randomized controlled trials concluded that vitamin k supplementation could slow down coronary artery calcification. The studies used about a hundred to two thousand micrograms of vitamin k two m k seven. The last supplement is a bonus and it's magnesium. Magnesium is the most important mineral in the body and it especially counteracts calcium and inflammation. In a 2019 randomized controlled trial, giving five hundred and seven milligrams of magnesium oxide for two years resulted in a significant regression in coronary artery artery calcification progression compared to the control group. The effects were greater in those with a calcium score of over 400. But the caveat is that these patients had chronic kidney disease and already existing calcification. There's also ample evidence to show that a magnesium deficiency and not eating enough magnesium from our foods are associated with higher coronary artery calcification. In this 2019 study, they found an inverse relationship between magnesium status and carotid intima media thickness. The lower the magnesium levels, the higher the carotid plaque score. In this 2014 study, there was an inverse relationship between dietary magnesium intake and the odds of coronary artery calcification. The higher the self reported magnesium intake, the lower the odds of calcification with the lowest odds seen at an intake of four hundred and twenty milligrams of magnesium per day. Another 2024 study saw that having higher dietary magnesium intake yielded a lower ten year risk of first atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease events such as a heart attack or stroke. The higher the intake of magnesium, the lower the risk. So it's definitely worthwhile to get your magnesium in check. Which of these supplements are worth to take? I think the ones you can't go wrong with are vitamin k two, magnesium and garlic. Whether or not you should take nelokinase or berberine depends on your other risk factors and if you already have atherosclerotic plaque. Pycnogenol and Gotu kola have the least evidence but they could still fit into someone's stack if you wanna leave no stone unturned. Check out my video about the supplements that help with sleep next. Thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Ciem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.