There are many things you can do to slow down wrinkles, such as taking collagen peptides, eating a healthy diet, and getting enough sleep, but none of them increase collagen synthesis by 400%. I'm talking about microneedling, which has been seen to increase collagen and elastin in the skin by 400% after six months as shown by this 2022 review. In this video, I'm going to talk about the science behind microneedling and why it just might be the most effective way to slow down skin aging. Make sure you watch until the end where I tell you how to do micro needling correctly because there are some pitfalls that you can fall into. First, let's talk about what is micro needling in the first place. Microneedling is a dermatological technique that causes micro trauma to the skin with small needles on a derma rolling device that then triggers collagen synthesis and skin repair. Micro reading can be done with a derma roller which is this rolling device with mini needles on top or with a dermapen which is like a pen that shoots the mini needles into the skin. To be honest, when I first heard about micro reading then I was quite skeptical. I thought, no way this can be real. But, then I read through the clinical studies done on derma rolling and I also tried it out myself. And I'll say that the effects are quite amazing. In this 2,018 study, they took forty people between the ages of 33 and 60 with aged skin from either smoking or general aging. They gave them a derma pen treatment for six sessions. The results showed a statistical improvement in skin wrinkles, fine lines, and crow's feet. The results were seen in both men and women and in both smokers and nonsmokers. Like I alluded to, microneedling can increase collagen synthesis in the skin by 400%. I think as you know collagen is the main protein inside a human body especially in the skin and you need collagen to maintain skin firmness. However, this 2014 study found that microneedling once a week for four weeks increased epidermal thickness by 658%. That's massive and pretty much unheard of when it comes to anti aging supplements or something else like that. Not only does microneedling reduce wrinkles, but it also reduces pigmentation of the skin and improves aesthetics. Microneedling for sixty days has been seen to improve pigmentation disorders. The microneedling lightens skin stains in patients with melasma. This has an obvious aesthetic effect making the skin look younger and less photo damaged. There's also acne and skin scarring. Microneedling has been seen to improve skin scars including acne by increasing the production of collagen, elastin, and increasing the thickness of the skin. In this 2,015 prospective clinical trial, they took 10 patients with different acne scars and gave them six microneedling treatments over the span of three months. The patients collectively reported a fifty one to sixty percent improvement in scar appearance, forty to fifty percent improvement in skin texture, and eighty to eighty five percent overall satisfaction. As you can see from left to right, the participants saw some improvements in their acne scarring with some seeing more results than others. In another 2014 clinical trial, they combined subcision microneedling and fifteen percent TCA peeling to fifty patients with atrophic acne scars. Alternatively, at two week intervals for a total of six sessions of each. Out of sixteen patients with grade four scars, sixty two point five percent of the patients improved to grade two and thirty seven point five percent improved to the grade three scars. Out of twenty two patients with grade three scars, twenty two point seven percent were left with no scars. Nine point one percent patients improved to grade one. And sixty eight point two percent of patients improved to grade two. All patients with grade two scars were left with no scars. And, overall, the level of patient satisfaction was very high in this study. These are some quite amazing transformation photos. I've never had acne or any serious skin scars, so I don't know if it actually works for my own experience. However, I do have like a mini scar right between my eyebrows That you can see sometimes That, happened from a branch that hit me right between the eyebrows luckily And there is like a mini scar I have seen some improvement when I'm doing derma rolling So you derma roll this scar here and, you know, the scar has gotten slightly smaller over the course of a few months. Microneedling was first introduced in the nineties to treat scars, but it's also been used to deliver drugs to the skin. As well as enhance the bioavailability of some active ingredients like peptides, vitamin c, collagen, and retinoids. The idea is that micro sized needles can pass through the outer layers of the skin, which creates microchannels that enable these compounds to get deeper into the skin and have more effects. That's why when it comes to skin rejuvenation, micro reading has better effects if you combine it with some other compounds. In this 2018 split face comparative study, they took 24 volunteers with photo aged skin and randomly divided them into three groups. Number one, derma rolling alone. Number two, derma rolling plus platelet rich plasma PRP. And number three, derma rolling plus TCA 15% peeling. Both sides of their face were divided randomly into the interventions. Meaning that the person's right side could have gotten either derma rolling alone and their left side could have gotten derma rolling plus PRP or derma rolling plus TCA peeling. So you have a comparison of the one single individual. They received one session every two weeks for six sessions in total. The results show that combined treatment of derma rolling and PRP or TCA peeling was more effective in increasing skin thickness and reducing wrinkles than derma rolling alone. Derma rolling alone did improve the outcomes, but the results were better when derma rolling was combined with PRP or TCA peeling. Out of PRP and TCA peeling, the PRP with derma rolling appeared to be the best. Microneedling also appears to help hair growth through similar mechanisms. The microneedles damage the skin slightly which then triggers collagen synthesis. Now, you're not gonna go from bald to Musafa, but you will see the growth of some small hairs. In this 2013 pilot study, they gave one group five percent minoxidil twice a day and the second group together with weekly microneedling. As you can see from the pictures, the group getting minoxidil alone did see some minor improvements in hair growth. But the microneedling plus minoxidil group saw much more results. Another 2015 study took four men with hair loss who were taking finasteride as well as minoxidil for two to five years already, but they saw no new hair growth. They were then put on microneedling for six months. All four patients showed plus two to up to plus three improvements on a seven point scale. And the new hair started showing after eight to 10 sessions. Again, those are quite amazing results. We don't have that many other clinical trials on the effects of derma rolling on hair growth. But anecdotally, some people do say that it does work. The reason microneedling works better with minoxidil than minoxidil alone or derma rolling alone is because derma rolling opens up these channels inside the scalp, inside the skin that then enables minoxidil to go deeper into the scalp. So microneedling itself is a tool that triggers collagen synthesis, but it also enables other tools, other ingredients to work better. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the bond charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes. They do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin antiaging, hormone optimization, pain management and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes. Especially, during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the bond charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most rheumatoidisors don't have the right wavelengths of light which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Boncharge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research. And they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIEM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Alright. So now let's talk about the do's and don'ts of micro needling. Some easy mistakes you can make. Because there are indeed a few mistakes that you could make. First of all, micro needling is considered generally safe and it is FDA approved for certain dermatological applications. However, microneedling can sometimes cause skin irritation, bruising, itching, redness or rashes. I've done microneedling once a week for about a year now and I've never had any issues with it. I've never had any irritation or skin rashes or anything like that. But it could happen for some people who have a much more sensitive skin. Second of all, you need to clean your derma roller or whatever device you're using. The needles are going to pick up all the dirt and dead skin cells. So you don't want to derma roll your face with dirty needles. For that, after every time I derma roll, I put the needles into a glass with isopropyl alcohol 70% solution to kill the bacteria. I keep it there for five minutes and let it dry off before I put the derma roller back into the box. Before you start doing derma rolling, you should also wash your face with warm water. And if you have some sort of a face cleanser or non irritating soap, then you can wash your face with that as well. You don't want the needles to open up the skin and let the dirt and sweat go into the skin because it can cause some inflammation and infections. Third, you might wonder which kind of a derma roller should you use. Well, there's obviously a lot of them out there. There's different types of derma rollers with different types of length of the needles. The derma roller that I've been using most consistently is the Alitura derma roller. It's length is one millimeter of the needle length which is kind of a effective length. Alitura's derma rollers also have the needle that looks more like a spike rather than a needle as this one which I think is gin number. That's more of like a needle as opposed to a spike. Some people say that a needle is better than the spike. But personally, I've used both. I don't notice much difference. I'm going to leave a table here on the screen that outlines FDA approved microneedling devices if you want to try out any of these. However, buying a regular cheap derma roller from Amazon should also get the job done. So what is the optimal length of the derma roller? For treating acne scars, they use longer needles with a length of 1.5 to two millimeters, which are twice as long as the needles you'd use for treating aging skin. For regular skin antiaging, a microneedle length of 0.5 to one millimeter is recommended and that's what I've been using. Some parts of the face are also more sensitive like under the eyes, which is where you wanna use shorter needles of about 0.25 millimeters. For hair, however, you need slightly longer needles of at least one millimeter up to 1.5 or two millimeters. It might also be a good idea to start with shorter needles to build your skin tolerance because if you haven't done it before then your skin might be much more sensitive towards the needles. But after a while, when your skin becomes thicker, once the collagen synthesis has begun, then you'll be able to tolerate a little bit longer needles. If you wanna get more effects, then yes, you do wanna eventually gravitate more towards 0.5 up to one millimeter of the needle length. The 0.25 eventually isn't going to work. It's not gonna be stimulating enough for the skin. However, going for longer needles like two millimeter or three millimeter, I think most people don't really need to and unless you have acne scars or some other skin conditions, then you don't really need to have these super long needles and they can actually be more harmful. And lastly, how do you actually do the derma rolling? Well first of all, you don't wanna press too hard. There's no reason to like really push against the skin because that's gonna cause unnecessary damage. So your water just doing is like rolling it over your face. And what I like to do is do the obviously you cover the entire face. Do like a clock ward, motions. You do one two three one two three one two three one two three so you're kind of you don't need to like roll it like some sort of a car toy or something like that. You're trying to obviously give every spot the equal amount of strokes or equal amount of, rolls. So like one two three, one two three, one two three, one two three. Kind of like that. That's how I do it. I think that's a pretty reasonable way to go about it. And you don't need to press super hard. Again, if it's too hard, too much irritation then it can cause more damage than necessary. So you're just easily rolling it over the skin without like actually pushing against it. The needles themselves do the work. You don't need to push extra. How often should you do derma rolling? Well, I've been doing it once a week. I think that's a pretty good frequency for most people. Doing it every day is obviously not gonna be that beneficial. Your skin needs time to recover. It's the same as with lifting weights. You know, you don't need to lift weights every day. You don't wanna do lift weight lifting every day. Just once a week in the evening, you do it and that stimulates the collagen synthesis for the rest of the week and enables the skin to actually recover and actually get, you know, stronger in essence. Remember that derma rolling is causing microchroma to the skin that then triggers the rejuvenation process. For your skin to heal and recover, you need to give it several days of no damage. Once a week is good enough. The best time to do derma rolling is in the evening because then you're not going to go outside into air pollution or sunlight that will start damaging the skin or causing infections. Do it one hour before bed after washing your face and go to bed. It will be best if you use some natural pillowcases like cotton or silk pillowcases because they're much more beneficial to your skin than polyester and artificial pillowcases. You could also apply some serums or hyaluronic acid. You could also apply some serums or hyaluronic acid cream after the derma rolling. Because as you saw from the studies, derma rolling works better if you combine it with some other treatments. And the needles enable the skin care ingredients to reach deeper into the skin. Now, I wouldn't recommend using some sort of fat or oil based skin care supplements because, you know, the oil tends to clog up your skin pores. Doesn't let your skin breathe that well. So if you do microneedling, you have these microchannels inside your skin opened up. Then clogging it up with some fats or oil is not really a good way to go about it. However, if you have some water based serums, those are much better because they actually absorb into the skin. When it comes to red light therapy, then I've found that doing it immediately after microneedling is quite effective. However, there is the argument that red light therapy also works through causing minor skin damage that then triggers collagen synthesis. So I don't think it's the best idea to do red light therapy immediately after microneedling. Instead, do red light therapy the day after because then your skin has already healed slightly. And then the red light therapy can provide additional healing effects. So you can recover faster. And to support a recovery every day, it's still recommended to eat a healthy diet and take collagen peptides as a supplement because they've been shown to improve skin aging by supporting collagen synthesis. So there you have it. Based on the research out there, then microneedling is one of the most effective ways to rejuvenate the skin and have skin antiaging benefits. It's relatively safe, relatively easy to do and you don't need to sacrifice that much time for it. It takes me less than five minutes to derma roll my face once a week. If you want to know about the most evidence based skin antiaging supplements, then check out this video next. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.