We call vitamin d a vitamin because it's essential for the human body. But vitamin d is also a hormone that governs hundreds of biochemical reactions and functions in the body. I call vitamin d the master hormone because it also controls the expression of other hormones. Vitamin d gets produced when our skin is exposed to UVB radiation from the sunlight. This then gets converted into vitamin d three sulfate. Vitamin d three sulfate has powerful anticoagulation, antioxidant, tissue oxygenating, and anti glycating effects that protect your body against inflammation, oxidative stress, and poor metabolic health. You also need vitamin d for making sex hormones and having strong bones. However, there's a lot of conflicting opinions about vitamin d three as a supplement. So in this video, I'm going to tell you what's the optimal vitamin d level you want to have, whether or not you should supplement, and also one critical thing you need to know when it comes to taking vitamin d supplements. Vitamin d is essential and our body can't make it itself. That's why we need to get exposed to sunlight. The precursor to vitamin d is seven dehydrocholesterol, which isn't a cholesterol molecule, but instead a zoosterol that acts as a precursor to cholesterol and vitamin d three. Seven dehydrocholesterol reacts with UVB radiation to then get converted into vitamin d three. The sunlight spectrum includes many different types of light. You have visible light between 400 to 700 nanometers represented by visible colors like blue, purple, green, yellow, orange, and red. Wavelengths at 750 to 1,000 nanometers are infrared light that's shorter than microwaves but longer than red light. Wavelengths at a 100 to 400 nanometers are UV light. Seven dehydrocholesterol reacts to UVB radiation at 290 to 350 nanometers. This is what you need sunlight for. Exposure to sunlight through the windows isn't enough because most glass blocks UVB radiation entirely. Sunlight exposure through the window glass also tends to block out the red light that's good for the skin and eyes. So you're getting predominantly blue light which tends to be harmful in excess. There are also u e b lamps that can provide the effects of vitamin d three synthesis but they have to be 290 to 350 nanometers. Tanning beds are another thing that works, but they can have risks if done chronically. When it comes to health outcomes, then there's a consistent association between low vitamin d and cardiovascular disease, autoimmune conditions like multiple sclerosis, arthritis, osteoporosis, diabetes, and all cause mortality. People with higher vitamin d levels have a lower risk of death from all causes and heart disease. A deficiency in vitamin d promotes the main hallmarks of aging, such as mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, inflammation, epigenetic alterations, DNA disorders, and telomere shortening. Adequate vitamin d, on the other hand, maintains optimal autophagy, which is the pathway of cell recycling and cleanup. Vitamin d is such a central hormone to all the chronic diseases and is also central to all the major hallmarks of aging. So what's the optimal vitamin d level? Vitamin d levels below twenty nanograms per milliliter or less than fifteen nanomoles per liter are considered insufficient and they're associated with an increased rate of bone loss. Vitamin d levels over twenty nanograms per milliliter are sufficient. However, it's been suggested that the insufficiency line should be at thirty nanograms per milliliter, which is seventy five nanomoles per liter. That would mean that there would be even more people with vitamin d insufficiency than currently accounted for. It's estimated that about fifty percent of the population has vitamin d insufficiency, and thirty five percent of adults in The United States are vitamin d deficient. When it comes to the range for lowest all cause mortality, then this 2017 meta analysis saw that compared to vitamin D levels of thirty to forty nanograms per milliliter or seventy five to ninety nine nanomoles per liter, those with vitamin D levels of sixteen to twenty nanograms per milliliter or forty to forty nine nanomoles per milliliter had a fifteen percent higher risk of all cause mortality and those below twelve nanograms per milliliter or less than thirty nanomoles per liter had a sixty seven percent higher risk. Similar results have been found with cardiovascular disease mortality. A 2017 meta analysis of prospective studies found that serum vitamin D levels were inversely associated with cardiovascular disease events and mortality. The lowest risk was at thirty to forty nanograms per milliliter or seventy five to ninety nine nanomoles per liter which is the same range as the one in the previous study on all cause mortality. Vitamin d levels above forty nanograms per milliliter or above one hundred nanomoles per liter are associated with a higher risk of cardiovascular disease mortality and myocardial infarction. It's very hard to reach those levels with just regular sunlight unless you're supplementing with vitamin d on top of that. Frequent use of tanning beds has also been seen to result in very high levels of vitamin d such as a hundred fifty to two hundred nanograms per milliliter or up to five hundred nanomoles per liter. Too much of anything including vitamin d can be harmful. So it looks like the optimal range is somewhere between thirty to forty nanograms per milliliter, which is seventy five to ninety nine nanomoles per liter. How much sunlight you need to reach those levels? The recommended daily allowance for vitamin d is six hundred international units for adults and eight hundred IUs for over 70 year olds. However, many experts and doctors consider this to be inadequate. It's more likely that people need at least a thousand IUs per day. A study done in Valencia, Spain on the thirty ninth latitude found that during the summer and autumn, it takes seven to thirty one minutes of spending time outdoors to reach a dose of one thousand international units for vitamin d. In January, it took more than two hours to reach that amount. Now Spain is a very sunny country. Now imagine what the situation is in Estonia where I live where we only get around seventy to eighty days of sunlight per year. So it's much harder to reach that amount and we need to spend more time outside to reach that amount especially in the wintertime. People living above the sixties latitude in the North such as in Norway, Sweden, Finland, parts of Canada and Russia have a difficulty making vitamin D between the months of October and March because of the lack of sunlight. Interestingly, I've never seen a vitamin D deficiency in my own blood work probably because I get enough sunlight during the summer. So I build up like a base. Then I also eat foods that have Vitamin D. I'm also with a lean body composition because excess body fat reduces your Vitamin D levels. And I also supplement Vitamin D in the winter months when I need to. I wanna take a quick break to let you know about my favorite wellness devices, which are the bond charge red light therapy devices. You've probably seen many of your favorite longevity influencers using these red light therapy devices. But do they actually work? Yes, they do. Red light therapy has been shown to have many benefits on skin antiaging, hormone optimization, pain management and even exercise performance. I use my device every day for fifteen minutes, especially during the winter months when there's not much sunlight. It increases my energy in the morning and makes my skin glow. Just check out the testimonials on the bond charge website for the before and after pictures of other people. Most rheumatic derbidizers don't have the right wavelengths of light which might mean you're not getting the claimed benefits. Bond charge uses the exact wavelengths of light used in research And, they also have near infrared light that's beneficial to the joints. Head over to boncharge.com and use the code SIIM. S I I M for a 15% discount. So what about vitamin d supplements? Do they actually work? A 2023 meta analysis of 80 randomized controlled trials concluded that vitamin d supplementation was associated with reduced risk of all cause mortality but not cardiovascular morbidity and cardiovascular mortality. That's quite a large amount of studies but the effect size in this study wasn't that large. They found only a five percent increase in mortality between the vitamin d supplementation group and there was no statistical significance for the cardiovascular mortality. I don't think you should take vitamin d levels if you have high vitamin d levels and it's only worthwhile if your vitamin d levels are in the insufficient range or on the lower end of normal. Especially if it's winter and there's no sun. When it comes to the dose then how much vitamin d you should take depends a lot on your vitamin d levels. That's why I encourage always to get your vitamin d levels measured first. If you're in the deficient range then ten thousand IUs a day will fix that in a few weeks. If you're just slightly low but not completely insufficient then five thousand IUs is enough. One important thing to remember when taking vitamin d supplements is that it can cause hypercalcemia or high calcium levels in the blood. This 2016 meta analysis of 48 studies found that long term vitamin d supplementation increases the risk of hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria or calcium excretion through urine. They didn't find an increased risk of kidney stones from that, but hypercalcemia from large doses of calcium supplements has also been seen to increase the risk of myocardial infarction in randomized controlled trials. To be fair, that's mostly with larger doses of calcium supplements like ten thousand milligrams a day, but still. That's why if you're taking vitamin d supplements, you should also combine it with vitamin k two because vitamin k two helps to direct calcium into the bones where it strengthens the bones. Vitamin k two activates two proteins that bind to calcium to support bone mineralization, and they are matrix gla protein and osteocalcin. That's why there are clinical trials showing that vitamin k two supplementation can enhance bone density and improve bone health. This twenty twenty two meta analysis of 10 studies did find that vitamin k two had a positive effect on improving bone mineral density in postmenopausal women and that it can also reduce the incidence of fractures. There are over 15 different types of vitamin k two out there. MK two and MK seven are the most common types. The problem with MK four is that it has a short half life. MK seven has up to 48 times longer half life than MK four. M k four also requires a very large dose, whereas m k seven is effective already with a dose of a hundred micrograms. Regarding heart disease, then vitamin k two has anticoagulation, anti inflammatory, and ant atherosclerotic properties. High dietary vitamin k two intake is associated with reduced coronary artery calcification. So vitamin k two is the perfect partner for vitamin d three supplementation because d three tends to increase calcium in the blood and k two helps with bone mineralization. You can also get vitamin k two from foods especially fermented foods, cheeses and natto which is this fermented soybean dish. Natto is the highest vitamin k two food in the world providing up to eleven hundred micrograms of vitamin k two MK seven per one hundred grams. Blue cheese is the second highest providing four hundred and forty micrograms per hundred grams. Goose liver pate provides three hundred and sixty nine micrograms per one hundred grams. And other types of cheeses like Gouda, hard cheeses, soft cheeses, etcetera provide around fifty to seventy five micrograms per one hundred grams. There's also evidence that vitamin k two supplementation can slow down the progression of coronary artery calcification. A 2023 meta analysis of 14 randomized control trials concluded that vitamin k supplementation could slow down coronary artery calcification. The studies used about a hundred to two thousand micrograms of vitamin k two m k seven. So a few hundred micrograms of vitamin k two m k seven can have many benefits in addition to bone mineralization. When taking vitamin k two then it's also important to pay attention to the form. Vitamin k two supplements are either in a cis or trans form. It refers to the bond structure of the vitamin and cis isomers aren't linear whereas the trans vitamin k two is a linear bond. The important thing here is that the binding sites of vitamin k two have a certain lock or entry point where the trans bond can lock into more easily than the cis bond. That's why all the natural dietary vitamin k two is in the trans form and most supplements tend to be in the cis form. So vitamin k two supplements in the transform are more bioactive and more effective than the cis form. Alright. Let's do a quick summary about vitamin d. Vitamin d is an essential nutrient that your body can't live without and you need vitamin d for virtually every process inside the body. Your body makes vitamin d when your skin gets exposed to UVB radiation. That UVB radiation is best sourced from natural sunlight, but UVB lights do work in terms of raising vitamin d levels. It's just that sunlight has many other benefits as well. You also get infrared and red light from the sunlight that you might not get from UV lights. A vitamin d range of thirty to forty nanograms per milliliter or seventy five to ninety nine nanowalls per liter is most optimal for the lowest risk of all cause mortality and cardiovascular disease events. Summer sunlight for thirty minutes a day is enough for sufficient vitamin d synthesis, but it's not enough during the winter months, especially above the sixties latitude in places like Scandinavia, Russia, Canada, etcetera. Vitamin d supplements work in raising vitamin d, but you should take a dose depending on your vitamin d levels. Pair vitamin d supplements with vitamin k two at a dose of at least a hundred to two thousand micrograms per day. And lastly, as a bonus, some additional supplements and minerals that help with vitamin d are magnesium that activates vitamin d and boron that helps with vitamin d utilization and bone mineralization. Alright. That's it for this video. Make sure to click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.