Two hundred days is the length of time it's gonna take us to get to Mars. So if we're not thinking that we better figure out what happens to a human in an isolated, confined, extreme environment before we go two hundred days to Mars, we're not thinking at all. All these hallmarks of aging, if we can just start clipping it and trimming it back and making it better, you give yourself the better opportunity to survive. If you're doing that, that means you're multiplying your life of yourself by one third. Welcome to the Seamland Podcast. I'm your host Seamland, and our guest today is doctor Joseph Duturi. Joseph broke the world record for spending a hundred days in an underwater port. He's got a PhD in biomedical engineering, and he's a researcher of hyperbaric oxygen therapy. In this episode, we're gonna talk about Josef's trip underwater and how it increased his telomere length by 20%. We'll also talk about the proposed health benefits of hyperbaric medicine. Josef, welcome to the show. Hey. Thank you for having me. Yeah. I'm excited to have you on the show. And, you recently became quite popular on media for having broken the world record for spending the most days under sea. So it's a really know, fascinating experiment that you did. And, there's also, like, a lot of interesting science behind that experiment. So I'm, yeah, really excited to talk with you today. Oh, yeah. A 100%. We had a, we had a good time doing it, and we did science. So we tried to make science cool. Sounds good. Well, I guess we can begin by maybe you can give a overview of, you know, many people might not have heard about the experiment. So what did you do, and what was, like, the significant thing about it? So as you know, I have a PhD in biomedical engineering. So I'm a clinical researcher sort of a guy. And what we wanted to do was figure out what happens to a human being when you leave it in an isolated, confined, extreme environment for a long period of time. We chose underwater. There are many reasons why, but we'll get into those later. But what I wanted to do was that biomedical research sort of stuff. So while I was down there for one hundred days, we said, hey. Listen. We're gonna check blood, saliva, urine, electrocardiograms, electroencephalograms, pulmonary function tests to the scale that hasn't been done since since c lab days. So that's the kind of level of research that we wanted to do. You what happens to a human when you leave them there? Right? So we wanted to figure that out. Why one hundred days? Well, one hundred days is just a mark. And everybody's like, well, you know, you just wanted to break the world record. I said, no. I I've really shorted myself by one hundred days because I wanted to stay for two hundred days. Two hundred days is the length of time it's gonna take us to get to Mars. So if we're not thinking that we better figure out what happens to a human in an isolated, confined, extreme environment before we go two hundred days to Mars, we're not thinking at all. Right? So that's what I wanted to do by and large, but I just we I couldn't afford to stay two hundred days, to be honest with you, because we paid out of the International Bank of Joe and some graciousness of a nonprofit corporate. And the second thing we wanted to do is we want to take kids and show them that science can be cool. Not that I'm cool per se, but that you can do science in cool environments. It's not all about beakers and, you know, white lab coats and microscopes and, oh, boring. Right? So if you get out in the wild and do research in the environment, it can be better. And the third reason and final reason is we wanted to talk to everybody in the underwater realm, from astronauts to aquanauts to marine scientists to microbiologists to sponge doctors for crying out loud, and find out what makes them tick and why they wanna take care of the marine environment and why it's so important to us and protect, preserve, and now rejuvenate our marine environment. So those are the three main things that we did while we were down there, and we had a whole lot of fun. So Yeah. Must have been a fun, like, a 100 you were alone there, right, for a hundred days? By and large, I was alone. People came to visit, but by and large Okay. Gotcha. Yeah. That's very interesting. So you would say that being underwater, like, mimics some of the same environment as you would, like, travel to Mars in space or whatever. Percent. A 100%. Right? You know, you have to worry about a lot of things. You have to worry about your air source. Same thing. So a lot of these things, you know, they're very similar environments. So analogous is the word that we use. It's an analog for space travel. So absolute. Mhmm. Yeah. And, it's obviously gonna be a long long time away until we actually get to Mars. And, obviously, it makes sense to kind of test similar environments because, you know, you know, there's it's such a, like, I guess, such a massive feat to be able to travel in space such a long time. So we wouldn't we wouldn't even, like, know the problems necessarily, what we might face, and we need to kind of Right. Come into conclusion of what are the possible, like, problems. 100%. I mean, I love Elon. He wants to go to Mars, and it's great, but we had some serious problems, and we need some serious people to start doing research into it before we get on the plane. Like, who's gonna carry us off the plane when we get to Mars? Like like, how do we maintain the muscle? How do we build the bone? What are we gonna eat? What are we gonna drink for crying out loud? You know? There's there's, like, real problems. You know? Yeah. Yeah. And but what about, like, living underwater in general? Like, would would it be feasible, or would it be any, like, anything rational behind living underwater as a species in general, like, if, the Earth like, the land becomes messed up or something? Oh, absolutely. It's protective from ionizing radiation, number one. As long as we don't just roll up in there and treat the water like we've treated our Earth. So let's not do that. Right? Let's let's try and get it a little bit better. I mean, I I always tell people, I say, let's this is the big blue globe on which we live. Right? We've gotta take care of this thing because this is this is what we got. This is it. Right? And most of it's water. But, boy, if we don't start taking better care of it, we're gonna be in trouble. Mhmm. So what was the, like, port like? I think, some people might have done scuba diving. I don't think many people have, like, spent long times underneath the sea. So, what was, like, the living conditions like for you, and, like, how how deep did you actually go? So I was in a habitat, and this habitat is basically a pressurized cylinder, very much akin to this this cup. So it's pressurized. It has a hole in the bottom, and it's pressurized so much so that the air is bubbling out the bottom, but it's underwater. And while it's underwater, I could be a little dry. Little dry, I say, because it's a 100 humid environment. So it's really not that. So, you know, you you you're down there for a long period of time. You're moist. Your cuts don't heal very well. Things like that. So there are some cons for living underwater. But, while you're down there, you get to rinse off with fresh water. You get to dry off with towels, and, hopefully, you have a great support crew, which I did, that supported me in my endeavor. I mean and now, like I said, we did blood, urine, saliva, electrocardiograms, all the testing. I did about, seven, eight hours of science a day every day. Wow. Wow. That's interesting. You I think you mentioned in some of the interviews that, you know, you lost weight, your blood markers improved, and you also like, telomere length increased and stem cell amount increased as well. So, like, yeah, like, can you tell us about that? Yeah. Sure. So every single inflammatory marker in my body was cut in half, but that's a known mechanism of action of hyperbaric medicine. Hyper means more than baric means pressure. Right? So hyperbaric medicine has been around for four hundred years, and that's one of the reasons why we wanted to do this because I also do research in hyperbaric medicine. So we wanted to make everybody understand the mechanism of action. So we knew we were gonna get decreased inflammatory markers. You know? All during COVID, we were treating people in hyperbaric chambers with great efficacy because it was an inflammatory process. Right? So if we can quell that systemic inflammatory response, we can do great things. But, you know, I I basically decreased my cortisol by, you know, from double digits to single digits. And with a decrease in cortisol, you have a corresponding increase in testosterone, which that remained around for a little while, which was epic. Right? I mean, so, you know, I'm I'm 57 years old, epigenetically. I'm registered as 34. Right? And that that is part of the way that I live. Right? I live in the gym. I go to the gym. I go work out. I take care of myself. I eat the right way. So part of that is just me, but part of it is the fact that I did live underwater and that it does things like give you more stem cells, give you collagen synthesis. Right? All those kind of things are things that you need, and collagen just isn't the stuff that you inject in your face. Right? Like, you know, women put collagen in their face. It's not just that. It's the building block of every cell in your body. So if you synthesize collagen production, holy mackerel, you can now build more cells in your body to replace the ones that are broken or senescent or whatever. So, yeah, lots of really good things came of it. I wanna take a quick break to talk to you about my favorite collagen out there. Collagen peptides have been shown to reverse skin aging in several human clinical trials. They do so because of being much more bioavailable than regular whole food collagen sources. Collagen content in your skin starts decreasing in your twenties already at a rate of about 10% per decade. So you should start using collagen already in your twenties and the sooner you do, the better it is for your skin aging. The brand of collagen I'm using, Northcoat, has the optimal type of collagen peptides in the low molecular weight form. They've also added five grams of extra glycine, which is an amino acid responsible for collagen synthesis as well as glutathione synthesis, the powerful antioxidant in the body. The Northcoat Complete Collagen also has vitamin c, which initiates collagen synthesis and eggshell membrane which has been shown to support joint function. The collagen is sourced from grass fed cows from the Alps, so it's one of the highest quality collagens in the world. Head over to livehealthy.com/collections/nordcode to get a 10 discount with the code scene 10. Alright. Back to the video. I think a lot of people, at least me included, my first, like, thought was, like, so the reason you saw those improvements because of being in, like, this environment that is out of your habitual environment and you, like, end up eating less calories and you lose weight and you're, like, not exposed to air pollution and those kind of things. Like, so how much of a role do you think those things have played in your, like, improvements in biomarkers and, and other things? So we're scientists. Right? So, basically, I'm a creature of habit. I do the same thing every day. I wake up in the morning, and I eat four eggs, a little bit of cheese, and a little bit three or four eggs, little bit of cheese and a little bit of meat. It might be bacon. It might be, you know, pan. It might be something, sausage, whatever. But that's my mixture in the morning. I ate that this morning. I ate it yesterday morning. I eat it every morning. Right? Same thing. Munch is handful of nuts, a bunch of protein, and a salad. Dinner is some protein and something green. That's it. I I just Mhmm. I'm not a very complicated person. Right? So if I say, oh, you're just dieting like that, and I'm like, no. I was not dieting. Mhmm. Hyperbaric oxygen increases your metabolism. So if it increases your metabolism, it's obvious that it decrease your weight. Right? It it's fact that this happens. Right? So while I'm down there, I just didn't know that it was gonna happen this much. So I lost, 15 pounds in twenty five days. Mhmm. And I was like, okay. So much so that my medical staff, bunch of doctors that I trained that were on my team, they said, listen. You've gotta double your protein. So I wound up eating 1.7 times 1.75 times the amount protein that I usually eat on the surface. So usually, you know, I'm I'm a hundred kilos, so, usually, I'll eat, you know, a 100 grams of protein. So I had to eat a 175 grams of protein every day just to maintain weight. Right? To because they didn't wanna lose any more weight. I don't I don't like being Right. Thin. Like, you know, I'm fit. I don't like being fit. Gotcha. Yeah. Like, I would, you know, you you would think that, yeah, you're eating less, which, you know, might happen to a subconscious degree, but you're also, like, moving less because how how big is the port? Like, you're not able to, like, go for walks there. Right? Yeah. You're definitely not able to do any aerobic activity. However, I went out and I swam for about an hour every day. I went out and I Okay. Kicked around and scuba dived, because I was underwater. I may as well go scuba dive. Now you are a little colder while you're under there, so that increases your metabolism, obviously. So there's something to that. But is it a is it a thing now? It's not. That's the the attribution is the increase in metabolism. I mean, anybody can talk, but I actually did it. So, yeah, everybody's like, oh, you didn't eat. And I mean, like, to the point of, I don't eat this way normally. But once a week, I allowed them to bring me down a chocolate covered key lime pie on a stick. Mhmm. I never eat that kind of crap. Right? Mhmm. But I ate it once a week while I was there because if you're in Key Largo, you may as well eat key lime pie on a stick. Right? Right. But, you know, I mean, I never eat sugar. I never eat it's just not my jam. But once a week, I did that. Why? It was a thing. It was goofy, so I did it. But, you know, it wasn't like, you know, I led a sedentary lifestyle while I was down there. I was always running from the microscope to to but, you know, even though we just did seven to eight hours of science a day, then we did about three hours of teaching. I lectured to 5,575 kids in, you know, science, technology, engineering, and math. And those were, like, literally three hour lectures, three hours of lectures every day. And I also taught biomedical engineering while I was down there at the University of South Florida. And then I did, like, two hours of interviews per night. I think I did a 150 interviews in the entire time I was down there, which is crazy, crazy, the amount of interview. So I was a one arm paper hanger. I mean, I would work from dawn to dusk. You know? So I drank the exact same thing that I drink, which is nothing but water. This is water. I know it looks like coffee. It's literally water. I drink about a gallon of water a day. I still drink about a gallon of water a day and two cups of coffee. That's it. Right. Wow. So, yeah, that's that's very interesting. Yeah. Like, I didn't know about the the kind of a cheat meal there, which, you know, makes it more kind of, I guess, believable that it there was some, like, additional effect on your metabolism as I'm Okay. Or it could be I mean, you know, everyone knows the Michael Phelps who, ate, like, 12,000 calories a day because he was swimming, like, many hours every day and the cold might Yeah. The water whiskey away from your body, what, 25 times faster or something? I was ridiculous. 25% faster, whatever. The point being that, yes, you do get a little colder while you're down there. I was cleaning the habitat, working, and, you know, taking care of myself. But but, you know, I take care of myself every day and you know? Yeah. So, yeah, I wouldn't have imagined that I would have lost weight. I would have imagined that I would have gained weight being sedentary, being more sedentary than I normally have. Usually, I'm in the gym, but one of the things that we wanted to prove was this blood flow restriction cup. So all I did was this elastic band and a blood flow restriction device, and I worked out with that. And that was it, to see if I could maintain muscle mass the entire time I'm down there, like when we go to space. Right? We're gonna be on that spaceship. We gotta figure out how to freaking maintain muscle mass. So Right. So you use the blood flow restriction training, like, I I I'm a pretty big fan of those as well. Like, you're just able to, like, stim stimulate the muscle with light lighter weights and, with less loads. 100%. I love them. I really had a good time learning about them. I really had a good time. I enjoyed, you know, learning that we could maintain muscle mass by just using these. I use no gravity assist. If I was to do squats, I would do them upside down in the air. Like, I'd lay on my back, and I'd hold the band and I'd squish them just like you'd have to do in space. But when you're in this austere environment, we have to be able to maintain muscle mass as we go transit to Mars. What happens to everybody on the International Space Station who comes down after two hundred days? They got no muzzle. Mhmm. They got none. And is they gonna be carried off of the capsule? Who's gonna carry us when we get to Mars? Boy, we better start figuring some crap out. Like, there's some real science that needs to be done, and nobody's thinking about it. Right? Right. So how how does the, under being underwater, like, reduce the muscle mass? Like, is there anything because in the space, there's, like, less gravity and but what what Disuse. You just totally don't use it. So Right. If you don't use it, you lose it. Yeah. Yeah. But but in as I understand, then in space, it's, like, exacerbated the muscle loss because of the Right. Because why? Things that are thousands of pounds are zero pounds because you're in zero gravity. There is no gravity because you're constantly falling. Right? So you have zero g. So, basically, you can pick things up. You can walk around. Like, you could pick up thousands of pound boxes. There's no weight in it whatsoever. Mhmm. Right? So you you we don't bring lead weights to Mars because they weigh nothing. Right? Mhmm. Oh, it's 10,000,000 pounds. Doesn't matter. You know? So it's just a waste. But what we do is we train with resistance pet resistance pads up there. We use something called an ARAD. It's space, a resistance device, an ARAD. So that device is great, except we need to couple it with the blood blood flow restriction. The blood flow restriction, as you probably well know, because you're a student of it, you increase nitric oxide synthase. NAS vasodilates. When you vasodilate, you're able to get rid of that lactic acid buildup. So it increases brain derived neurotropic factor. There's a whole bunch of good stuff that comes with using those. So I flew them right after I got out of the water. I went and flew them in zero g. And if all goes well, I'll fly them in space, so we'll see how it goes. But that's that's absolutely my intention. Mhmm. What's the, like, mechanism if, there is, like, some increase in metabolic rate? How does the hyperbaric environment, like, create that? How does it increase your metabolism? Great question. So what happens is when you increase the pressure, let's say you just double the pressure. That means you double the number of molecules that are in there. So you're exposing yourself to twice as many oxygen molecules as you would normally be. So, effectively, instead of breathing 21% oxygen, effectively, you're breathing 42% oxygen. So you're doubling the number of oxygen molecules, which is doubling your metabolism. Because you've got more oxygen available, your body goes, okay. I'm gonna use that. Well, that's interesting. Yeah. And in in space, would you predict that there's gonna be a similar, like, increase in metabolic rate? Or So so many good things came out of this study that we are now opining that maybe we send a hyperbaric chamber up there, and when we're transiting, we're in a hyperbaric chamber while we're in space, transiting to Mars. Mhmm. And we're using that to not only live when we get to Mars, partially live when we get to Mars, but we're using it to increase the number of stem cells, to increase, to decrease the amount of inflammation, to protect us from ionizing radiation. Like, this is a nobody's ever thought about this concept. But, like, when we finished this study, we were like, I wonder if we could get a hyperbaric chamber up there that we get we gotta have a small thing that we're going to Mars with anyway. Why can't it be a hyperbaric chamber? Mhmm. That could protect us more from the radiation of the sun. Okay. That's good. What else can it do? Yeah. Maybe it can increase the number of stem cells, you know, in yeah. Lots of good things can come out of us transporting in a hyperbaric condition. May even set us up to when we get to Mars, we're that much better off. Mhmm. Yeah. Like, because I as I understand, then, like, space ages you quite fast. So being in space makes you age quite fast, and you're experiencing a lot of this information. And and, yeah, like, you know, why wouldn't you want to use any, like, whatever, like, supplements or peptides or whatever other, like, hormones Absolutely. Counteract that. Absolutely. To contradict exactly. You you get aged because of all the free radicals. And, like, right now on the surface of the Earth, we're in an electromagnetosphere. Right? Like, we're protected pretty much from the sun. You go out of that. Oh, okay. Now all bets are off. Right? And there's a coronal mass ejection, a CME, that comes from the sun and, like, lights up our northern lights and we get this pretty show. What happens to astronauts that are outside? Well, they die. Mhmm. Right? So we gotta start thinking holy mackerel. How are we gonna protect them? And it's not just trying to forecast, like, okay. We're going to the moon. What are we talking about? Seventy hour seventy hour drive to the moon? Sixty seven hour drive to the moon? No big deal. Right? Like, we can predict solar flares or coronal mass ejections. We can predict that pretty much a couple days ahead of time. Right? But you can't predict two hundred days in the future how many coronal mass ejections they're gonna be and where they're gonna be. So where you are in that transit from here to there, or you get hit by a CME and you're not protected by a magnetosphere and you have no prophylactic around you, yeah, baby. Mhmm. So we we gotta get an electromagnetosphere or something, you know, electromagnetic environment to shield or something. We gotta do something, and somebody's gotta start thinking. This is why I keep going. We need the kids involved. We need the kids because the kids are thinking outside the box. The old people are down here on Earth, and we're just like, yeah. We're just trying to get along. We need the young people to start thinking differently and start thinking about these scientific problems that we have. Right. So, so the kind of concept relies on, this hyperbaric oxygen therapy. And I think, you know, a lot of my followers have heard about it, but, can you, yeah, like, explain a bit, in detail as well of, you know, what it actually is and how do we, like, regularly do it other than, like, being under underwater? Right. So hyperbaric therapy has been around for four hundred years. It's not a new science. It's been around for four hundred years. We've known that it works on things, but, you know, science wins over bullshit every time. So what we haven't done is been able to figure out the why behind it. Well, now we're starting to get where the science is catching up. In 2019, they, this this two guys, won the Nobel Prize in medicine for the discovery of something called HIF one alpha. So up up regulating, sort of a, gene expression thing. What what that does is when you are in a relative hyperoxic state, more oxygen, Your body gets used to it for a minute, and then when you take it away, you get relative hypoxia. When you get relative hypoxia, you induce brain derived neurotropic factor. Brain derived neurotropic factor is the lawn seed for the brain. Well, that's great. So if I can give you a hyperbaric treatment and then take it away from you, cycle you, which is what we would have to do on the way to Mars, we cycle the person. We give them brain derived neurotrophic factor, insulin like growth factor. You know? We reduce their interleukin six, the inflammatory markers. You know? We keep doing all of these things that they need done. If we cycle this look. The only constant is life is change. Right? Michael Jackson sleeping in a hyperbaric chamber never actually happened, by the way. But that's not the kind of thing that's gonna be beneficial to you. If you want benefit from something, on again, off again, on again, off again, on again, off again, whatever that thing is. Like, you can't live in the gym and work out. Like, I work out all the time. You can't work out all the time. You need to recover as well. Right? So you need to be on, off, on, off, and that's how hyperbaric medicine works. Right? It's by the on again, off again, and then you turn on all these growth factors, platelet derived growth factor, vascular endothelial growth factor. And these are all known to science now. Right? So now that we know all these mechanism of actions, we can modulate, figure out what we gotta get, and get more of that stuff. Right? Whatever that stuff is that we're looking for. Oh, you want more blood vessels. We need more vascular endothelial growth factor. Hold on. We know how to do that. Let's up regulate this. Turn this button. And boom. You get more VEGF. Mhmm. So that's the kind of thing. Like, we need really smart people to start looking at this problem and start to develop a plan at least. You know? Yeah. So this h f one is hypoxia inducible factor one. And, like, upregulates when your body's experiencing, low oxygen levels or or a high aspect of, like, hypoxia, and then the body reacts to that hypoxia by increasing the these, these, angiogenesis, Well, by increasing Yeah. They're just one neuroplasticity or brain derived neurotrophic factor. Neuro, so neurogenesis, not necessarily angiogenesis, but neurogenesis. But, yeah, you're exactly right. Right? So and it's just relative hypoxia. So if I give you a lot of oxygen and then I take it away and give you air like you're breathing right now, oh, now you have this stimulation of this HIF one alpha. Oh, that's great. Oh, wow. Yeah. Okay. So it's a a relative aspect. If you go, like, if you swim, I guess, underwater or, sorry, like, if you, yeah, go underwater to swim, then you're getting experiencing this shift as well because you're coming from a, like, a, like, a, you know, land land environment. Yeah. So you may get some of that if you're breathing oxygen underwater. Yeah. Okay. And then you come back to the surface. But there are hyperbaric chambers all over the world. Like like, people are there there's a hyperbaric center right here. There's, you know, right up the block, there's there's two down the road. You know, they're they're all over the place, and you can get these kind of sort of results with that because they're known. They're peer reviewed. They're it's not like, oh, well, we don't know that to be science that's correct. No. No. No. No. No. We know the mechanism of action of hyperbaric medicine. We have known it. There are about 11 or 12 of them that we know. One of them is toxin inhibition. One of them is growth factors, the VEGF, the, you know, BDNF, the platelet derived growth factor. We know that kind of stuff. You know? That is so we know the mechanism of action. You just gotta apply it correctly across a broad spectrum of whatever your problem is. You know? I think I think the this the FDA has approved the hyperbaric oxygen therapy for, like, something like 15 conditions. So different, like, skin burns and, carbon monoxide poisoning and those things. What what are the, like so I guess these are the most, like, proven conditions to have, benefited from hyperbaric, treatment. So, what are the Not necessarily the most proven. They're the ones that insurance will pay for. Right? Right. Because we think that the burden of proof I'm a scientist. Right? The burden of proof is a randomized placebo, you know, double blind, placebo controlled, randomized trial. Right? That is not the case. Not every single indication that is approved has gone through randomized controlled trials. Gaseous gangrene. Hyperbaric oxygen works due to the mechanism of action called toxin inhibition. Right? When you get over 450 of mercury delivered to your finger, you probably get about 50 right now. When you get over 450 of mercury to your cellular level, You cannot produce toxins at cellular level. So it stops gaseous gangrene in its tracks. But there are no randomized controlled trials on that. Why? Well, that lacks efficacy, and that's just, like, skeezy. Right? Oh, we're gonna we're gonna give you the good stuff that we know does this, but we're not gonna give you it? No. It it lacks, you know, it it lacks the sniff test, if you know what I mean. Right. So you're saying that there are, like, these plausible, like, proven mechanisms by which, that it can help various conditions, but the FDA has approved only, like, a handful of, Yeah. They approved 15 approved indications. And what does that mean? 15 approved indications means that insurance will most likely cover that. But I don't I don't give a crap about insurance. I don't care all about insurance. I care about helping the person. So I look at the just like every other physician. Right? And I teach physicians at the University of South Florida. I train them to look at the mechanism of action and find the disease. Let's just take a silly one, Crohn's. Right? It's a disease of inflammation. We already know one of the mechanism of action, hyperbaric medicine, is it reduces the inflammatory process, reduces the cytokine storm. So if this disease comes from an inflammatory process, do you think that we could apply the anti inflammatory and it might work? Is it, this is simple. Like, should it work? Yeah. Probably. Are there double blind, randomized, placebo controlled trials? Nope. Because nobody's paying for them. Right. That doesn't mean that it doesn't work. Like like, science wins over bullshit, but, god, what works works. Right? You know? So so we try this, and this is what we're trying to do, is bring things that are off label to the on label column. And, you know, I guess it's to get them paid or to get people paid, but, really, it's to truly help people. And if you're looking to help people, then don't worry about the money. Don't worry about getting paid back for it. Just just try and do it and see what happens. Right? So that's kinda what I'm trying to get the doctors to start thinking in that vein. And, you know, it's working, but it's a slow process. We are changing medicine by the day. Right. What about the telomeres and the stem cells? So these are Oh, yeah. Like, one of the main hallmarks of aging, so telomere attrition and stem cell exhaustion. And you saw that your telomeres increased and your stem cells increased. So, what's the, like, first mechanism of that with the hyperbaric or at least, like, under c? So it kind of works through the hyperbaric mechanism, but are there any, like, test studies where exact same thing. The increased pressure is the increased pressure is the Right. However you get it, you can submerse yourself in a vat of, you know, hydrogen. Doesn't matter. Increase the pressure. Doesn't matter. So well, don't do the hydrogen because it's exposed super fast. But but, yeah, 100%, the the mechanism of action is called reverse transcriptase. Right? So what you're doing is you're building on the end of the telomeres. Right? On the end of the chromosomes, you have these little things called telomeres. And as you use them, you lose them. They go away. They go away. They go away. They go away. When they're gone, the ends fray, and then you can't really replicate that anymore, and you can't transcript that. So that's cellular senescence, cell death. Right? That's it. So, realistically, if I can increase that by 17% or in some papers, Efrati, Shay Efrati, a great researcher, he found, that he increased it by 33%. 30 to 33 depends on which paper you read. But, you know, if you're if you're doing that, that means you're multiplying your life of your cell by one third. You know? I mean, come on. That that that's pretty damn substantial. Right? So is that the cure to aging? No. Could you get hit by a bus tomorrow? Yeah. It's not gonna prevent that. But is it gonna make that cell be able to be replicated more? Oh, that's that's science, man. That works. Right? So, yes, that's the absolute truth. But you know? Yeah. It's like extending, like, healthy aging and prolonging the healthy functioning of the cell kind of, longer. 100%. And then if you believe some of the other stuff that's written and you combine it with some science and you go, well, hold on a second. Wait a minute. If I can extend the length of this cell and then I can turn on a sirtuin activating compound or a sac, click, and I can stop this thing from replicating and start it to be in survival mode. I could even extend it further. Right? So we can use science to go ahead and extend the things that we're already trying to extend. Look. This is this is my personal love. This is not my my job. My job as the assistant vice president of veterans clinical research at the University of South Florida has nothing to do with me extending my personal longevity. That's what I'm doing is extending my personal longevity. I'm hitting the gym. I spell gym with a g, not with a j. Right? Because I wanna do the things that I wanna do long term. I wanna induce hormesis, which takes those sacs, turns them on, and puts them in the the, chill out mode, stop replicating, and start to kind of, protect yourself mode. So I spent I do I do lots of stuff like that. Yeah. Is it proven? Double blind, randomized? Nope. Nope. Right. Yeah. I think Does the science fit? Yep. Yep. Yeah. I think there was this actually in humans in 2000. I remember from 2020, there was a Israel study, I think, where they did use the hyperbaric as well, and they saw, like, the telomeres increased by 20% in humans. So it's obviously like a like a single study as of now, but, yeah, like, at at least it's shown to, like, work in other people as well, not just, the Is is that Shay Efradi's clap, Shay Efrati's study? He's from Israel. I'm looking at this authors of this yeah. Shay Efrati. Yeah. He's one of the authors. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. That's that's probably him. Yeah. No. Great study. Great study. He's one of the best researchers I've ever seen in our new research pool of people. Right? He's he's great at what he does. So and he pushes the balance. Right? Yeah. Another another another thing that he found was that the immunosenescence, decreased as well. So the aging of the, immune immune system, which, is also, like, a pretty problematic thing that we they all the people generally see a decrease in their immune function. And, you know, cell senescence is also, like, a hallmark of aging, and immunos senescence is, like, a subcategory of this cell senescence phenomenon. Now the zombie cells. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, all these hallmarks of aging, if we can just start clipping it, right, and trimming it back and making it better, you give yourself the better opportunity to survive. Right? Which is all we're really doing. Like, people say, oh, it's the it's the holy grail. We're going to, you know, we're gonna cure aging. Mhmm. Hold on a second. Science. Right? We we can give your body the tools to help itself. Right? So hyperbaric oxygen doesn't cure anything. Right? So if you have leukemia, leukemia means you don't produce these, these red blood cells very well. You don't transport the oxygen very well. I can give you oxygen that you can then deliver to yourself. No problem. Does it cure leukemia? Nope. Right? So it gives your body the tools to help itself. And if everything is great, then things are great. Right? That's all we're doing. We're giving, you know, luck favors the prepared. Am I gonna live to a 110? That's my plan. I'm gonna prepare my body to live to a 110 and do the bet my body and my brain because you cannot I I'm not living to a 110 in a vegetative state. Right? There's no I don't want Alzheimer's. I don't want any, you know, I don't want any dementia. I I intend to circumvent that through the use of the things that I'm doing. You know? Right. And, I think it does apply to, like, other senescent cells as well, not just, immune cells. So I think there was, like, another study about skin aging as well because the the accumulation of the senescent cells is one of the biggest, causes of intrinsic, skin aging. So, like, wrinkles and, loss of collagen, and those things will are primarily driven by the cell senescence. Yeah. No. That's that's that's very true, the elasticity. And, yeah, That is certainly the case. But, you know, let's so, like, back up to one of the other known mechanism of action. You know, collagen synthesis. Fiber mass proliferation, secondary to collagen synthesis. Wait. You can give you more of that collagen stuff for your building of all yours. Oh, oh, okay. So you can look younger. You can look younger. You know? And he he did another study called, like, cognitive enhancement in a declining age population, I think was the actual name of the study. But perfect. Right? Like, wait. You mean I can get a increase on my ability to multitask and remember things? I you you have my attention now. Right? Like, I can get smarter? Okay. Mhmm. I'll take that. I'll take two. Right. And what about the stem cells? Like, how what's the, like, mechanism there that it, increases Yeah. So stem cells is just one of those things. It's it's we're really tricking our body into the point where it's at, at the point of needing stem cells. So, basically, it's just trick on your body. Steve Thumb did this work in I wanna say it was the seventies or eighties. Long time ago, we did this work. And what he found is that in hyperbaric medicine, you multiply the number of stem cells by eight if you do 20 treatments at this pressure and this depth. Blah blah blah. So we were like, oh, hey. I wonder what. I wonder how this works. Then one of these new PhD researchers just did young guy just got his PhD. He just found out that if you pressurize somebody in air five times to 1.3 remember, I was at 1.7. Five times in air, you double the number of CD 34 plus progenitor stem cells. So we believe the mech believe believe the mechanism of action at this point is more so having to do with the pressure and less so having to do with the oxygen. Mhmm. Really freaking cool. So that means that you can go on a scuba dive every day, and you can double the number of stem cells that you have by tricking your body. So stem cells can be used for anything, especially the, you know, c d 34 plus. You know? They're like the wildcard of all stem cells, if you will. Wow. And and, you know, it's proliferation. I mean, you're you're basically you're letting these things loose to help heal. Now does that shorten your life? I don't you know, there's more things there's more questions to ask. Right? Right. If you have a healthy immune system and everything's going well and your bone marrow is great and you're okay. Then maybe you maybe you are okay. Who knows? Well, that's very interesting. Yeah. Like, so you can just do scuba diving or some other, like, high pressure an increase in pressure. Right? Right. So you think, like, maybe, like, scoo I don't know if there's any data about that, like, but are scuba divers with longer life expectancy or something? I'm just guessing. So there's a there's a bit of research that being that's being done right now in PTSD, amelioration of PTSD by scuba diving. So there's a whole bunch of research going on right now with that. And what is that? Hyperbaric. It's just more pressure. That's it. It's hyperbaric. It's hyperbaric medicine. Scuba diving, hyperbaric medicine. Pressurizing in a hyperbaric chamber, hyperbaric medicine. Living underwater for a hundred days, hyperbaric medicine. Going in space, hyperbaric medicine. Same stuff. Right. What about, like, the downside? So, like, you know, there's rarely things that are just a 100% beneficial at least when it comes to HF ones and hypoxia and, angiogenesis as well as, like, even the telomerase activation. So Yeah. They're they're all implicated in some aspects of cancer as well. So, like, the cancer can survive in this, low oxygen environment by increasing the blood supply to itself. And, with the telomerase, it can also, like, I've heard, like, that it can, like, immortalize cancer cells as well. So this, replication of the telomer telomerase on the cancer cells. So, what yeah. Well, like, what do you think about the are there any, like, real negatives and downsides to, like, maybe doing too much or, in some people? That's why I say you need to not be doing this full time. The only constant in life is change. You need to fluctuate, moderate. Right? Right. So while I was down there look. When astronauts are in space, they grow. Why? Zero gravity. Nothing's compressing them. They're being flung around. They're actually in tension. They're being pulled apart. Me, I was underwater. I was being compressed. So I was in compression. I shrunk by three quarters of an inch. Well Okay. It's science. Whatever. I shrunk. Everybody said, no. You didn't shrink. I'm like, I shrunk. I'm telling you, I'm not hitting my head on the thing anymore. Sure enough, I came out and I lost three quarters of an inch. Okay. No big deal. But, a lot of things like that happened. A lot of things came up like that. And, yes, there are some possibilities of you staying in that environment for long periods of time that there could be problems. However, comma, what you try and do is you try and ameliorate these things. So the hypoxia that you're talking about, that's absolutely true, and, cancer will create angiogenesis. It'll create vascular endothelial growth factor if it's not getting the proper blood supply. But when you're in hyperbaric medicine, you're giving it the oxygen that it needs not to grow, not to take over the other cell next door. Right? Cancer's one of these things like, hey. Knocks on the cell next door, says, hey. Do you have any oxygen? Cell goes, yeah. I got some. Would you like one? And he goes, no. No. No. I'll just take it all. I'll just take you over. Right? That's the way cancer metastasizes. Right? It's like gobbling and scavenging. Right? It doesn't do that when it's in hyperbaric oxygen because it's getting fed the oxygen that it needs. Right? So it's not necessarily growing now, with respect to you coming off and being a hypoxia. You're just in relative hypoxia. Remember, in that relative state is short period of time because your body then realizes, oh, shit. This is where I was supposed to be. I'm at 21%, which is my norm. Okay. I'll just go back to being my normal. Right? So it's just that that quick change. So not not there long enough to induce cancer, at least so we see so far. Nobody knows. Like, great question because nobody's doing research on that kind of stuff. So, yeah, that, that senescence, the zombie cell, they're the the propagation of telomeres. Yeah. You're absolutely right. If you get to a point where you got the wrong, you know, chromosome and you've made that chromosome longer, then, yeah, you'll be doing bad things for cancer. Hasn't happened, but it could happen. Yes. It's theoretic. Right? Yeah. Like, that comes down to this constant, exposure to this, stress or so, like, you know, the same can apply to some other, like, these, pathways that work through the same, like, hormetic pathways. So, like, you know, whatever, like, other similar stressor can also have, like, a similar effect, like an unwanted consequence in some sense. But, yeah, like, it consequence. Absolutely. It can just yeah. Or, you know, it comes down to, yeah, probably, like, just managing the dose and the the frequency of not giving the same type of stressor all the time. You know, the same way, like, you're you don't wanna, yeah, like, work out all the time. You need some time to kind of take a break as well. Exactly. Right? And and, you know, every once in a while, go on the ice bath, induce that hormesis, and then every once in a while, stress your brain, give that hormesis, and then every once in a while, stress your muscles, give that. You know? It's a variation of life. Right? The only constant is change. Yeah. So so what what would be like, I heard that your vision is that people go to these underwater hotels for two weeks and get this hyperbaric medicine, by being underwater. But, you know, first of all, are there any, like, companies doing that now? Or and the second question is, yeah, like, how do they do it? Okay. If they want to find a hyperbaric clinic, like, what are some, like, I guess I guess, like, some, pointers for them? Yeah. You can look in the phone book and find any hyperbaric clinic. Make sure they're trained by somebody like the International Board of Embassy Medicine or equivalent. Right? I mean, we got we we have standards. We have to make sure you don't wanna last thing you wanna do is get in trouble in a hyperbaric chamber because bad things can happen. Right? Like, it can blow up. Right? We've seen these things blow up from time to time. But you go to a reputable place like the ones that have an IBUM seal of approval, and then, yeah, absolutely. Could be, could be could be easily done. That would be my push is to search for somebody that is IBUM approved, and then, you know, go from there. But, realistically, you look in the yellow pages. I I guess they still have yellow pages, but just Google it and look up at the American Medicine Center and then call them and ask them what they do. You know, the soft chambers do what they do. The hard chambers do what they do. There are two different mechanism of actions. You know, so I would tend to lean towards the soft, the hard chambers. I mean, I tend to lean towards the hard chambers for the mechanisms that I want to happen, But that doesn't mean that physics stops working. Right? Physics works, but the same thing is going for a dive. Right? If you just go for a very shallow dive, you can get some of these health benefits. You get them quicker when you go deeper and stay longer. So if you don't have that kind of time, go to the hard ones. But sure that, and you always, always, always wanna walk in that facility and feel safe and comfortable. Because remember, you're dealing with oxygen. And oxygen, while it's not flammable, oxygen's not flammable at all. It is an accelerant. It will make things burn faster. Mhmm. Do not mess with that. It's not something to be trifled with. So you wanna make sure they have a red book, which has all of their emergency procedures and that they've been well trained and taken care you know? So, you know, give it your first due diligence. You know? You don't go to the witch doctor that has the, the shrunken head hanging in the front. Oh, hey. Let me go to that doctor. You know? Maybe you go to you know? So Right. Yeah. Due to, like, the soft chambers also explode or Soft chambers can. They have not yet, but that doesn't mean that they can't. Right. They're they are newer. They've been around for about twenty five or so years, I'm guessing. And they haven't had nearly the safety record because they're not as dynamic, and they're not as full of pressure, and they're not usually filled with a 100% oxygen. So if that's the case, then they're less volatile. I mean, that's just physics. Right? You could you could state that empirically because it's physics. Right? And people get worried about them all the time, but they have a great safety record. But they don't do it as quickly as you know? But it depends on what ailed you. Right? It depends on what the issue is that you're trying to fix. How often so, like, the one session, I guess, is I've done it, like, a few times. How I don't remember exactly how long the session was. Like, maybe, like, forty five minutes or sixty minutes, something like that. Right? One hour, usually. They're usually one hour. So a total of seventy six minutes, which basically a seventy six minute treatment. It's ten minutes to descend, one hour of time at depth, six minutes to ascend, and then some time to change your clothes. So plan on an hour and a half, and here's the way that we have seen. We have seen best results if you do them consistently over short bursts of time. So, basically, do 10 treatments over the course of two weeks, one a day, every day, Monday through Friday, and go away on the weekends, then come back on Monday through Friday, and that will give you the best benefit. Now I'm not a I'm not a used car salesman. I don't make any money off of this. I'm just trying to tell people, like, listen. Your best bet is to do it frequently and then stop doing. Right? Because remember, you wanna oscillate. Right? You wanna always change. So you don't ever wanna just keep doing hyperbarics your entire life. If any practitioner says, just keep coming back, and and I'll just treat you every day your entire life, Run. Run. Because they're not understanding mechanisms of action. Right? So we need to we need to modulate. We need to change. We need to change it up. Otherwise, your body's gonna get used to it, and then, you know, maybe even bad things are gonna happen like you had mentioned. Right? So, you know, what we do is we change stuff. So Right. Gotcha. And, what if, someone is doesn't have any health issues? Is it still would would you, like, think they have anything to gain in terms of, like, either preventing so or increasing the body's resilience? Or what what would any, like, person who doesn't have any health issues, you know, is it something that they can actually gain additional benefits from, or or does it only work if you have and and in particular, like, inflammatory condition? Yeah. So science always wins. Right? Now let me to answer that question, let me go to off track betting. Off track betting and horse racing. You're like, why are we talking about horse racing? We're talking about horse racing because horse racing forbids you to be your horse to be in a hyperbaric chamber within twenty four hours of a race. Oh, really? Because they consider it a performance enhancing drug. Wow. Wait. What? If the betting people are like, wait. Wait. Wait. Wait. Wait. You can't do that. That's a that's a boost. You can't do that. Pretty loudly says, but nobody's doing wellness studies. Right? So from a scientific standpoint, as a scientist, I can't say that it does. Does it make you feel better? Yeah. But feeling better is not objective quality evidence. Mhmm. I'm a scientist. Yeah. Science wins over bullshit. And when you say I feel better, that's bullshit. I I feel better. I look better. I look better too. My hair's longer. I have no idea. Right? But you can't just say stuff. Right? So do we think, yeah, we think it's a performance enhancing drug, but it's not yet classified as one. It is for the horses. It is for some other things. But it's not Olympics? Is it banned in the Olympics? Sorry. Yeah. Right? It's just, hey. Just start treating people in Iberic chambers in between races. Hey. It's just the way it is. Right? But, yeah. Now I, I suspect that at some point, somebody's gonna get onto it, and some sports team's gonna have Iberic Chamber. And then before you know it, their guys are gonna be running faster, harder, you know, able to produce more, able to generate more energy, whatever, whatever, whatever. And they're gonna win, and somebody's gonna claim foul, and it's gonna Yeah. Yeah. So So do I think it helps you for wellness? Yes. Could it also hurt you? Yeah. If you sleep in a hyperbaric chamber, yeah, it could really hurt you. Don't do that. Right? Like, oscillate it. Right? Change it up. You know? Find find a good doctor that knows what he's doing or she's doing and and work through it. You know? Mhmm. Yeah. Interesting. Like, I I did it, you know, I guess, like, two or three times in the past. I didn't notice, like, anything significant when I did it, but I did it only, like, you know, I did it once. And then the next time, I did it again, like, in a year just so that I could try it out. But maybe at least I didn't notice, like, any difference. I didn't, like, notice any, like, you know, difference in my, like, feeling or sleep or Did you just do it consistently for, like, ten days? No. That's what I did. Like, I did only, like, one session. Like, one session. So I was visiting, like, another city, like, London or LA or something. And then I did it there at some local clinic. And, you know, the next time I did it was, again, like, in another year when I was visiting another city. So I I, I haven't done it, like, consistently, but, even, like, from so, like, I guess one session might not be enough or or is it No. One session is not enough for anything except science. Right? Except we have seen that migraines get better in one session. That's the only thing that gets better in one session that we've seen so far. Mhmm. Gotcha. So Good. But, yeah, you need, generally speaking, about 10 to start to get the anti inflammatory effect, maybe 20 to start doing angiogenesis depends on what the mechanism of action that you want is. Right? So we gotta, this is why everybody's like, just go to two point zero for sixty minutes. And I'm like, why? You don't even know what you're talking about. Really? Like, every case is different. Every person's different. I try and get the MDs. I'm like, you better start asking freaking questions. Because if you just walk in there and give them exactly the same thing, like, oh, yeah. Here's a here's a cookie. You want a cookie? Here's a cookie. Here's a cookie. And you keep giving out the same cookie. You're only gonna get what they give you. You know? So you gotta modulate it. You gotta figure it out. You ought to be prescribing, you know yeah. You ought to be prescribing it and checking it. Right. What if the people who have their own soft chamber at home, like, like, I I I haven't used one at home, so I don't know that, like, the settings are there any, like if you do have it at home, like, what settings you should, like, look at, like, the Fisher or Don't do it too often. Don't do it too often. Be very careful in what you're doing, and, you know, be doing it for the right reason. Take a training course because if you're doing it at home, you could still get hurt. The shallowest recorded depth of an arterial gas embolism is three feet. That's what that's a meter for crying out loud. I mean, you're talking nothing. Right? Like Mhmm. The difference in pressure, you know, you're taking those chambers, the soft chambers, even the ones you use at home, to about, 11 feet. Mhmm. So the shallowest recorded depth is three feet. That means at four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10, you can still get an arterial gas number. So you could hurt yourself. So we definitely wanna make sure you get training. So seek, like, the international board of undersea medicine, seek them out, and just get some training so that you know what you're doing, and you don't accidentally hurt yourself. Right? Mhmm. And and this way, you don't god forbid. I mean, you do something to your house, you know? Like, oh, I got a good idea. Let me just take my laptop in this oxygen filled chamber. No. Don't do that. Right? Like, woah. Wait a minute. I didn't even think. Well, that's alright. They'll teach you in the course. Right? They'll teach you to be as safe as possible. So Right. Well, yeah, that's good because, you know, that's what I I would have thought to do, like, with the with the laptop or, like, a phone or whatever. Alright. So I can work more. No. Your job is to get in there, breathe in and out, box breathe, meditate and breathe, repeat as necessary, think, do something without your without your phone, right, without this damn device that you have, like, and just think, and just breathe, and just be. Give yourself that one hour a day. One hour. Just give it to yourself, and you will be like, damn, I feel so much better. So we don't know whether it's the intrinsic benefit of breathing and just relaxing without the phone for an hour or whether it's really the hyphenic oxygen. Whichever one, it works. Who cares? Right? Yeah. What what is, like, next for you in terms of this, deep sea saga? So are you planning on any other, new trip, longer trip, the two hundred day trip? I'm not planning a two hundred day trip, but I am absolutely planning on looking at space. So, Elon, I know I keep saying bad things about you, but if if you're a listener of the podcast here, by all means, man, pick me, coach. I'm in there. Yeah. I applied to NASA this year, so we'll see. I'd love to, love to make that happen. I just got my, patent, my US patent on the life support system device and the early warning detection system. So I I think I'm primed for it. So we'll see. You You know, we'll see what happens. But, hopefully, I have a lot that I can still keep giving then and you know? Yeah. That sounds cool. Yeah. That sounds pretty awesome. And I'm, yeah, like, you know, excited to see how, you know, people in space kinda use some of this kind of technology and, you know, other things as well, like, to counteract the inflammation and the oxidative stress. And, you know, you kinda have to stack all the things that we kinda know. Right. Put all the balls in your court. Right? Like, listen. I'm a take that. It's coming with me. I'm gonna take that. It's coming with me. This, this, this. I'll pile up as much stuff because listen. The space will happily and gleefully kill you. It it won't even think about it. It's just like, oh, well. My bad. You know? Something going this way at a thousand miles an hour and something going this way at a thousand miles an hour, nothing's gonna survive it. Right? So you just gotta think there's lots of stuff floating around our universe. So I don't know. Yeah. Yeah. It's an inherently dangerous environment, so we need to figure out to give ourselves the the stack of stuff to do the best that we could. Is there any way to for people to, like, support your projects, or where can they learn more about maybe if they want to do this experiment themselves? Right. Yeah. And listen. Anybody that wants to stay underwater for a prolonged period of time, I will help you. Contact me. Doctor Deepsea, Instagram is doctor Deepsea, Jodatore, Google me, whatever whatever. Go to www.doctordeepsea.com, and and contact me. And I literally I answer all of those. Right? So, you know, I'll I'll get back to you if you want help staying underwater. You want help with a place to I wanna learn how to dive in New York City. I'll be like, oh, big apple divers. Hold on. I got these guys over there that could peep you know? I'm not gonna pay for it, but, you know, I'll be. You know what I'm saying? I'll point you in the right direction. If you're young and you're into science, technology, engineering, and mathematics, I'll help you. I'll work with you. I'll write letters of recommendation for you from the assistant vice president of the University of South Florida. I will do everything that I can to help your career and to help you break my record. Let's do that. This way, the world wins. It's not me. It's not my record. Who cares? It wasn't even about the record. It was just to get kids to start to think about the world differently and that, look. You gotta hand this ball off to somebody. You know? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's really important. I agree. But, yeah, I I think I you mentioned some of the socials and the website. I'll put the links in the show notes for people to check out. And my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? Just learned this. I literally just learned this. So truth be told, I got a nine ten on my SAT. So I believed it when the guidance counselor said, oh, you're not gonna amount to anything. I believed other people for the longest time. And then I went to the Navy, and then I learned how to learn. And then I went to night school, and I was like, oh, wow. This isn't that bad. Okay. I can figure that out. And then I was like, oh, me. Maybe you are actually three five four five GPA in college. Not bad. Alright. Maybe you can go get a master's. Boom. Master's. Maybe you can go get a PhD. Stop listening to other people. Stop. Don't they they they're not in your body. They're not your world. They're not your life. Don't listen to anybody. Just keep going. And and now that I've got that, I'm like, oh, here. Hold my beer. Go watch this. Yeah. They're like, you can't you can't stand the water. That's gonna hurt you. Blah blah blah. You can't do this. That's gonna I'm like, oh, really? Okay. Yeah. So yeah, man. Take the attitude of fold my beer. Anytime somebody says you can't, watch. Yeah. Well, that's a good good advice. Yeah. And I support that for sure. Well, it's been a great talking with you, and, yeah, looking forward to, I guess, the space trip plan, maybe the next next record and underwater. Yeah. Great. Listen. Do me a favor. Tag me on this, and let's let's, like, do this mutual post task thing. For sure. We can get this out to a great group audience. This is a great interview. I went places where I hadn't gone before, so I love it. I love this kind of stuff. Thank you for a great interview. Well, my pleasure. It's been a great talk with you as well. Alright. Cheers.