The rejuvenation olympics leaderboard was recently updated and at the moment I have the rank one spot for the slowest speed of aging. In this video, I'm going to walk you through the new leaderboard and I'm gonna share with you my results. And I'm also going to give you an overview of my current routines regarding exercise, diet, supplements, etcetera. So make sure you click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. Okay. So I'm rank one with an average score of 0.65 and my lowest score being 0.62. Brian Johnson is ranked three with an average test result of 0.67. His most recent result was his lowest score to date, 0.64, which is why he was able to bump himself to a higher rank as his previous score was 0.69. You can probably recognize some other names on the list like Dave Pascow who is rank five at the moment, Ben Greenfield at rank 13, and Michael Lustgarten at rank nine. There's also a new leaderboard called the symphony age. I hadn't heard about it before, but it's based on a 2023 study by doctor Morgan Levin, and it supposedly measures the biological age of different organ systems. They had the symphony age lie for only a day and I was also ranked one there. I managed to take a screenshot before they took it down and my organ systems are 42.5% younger than my chronological age. So based on the calculations, my organ systems should be 16.7 years old as my chronological age at the time of the test was 29. So it appears that this test takes into account chronological age, which means that the results are less dependent on your age. However, they took the SymphonyAged leaderboard down at the moment, and they're probably updating it. Maybe they're putting Brian Johnson on the list or something else like that. We'll see what the new update brings. Now although I am ranked one on pretty much both of the leaderboards, I am somewhat disappointed with how the, entire leaderboard has been structured. You might know that I got this result already back in November, but the website was updated only now, which is about ten months later. I haven't done a test since last October, and the same applies to other people like Dave Pascaux, who I think hasn't done the test in over a year as well. Brian Johnson has a fairly recent test as I think he got the result of 0.64 a few weeks ago, after which they updated the list. So so far, the frequency of updating the list hasn't been that well organized, and it feels kind of a strange. I definitely don't recommend regular people to start doing this test because the test costs quite a lot. It's $230 for the speed of aging test, and the company providing these tests sells a rejuvenation Olympics bundle with three tests needed to be verified for the leaderboard. It costs $795. So to get to the leaderboard, you need to do three tests, and that's gonna cost you $800. So I think most people, you know, first of all, they're not going to gain that much valuable information from doing these tests that would justify spending $800 in my opinion. And I also believe that if you spend the money on some more traditional biomarkers, you would get a lot more valuable information about your health and longevity. For example, for $230, you could measure over a 150 different blood markers such as inflammation, all the blood cells, all the hormones, all the kidney markers, all the liver markers, all the glucose markers, all the lipids, etcetera. So my advice is that don't do this test because it's probably not worth it in terms of the money that you get, and, you would get much more valuable information about your health and longevity by measuring your blood markers. You could literally cover, you know, dozens and up to, you know, several hundreds of these biomarkers with this money. And the problem is that we don't know how accurate or relevant these biological age tests really are. For example, there's another competitor named Claudio Peftenaru who has a score of 0.48, and they said on Twitter that they eat McDonald's. So maybe it's some sort of a genetic freak who's able to slow down his speed of aging by eating McDonald's, or the test could be somewhat misleading, or it measures something else, or we don't necessarily know what the numbers mean. That could also be, like, a big possibility. So for most regular people, I wouldn't recommend doing the test. I personally I haven't decided if I am gonna do another test. Probably not, but we'll see. But regardless, in the rest of this video, I'm going to give you a small overview of my current routine. I've made several videos focusing on the specifics such as sleep, diet, workout routine, etcetera. So if you want to learn everything in detail, then check out those videos. The links are in the description. I wake up around 6AM, and the first thing I do is I take my dog out for a walk. This is great for getting bright light exposure, which is important for starting this circadian rhythm. Then I have a cup of coffee or tea and start working on my computer. I work for about three to four hours, and sometimes I walk on my treadmill while doing that. I aim for about 10 to 12,000 steps per day. At 11AM, I break my fast with a protein shake that consists of 30 grams of whey protein, 10 grams of collagen, and some dark chocolate. I fast usually for sixteen hours before this, and the reason I have the protein is because it's better for body composition, exercise performance, and time management. I usually just eat at 5PM and fast the rest of the day. After the protein shake, I do some more work, but at one to 2PM, I exercise. My current workout plan is resistance training three times per week for forty five minutes, zone two cardio twice a week for sixty minutes, hit cardio once a week for thirty minutes, and I leave one day for rest or active recovery where I go for a long walk or hike. Then after the workout, I have a sauna or I use the infrared sauna blanket if I don't have the time to heat up the regular sauna. I take the sauna or use the blanket four times a week for twenty to thirty minutes. I have dinner at 5PM, which consists of some proteins such as fish, eggs, meat, beans, cottage, cheese, a lot of vegetables, and tubers like broccoli, cauliflower, carrots, beet root, tomatoes, and my main carb source is usually potatoes, whether that be white or sweet potatoes. My estimated calorie intake is around 2,200 to 2,500 depending on if I work out or not. Out of that, 20 to 25% is protein as I aim for a 120 to a 140 grams of protein per day. 35% is fat, which I get primarily from fish, eggs, and olive oil, and the rest comes from carbs. After dinner, I spend time with my wife and try to relax. We might go for another walk with a dog or watch something else. I go to bed at 10PM, and I start reducing the intensity of light about one hour before bed. What about supplements? I've cut down on a lot of the supplements at the moment, and I take only the supplements I think actually have solid human evidence. I don't like taking theoretical supplements based on animal studies, and I take only the ones I believe have strong evidence. The supplements I'm taking every day are glycine, trimethylglycine, asteaxanthin, collagen, omega threes, and hyaluronic acid. That's it. That's not very complex or difficult. It just requires consistency and trying to also improve your body composition and improve your results. I think the biggest gains for your longevity will come from being in better shape, exercising regularly, sleeping enough, keeping stress low, and eating a relatively clean diet. But you don't need to even be a 100% perfect with that as the blood markers are more important. If you want to learn more about the science of longevity and how to slow down aging and add healthy years to your life, then you can preorder my new book, The Longevity Leap. It's based on over 8,000 studies, meta analysis, and scientific articles. You can preorder via the link in the description, and you'll get the book in September 2024. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. Thanks for watching this video. My name is Si. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.