Richard Morgan is a 93 year old Irishman who's a four time world champion in indoor rowing. He's got the lung function of a 40 year old and he rows 30 kilometers per week. Richard's completely the opposite of what you would expect a 19 year old to look and function like. You might think that it's genetics, but that's not really the case. Richard wasn't an athlete his entire life. He actually started exercising only in his seventies. And what age were you then? 73. In this video, I'm going to go through a study the researchers did on Richard and talk about his training routine and diet. So make sure you click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. The study was published recently in the Journal of Applied Physiology and Richard was 92 years old at the time. They measured his cardiorespiratory fitness, heart rate, muscle mass, and dietary intake. The most remarkable thing they found in my opinion is that Richard's maximum heart rate was a 153 beats per minute. Whereas for someone his age, it would normally be only a 128. So he had the maximum heart rate of someone in their sixties and his v r two max was 23.4, which would put him in the top ninetieth percentile of people in their eighties and the sixtieth percentile of someone in their seventies. However, his vital capacity was 3.36 liters, which is the same as someone in their late thirties and early forties. Vital capacity describes the volume of air that the lungs are able to exchange, and this goes down with age. Although the study didn't measure Richard's blood markers like hemoglobin a one c or inflammation, his, fitness markers were still excellent. A higher VO two max is one of the best predictors of longevity and reduced mortality. Having a v o two max above fifty milliliters per kilogram per minute is linked to a four times lower risk of mortality compared to a v o two max below 16. Now Richard's v o two max was 23, which is, you know, low compared to someone in their thirties or forties. But compared to someone in their nineties, then it's very high. A v two max of 16 is considered the disability line below which you're not able to walk around and take care of yourself, and Richard is still well above that line in his nineties. Vio to max and cardiovascular fitness declined by about six to 15% per decade. In a twenty two year longitudinal study on elite runners, those who stopped running completely saw a 15% decrease in their vio to max per decade. Those who are engaged in only fitness running, like running on the weekends for general health, saw a 15% reduction in their VO to max per decade. However, those who kept running regularly experienced only a 6% drop per decade twenty two years after the fact. That's quite astonishing. Those who kept exercising and those who kept running pretty much cut their VO2 max decline in half. It also goes to show that if you stop exercising, you pretty much fall off the cliff in terms of your fitness and functional capacity. So what does Richard's training look like? On average, he rose 30 kilometers per week which totals to about forty minutes per day. 70% of that time is spent in low intensity, what's called zone two. 20% in moderate intensity and only 10% at near maximum intensity. In addition to that, he lifts weights twice a week close to failure. He does three sets of dumbbell lunges, rows, and curls. That's a pretty minimalist lifting program and it makes sense for him because he specializes in indoor rowing. However, from a longevity perspective, you obviously want to do resistance training. I have made some videos comparing the reduction in all cause mortality between resistance training and cardio and most of the evidence suggests that a higher e h m x gives greater longevity benefits than higher muscle strength and muscle mass. But the combination of both is better than one or the other alone. Richard is pretty lightweight. He weighs only fifty nine kilograms or a hundred and thirty pounds, but that's to be expected for someone in their nineties. He had a lean muscle mass of forty seven point seven kilograms which made up 80.6% of his total body weight which is excellent for his age. His fat mass was nine point one kilograms which made his body fat percentage 15.4%. Being too low body weight for someone in their nineties could be dangerous and it is associated with higher risk of mortality. However, that's usually because people with lower body weight are also the ones who have less muscle and lower bone density which increase the risk of frailty. In Richard's case, it's not a problem because he has a lot of muscle, you know, relatively speaking to his age. What about his diet? There were no specifics about the exact foods that Richard eats but they did measure his total calorie intake and protein intake. His diet is high protein, 2.3 grams per kilogram per day of lean body mass, which for his forty seven point seven kilogram of lean mass would equate to a 110 grams of protein per day. The 2.3 gram per kilogram is the equivalent of one gram per pound of lean body mass. Research has found that the maximum ceiling for muscle growth is somewhere between 0.8 gram per pound or 1.6 gram per kilogram of lean muscle of protein per day. Richard eats more than that 0.8 grams per kilogram but that's actually a good thing because the elderly people they need more protein. When you get older, your body isn't able to maintain and build muscle that easily which is why a higher protein than is recommended is generally better for the elderly people. Keep in mind that this number refers to the lean body mass not total body mass. Richard's total calorie intake was 33.4 plus and minus 1.7 cal calories per kilogram of lean mass which is 1,600 calories per day. You would imagine that's quite low for someone who rose forty minutes every day. But it's not low for someone who weighs only fifty nine kilograms. The lower your body weight and the less muscle mass you have, the lower your metabolic rate is also going to be. Of course, Richard muscle mass is relatively speaking high in terms of the total percentage of his body weight but objectively speaking having forty seven point seven kilograms of lean mass and only weighing fifty nine kilograms total is not a lot of weight which is why his metabolic rate is also lower. Overall, the biggest takeaway for this is that it's never too late to start and you should always keep going no matter your age. If you stop using the things that keep you young or if you stop using your muscles then they're inevitably going to deteriorate. Alright. I hope you got some valuable information from this video. If you want to get the comprehensive three sixty health assessment with dozens of different tests, hundreds of biomarkers, the body composition scan, the v r two max test, full body MRI, you name it, and all of that in a five star hotel, then I invite you to join me at my retreat at a longevity clinic in India. It's an all inclusive retreat so it covers all the tests and medical exams, seven day accommodation at at the five star hotel, and three meals a day. If you're interested then email me the word India to info@ceblant.com and I'll send you the details. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click like and subscribe. Notification bell as well. My name is ceblant. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.