Both me and my wife, Inka, have been using NAC. We wanted to see if we get different results with it. My name is Sim Lund, and I'm an anthropologist. And I'm Inka Lund. I have a master's in neuropsychology. And in this video, we're gonna discuss our experience with NAC and compare our results. So, yeah, NAC is the supplement and acetylcysteine that is sold in anywhere online, and we have both been using it. I've been using it for a little bit longer, a few years on and off. And SIM has used it every now and then for a month or two or even three, and we just wanted to discuss our results because they were completely different. So make sure to click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. NAC or n acetylcysteine is a supplement that's a precursor of amino acids called cysteine. Since 1990, it's also been sold as a supplement, and it's studied as a nutraceutical for some general inflammatory conditions, like some neurological and psychiatric symptoms as outlined in this scientific review. So let's talk about us taking NAC starting with INCA. Right. So I have made a previous video about my NAC use to my channel, and I have explained there how I've been getting quite a lot of benefits from NAC. So I used it about a year before because I was suffering from severe migraines and cluster headaches, and I got relief from to my migraines during the life period when I was using the NAC. So I wanted to make the video. And now I'm being very careful not to say that NAC cured or treated my migraine because I was using using other supplements as well, and I've always been very careful with my lifestyle and use lifestyle tools as well to counteract inflammation that is associated with migraine. But since I've been taking NAC on and off for a couple years now, I have been able to do this controlled experiments where I take NAC and I stop it and I start taking it again. And I stop it and I start taking it again and seeing if everything or anything changes. And consistently, I come into a conclusion where when I start taking NAC again, I can see a reduction in my migraine frequency, my pain ratings, so how severe are my migraines. I can see a reduction in post trauma and prodromal symptoms, which are the symptoms that precede migraine and the after effects, so to speak, when the pain itself is gone it's gone. And I guess a little good background is to tell that I was growing up with chronic migraine, which means that I had about 15 to 28 migraines a month. This means, like, as bad as it sounds, so at some months I was every day having pain. So it's chronic pain condition. And at the moment, I'm currently classified as on a remission, which means that I'm currently off medications, and I'm also experiencing maybe I have migraines months when I'm completely migraine free, but I'm experiencing from zero to five migraines a month, and they are very manageable. So usually, I'm able to just get over it with a cold cap or some natural things. So back to NAC. So there was a scientific study in 2020 where they actually looked at the effects on migraine, and microneurs when using NAC and they noticed a mean reduction of migraine days of three days and reduction of symptoms like, migraine duration, pain, medication use, and, pain severity. And I can definitely attest to that based on my experience. So I had a little gap with using NAC. So why I think it helps for my migraine is because of this antioxidant activity and because it lowers neuroinflammation. And I guess we are going to discuss a little bit more about the mechanisms later. But just now that I think that it's also been very helpful for, other things. So recently, I noticed an improvement in my liver values, and I told you that, hey. Like, I don't know if it's the NAC or if it's the Dandelion and Myakthistle that I'm taking, but my liver values have gone from high to optimal. And this happened this change occurred around the same time and I that I started reusing NAC. But I also started using milk thistle and dandelion for the little and chamomile. And they work through a similar pathway as NEC Yes. So they can support each other. Definitely. And I just want to point out at this point that, you know, it is one of those medical uses that, NAC is approved by FDA. So it's the liver toxicity induced by, paracetamol overdose. And I was treated with paracetamol or my, like, childhood. So I guess that affected a little bit of on my liver, and maybe maybe it has some benefits for now recovering it. And when we discuss about the mechanisms then, I can also point out maybe some risks or downsides that I've noticed. I have also measured my liver values around the same time when I did use NEC, but I didn't see any differences in my liver values because, yeah, my, liver values were already normal and quite good. So I wasn't, you know, expected to gain any benefits from that. So it does kind of work in situations with higher inflammation and higher oxidative stress, especially on, like, the liver side. You may be aware that there's an interesting situation with the FDA regarding NAC supplement status. In 2021, the FDA started examining the supplement status of NAC because of citizen petitions and because it was being sold and marketed for quote unquote treating conditions that it's not intended to. Amazon quickly removed it from its stores, but the FDA didn't find any safety concerns related to the supplement. And a few months later, it was back on sale. As of now, NAC is classified as a supplement, and you can still get it over the counter. So what were my results? I've been researching about the benefits of NAC for many years up to four to five years, well before the FDA stuff. When the FDA announced that they were gonna potentially change NAC's status, I was actually buying, like, tens of bottles of NAC for future storage just so I could give it to myself and my family if needed. However, so far, I haven't been taking NAC that regularly because based on the research, I might not be the best candidate for it. And this is why. The biggest general benefit of NAC is glutathione production, which is a powerful antioxidant. NAC alone increases gluathione, but the most effective way to do it is to combine NAC and glycine. Both glycine and NAC are precursors to gluathione. What's gotten me most excited about glycine and NAC as longevity supplements are several human clinical trials over the past few years. They've shown that glycine and NAC improves seven hallmarks of aging, including inflammation, cell senescence, and mitochondrial dysfunction, while also showing benefits in body composition, insulin resistance, cognition, muscle strength, and waist circumference. And I should say that this time, I'm actually using glycine as well with NAC, and I feel like the combination is way better than NAC alone. All of this sounds amazing, but the caveat is that these studies were done on the elderly people. With age, especially after the age of 45, gluathione levels decline rapidly and inflammation levels increase. Fixing that gluathione deficiency with glycine and NAC has been seen to improve inflammatory markers and other functional outcomes. So I think that I'm already not expected to gain a lot of benefits from NAC because I'm young and my gluathione levels are already higher. But after the age of 45, when the decline in gluathione generally starts to happen, I might gain more benefits. Do you think you'll start taking it then? I do definitely think that if I'm, you know, in my fifties, sixties, seventies, eighties, then I would definitely take NAC and glycine every day. But right now, I just haven't noticed any significant improvements in my, like, health markers and in, like, my well-being or my energy levels or anything like that that you do see in the other studies on the older people. However, I do use NAC when I'm about to get sick or if I'm already sick from some sort of an infection or a virus. In those situations, both of us, we take larger amounts of NAC and we notice that the, sickness and virus kind of passes away faster and we recover pretty quickly as well. The only thing I do notice when I take NAC on a daily basis is that my muscle soreness might be slightly less or my muscles feel less sore and I recover from intense physical exercise a bit faster. I actually noticed this too and my joints, like, if I do resistance training then I can recover a lot faster and with less aches. And it's backed up by some actual studies where NAC does reduce muscle soreness but at the same time it can also counteract some of the muscle growth signal if you take it after a resistance training workout. So it's a double edged sword. It does reduce muscle soreness by reducing the inflammation, but, it can also, like, blunt some of the hypertrophy response. So let's talk about the dose of NAC. How much NAC, were you usually taking? Yeah. So based on all the studies that I read, I actually took at the beginning, I took just six hundred milligrams, but I didn't see any benefits. Then I ramped up the dose to twelve hundred milligrams, and that's when I started seeing and feeling the benefits. So that's where I kinda stayed within. Some studies even go up to two thousand four hundred milligrams, but I haven't yet tried it or I don't I haven't seen a reason to really go higher because I'm already feeling or getting quite a lot of benefits from this one. And I do want to say a couple of caveats when using NAC. One is that if I take it on an empty stomach, I will feel extremely nauseous. So I don't know why that is, but I've heard this from so many people. How I counteract this is that either I take it with food or usually, and this is what I most commonly do, is that I just take it in the evening before bed, which for some reason helps me sleep as well. So that's what I've been doing right now. So and with that well, in the evening, I take three to five grams of glycine, but throughout the day, I may eat eat, like, three to 10, sometimes even fifteen grams of glycine. Really depends on the day and if I eat collagen supplements as well. This is this has been my dose for a long time. Yeah. And the dosage depends a lot on the individual and their age and inflammatory status because in the clinical trials that I mentioned earlier, the 2021 showed that in the elderly people, a dose of two point four grams of NAC wasn't really effective, but a dose of four point eight and seven point two of both NAC and glycine was effective. So, That's quite a big dose. Yes. It is a very large dose. It's much higher than conventionally used but, I mean, that's what the kind of study found and it might be because the other people produce such a small amount of glutathione naturally and just providing the precursors, glycine and NAC, in larger doses is what's needed to see, like, an actual effect. But for you, you're young and you still produce sufficient amount of glutathione and you're just getting the benefits, the smaller dose. Yeah. I want to talk about its effects on neurotransmitters as well. But just before that, I want to point out one single risk that I found recently. So I've also, like, seem I've been just so interested in the studies, and I keep following what's coming up. And there was a 2020 study that I just recently found which looked at NAC users for fourteen years. So it was a longitudinal study, and they lose looked at their relative risk of getting knee osteoarthritis. And this was very fascinating for me because the results were completely unexpected. Also, for the researchers, their hypothesis was that NAC users would have a reduced risk of getting knee osteoarthritis, but they had four times higher risk. Wow. And that was people from 25 to 65. So all age people, four times higher risk. It was the altogether, the participants over 60,000 participants. So it wasn't a small grade scale study. It was actually quite a large study. So this is quite interesting. And what they hypothesize that maybe the effect is, so they don't know, obviously, because it's, there are other studies that show that it can actually increase cartilage turn turnover like animal and tissue model studies. But it might be that they were taking it already because they had joint issues or something or inflammation or they were more prone to inflammation already which made them take NAC and they developed the condition. So that's one explanation. Another explanation is that there is a real effect that, NAC there were some biological mechanisms that I didn't write down. I don't remember them right at this point. But there is something that can maybe, reduce the rate that the tissue is regenerating. So potentially like, these are all hypothesis, of course. They don't really know why this happened. But just I I just wanted to I thought it's, like, responsible to point this out because when I talk about my experiences with NAC, it sounds like, you know, very, very beneficial and magic, but it's not. I've done so many other things as well on the path. And for me, I just noticed the difference that it does help me, but it's not to say that everyone will benefit or should use it all the time. And you need to do your own research about it, of course. Like, we all need to do of the supplements that we are using. Yeah. And with these antioxidants defined, similar effects, at least with all cause mortality. So, like, supplementation with vitamin c and vitamin e and vitamin e are found to be linked to higher all cause mortality and heart disease. But, you know, that could also be because of the same reason that the sicker people or people who have some sort of chronic disease are using it, for that reason and it's not inherently potentially or perhaps we don't know necessarily but it's not inherently because of the supplement itself. All this is to say that I'll keep using it for now at least and I'm gonna keep a close look at the studies that come out. I'm personally not planning on using it. I might take it if I'm like, catching a cold or something or a virus, but other than that I'm not I didn't see any, like, actual effects from it, and I'm more likely to take just the regular glycine. So I'm getting, I think, some glutathione effects from the glycine already and some other benefits for collagen and, other benefits. I'll just briefly mention about the neurotransmitters because many people know NAC as the precursors of clutothione, but many people are not aware that NAC actually has shown to affect neurotransmitters as well. For example, it can down regulate it this is my studies, by the way. Down regulate the dopamine transporter, which means that there is more available dopamine in the brain. And why I think it might be beneficial for migraines is that they find that migraine nerves, there is excessive, neuroinflammation, which usually includes some sort of excessive glutaminergic signaling in the brain. It's called, like, excitotoxicity. And NAC has shown through the cysteine glutamate transporters actually balance this over, the signaling of glutamine in the brain. So, technically, lower the risk for this excitotoxicity. Potentially, these were animal models again, but that would maybe explain some of the effects on the migraine. So I have a more comprehensive video on my channel on my migraine experience, and also there is some mechanistic information about it and the information on how it has been studied in neuropsychological conditions. So if you're interested in learning more, you can, of course, check that video on my channel. And if you want a list of evidence based supplements that I personally take and which ones I don't take, then check out my free supplement list. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click a like and subscribe. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.