Dave Pascaux is a 61 year old man who ranks higher at the Rejuvenation Leaderboard than Brian Johnson, the entrepreneur who spends over $2,000,000 a year to reverse his age. Dave Pascaux, on the other hand, spends only 30,000 a year. Hey. My name is Seem. And in this video, I'm going to go through Dave Pascaux's health routines. What supplements does he take? What foods does he eat? What kind of exercise does he follow? And what other tests does he do? So the Rejuvenation Olympics is this leaderboard created by Brian Johnson, and it just ranks people based on their epigenetic age tests. Dave Pascaux is number six on the Rejuvenation Olympics, and he's slightly ahead of Brian Johnson. His oldest two test average was 0.79 compared to Brian's 0.8 and his most recent test was 0.66 compared to Brian's 0.69. Now as a disclaimer, this leaderboard is very outdated. So the last time this leaderboard was updated was in September 2023 so that's, you know, over six months ago. I personally should also be on the leaderboard and in fact I would be actually number one as of now based on the statistics from September 2023. My result would be 0.65 on the three test average and my lowest score was 0.62, but they just haven't updated the leaderboard which is a shame because, yeah, it would be interesting but apparently they're not really, you know, willing to update it or there's just some other problems related to that. But regardless this video is about Dave Pascaux, so he has a website davepascaux.net where he outlines his routine pretty much in detail. So we'll just go through and I'm gonna give my comments on these things. Chronological age 61, will be 62 in August, current epigenetic age 37.95, current pace of aging 0.66, and he's number six on the rejuvenation Olympics. Height six feet, weight one hundred and sixty seven pounds, BMI twenty two point one, marital status a single, exercise walking, running, hiking, p 90 x, yoga, pilates, carol bike. So this is kind of AI based high intensity exercise machine where you're riding on a bike. Currently taking over a 150 plus supplements a day, eighty two in the morning, seventy six in the evening. So that's interesting. He takes more supplements than Brian Johnson and he has a slightly better result so you would think like, hey, more supplements, more results, but, yeah, I'm personally taking only, like, ten supplements a day, but, yeah, I'm not, you know, thinking that it's inherently necessary, but I don't think that taking more supplements isn't inherently harmful either. There's no evidence that taking more supplements is somehow harmful but, you know, we'll react to the exact list of supplements he takes and see what does he take. Self observed differences from Brian Johnson, I'm chronologically 16 years older so that's true. Dave is 61 and Brian is I think 45 or something like that. So, yeah, there's a pretty big gap between them. I'm not a vegan. I'm not calorie restricted. In fact, I don't pay attention to calories at all by limiting simple carbohydrates. Most of the time, I eat as much as I like without gaining weight and apparently without increasing my rate of aging. I agree with that that you don't need to be in a severely calorie restricted diet, but the caveat here is that he's still pretty lean. He doesn't count calories or he doesn't think about think about the calories, but if you were to calculate all the calories that he does eat, then he probably falls somewhere around his maintenance calories. Maybe sometimes he goes below that, sometimes above that, but the average is that he's somewhere around his maintenance calories. He's not eating extra calories because he wouldn't have, you know, such leanness. So the fact that he is so lean is just a reflection of his calorie intake as a whole. But, yeah, you don't need to be in a super severe calorie restricted diet, but, the most important part is to just not be overweight and be slightly on the leaner side. Dave is not on testosterone replacement therapy. His testosterone is pretty high, eight zero eight to 1,200, but the only thing he does take is thyroid replacement hormones, so t three and t four, because since, his early thirties, his thyroid has stopped working. So let's look at his diet. What kind of meals does he eat? Weekday breakfast, so his typical breakfast Monday through Friday, one green banana. I would suggest or presume it's because of the lower glycemic index and the higher resistant starch content, which, is going to be better for the glycemic control and the gut microbiome potentially. Four heaping serving spoons of my chia nut berry bowl with additional unsweetened almond milk. So what's the chia nut berry bowl? Chia seeds soaked overnight in unsweetened almond milk, every type of organic nut and seed imaginable, so different kinds of nuts chopped, organic berries raspberries, blueberries, beetroot powder, kamu kamu powder, maca powder, mangosteen powder, spirulina, Himalayan, tartary, buckwheat, nutritional yeast, extra virgin olive oil, spices, basil, ginger, lemon thyme, etcetera. Are all these various not seeds, spices necessary? Necessary, no. Beneficial, I believe, yes. Any small subset would be just fine, but I personally like to go for maximal nutritional density and diversity. So I agree, like, you don't need to always eat all the possible nuts or all the possible berries out there, all the possible herbs out there. They have actually very similar effects and similar nutrient profile. So, like, if you compare blueberries to blackberries, for example, they're very similar in terms of their polyphenol and anthocyanin content. Maybe there is some difference between, like, strawberries and blueberries, but they're still very similar in terms of that as well and that applies to the nuts as well. So, like, almonds versus hazelnuts, there's not a lot of difference between them and the herbs as well. Basil and cumin or lemon thyme, oregano, parsley, rosemary, their herbs, they have very similar effects. So I agree that you don't need to always have a bunch of all the different possible options out there. You can get a lot of the benefits from a select few of these but, you know, if you want to put in like slightly more extra effort and it takes maybe more time to prepare this food then you can go for it. Next weekend breakfast, so Saturday and Sunday. On Saturday at home, one green banana again, four egg omelette with arugula and precooked mushrooms. On Sunday at church, happy goat omelette with extra eggs, three, and hash browns. Next, lunch only a few times per week consisting of one or more of the following. One can of wild planet sardines, one can of mussels, one can of oysters, one can of mackerel, eight to 10 precooked thawed frozen shrimp, so this is like a seafood lunch, one avocado, one green apple, one pear, one orange, raw baby carrots, chunks of celery stalk used like chips to scoop hummus, and chicken or beef bone broth. So, yeah, just a nice lunch. I think it's a pretty good one. Dinner usually between three to 5PM ending before 6PM, so making sure that he stops eating a few hours before bed. I agree that's a good idea. All of my meat comes from ButcherBox and it's organic, grass fed, grass finished. I'm still learning, but I've got the following items down pretty well. Number one, a very large premade salad. So this is the salad that he makes, this large premade salad, mix of organic greens, arugula, baby spinach, baby spring mix, Swiss chard, mix of homegrown sprouts and microgreens, broccoli, fenugreek lentils, monk, peas, radish. So these are sprouts, not the actual, vegetables, berries from my yard when in season, otherwise store bought and organic when possible, blueberries, raspberries, blackberries, goji berries, shredded organic vegetables, beets, cabbage, carrots, parsnips, radishes, turnips, chopped tomatoes, sliced cucumber, whole green olives, goat cheese, nutritional yeast, optional chicken breast in extra virgin olive oil, and or thawed precooked shrimp, dressing, apple cider vinegar, extra virgin olive oil, blend of cold pressed organic oils, black cumin oil, five seed blend, black sesame oil, coriander oil, flax oil, sunflower oil, pumpkin oil. So, I do agree that the Evo extra virgin olive oil is very healthy and is also associated with many health benefits and health outcomes, better health outcomes generally. Apple cider vinegar I give you as well is a good salad dressing and also has benefits on the glycemic response, lipids, postprandial lipids, etcetera. You know, I have heard a lot about black cumin oil, black seed oil, those kind of things. I've never tried them myself. I do think that extra virgin olive oil is probably better if you actually have the good quality extra virgin olive oil and these different oils. I've never tried them as well. I haven't done research about them as well. Pumpkin oil and coriander oil, baksesame oil, etcetera. So for dinner is the premade salad that we just talked about, large salad with different vegetables and oils, and the number two option is a slow cooker meal such as chuck roast cooked with baby carrots, purple, yellow, and white onions, mix of potatoes, purple petite potatoes, sweet potatoes, yams, cayenne pepper, red pepper flakes, garlic, fresh chopped homegrown herbs. And, the other option is pork ribs cooked with sauerkraut, baby carrots, fresh chopped homegrown herbs. B or a new wave infrared oven grilled meal such as Atlantic wild caught salmon, grass fed grown beef seasoned with missus dash. It's a very specific, routine, or instant pot pressure cooked chicken breasts. Three or more choices of sides, instant pre cooked sweet potatoes, instant pot pre cooked acorn squash, instant pot precooked mushrooms with baby Bella, shitake, white button, etcetera, and instant pot precooked rice, mix of various varieties, cooked in cast of mushroom juice and chicken or beef bone broth. So different kinds of, you know, I guess the option is like large salad, one of the meal of the meat options, chuck roast, ribs, salmon or beef, and then the third option is some sort of carbohydrate instant pot precooked like yams, squash, mushrooms, or rice, and broccoli. Let's move on with the supplements. What kind of a 150 supplements does he take? Alright. Pre or post workout supplement shake. So I guess it's some sort of protein shake. Consumption and contents vary depending upon variables such as fasting status and whether I'm pushing autophagy or pushing mTOR and growth. And the first ingredient is almond milk, 12 ounces unsweetened, aminos one scoop, eight grams, colostrum, athletic greens one scoop, beetroot powder, beta alanine, collagen peptides, creatine monohydrate, d ribose, citrulline, glutamine, leucine, lipids powder, which, is not specifically what kind of lipids is in in the ingredients, liposomal glutathione, mitopur powder, so this urolithin A, which is a compound helps with mitochondrial function and mitophagy, plant sterol extract, free radical scavenger, raw phytoplankton, red powder, so, red vegetables and berries, trehalose, which is a type of sugar that does promote autophagy, and whey protein, one scoop thirty grams. So I guess this is either the pre or the post workout supplement and I'm not sure which when which type of the day does he take it. So this is the pre and post workout supplement. It's got a lot of ingredients and a lot of different flavors. I'm not sure how it would taste like if you have Athletic Greens, beetroot powder, and trehalose and whey protein in the same shake. So, yeah. Would be interesting to taste that kind of a shake but it's got a lot of ingredients and, you know, generally these ingredients do help with physical performance and recovery. So d ribose is, like a sugar molecule, helps with energy production. Beta alanine helps with, the acid buffering. Citrulline helps with the pump. Creatine helps with energy and, muscle strength. Collagen peptides help with the joint and skin. Colostrum helps with the gut and also recovery. Then there's you got the aminos there, the whey protein, Ritz powder. So he's got a lot of stuff. These are the supplements he takes on waking. So prescription drugs are the thyroid hormones, levothyroxine and lithryonine. Bill Andrews TAM eight one eight, which is a strong telomerase activator. It's scientifically proven to be more than 300 times stronger than any other anti aging ingredient. So I haven't heard about this product. I'm not sure of the science behind it either. So telomerase increases telomere growth, but, you know, this telomerase can also be implicated in some other negative health effects. So it's not necessarily something I would take myself, and I'm not sure of the science exactly. And the price is also pretty high, $800 for ninety capsules of three hundred and seventy five milligrams. So I'm not you know, I wouldn't spend that kind of money. I'm not sure what kind of a science does it have as of now. TA Science says twenty five milligrams TA sixty five is a nutritional supplement extracted from astragalus membrane acanus, dried root, and can help to maintain or rebuild telomeres. So this is another telomerase activator cell rejuvenation from Astragalus and the price is also pretty hefty, $487 for ninety capsules. So, again, I'm not aware of the science behind this product and I'm not sure if it even has any proven benefits. So but, you know, Dave does take it. He spends almost 500 for this and 800 for the other product. So he might find it valuable, but again, I personally wouldn't probably take it because I guess the science isn't that clear because if it really worked and really had, you know, that kind of miraculous effects then many more people would take it and you would, you know, you would probably hear more about it. But, you know, it's $487 for ninety capsules and 800 for the other ninety capsules. So over $1,000, for these capsules alone. DHEA, ten milligrams. So this is a hormone testosterone, a precursor, and it does generally go down with age. He doesn't take TRT, but at his age taking DHEA might be effective if he had low testosterone. He says his testosterone is pretty high. So, you know, there's no evidence that people who have already elevated or higher end testosterone that they would benefit from DHEA in terms of increasing testosterone levels. If your testosterone levels are low or on the lower end you might see a slight increase or if you're a woman then women generally see quite a lot of benefits from DHEA, but men who already have high testosterone such as Dave then at least they don't see there's no studies that they would see additional benefits if that makes sense. Pregnenolone fifty milligrams is another steroid hormone and it also helps with recovery, sleep, and mood even. Mitochondrial energy optimizer with PQQ. So this is similar to CoQ10 but PQQ is slightly more potent for the mitochondrial function than CoQ ten. Neo forty Pro. Neo forty Professional is a clinically researched patented technology that helps support healthy blood pressure levels already in the normal range, increase nitric oxide levels, promote artery vasodilation, promote increased circulation, support healthy arterial function and support cardiovascular and heart health. So this is more like a No producer or No synthesizer nitric oxide that helps with the circulation and blood pressure effects. But he already takes quite a lot of these No promoters like beetroot powder and these other herb powders. They already have quite a potent effect on the vasodilation and nitric oxide production as well. So he's, I'm not sure how much benefit he would gain from taking extra of these No, producers. Okay. Moving on. Morning supplements with breakfast. Annatto GG, which is a compound found in annatto seeds that may support healthy cholesterol inflammation and and overall health. True NIAGEN or nicotinamide riboside three hundred milligrams that helps with NAD and yes there's a lot of studies showing nicotinamide riboside specifically true NIAGEN increased NAD in a dose dependent manner. BioSec Labs NAD region, calcium d glucarate five hundred milligrams, compound found in many fruits and vegetables supports natural detoxification. LE, c d choline, CDP choline, so a choline supplement important for the brain and liver health. LE Super CLA blend with sesame lignins, CLE supplement that helps with fat metabolism. Super K, so a k two and k one supplement. Grass fed beef liver. Endocannabinoid system booster. So I guess some sort of a CBD product, endothelial defense, arginine folic acid b six, ergothioneine which is a like it's some sort of considered like a longevity vitamin. You get it from some sort of different kinds of foods like mushrooms and vegetables and and it does have interesting effects. There's not a lot of research about ergothioneine as a supplement in terms of health benefits. Health, longevity, longevity, anabolic peptide support. So this supplement also costs 79.99 for thirty days so it's a pretty hefty supplement as well and it contains different kinds of peptides. Peptides hydrolyzed from fava bean protein, Astraganis, member Naconus, and Panax Noto ginseng. HMB helps with muscle preservation and reducing muscle catabolism. Like, I do believe that HMB is beneficial for the elderly people. There is research suggesting HMB helps with muscle maintenance in the elderly people or people who suffer from, you know, this muscle wasting, but, if you're having this with breakfast then it has less of a benefit. So I would I have taken HMB as well and I take it usually on a faster state in the morning so maybe having HMB immediately after waking up would make more sense because if you're already eating you're getting the protein from the food that already reduces the muscle catabolism. So HMB has less of an effect. Huperzine A is also like a cholinergic compound, helps with neurotransmitters. Megalicopine, antioxidant in tomatoes. Fosotylcholine, so another choline supplement. Proresolving mediators, a supplement designed to support the body's natural inflammatory response, including ingredients such as EPA and EHA. SAMe, so esadenosylmethionine, is a methyl donor super absorbable tocotrienols, vitamin e form Tongkat Ali complex so that's gonna help with the testosterone Vazganox trying it out supports nitric oxide vitamin d3 eight thousand IUs and ultra zeaxanthin with lutein six milligrams. I do think that zeaxanthin is a good supplement, but you can also get it from quite a lot of foods. So my first comment for these morning supplements is that he's taking a lot of things that are somewhat redundant in my opinion. At least, of course, he can do whatever he wants. I'm just giving, like, what I would do or I wouldn't stack a lot of these nitric oxide boosters because excess nitric oxide can actually be harmful and cause more oxidative stress and given that he's already eating so many nitric oxide boosting foods in his smoothie, in his regular meals, then I don't see any additional, like, reason to take extra No boosters, at least in my opinion, and excess No can actually be harmful. The same with this choline choline supplements, phosphatidylcholine and this, c d choline, c d c d b choline, etcetera. He's taking so many of them, so it's hard to say, okay, which one work? How much would you actually need? So he's kind of stacking all these, similar supplements almost like for the sake of just stacking them and you get a lot of the choline from your actual foods as well. So he eats, like, eggs pretty regularly and, the other foods have choline as well. So it's hard to say, okay, which ones are redundant and which one are, like, unnecessary in the first place. Same with, like, Brian Johnson. Brian Johnson takes, like, you know, 100 supplements. A lot of the supplements are kind of redundant that he has and, I'm not saying that they might not have benefits, it's just that they're redundant almost and they're kind of stacking the effects without knowing which ones, work in my opinion. Morning and evening supplements are terozyl, a patented blend of nutrients that provides endothelial support. So the similar with nitric oxide promoting the production of nitric oxide. Azaxanthin, I think that is a good supplement. Skin benefits, cholesterol inflammation, blood pressure benefits in human randomized clinical trials. So this actually has, you know, solid human evidence in clinical trials that it works which isn't the case with a lot of these other supplements like codeine etcetera. Calcium alpha ketoglutarate, this is also interesting supplement. There is a, like, one or two studies I believe showing that the calcium AKG supplementation reduces biological age by up to like eight years if I'm not mistaken was the number. So, it's certainly interesting. I would want to see more research about it and, yeah. It's, but the problem is that it's also quite expensive. Next supplement, Nutikost Dim. So Dim is a helps with estrogen and hormone balance. Ester c, patented form of vitamin c. Cuolic aged garlic extract. I think this is a good supplement. It has research and garlic, allicin, aged garlic extract, they have human clinical trials as well showing the benefits on blood pressure, inflammation, cholesterol, blood sugar. So garlic is a really powerful food and the garlic supplements also have benefits. Hyaluronic acid does have human trials even doses of two hundred milligrams helping with skin hydration and skin aging. NAC has benefits increases glutathione human in human trials. So in these trials that they have done with glycine and NAC the lowest effective dose was, like, five grams of NAC and the doses of two point five grams of, NAC didn't work, either and the same with glycine. So you need to get based on the trials, like, a hundred milligrams per kilogram of glycine and ninety eight milligrams per kilogram of NAC to see benefits in increasing gluthan in the elderly people, so people in their seventies, eighties. Now Dave is significantly healthier than the average 61 year old person, but there is some age related decline in glutathione as well starting at the age of 45 already. So for him taking one thousand milligrams of NAC, I would presume it does have some benefits and it can help, but at least based on the studies like 2.5 isn't even enough to see effects. Lipoic acid, antioxidant, taurine four thousand milligrams. So there was a recent mouse study in 2023 that showed that a dose of three to six grams of taurine, so four thousand milligrams will be in the middle of there, did have benefits on extending lifespan in those mice. So four thousand milligrams would work to fit that kind of a paradigm or the results of that study. But again, it's a mouse study. We don't have a lot of human trials at least in such large doses of taurine. So I do think taurine is probably good and it has benefits. I'm just not taking it myself right now on a regular basis at least. TMG betaine, so three thousand milligrams supports methylation, liver function and cardiovascular health. I agree TMG is good. It even has it even has, like, exercise, performance benefits. I take TMG every day myself for methylation support and I'm trying to get my homocysteine lower as well. I take only one gram per day. I might, you know, increase it actually also to a bit higher dose. Multivitamin that has vitamins and minerals and yarrowubiconol, so this is CoQ ten. Evening supplements, Pendulum Akkermansia, so probiotic, pure apigenin that helps with NAD levels by suppressing CD 38 and it has other anti inflammatory effects. I agree. It's also senolytic. It's just we don't have any human trials with senolytics, so we don't know again like what's the necessary dose for the senolytics. Arachidonic acid, one thousand five hundred milligrams, so it actually increases inflammation or it promotes this cell swelling in response to resistance training so it can actually help with muscle growth. It's just another example of like stacking a lot of supplements. So he takes this supplement that, is a precursor to certain inflammatory molecules in the body so it helps with muscle growth through the increased inflammation but then he's also taking a lot of anti inflammatory supplements so, you know, which one is it? Like, is the anti inflammatory supplements counteracting the effects of this arachidonic acid or is the arachidonic acid exceeding the anti inflammatory supplement so he needs to take anti inflammatory supplements? So we don't know because there's no research about that. So it's, you know, I think my message here is to let people know that you need to think about okay what kind of supplements are you taking and if you're stacking a lot of supplements you have no idea if they contribute to each other or if they cancel each other out, what's the actual defect size that you're getting. So it's just a lot of these, you know, people might get impression that they need to just take oh this supplement has this research, I'm gonna take it and I'm gonna keep stacking all the supplements etc etc. Optimized ashwagandha, so everyone pretty much knows what that is, helps with stress and relaxation, it might help with testosterone as well. Extra strength, Avmacol, so sulforaphane and myrosinase, NRF two activator helps with glufan, Bacopa helps with cognition. Thorne berbercap berberine two hundred milligrams helps with cholesterol, blood sugar, and inflammation. Beta glucans found in, different kinds of, plants and fungi. Bilberry extract, optimized broccoli and cruciferous blend. So he's taking the, sulforaphane and myrosinase and, he's taking the broccoli and cruciferous blend as well. So it's, again, stacking some supplements carnitine and helps with energy production and fat loss. Super carnosine helps with fighting advanced glycation end products, which I think is a good supplement to take in my opinion. I'm not taking it myself, but, I think, it would make sense why because at least it's a, like, a unique effect that you don't get from the other supplements. Chromium picolinate, healthy cholesterol and insulin sensitivity. Curcumin, so inflammation. So it's funny, like, curcumin in large amounts can suppress muscle hypertrophy especially if you take it after training. So evening supplements, I would suggest then, the curcumin comes after the training. So he's taking the arachidonic acid in the evening that supposedly increases the inflammatory response but then he's also taking the anti inflammatory curcumin that suppresses the inflammatory response and suppresses the muscle hypertrophy response. So it's interesting, like, you take the inflammatory but then you're like the anti inflammatory so it's like upwards and downwards. So it's a bit like I think the timing is a bit off. So like if you wanna take curcumin then it's better to take it in the morning and not after exercise. After the exercise you might you could take arachidonic acid and it would probably have effects in increasing the cell swelling response and muscle hypertrophy, but taking arachidonic acid with curcumin together doesn't make sense in my opinion. EGCG green tea extract. So, this helps as well with like fat burning and liver health and other benefits, but taking it after exercise again isn't I think the smartest idea because EGCG is mTOR inhibitor and AMPK activator, so it does the opposite of recovery. So it you should you should take this in the morning like you should take it before exercise to help with the fat oxidation during the exercise. So taking it after the exercise, again, like cancels out some of the benefits of the exercise or at least mitigates some of the effects. Fatty fifteen. So c fifteen is a type of fatty acid. Fatty fifteen is the world's first and only science backed patented award winning c fifteen fifteen, a supplement that supports your long term health and wellness. So ninety day starter kit is a 119. So one hundred and twenty thirty day trial kit $50. So again, it's a pretty hefty supplement. I'm not sure exactly what this does and if it's even necessary. Next up Ginkgo Biloba for the cognition and brain side. Giro protect longevity AI, antioxidant blend polyphenol and omega three fatty acids, age a cell, supplement designed to support healthy aging by promoting cell repair and regeneration, glucosamine chondroitin, so helps with joints. I think I do think that larger dose of glucosamine is needed, so three grams of glucosamine sulfate, for example, is what provides greater benefits for their joints and usually the lower doses. So, like, one one gram, one and a half grams. You the reason why people think glucosamine doesn't work is because they take such a low dose. So, like, one gram isn't enough generally. So, like, higher dose three grams is, what would be more effective. Grape seed extract, another proanthocyanate supplement. So, you know, again, this is like another AMPK activator, enterinhibitor. So this would be better in the morning. Again, like, it's interesting to take it after the the training in my opinion. HelioCare fern block fern block protects skin cells, maintains the structure increasing collagen hydroxychloroquine elastin. Healthy Cell AC eleven supports healthspan by enhancing natural ability to repair DNA. So a thirty serving supplement $32.99 Swanson Reuterie Plus probiotic, lactoferrin, milk protein, sunflower, lecithin, luteolin, lithium orotate one thousand micrograms. So So again, every time I mention lithium orotate then people are kind of overreacting thinking like it's always harmful, you get it from batteries, car batteries. Well, like lithium is a quite interesting supplement and it does have a few studies showing that higher lithium levels as well as higher amounts of lithium in the drinking water are associated with longevity in different parts of the world as well, so not just one single location. So higher amounts of lithium, naturally occurring lithium in the tap water is linked to lower homicide, lower suicide, and slightly longevity, better mental health, so it helps with brain health and there are a few clinical trials as well that lithium might help with some aspects of mood disorders etc. So I have taken lithium as well. I think it's a pretty interesting and potentially beneficial supplement in smaller doses so like one thousand micrograms. Lysine, I mean acid protein synthesis collagen production, nattokinase, so I've mentioned nattokinase on my channel as well so the most interesting thing about nattokinase is that it has been shown to reduce plaque scores in humans. We would probably need more studies to confirm that but as of now I do think nattokinase is a potential longevity supplement in the future at least for the cardiovascular health. It has many other cardiovascular benefits as well. Nutrafol physician formulated for visibly thicker stronger hair. Magnesium breakthroughs is this kind of different seven different types of magnesiums. I think it's a great product. I like it. Milk thistle helps with liver health and glutathione production. MSM, so another sulfur compound for the joints, but there are still being a kind of cousin molecule to resveratrol, but there's no, like, human studies really about that same with, like, resveratrol. It doesn't have any human studies showing that it's actually beneficial for longevity unless you are obese and unless you have metabolic syndrome. Pycnogenol, so it's the maritime pine bark extract rich in procyanidins and antioxidants. Again, it's a autophagy inducer and AMPK activator so you don't want to take it before the exercise, not in the evening. In my opinion, red yeast rice helps with cholesterol levels. Resveratrol, I mentioned it, there's little pretty much very little evidence that it has any benefits in otherwise healthy people and it actually reduces VO2 max, might reduce muscle growth and reduces testosterone levels as well. So it only works, at least in mice, it only works if the mice are super obese and eating like a very fatty diet, but in humans and in humans there is some trials as well where it works in improving blood sugar and cholesterol levels, but only in people who are, you know, overweight and with metabolic syndrome. Saw palmetto extract for testosterone. Again, I'm not taking any testosterone proof boosters myself. They might help, they might work, and they might not work either. High potency serrapeptase, Sert6 activator, naturals SOD powder, so superoxide dismutase, antioxidant, again, I wouldn't take it in the evening after exercise. Spermidine. So this supplement, you know, there's at least two clinical trials, recent ones, that one found that it didn't raise blood spyrimidine levels and two it didn't improve cognition in elderly people so these two studies at least for me are showing that there's no point in supplementing spermidine and you want to get the spermidine from the foods that you eat, so like mushrooms, vegetables, cheese and other stuff like that. So he eats a lot of spermidine from his diet and the associations with longevity all are based on the dietary spermidine. So the study showing that spermidine intake is linked to reduced mortality and greater longevity are based on the dietary spermidine so I wouldn't take a spermidine supplement myself. Stem region natural ingredients promoting stem cell release and migration. So I'm not sure again if there is any studies about this supplement or if you can even induce them. There are a few compounds that do help with stem cell activation and production, but yeah, like one bottle sixty capsules a $186, you know, that's not something I would myself take at least. Stinging nettle root, so this help with kidneys I guess and with prostate. Zinc thirty milligrams, pretty high dose like the RDA for zinc is only eight milligrams and taking large amounts of zinc can have quite negative effects like it can reduce your copper status which reduces hemoglobin levels and it can also increase cholesterol levels. So personally I wouldn't take thirty milligrams of zinc every day especially if you're already getting quite a lot of zinc from your food. Like, yes, zinc does increase testosterone but it has other negative effects especially if you're taking as a supplement in larger quantities. So he's getting a lot of the seafood like the sardines and oysters and stuff that they have already quite a lot of zinc so he's getting well beyond the RDA from his diet alone. Next up, every other week, if not weekly, rapamycin six milligrams. So this is the mTOR inhibitor. It's thought to have longevity benefits. Obviously, we don't have human trials. In animal studies, rapamycin is the, I think, the only, like, pharmaceutical that has been repeatedly and consistently shown to extend lifespan and the effects are very similar to the gold standard of life extension in animals, which is calorie restriction and, yeah, rapamycin is certainly very interesting and I am excited for the future trials of rapamycin. I'm not taking it myself right now, but again it might have like some negative side effects. As of now there are no real known side effects to rapamycin even peep in in even in people who are taking it recreationally. Once a week or month in the evening, difisetin eight hundred milligrams, quercetin and tiaflavine. So these are these senolytics and I guess he's taking it for the sake of cleaning out the senescent cells. But again the problem is, like I mentioned, there's not there's no studies human clinical trials on the senolytics as of now. They're being done. They're coming out in the next few years, but as of now there's no established protocol of how much senescent cells you need to remove, how much of these compounds you need to take to get those effects, how frequently you should do it, how should you pulse them, so we don't have that kind of data. So right now it's very speculative to take, senolytics and do, like, a senolytic cleanse a few times a month or something. It's very speculative as of now and it's hypothetical, but in the future we might have these trials. But, you know, these supplements are generally with anti inflammatory effects, antioxidant effects, but there's no established senolytic protocol if that makes sense. First of all, you don't have a way to, like, measure your senescent cell burden. There are a few biomarkers but they're not found in your like regular lab. You can't measure your senescent cell burden from your doctor, for example. So first of all you don't know how to measure it, you don't know what's the right protocol, how frequently you should do it, and how much of these, compounds you should take. So I'm not doing any senescent cell cleaning myself. So overall my impression with his supplement routine is that he's, you know, taking a few pretty interesting ingredients, he's trying to like stack all together and it's kind of hard to understand what's the goal with this routine and, you know, it would make sense if he times them more properly. So for example, he takes these anti inflammatory supplements in the evening presumably after the workout, but he also takes this quote unquote inflammatory supplement arachidonic acid at the same time and, yeah. So it's pretty all over the place in my opinion at least and given how much these supplements cost, like a few of the supplements, they cost at, like, $70 per one month package, a $186 per one sixty sixty day package. So So these supplements are pretty expensive and I would imagine that he spends over half of all of these things on his supplements. So he probably spends like over 1,000, maybe $2,000 per month on supplements. It's hard to say which ones work and which ones are actually giving the biggest effects for him. So that's why I like to take more of like a conservative approach to supplements. I personally take right now only less than 10 supplements a day and I do think the reason I take them is that because they have so much evidence and proven to work and we know the exact dosage, we have multiple human clinical trials showing the the effects, so my approach would be to, yeah, like just take the least but most effective supplements rather than taking a lot of different supplements that also stack on top of each other and also the things that you're already getting from the diet. So all these No boosters, all these polyphenols, all these anti inflammatory stuff, you're he's getting a lot of them from the diet. And the same applies to Brian Johnson as well who's taking like a 100 over one hundred supplements per day. Brian Johnson is also stacking these same things without knowing if they work, without knowing what's the effect size of an individual supplement. He says he does know that but he doesn't really know that because he hasn't done a specific split test, so to say, because it's impossible to split test 100 supplements while controlling all the other variables. So yeah, like you will never know exactly does this supplement work and how big an effect are you getting it from there. So that's why I created my own supplement list. You can get it for free at cineland dot co slash supplement list or click the link in the description to get your free PDF of the supplements I take and the list of the most effective supplements that are out there and the list of supplements that don't work. But of course, Dave does many other things besides taking supplements, so we'll continue with his other routines. So this is his daily routine, morning routine, wake up whenever I wake up, no alarm, no stress. While still in bed, I do the Beemer b body mat. So this is this kind of like not necessarily a PMF mattress, but it's this I've tried it myself. It's, this kind of a microcirculation device that helps with causing microcirculation as they say and supposedly helps with circulation. It's not PMF per se but it's slightly different with similar effects. Stretch the lower back feet overhead with knees to chest. Take on waking medications and supplements as we talked about. Begin listening to podcasts, see subscriptions and or audible book selection, and then he does, not necessarily in this order, mini trampoline five minutes, various floor stretches fifteen minutes, foam roller fifteen minutes, inversion table five minutes, brush teeth, scrape tongue, wash face, weigh myself, check sleep scores on fitness trackers. So, yeah, it's a good idea to obviously stretch and get your body moving a little bit after waking up. Brush your teeth, scrape tongue, wash face, those are also underrated and quite important. At least one hour after waking up, he takes the morning supplements, bio bioregulators of the week, various proteolytic enzymes, and duqualiazynolytic, all washed down with home brewed, lemon tea, omnibiotic, hedge ox, probiotics, Optivita, Health Complete Essentials, Collagen peptides, and another half cup of three stage filtered water to completely fill my glass mug. Methylene blue occasionally h two tablet, so molecular hydrogen, JUV session, Radler therapy twenty minutes hopefully before sunrise. Carol, bike sprint, then prepare and begin drinking the pre post workout supplement shake, which is the shake that we talked about. One teaspoon each of the following bulletproof MCT oil, C60 in extra virgin olive oil, rosita cord liver oil, Siberian sea buckthorn oil, step outside for some sunrise exposure. Agreed. That's a quite important thing. I would even do it, like, before, but he might wake up before the sunrise. So, yeah. Normally, an outdoor walk or run would occur here in warmer weather. To avoid a slip and fall injury during the winter months, I opt for the treadmill in my basement whenever the outdoor temperature drops below freezing. P 90 x, workout of the day, sometimes all at once, sometimes afford piecemeal throughout the day in exercise snacks. Tap out XT, eight back abs XT and P 90 x ab. Rupert X together back to back every other day. So this kind of bodyweight, high intensity workout, infrared sauna and meditation, twenty five to forty five minutes. Inject peptides of the day when applicable. Shower with Doctor. Bronner's Castile soap and occasionally using Alatora meteorite facial scrub. Moisturize with La Roche Posay Lipicarbol AP plus intense repair body lotion for dry skin especially in winter. Eat breakfast. So you see breakfast menu with proteolytic enzymes. Quarterly and semiannual plasma donations twice weekly for two to three plus weeks quarterly. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy, ten ninety minute sessions, ten days in a row annually or semiannually for injury repair, DNA repair, ten minute lengthening, and clearance of senescent cells. Early mid afternoon routine, eat lunch occasionally. I usually get too busy to stop to eat only a few times a week. I have the lunch. Pause listening to podcasts and audiobooks. Begin watching YouTube videos. See subscription while eating. Late afternoon and early evening routine. End of listening to podcasts, audiobooks, and YouTube videos. I eat dinner typically between three to 5PM. Evening supplements, plus protozic enzymes taken with dinner, we desone it. Begin watching Netflix in the kitchen while dining. Smart home with Phillips Hue light bulbs in recessed lighting all throughout the house. All screens reduce blue light on a schedule. Good. So you put the blue blocking on. Blue blocking glasses to prepare for the evening so it's good that he respects the circadian rhythm. After dinner routine continue watching Netflix in the den while working on balance and flexibility with Bosu ball and fitter first balance board. So he's doing balance exercises in the evening, eat two kiwis. So I guess this helps with sleep. There's studies showing that kiwis help with sleep and serotonin. Occasional light snack of pistachios and chlorella. Bedtime routine. Floss brush teeth. Wash face with La Roche Posay. Apply whole body skin treatments, especially on face, neck, chest, and hands, combining and or rotating the following products. Cara only stem cell regenerative cream and anti pigmentation formula, Differin gel hyaluronic acid, OneSkin OS one, Vitali skincare, sleep breakthrough supplement mixed with collagen peptides, HVM ketone IQ. Interesting to take the ketones before bed like that and rapamycin, inject the evening peptides when applicable, beamer body mat, pray and review my daily blessings until I fall asleep. So that's the there's no timing of when he goes to bed but that's his routine. So these are the highlights of Dave's routine, his supplement routine, his diet, his exercise, and his daily routine. I'm not gonna go through all the testing he does. I'm not gonna go through all the gadgets he uses, etcetera. You you get the idea already of the general picture of what he does. So my overall impression is that he's pretty dedicated to his routine. He's pretty optimized in terms of that. He follows it consistently. He's getting great results obviously. He looks great for someone who is in his sixties and he gets great results with all his, epigenetic tests, his blood work as well as I presume, and he, gets better results than Brian Johnson and he spends only $30,000 a year on all of this protocol, which is significantly less than Brian Johnson. But again, like, it's still quite a lot like $30,000 per year so that would be something around like 2 and a half thousand per month, which I don't I don't I'm not sure what like what the economic difference between US and Estonia would be. So 2,500 in Estonia to spend on all of the supplements and I presume the foods as well would, it's not it's it's definitely on the higher end in terms of Estonian economics, but in The US it's pretty reasonable, I would presume, like 2,500 on all the foods and supplements would, you know, maybe be more than the average person, but it's still pretty reasonable. Does he need to spend all of that money? You know, that's his decision. He does it what he wants. That's his life. I'm just giving my thoughts and comments on the topic. He definitely could, you know, if he wants to cut down on the budget or something he would definitely reduce some of the supplements because a lot of them are redundant. That's kind of my main comment on the supplements and, yeah, like that's that's that's where he would probably gain the most, like, price reduction, but you know, he can do what he wants. And I did notice that Dave watches my YouTube channel because I was in one of his lists of the YouTube subscribed channels that he watches. So if you're watching this Dave, then I've been trying to get you on my podcast. I haven't found any contact email. I tried to reach out on LinkedIn but you haven't responded. So if you're watching this, probably you are, so then you can reach out to me on email and we'll do a podcast if you're up for it. Other than that, if you want to check out my longevity routine then check out my evidence based longevity routine video in the description. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click the like and subscribe. My name is C. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.