Last year, I measured my biological age to get qualified to the rejuvenation Olympics. It's a leaderboard created by Brian Johnson to rank people with the slowest speeds of epigenetic aging. However, many people have kept asking me why am I not still ranked on the leaderboard. Well, the truth is that I've been trying to apply my results to the leaderboard since November 2023. But so far, after several applications and several emails, they just still haven't accepted my results. Now I didn't plan to make this video but just because so many people kept asking me where are my results, why am I not on the leaderboard, so I decided to make a video about my results and also talk about why I'm not there. I'm also teaming up with doctor Michael Lustgarten who has a PhD in physiology and who's also an expert in longevity and biological age modification. So what results did I get? My first test results came back very good. I got a speed of aging of 0.62. The current best at the time was 0.665, which is still currently the best result as of now. It's the epigenetic speed or pace of aging, and, it's basically got a low and a high. The lowest could be 0.6, and the highest pace of aging would be 1.4. So 0.6 basically means for every one year of chronological age that passes, you're aging at point six years, and 1.4 would be your aging at 1.4 years per year. To qualify for the leaderboard, you need three tests with the first and last being six months apart. So I had to wait until November to get my third test result. In November, I got my three test average result, which was 0.65. That would still put me at rank one in the absolute lowest value, but not when you're adjusting for chronological age. So my three test result was still the number one value on the leaderboard, but it doesn't matter because they still haven't accepted my results. I even tweeted Brian Johnson on Twitter asking if he can look into it. He tweeted me back that he messaged the team, but that was already in January. Now personally, I don't really care about the results that much. The only reason I got into it was that, hey, I did my first test. I got 0.62, which was, you know, much better than the other results on the leaderboard. So I thought, hey. So that was the real reason I did it. I don't really think that these tests are, you know, as important as some other vital vital biomarkers like your blood work, your lipid panel, your glucose levels, your inflammation levels, your liver panel, all those things. And even things like VO two max test, your muscle strength, your general fitness, I think those tests, those markers are significantly more important than these epigenetic age tests because these epigenetic age tests, they're very new and they're not really that accurate when you look into, like, how many things can affect the results. I just recently did a comprehensive blood panel with a 180 biomarkers and it came back very good. Your VO2 max is also one of the best predictors of majority and my result was sixty six, which is in the elite level of 18 year olds. And if I were to be able to choose, okay, you can have ten years lower biological age and a do not in pace value of 0.6 versus having a VO2 max above 60, then I would choose the VO2 max above 60 every day of the week because the VO2 max above 60 is a significantly stronger predictor of mortality. We have a lot more data about it and it's much more important for overall health longevity. So in in the CALERI study, they looked at, six different epigenetic clocks and looking at epigenetic changes, baseline twelve and twenty one 24, two years after on being on CR. So none of the other five or four gold standard epigenetic clocks, Horvath, Hannem, PhenoAge, GrimAge, and then an earlier iteration of Dunedin Pace. None of those were able to identify an epigenetic age reduction as a result of CR either at the twelve or twenty four month time period. But Dunedin Pace saw a younger epigenetic pace of aging at both the twelve and twenty four month time periods relative to the control group. So the argument could be that at least based on that study in a head to head matchup, that Dunedin pace is the only clock that can actually detect a biological age slowing or an epigenetic age slowing relative to the other gold standard clocks. So just to add to that a little bit more, then there's also all cause mortality risk. How does darida pace compare against the gold standard clocks for for all cause mortality risk? And in that case, Horvath and Hannam are not very good for all cause mortality across many studies. The gold standard clocks there are, pheno age and and note that this is the PhenoAge not on the blood biomarker base, but the epigenetic, test for PhenoAge. So PhenoAge and GrimAge are the gold standards there, and Dunedin Pace compared favorably in terms of the effect size hazard ratio in at least two studies. So it's as good as or it's in the same ballpark as the best epigenetic clocks for its association with all cause mortality risk, and it's the only epigenetic clock that's been able to detect an epigenetic age slowing as a result of CR. The problem with these epigenetic tests and the do not in pace value is also that they're pretty sensitive. There is evidence that biological age values as measured by these epigenetic tests increase during stress, infections, and inflammation. I did get the c virus before measuring my second test which was 0.65. I did recover fast and didn't have any other symptoms, but the infection might have affected my results. Before my third test, I also lost about three to four kilograms of weight and I started doing a lot of cardio to increase my VO two max. However, I increased my VO two max from 53 to 66 during this time, which is a massive increase. And like I said, a VO two max of 66 is a significantly bigger predictor of longevity than a doonad in pace value of 0.6 or even, like, 0.5 if it were to be possible. So I would choose the VO2 max any day of the week, and I don't regret increasing my VO2 max and doing a lot of cardio to get the 66 VO2 max even if it increased my DOONAD in pace value slightly. I will always choose the VO2 max. At least for the Horvath test that, very fit people have generally higher, the older ages for the Horvath test relative to their chronological age. I don't know if that's true for, Donita PACE, but just anecdotally too. I mean, your regular exercise I'm a regular exerciser. People that are in, you know, the or close to the top 25, exercise is a big part of the approach. So how much that contributes? We'd have to stop training, you know, for few months, which isn't gonna happen, right, to do that experiment. Right? So, yeah, that's probably a big part of it too. How much it contributes? Is CR better? Could you just be CR? Could you be only exercise and not CR? You know, I don't know. If I really wanted to slow down my doing it in pace value, then I would have to go on a lower calorie diet. I would have to stop exercising almost completely besides maybe just walking. I would have to sleep a lot, I would have to live in a bubble and not get infected, and then for the course of few weeks or months, I would see my donated pace value going to much lower levels. But I don't think that's worth it when you look at the all the other data about exercise and a healthy lifestyle, then the veo to max and just exercising in general is a much better predictor of longevity. Anyway, long story short, I'd bet that chronic overtraining, chronic overnutrition, chronic oversupplementation, All these things could impact it, but then that's a a a matter of of dose with inter individual variability. You'd have to somebody would have to actually do the test, you know, to see what's up. Like, for example, in elite athlete who's lean, but, you know, a professional athlete, you know, maybe basketball player, soccer player who's running literally miles and kilometers every couple days. For the average person, that's probably chronic overtraining. But for the elite athlete who's probably got the genetics to handle that, maybe they're donated a pace with point six or something fantastic. Whereas if the average person did that, it'd be all out of whack. Right? So I didn't change my diet that much during this period. I only reduced my calorie intake quite significantly, and I lost, you know, three to four kilograms of weight, which was also probably the due to the increased cardio and just increased exercise. But maybe too much calorie restriction might accelerate the do not in pace value, at least based on my experience, you know, combining a lot of exercise with the lower calorie intake, then it might increase the speed of aging because of the increased stress. So there is probably like a sweet spot with calorie restriction. Too much calorie restriction probably isn't good enough but being over nourished and being overweight is probably also not optimal when it comes to the speed of biological aging. Overall, as of making this video in 02/29/2024, then I am number one, the unofficial record holder of the lower speed of aging on the rejuvenation leaderboard. Of course, there are many many other people who might have a better result or a better three test average than me. Even like some of my own coaching clients that I have consulted during this period, they have seen a test result of zero point sixty one and zero point six even. So I'm not saying that, you know, I have the best result in the world or whatever. It doesn't really even matter that much because of the things that I mentioned in this video and there are other much more important markers that matter a lot more than the Dunedin pace value like the v o two max test and even just the regular blood panel. Panel actually improved over this period. So if you look at the whole picture, my blood markers improved, my lipids were slightly lower, my glucose were slightly lower, my other markers were also, like, very similar, but the general trend was that my blood markers got slightly better over the six months that I did the tests. My VO2 max got a lot better which is a huge win and the only thing that got worse was the Dunedin pace value slightly due to excess exercise, maybe some infection, maybe excess calorie restriction. So if you look at the whole picture, then my speed of aging, objectively speaking, should be lower because of all the other improvements in my health and biomarkers. Cover as many biomarkers of organ and systemic health as possible. So you're right. It it's one biomarker, you know, the epigenetic speed of aging. The other is how old are you epigenetically or VAD clock. So and, you know, just even as a side note there, the methylation that they're looking at is, you know, c h three. It's either on the DNA or not. That's only one aspect of epigenetic changes. Acetylation, you know, adding acetate, c h three c double bond o o h. That's another epigenetic modification. And there as far as I know, there are no epigenetic clocks that are looking at acetylation, you know, as, the as the speed of aging relative to acetylation, or it's not just methylation or acetylation. Genes are turned off and on by the combination of these things. Right? So, how to study that, that's a whole another can of worms that's you know? But the good news is the methylation based clocks, it's a cutting edge. It's as good as we can do in that aspect, but it's a small part of the approach, which highlights the need for, you know, blood based biomarkers of kidney, liver, immune cells, metabolic health, you know, as many organ systems as possible. But then other things that aren't covered on blood test, blood pressure, lung function, which are also affected by aging and can be impacted by lifestyle modifications. So, yeah, the goal is to optimize everything and and and track track, intervene, optimize, and keep that circle going indefinitely. So I hope you got some valuable information from this. This is the answer why I'm not on the leaderboard right now. You know, who knows if I will ever be put on the leaderboard. If it takes them for, you know, four months to just put a person on the leaderboard, then, you know, I'm not really interested in kind of waiting that long. I'm not going to probably do another test either because, you know, what's the point in waiting four months to get on the leaderboard if you're not really getting there in the first place? As of now, I'm not there. Maybe after this video comes out, maybe I will there, but it's already been four months. So, yeah, it's kind of a pointless to wait. Yeah. Conquer aging or die trying all over the interwebs. YouTube, Twitter, Instagram, you name it. But other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.