There's not any serious evolutionary purpose to to live, you know, after you're gonna have children. And I think that in the modern lifestyle, my personal opinion is that everybody needs supplements. Welcome to the Seamnan podcast. I'm your host Seam Lund. And today, our guest is Joe Cohen. Joe is the founder and CEO of SelfDecode. Me and Joe had a conversation at our retreat in India at a five star hotel and longevity clinic. In this episode, we discuss our experience. Seventh time. Yeah? When was the first time? My first time in the program was in 2019, March 2019. Oh, well, this is before. Yeah. That was easy. The before the program even started. So I it was, like, starting to bud, and I did a bunch of treatments. I did the ultrasound, the CT scan. They didn't do the whole body MRI then, but, obviously, they do it now. And, yeah, there there's certain tests that were added that I didn't do then. For example, the last time I did a screening a cancer screening test in the blood. Mhmm. So similar to a GRAIL test. Right. So I've done that. That's like an example of a new test they added. They also added some of the biomarkers. I told them to to add the amino acid panel, which I think is very important because that's been a game changer in a lot of things I'm doing. Mhmm. Right. For example, it's just not it wouldn't it wasn't clear to me what amino acids that I was deficient in any amino acids. Right? You would think that if you eat enough protein, you won't be deficient in amino acids, but Mhmm. That's actually not true. What what are things like then affect that if you're eating, like, you know, meat, you would expect getting rid of everything? I think it's more influenced by utilization. Right. So Gut. It's it's not so not even the gut, just how much you utilize the amino acids. So even if you consume a lot, if you utilize them more Mhmm. It'll just be lowered in the blood. And the utilization depends on nutrients that you're consuming. So if you're maybe you're consuming more of one nutrient Mhmm. Might utilize an amino acid more. Gotcha. And for example, b six causes the utilization of a lot of amino acids. And so if you're taking other supplements, sometimes other supplements will increase the utilization. So let's say, I I don't know if this is the case, but let's say HMD is a a supplement that maintains muscles. Right? One like, a lot of the mechanisms by which we maintain muscle mass is not breaking down muscle. That is the main mechanism. Right? It decreases catabolism. And so if you decrease catabolism, then the the the body uses that as a mechanism to increase amino acids in your blood when needed. But the thing is I'd actually take a bunch of things that decrease the catabolism, which means that I don't break down the amino acids very much. I'm more like use them, but don't break down my, muscles very much, which can be a good thing, but also I noticed that when I exercise a fair bit Mhmm. My amino acids, a lot of them are low because I think it's used. And then if I'm taking certain supplements, maybe certain nutrients that are helping the utilization and then certain supplements that prevent capitalism Yeah. All of a sudden, that could be one of the reasons why they're lower. Right? Certain amino acids, even if I am taking it, and certain amino acids are being utilized more than others. So, for example, I noticed if I eat more protein, there's certain amino acids that just go off if I generally eat more protein. That includes tyrosine and phenylalanine. And the reason, I think, is because those are not really utilized by exercise very much. They're utilized by other processes. Mhmm. And for whatever reason, like, there's just a limit in how much you're gonna use. So if you if you consume a lot of protein, I just noticed my tyrosine and phenylalanine go up. Yeah. But that's pretty responsive Right. To, how much protein I eat. On the other hand, as I've eaten more protein, I told you I eat, 218 of protein a day, something like that, which is a lot. My leucine is still low. I mean, like, the range is, it's somewhere the range is, like, 68 to $1.83, but my leucine tested a bunch of times, it hovers around 70, which is which is quite low, given that I consume a lot of whey. I have a 100 use that. Is it because of the pre protein? I think so. So my muscle mass has been going up, and I just think that what I noticed is that if my body's fighting infection, it takes the leucine because your body needs leucine for, you know, different immune proteins. And if I'm working out or if I'm exercising, my my muscles just soak up too soon. Mhmm. And then I think could be certain nutrients, certain vitamins or certain nutrients, that I'm taking, could be they utilize this more, which could be a good thing. But then what happens is is that the serum levels are low, and there's kind of like, you know, my body doesn't wanna break down muscle tissue, but then the leucine levels are lower. Whereas I find that the isoleucine is like, my isoleucine and isoleucine is worse. There's some negative effects from having higher isoleucine. But now my isoleucine went a little down just because I'm just taking leucine instead of branching amino acids. Right. Yeah. And and there's a bunch of examples like that with different amino acids that were just low. And Yeah. I I remember, like, last time I haven't gotten the amino acid report yet, but the last time my glycine levels were up. You know, I'll I'm taking a lot of glycines. I would expect to be much higher. But, they were, like, you know, normal, but, like, slightly, like, lower. Is there, like, any reason why that would be, like, is it used for cholizo synthesis, or is it used for gliothan? Yes. The glycine, I think, is a little different. But number one is it's the utilization. Mhmm. And number two, I think the half life of glycine is pretty short. Mhmm. But why it's still important to understand what your glycine levels are is because if you have lower glycine, it helps to frequently take glycine throughout the day. Got you. It's kinda like vitamin c is that you take vitamin c, it's not gonna last that long in the blood. Mhmm. But still, if you have low vitamin c, it's still a good idea to take it Frequently. Frequently. And, yeah, and and, you know, you you digest it over time, and then maybe it doesn't stay in the blood, but every time you ingest it, it's like a four or five hour bump. And the thing is the next day, it's probably not gonna show up very much just because it's going to have some impact, but it's not gonna be huge because, you know but you're probably taking it twelve hours before the blood test, right, at least. Mhmm. Like, you you know, if you take it at 8PM and you do a blood test at 8AM, that's twelve hours. Right. So it's not gonna be that significant in the blood. It'll be somewhat because, you know, you're, you know, you're kind of feeding all the glycine your system needs, but but I don't think it's the it's gonna be huge. So you have certain amino acids like that that it's not super responsive to what you're intaking. But they do these studies that show, like, if you have a tendency for higher glycine, there's certain benefits. Right? And so same with vitamin c. You have, like, higher vitamin c, higher glycine, higher this, that. There could be benefits to having higher levels of certain amino acids. And even if you're taking it and it's not responding that much, it's still probably good to take it because at least for most of the day, you know, sixteen hours a day, you could still have it more elevated. And, you know, maybe eight hours is not gonna be elevated, but who cares? Gotcha. Are there any tests that you do more frequently, or or are you doing it in the morning at AIBO when you come? I try to do as much testing as possible with as many things as possible. So there's always things you could optimize to some degree. One of the things that I'm optimizing now is my total serum protein. So the the range in that they give in the test is, like, 6.1 to 8.1 or something or 8.5. I don't know. It's a pretty broad range. But the optimal range is actually you wanna be above 6.5. So recently, it's been above 6.5 when I really increase my protein intake. But I actually wanna get it even higher because if my body's fighting infection, it goes down often, or it it could even go up. So that's the tricky thing is it could either go down and up. If it goes down, it's because utilizing it. It goes up. It's because my body's breaking down muscle. Gotcha. So I remember one time I had an infection, it went up because it was very clear that my body was just breaking down muscle at that stage. Mhmm. So it's a very the body can easily just increase amino acids, and that could help certain people if if you have a tendency to break down muscle. In that sense, it could help your immune system by just giving you the amino acids whenever you need it, but then longer term, you'll have more blessed muscle mass. I wanna take a quick break to announce you that you can now order my book, The Longevity Leap. Containing over 8,000 references to scientific articles and studies, The Longevity Leap is an evidence based overview of the biology of aging, chronic diseases that kill most people, and practical lifestyle routines that have been proven to improve your health and slow down aging. You can order the book at at thelongevityleap.com. With your order, you will also get two bonus chapters. One about skin aging and the other about my personal routines. Head over to the longevityleap.com to get your copy today. How many supplements are you taking now then? I take a hundred sixty supplements a day. Two sixty? Yeah. And I kind of have a list of there's about 90 things that I take that are I've noticed some change in my blood from it, like, significant enough, or there's some something significant that I noticed from it in life that not just like a minor effect, it seems pretty significant, and it it helps me in some way. So there's still a gap of, like, 70 that are, like, things based on what you're reading about, or maybe it has a minor effect, but nothing significant. Right. Or I don't notice anything significant in my blood test. So there's there's a that's kind of my goal is to eventually just take things that I notice a change based on some one marker. So there's no, like, things that you're taking because you see the results and the things that you're, like, experimenting with right now to Yeah. Either experimenting or, let's say, for example, AstraZeneca, and I don't notice any benefits from that. You know? I don't but, you know, it's kind of just like, you see some research, you know, like, okay. It does this, that, and the other thing. Makes sense. Yeah. And animals who took it live longer than Right. It's like, alright. I think it's right. Yeah. You know, like, it maybe it's you get a slower rate of aging because some of the carotenoids, they they claim, help with that the aging rate. Yeah. Like, you know, eye health and this was preventive kind of. Right. But who knows? Right? That's the thing is, like, I haven't noticed anything, and I haven't clearly seen that, oh, I took Astaxanthin, and all of a sudden, this marker moved quite a while. Yeah. Maybe, like, I haven't measured enough or something or sun damage or because the current Yeah. But I do measure sun damage, but I don't I can't pinpoint first of all, my sun damage has stayed the same since the last test. I I can't pinpoint what it would maybe it would have been worth I don't know. But the the idea is that it's very certain it's very hard to pinpoint things if it's not very significant in the blood. Meaning, like, if it helps 5%, I won't be able to tell. Yeah. Yeah. But there's certain things that I take, and it's like, this house. Right? So some of them could even be amino acids. I took the amino acid, and all of a sudden, my amino acids in my blood doubled. Right? So that's very clear, and then they stayed elevated. So that's very clear that this amino acid is doing something. And then, you know, over time, I might also notice, okay. I could see it is also improving my performance or this, that, and the other. But, usually, it's like either I notice something very strong on the blood or very significant in some issue I had or like, if it's related to mood, I might not notice something very strong in the blood, but I noticed a significant effect on my mood. In that case, I'll you know, it's like I consider that as some of the things that are, like, validated in my opinion if if I if it's significant enough that I know, hey. This is having a significant effect on my mood. Mhmm. And do you like pharmaceutical types or, like, medications or anything? Anything that Most of them yeah. I take some medications, pharmaceuticals. A lot of them aren't related to lowering lipids, which I do see very clearly that, boy, that they're working in there's also clinical trials as well. Like, the PCSK nine in heavy work barely works. Yeah. That lowers my lipoprotein a as well, which I have elevated levels of. And then my cholesterol as well. And this is mainly genetic based, so I have to tape these things. And then bemidyl acid works very well for me. Is it in my I take that as well, and that can I say that I noticed a huge difference? No. But it's, like, 10%. It's supposed to have a 10% effect in the cholesterol levels. So not that's an example of something that if it was like a if there weren't a lot of trials on it, I wouldn't be sure, like, a 100% what it's doing. It seems to have some effect, but Yeah. Wouldn't be sure. But then so those are the three pharmaceuticals that I take for cholesterol. Right. Yeah. The lot of the, you know, supplements and medications is you need to find a balance between your own blood work and the clinical trials. Right. Because a lot of them are, yeah, like, you know, primary prevention and, you know, they, work over the course of decades, essentially. So it's hard to see changes even, like, within a year even to know if there is any actual effect. So you need to kinda trust some of the clinical trials in that sense. But if you measure it enough, you can get some kind of idea often. Like, it seems like ezetimibe does something from Yeah. Even if it's, like, you know, minor Right. 10% to the Yeah. It seems like nine. It seems like it lowers it somewhat. I don't know how much. But I'll tell you the PCSK nine inhibitor definitely works a lot for me. Like, that's, like, at least that's, like, a 50% for me. Mhmm. Yeah. It's, like, 25% for the l t a, I think. Yeah. 25% for l t a, and that I noticed as well. Yeah. So these that has a very clear effect for me. Bempedoic acid works very well for me. I would it could even be more than what the studies say. So it's like they the studies show twenty percent, but I think I get a twenty percent decline by taking it. Well, let's by taking it every other day. Mhmm. So You don't take every day? No. I take it every other day. Dose. Yeah. The regular dose, which it's a hundred eighty milligrams. Okay. So, yeah, take that. I find that I don't need it every day. Just my I I was actually even taking it twice a week. I just started with every other day. Mhmm. Because Do you notice any, like, side effects from cholazepamol or anything? Some of them do have side effects. I had to start taking certain supplements for side effects, like Berbera. Okay. What do you think? I had muscle pain. Yeah. Give me muscle pain. I've been taking, like, one gram even pretty regularly. I don't guess you have it. Yeah. It's some it seems weird, but Berbera seems to give me muscle pain. You know? It it happens from a couple supplements. I get it from Boswellia. Mhmm. I get it from Stans. Yeah. That's, like, individual based. Yeah. So it didn't give me muscle pain, Berber, in until I started exercising more. Interesting. Because I was taking it for years before that that Although although I do, but I've had a little bit of, like, elbow pain over the last few weeks, and I've been taking Berberine as well. So that might help. Or that might cause it slightly because Maybe. Reduce protein synthesis. Uh-huh. Maybe. Mhmm. So but we'll see. I need to stop taking it for a bit. Could be. What did the elbow pain come from? Is that injury? Or Just yeah. I just did a bit of too much muscle ups. Not too, too vigorous. Yeah. So there is yeah. One other I also take some pharmaceuticals for sleep Okay. Good one. If I need it. So I take low dose naltrexone. That's the antihistamine system. It's, it's not specific for that. It's, it's, it helps with the opioids, this thing. And I like how I feel on it. It improves my mood and helps me sleep better. I I find it improves my sleep. So I take that. And then there's certain pharmaceuticals that I'll take as needed, like low dose trazodil Mhmm. As needed. If I need to if I'm traveling or if I wake up in the middle of the night, I wanna go back to sleep reliably. That's it. Gotcha. I don't take it as a standard, though. And then I'll take an antihistamine if I wanna go to sleep for longer, like, doxylamine succinate. That's if I'm on a long hold flight, and I wanna get knocked out. So that these are like and then meclizine also if I'm traveling and I wanna help with sleep. I don't take it every night, but I take it relatively often also because it's an mTOR inhibitor, so it helps with longevity. Gotcha. Yeah. So that's kind of like, You just the the rapamycin? Yeah. I take rapamycin as well. That's just for longevity. Nothing specific. I also find that it helps my front studies. Yeah. The you may have a suppressor. Mhmm. Well, it causes tolerance to the foods. Mhmm. Doesn't just suppress it. It actually causes you to tolerate the food. Wow. Which is which is a little different. Right? So you need foods that you weren't able to. Absolutely. Yeah. Wow. So eggs, dairy, whole bunch of stuff that I wouldn't hang before. So I would say that for me, it's not only an at the age of drug. It's actually a a treatment for myoflidescent. So I I like that. I like the rapamycin. I take four milligrams a week. And then what other pharmaceuticals do I take? Ketamine as a replacement for an off the whole pretty much. Yeah. If I or if I if I ever get into a loo, which doesn't really happen, very often, but it's it's a I find it's a good replacement for alcohol. It's healthier than alcohol. Right? I saw a few weeks ago with this this new ketone ester drink, like, as in some sort of supposed to be, like, the alcohol replication. So gives you the buzz, but you get ketones instead. So it's like soup like some sort of a larger dose of ketone esters, in in a like a like a like a white claw or something. I tried it, but, something's found online. So that could be even, like, some sort of a use case if if if I'll try it out at some point, but I interesting. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I wonder I mean, some of these promises usually don't work, not being alcohol replacements. Yeah. Or for also probably be, like, banned. Yeah. Yeah. Like, guys, it's too good. What what are you like, you know, people say, like, all these supplements. So, like, why do you need them? Like, what are your arguments against that? Well so I would I would, separate them into different categories. I think you could make an argument about 70 of the one sixty while you need them Mhmm. Because those are the ones I said I don't really clearly notice, like, huge impact in any way. The other ones, like I said, either they help a blood biomarker or they help some kind of septum or issue that I have. So why do I need you know, it's like I would say, also, a lot of natural stuff. Like, let's say for me, mood is a big thing. And recently, I've come back as like, when when I'm tested in the big five, there's, like, these six facets of neuroticism. They're all related to mood. I got very low on all those facets, which means my mood is, the best that they have ever tested here. Okay. So it's extremely rare to get very low on all those. Whereas that wasn't always the case. I think it's changed quite a lot. And so for me, I take about fifteen supplements just for mood. Just for mood. So if somebody has great mood or they don't wanna improve their mood, they don't care about it or whatever, then that's 15 that they can knock out right there. Right. Yes. Just not use. Mhmm. Right? I might even take a little yeah. I mean, that's, like, 15 purely for mood. And then it's probably there's definitely other things that help with mood as well, but that's not maybe the main furthest. And then there is different other things. There's, like, let's say, I've had autoimmune issues in the past, so I would say there's a bunch of things that are for lowering inflammation, helping with my immune system. There's a bunch of things that help me with my immunity as well. Like, I would say that I don't get less sick. The frequency that I get sick is not different, but the impact to my life of getting an infection is completely different. So whereas before I would not be able to function, now I can do whatever I I can go about my daily life without a problem. Because the frequency hasn't changed, but the you know, it's like you I let's say if I go COVID's going around, I'll still get COVID, but I'll still I'll be able to function instead of being out for a week Yeah. Or whatever it is. Right? Like so that's kind of yeah. I'll still function perfectly fine and just even be able to exercise and do whatever. Right? So for me, immune system is a big one. There's a lot of things I take for that. And then, yeah. And so there's kind of like I have a lot of these goals that you know, some people, they don't have any mood issues. I think it's rare, but it happens. Yeah. Their means they never get sick. You know? And some things are to help me build muscle. Correct. Even creatine is something that Pretty much everyone benefits from. Well, yeah. But it but but I'm not even sure how that helps me personally. Like, I haven't seen any benefit, and I haven't even seen any like, it's not even one I don't even know if I consider it as one in 90 things, but it's something I take just because I think first of all, probably it probably is significant because all the amino acids that are used to create creatine, I've been on the lower end of so so what is it? It's like arginine, methionine, and glycine? Are those the three? Well, glycine for sure. Yeah. And then it's methionine as well, and I think arginine. And I've been lower on all those three in the past. So just as an amino acid supplement. Yeah. Seems like it would not be a bad idea, but I don't know if I notice any significant difference of amino acids from taking it. But the idea is that there's good research on it and you know? So it's like there's certain things it'll take for muscle mass, like beta alanine, creaking. I can't say I noticed huge like, it's hard to notice, but you see their end results. Like, my muscle mass has been going up from 70% to 75%. So Right. There's a change. You know? I I can't be very clear about exactly what did the change, but it's going in the right direction. And so that means I'm doing something right. Yeah. But it for things like that, I'll look at the research because it's very hard to know, am I gaining more muscle? Like, I I can't tell really. Right? So it's just too hard to tell. So I think that sometimes I'll rely on research, but I have my goals. Some some people may not have a goal that they wanna build muscle, or if they do, maybe they're building muscle great without any of these things, and they don't need any bone. Right? Or So I think it's dependent on the person. I think I did notice some benefits from beta alanine just in terms of, like, energy levels, but times hard to know exactly. Brilliant. Yeah. It should you are just trying to optimize Yeah. Areas. Yeah. And there's, yeah, there's certain things. I think, then there's certain things that help me quite a lot that and very impactful. And then sometimes you have to take things to counteract the side effects of other things. It's like a balancing act. Right. So, yeah, I found that I needed a lot more sulfur. Could be because I'm taking supplements, and your body uses sulfur to detox. Right. So when you're taking a hundred sixty supplements a day, maybe you need more sulfur. Yeah. That could be a a side effect. Right? But I just take more sulfur. And then what I find is that, if you take more sulfur, I think you need more molybdenum enough. It kind of so there's there's sometimes there's a balancing act, but overall, the results have been you know, like, you take something, then maybe you need something else. Like, some of the b vitamins, when you take them, they utilize amino acids and other things more, and you might run out of them. So it's it's a little bit of a balancing act. Right? Not so simple to just take a lot of b vitamins and Yeah. But, oh, that's the other thing, though. Like, let's say my homocysteine, I probably take at least five supplements for methylation because, genetically, I'm an undermethylamic. So even if I throw everything at methylation, like, any supplement you could think of for methylation, my homocysteine still is, like, 10, which which is pretty good. But you know what I'm saying? Like, you could also some people are 10 without doing anything. Yeah. Yeah. So when I say 10, I I was just in a 12. I I think it went up for probably I was five who knows what, but, normally, I'm like, let's say, last time was an 8.8. But now I'm taking five grams of TMG a day. Oh, really? Yeah. Right. My full my methylfolate and my b twelve were, like, off the charts. Being like, it was just the highest like, it's really high. Well, the b twelve is very high, and then the folate, it doesn't go beyond 24, so just maxed out. Right. And I was also taking a good amount of b six, fifty milligrams a day. I even opted now to because I still wanna I think more will reduce my homocysteine based on the amino acid panel. Actually, it was clear that I could even use more b six. So I I'm I opted to seventy five milligrams a day. But so I'm taking all these b vitamins. Right? And, what else am I taking from methylation? MSM. Take eight grams a day. Yeah. I take taurine, which is brings homocysteine down three grams a day. And I take eighteen hundred milligrams of NAC, which brings down homocysteine. So I'm doing all these things, and I know that they work to bring down homocysteine individually. That's not so much of a question. Like, I've seen them work. Toreen, I don't know if I've seen work, but the studies show that it works and rates down felt like ten to fifteen percent. But, you know, you I do all these things, and then, you know, my homocysteine is still 12. Whereas I've done, like, much less stuff for some other people, when, let's say, Liver King. Right. His home assisting was twelve, one something, and now it's five. Wow. And so I could see very clearly that he is responding way more effectively to, like, much less stuff than than me. Like, I just have to do way more Right. To bring down my homocysteine than other people. Right? So it's very clear, like you know? So that's an example of things that I need to take for me because I just you know? And it's like I'm running out of things that are gonna bring down homocysteine just because, you know, I've already matched the dosage on all the individual stuff. Right. You don't wanna take more than five gram of the TMG a day. Like, nobody studied that Yeah. Long term. Right. And, like, already taking the b vitamins, like, everything that you could take. Right? So it's like the Genetics, yeah, has a huge Yeah. On all these things. I think, but over but, I mean, my I think, probably something was just off there, meaning, I think, I have been able to bring it down to nine or eight eight point eight. And it was lower before, so it goes low when I don't exercise. If I don't exercise, it's no problem if you're just doing it. Yeah. And and so that's the thing is, like, for me, if I exercise, I use a lot of mental growth, and then I need to take a lot of supplements in order to counteract that. So I find that exercise makes me take another, like, fifteen supplements a day. Interesting. Counteracts some of the negatives of exercise. But and I I think that's probably not the case with most people, but, like, you know, exercise is still beneficial quite beneficial for all these other areas. So you want the positives. You don't want the negatives. Yeah. How did the Yeah. How did you start working with Liberking? He signed up to South Dakota, actually. Right. And then, you know what? We I like, he he got, like, a a voter package that had a consult, and I don't even know if he did it on purpose or not. But, anyway, I just reached out to him. I said, hey. I was gonna call whatever. We spoke for an hour. And, then I say, hey. Let me, you know, I'll be in Texas. I could stop by the ridge. She's like, yeah. You know? I was like, fuck yeah. I was like, alright. So I I just came. I didn't know what to expect. I was supposed to come for, like I thought I was gonna come for, like, a couple days. But then, we started working together, and I started, you know, making certain changes to his regimen. Right. And then he started to have benefits. So I started to make more and more and more, and then you start to see benefits in a whole bunch of different ways, how we felt in different ways, blood markers, everything. And, so you just, like, kept wanting me to stay more. Mhmm. I know staying thirty weeks. I went to with Mexico. He's now taking supplements. Right. He's taking yeah. Yeah. I mean, normally, I wouldn't discuss it because, you know, it's it's it's prophecy, but he he is public of that. So, that's he calls me his high priest. High priest, Cohen. Yeah. High priest, and he just but but I like working with people like that because he's an anim. Like, he does do anything that you're telling me. He'll do it. Like, if he tries you. Right? If he doesn't trust you, he's not gonna do anything. Right. But if he trusts you, he'll he'll do everything, and, like, he's just gonna get it done. You know, he'll get it done. He's an action guy. And so he's just like it's just like, you know, he could take down 30 pills in one go, and it's just like, he can down more pills than me. Like, he's quicker at downing pills than me. Yeah. He's Yeah. Yeah. He's an animal. So, but, you know, a lot of his stuff is he pushes himself really hard. Like, whether it's exercise, he will push himself really hard. And so I think the ancestral lifestyle that he lives is a very good framework, a base, but people very few people are like him, and they they don't push themselves. Like, he has he has a very strong sense of purpose and drama, which may, you know, make him just go, go, go all the time. And as a result of that, it just, you know, it it's his nervous system is activated, and then he over exercises. Mhmm. Like, if if he just didn't exercise that much Should probably be better better record. Yeah. A 100 per he knows that too, but it's thing something that he really likes to do. So, like, it makes him feel, you know, like, he likes working hard. Right? He likes to earn things, and, he likes to create value. And, so I I think that, but with that, you know, so he needs it it's not you can't just live a a and I think that in the modern lifestyle, my personal opinion is that everybody needs supplements because just just because of different whatever the reason I think, first of all, people have always taken herbal stuff. Right? They've always had different kinds of medicines, but I think that, also people wanna live longer. Right? Once upon a time, you know, you live to 40. It just didn't matter. Right. Right? And then Yeah. Like, you would diet and exercise. You're only gonna get so far for, like, maximum life extension there there. Yeah. It's not gonna take you past a 120, like, the like, regular lifestyle. Yeah. And I think there's a few things that are just very different in the modern lifestyle, all that we never had. So the amount of infections and toxins is very different. And that has a big effect, some more on some people, some on less. But for me, I think it was probably more. Some people maybe less, but the idea is that it's got a huge effect. Very hard to underestimate that. And just the amount of toxins, heavy metals, everything. Right? Yeah. Plastics, we don't know what EMS are doing, but, like, there's just thousands of toxins that we're exposed to that we haven't ever been exposed to. Yeah. So that's one. And then the amount of infections that we're exposed to that we have if you grew up in a community, first of all, there's no cars, no airplanes, no no pollution. Right? So, I mean, almost no pollution. Right? So we have pollution. We have higher levels of CO two. It's just it's hard to then there's the modern environment with artificial lighting and it would it's stress. You can't escape it. Right. I think once upon a time, when we were just farmers or just, like, hunters, whatever, it's like, you know, there was, like, a community of a 100 people. Yeah. You had to just pick, like, somebody to marry. Wasn't like you didn't have, like, a million options. So if you know it's a force, if you get divorced, you'd probably die. Right? Like, you just wouldn't make it. Yes. You lift to 40, and it was just like and that was kinda like, it is what it is. You know? You know? You're not like there there were certain stressors, but it was kinda like, you know, there was there was no depression. You just had to, like, live, right, just to survive. You had to, like, struggle and survive. Mhmm. You don't have time to be depressed or anything. Right. And so I think that the amount of differences and I'm I'm not even there's probably a lot of other one, but, you know, the idea is that we're not living anywhere close to what we were. And even if we were, that doesn't mean it's even we live Yeah. To 80. Right. We we die much earlier probably, whether it's from an accident or or even just, you know, just the our bodies weren't designed to live. Yeah. 200. Yeah. They there's just there's not any serious evolutionary purpose to to live till after child you know, after you're gonna have children. Yeah. But, yeah. So I think, yeah. So I I think, overall, it's like we have so I think the infection is probably a huge piece too because if you're in a community of a 100 people, you're not there's very little travel going on. Right? Like, there's no airplanes. There's no cars. Even a horse and buggy were new inventions. Right? They're pretty new. They didn't even have horses at all. Few thousand years ago. Right? Maybe two thousand years ago, three thousand. I don't know what the e even if it was 3,000, it wouldn't wasn't widespread until Yeah. More modern. And so you had to walk everywhere. And how far are you gonna walk already? Right? It's just like, even boats, they didn't they didn't travel that far. Yeah. They only reached America. It's not just it's like how far are you traveling. Right? The idea is and then and then even then, like, in the fifteen hundreds, you see the black black thirteen hundreds, the black plague. They wiped out, like, half of humanity. Yeah. Right? Like, it wasn't always rainbows even back when when it was just not So I I think that as time went on, you had all these plagues, and that's how people got wiped out, infections. Whereas now we have things to, like, manage these infections, but, you know, you're flying, the amount that I'm flying all over the world. There's 8,000,000,000 people. Everybody's just you go on an airplane. It's just the Yeah. Infection. You know? You you go you you're going from one place to the other. You're getting global infections all of a sudden. Right? So it's like infection that starts in China and Wuhan would have never made its way out of that area because who's, like Yeah. Walking out of you know? You gotta travel in park. By the time you walk three days, the infection's gone even. Yeah. Right? And so it's like but now we have just I I know, like, I'll get infection once a month based on my blood test. Right? Because I track it. Yeah. But I don't I don't get very sick, so I'm in robust. So I think there's a lot of you know, people talk about, we got here because of I I think there's a lot of value to an ancestral lifestyle, but it's not enough. And that I think he's realized that as well, but it's not enough. You need we have modern technology. We have modern medicine. We wanna take the things. We're able to now measure your genetics, 200,000,000 variants, your blood, a whole bunch of other things. We have all this new technology. Every supplement is a new technology, every drug. And doesn't mean you need to take everyone, but we have all these new technologies that, whether it's software or that you can really, I think, take somebody who may have lived to 40 and make them live to a 100. Whereas there could have been somebody lift 90 back then or even maybe a 100, and they you still have that today, but it's extremely rare. Whereas I think with technology Everyone everybody could do that if they put in the time, effort, whatever, if they if they actually implement things. So I think that, you know, he's he's he lives in certain ways, he lives a very healthy lifestyle with his ancestral lifestyle, But I also think that he realizes that, you know, in certain things he does that are not so ancestral, and I think he's public about those things now. But he is. But the the thing is is that, and he's realized that, actually, what's ideal is to take modern technology and add it. Like, the base is ancestral. Right? So it's got these nine tenets. And then, you know, like, Slee like, all these things that are basic, and I think he's right about those. Right? That's the you know, exercise, move, whatever. And so he's he's got I think he's right about all those things, but now I think he's realizing that you could do all those as the base and then have, use modern technology to fill in any of the gaps that you need depending on, you know, what some people have more gaps than others. I think I had a lot of gaps. Mhmm. Yeah. I mean, at some point, I was disabled, so not everybody's like that. Right? I have I need to improve my moodle up. My cholesterol, lipoprotein levels are much higher. Mhmm. Not everybody has that. Right? So the you have differences. Some people I think a lot of these differences were evolved from, so, like, let's say, lipoprotein a, it might help with certain clotting or recovery if you get a cut for injury. No. In the wonder world, it's a bit not new. Yeah. But when are we getting cuts and injuries? Right? So it's like even in so if you think about it, even in let's say if I was living a super ancestral lifestyle, I still have pod lipoprotein a. Yeah. Doesn't you know? And and some people might be more susceptible to clotting and more cholesterol, and more, you know, all these other more, you know, methylation. And and it just in a certain environment, it could have been beneficial because maybe I would have healed quicker, or I would have been built muscle quicker. But then in this environment, you know, maybe I'm just not gonna lift to, like, a 100. Yeah. So that's where I think the modern technology comes in. Number one is our environment is very different. Number two is our genetics are very different, and not everybody's genetics are geared towards longevity or having a great mood. Maybe, you know, depression could be, like, something that helps drive people in certain situations or anxiety and but in in a a world of abundance, nobody's starving. Yeah. So that definitely, like, a lot of differences between people and they got precision health and understanding your own body is the key to making those adjustments based on those results. SalesLacode is the website, right, where people can check out their genetics? Yeah. Ex absolutely. And with genetics, genetics can be used for a couple things. Number one is to see what your disease is you're susceptible susceptible to. Yeah. So we see even in the monitor. We're almost clear. Some people don't get certain diseases. Right? They get certain diseases first than others. And centenarians, they just delay the diseases they get. So you could be more or less resilient, and evolutionarily, it may have not mattered. But, because, you know, anyway, it didn't matter if you lived if you, like, you just looked to see you would you would have died from somebody else anyway. Right? But now while we wanna live longer, it makes a difference. You wanna see what you're susceptible to. It can help you prioritize certain recommendations over others. We also are introducing pharmacogenomics. So we have a new product now. It's called Longevity Screener. You can look at which diseases. It gives you more absolute risk scores rather than your higher or less likely. So there are different ways of looking at it in terms of genetics, but now we found, we we've been able to introduce absolute risk for us to tell you what that you're very high on this area. You really this is what your weakest point is. And then, so prioritizing recommendations and then, yeah, just seeing all your different susceptibilities and whatnot. And then there's pharmacogenomics, which we're gonna be interested in. If you could see even what drugs we're we're all doing. And then the rest is you wanna look at as many lab tests and do this to fetch testing as possible. So it's like, I see genetics as like a framework, a blueprint, and then you wanna kinda see what is going on currently. And, you could upload that data as well and get better recommendations. Nice. That's awesome. Not right here. Time is to see you again. Alright. That's it for this episode. If you liked it, then make sure you click a like and subscribe. And make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, at the longevityleep.com.