Alright. First question. Your last q and a about supplements that damage your kidneys was eye opening. Are there any supplements that are bad for the heart? So my point in the previous q and a was that, you know, whether or not some supplement is bad for your kidneys or any food is bad for your kidneys depends on your kidney markers and your actual kidney health. So it all comes down to how something affects your body and the way you know that is, you know, technically you could also assess it based on your, you know, how you feel, but looking at certain biomarkers is, where it's all about essentially when we're talking about kidney health. With heart health it's a bit more tricky because there's no specific biomarker for heart health, whereas we have it with, kidneys. But, with heart health, okay, let's talk about the risk of heart disease primarily. So the two supplements that appear to have some evidence and associations with heart disease are iron and calcium. So excess iron intake can be, increasing the risk of atherosclerosis. It can increase inflammation, oxidative stress in the body and damage the blood vessels. So excess iron in of itself, like blood iron levels, too high blood iron levels, no matter the source they are also considered like a risk factor for heart disease. Now the same applies to low iron levels, low iron levels, anemia, those things are also risk factors for heart disease. So obviously the answer is somewhere in the middle having normal iron levels and supplementing iron, if you don't have any reason for that, you know, could increase inflammation and oxidative stress in your body. So I wouldn't say that, everyone should be afraid of taking iron supplements. You know, women, if they're suffering from iron deficiency anemia, might benefit from iron supplements. But if you're like a regular guy or a regular person then, it's one of those supplements that you would definitely need to be more careful with. The same applies to calcium. So excess calcium levels in the blood can cause this hypercalcemia, which, appears to increase the risk of myocardial infarction and also ather not atherosclerosis essentially, but like calcification. So this doesn't apply to dietary calcium, fortunately. So dietary calcium appears to be kind of more neutral, but excess calcium supplementation, so causing hypercalcemia in the blood, appears to promote that. So again, if if you don't have any calcium deficiency, you are consuming calcium from the diet, then it's certainly something that, or you wouldn't want to necessarily supplement with calcium. If you are postmenopausal woman or you're on a very low calcium diet or your blood calcium levels are low then it's kind of a different scenario. In that kind of case, it might be okay to do. So monitoring your blood markers, monitoring your iron levels, your calcium levels, they are also kinda handy in this scenario. Now there are certain supplements that also contain calcium, not as a main ingredient, but they can still potentially cause hypercalcemia. One of the first ones is calcium alpha ketoglutarate, which, yeah many people are using as a longevity supplement but it does contain calcium as well. It says in the name calcium alpha ketoglutarate. You can also use alpha ketoglutarate as arginine alpha ketoglutarate. So that wouldn't have the calcium but calcium alpha ketoglutarate is one of the more popular versions of AKG. And, like one thousand milligrams of calcium AKG is something like four hundred milligrams of calcium. So, yeah, you would need to be more careful with that as well. So I'm not a big proponent of taking calcium, AKG over the long term all the time. You could swap it out for arginine, AKG or something like that. Unless you are, again, on a low calcium diet. The second version or supplement that also falls into this category is HMB. So HMB is a supplement that has evidence that it can protect against muscle metabolism and sarcopenia, especially in elderly people. So, this is a kind of a useful supplement, but only if you're more at a higher risk of, frailty and sarcopenia to prevent excessive muscle loss. And HMB can also be combined with calcium HMB or HMB three acid. So, the calcium HMB is kind of unfortunately or fortunately more effective than the free acid version. So if you are taking HMB then the calcium HMB is definitely more potent or more effective. And it's kind of similar that, okay, three three grams of, HMB calcium is gonna contain something like, like, four hundred milligrams of calcium. So you need to be aware of that and, adjust your dietary calcium intake accordingly or just monitor your blood calcium levels based on that. So these will be additional calcium examples or calcium supplement examples. I'm sure there might be a few more. Another supplement that might be harmful for the heart, is high dose omega-3s and I'm talking specifically about the risk of atrial fibrillation. So I've made a video about it as well in the past. How omega-3s generally have been found to have benefits for cardiovascular disease and reducing the risk of certain, like adverse outcomes from cardiovascular disease. But, kind of the dose is more important here. Excessive omega three intake of over three grams a day appears to increase the risk of atrial fibrillation but is a higher risk in people who already have some risk of atrial fibrillation or they already have it. So if you're an otherwise healthy person, you don't have heart disease, you're taking three grams of omega threes then chances are you'll be fine. But again, you know, you need to monitor your own heart health and pay attention to like atrial fibrillation in this example. So usually one point five grams of omega threes are safe. Less than three grams, something like two point five grams also appear to be safe. If it goes over three grams then, that's what the research finds that it appears to increase the risk of atrial fibrillation slightly and more specifically in people with already existing atrial fibrillation or already existing heart disease. So it kind of depends on which person are we talking about. Speaking of atrial fibrillation or heart health in general then excess caffeine could also contribute to that. Now it's very hard to consume too much caffeine if you're drinking coffee or something like that unless you're drinking like five, six, 10 cups a day. But it's very easy to overdose caffeine if you're relying on pre workouts or energy drinks or something like that. And a lot of the pre workouts on the market, in my opinion, are too high in caffeine. They might have two hundred milligrams of caffeine per serving which is the equivalent of like two to three cups of coffee. And, you know, there's genetic differences between people and how they metabolize caffeine. If you're a fast metabolizer of caffeine then, you know, you could drink coffee and fall asleep fine and you don't really see adverse effects on heart health because of that, because you clear the caffeine quite fast. If you're a slow metabolizer of caffeine, then these people appear to get all the negative side effects from caffeine. They get insomnia, they get anxiety, they get irregular heartbeat, those kind of things. So, yeah if you're a slow metabolizer of caffeine then you would definitely wanna be very careful with caffeine intake and lean more towards the lower intake of caffeine like less than two hundred milligrams, ideally like a hundred milligrams. If you are a fast metabolizer then four hundred milligrams in my opinion is already too high, like although that's considered like a safe dose per day. But, for my own preference, I tend to stick somewhere like a hundred, a hundred and fifty milligrams of caffeine per day, which is like a pretty low dose, like one to two cups of coffee is what you'll, is where you can get it from, so yeah. Caffeine in very large doses obviously can be lethal, like if you just take powdered caffeine then many people have a diet to that. It's very easy to overdose on powdered caffeine and, yeah. It can also be harmful to for your heart health if it increases your heart rate too much if you take like four hundred, five hundred, six hundred milligrams of caffeine. And lastly, there are certain supplements that can also interfere with medications like blood thinners and certain lipid lowering drugs. You know, if you take something like a garlic supplement or arginine for example, they can have like negative adverse reactions with these blood thinners like aspirin or something else like that. So, yeah. You will want to be mindful of that as well. Kind of read the the package and make sure that it doesn't interact with certain of the supplements that you might take. Next question. Do you think we will see people live to more than 125 in this generation? So it depends a lot on what you mean by this generation. Do you mean that the generation that is born right now Or do you mean that okay, is someone right now currently in this generation going to exceed the age of 125? So currently the oldest living person right now is 116 years of age and she's a woman from Japan. So that gives you nine more years to reach the 125 mark. So I think it's and depends on you, like where do you draw the line? Okay, when does the next generation begin? So I'll say that I don't think it's feasible that someone right now will exceed over the age of 125. Because we haven't made any real breakthroughs in, life extension or life expectancy for many decades. And the oldest living person ever in history, Joan Calment, she made it to 122. The second longest living person was a japanese woman. She lived to 119, so there was already a three year gap between those people and no one has ever reached over 125 so far. So and there's nine years for the current older living person to reach 125, so it's too big of a leap. We would see someone already having broken the 120, year mark, after John. So, yeah. Currently I would say we won't be seeing anyone living to a 125 or above for the next, I would say, for a few decades at least. And, when we're speaking of people who are born right now, so people who are, you know, somewhere in their teenage years, maybe in their early twenties, then, it is feasible that those people will make it to over a 120 and possibly up to a 125. So, the mathematical models, Bayesian models, they have kind of predicted that someone will break John Coman's record in this century. So before the year 2100, someone will have reached the age of, like, 130. So I think that is, possible, because of just improvements in health care, people staying healthier for longer, advancements in some like basic medicines that reduce the risk of these chronic diseases. So, even just by that it's possible to reach a 130, within this century. But, beyond that, you know, we don't have any currently we don't have any, like, massive breakthroughs in life extension or longevity. Like we you know, gene therapy is very new currently. There's no evidence that it's gonna really do anything. And, like regeneration. Regenerative therapies etc. They're also very new. There's not a lot of evidence that they would extend maximum lifespan. They would probably extend health span so people live, like, in better health for slightly longer. But, yeah, we don't have any, like, massive breakthroughs that actually mean we're gonna live 150, 200 years of age, unfortunately. But, for sure someone will reach 130 within this century based on just the current, like, improvements in healthcare. This episode is brought to you by Bone Charge, my favorite company for blue blocking glasses, red light therapy devices, and red light light bulbs. These items are essential for keeping your sleep wakefulness cycles aligned in a world that tries to mess them up. Instead of looking at your phone before bed and letting the blue light disrupt your melatonin production, why not wear blue blockers instead that prevent that from happening? Instead of having your bedroom lit up with bright lights, use the more sleep friendly alternative by opting for flicker free red light light bulbs that don't disrupt your sleep. Boncharge also has amazing infrared sauna blankets that can give you the same health benefits as the traditional sauna. You also get the unique benefits of infrared light that improves joint and skin health. Head over to boncharge.com/seamlund and use the code SIEM, s I I m, for a 15% discount. Next question. How do you feel about the protein powder additive maltodextrin? Some protein powders have up to 15 grams of carbs for maltodextrin. So, I'm not a big fan of maltodextrin myself. I think it's kind of unnecessary. You know, my favorite protein powder would be just just a protein powder with minimal additives. Like, you don't need the maltodextrin and a lot of these mass gainers, they're just essentially pure sugar added to their like maltodextrin or dextrose, whatever it is. So these mass gainers are kind of a scam. You could just, take a regular clean protein powder that just has, the protein and, when you're looking at the macros, what I like to look at is that okay, one scoop of protein powder it should have, you know, anything. Somewhere like at least 25 to 30 grams of protein per scoop, less than five grams of fat, and, usually it's gonna be something like two grams of carbs from, the powder. So if it's like whey powder or something like that, it's gonna contain a little bit of carbohydrates. So that's the like ideal protein powder that you would want to look at. If it has like 15 grams of carbs in there, then it's just added there for like no particular reason. Next question. What are thoughts on hyaluronic acid supplementation fueling cancer growth? So this is a common question I get asked when I ever mention hyaluronic acid. So the idea that hyaluronic acid would promote cancer is not really backed up even by animal studies because they are having studies on mice that already have cancer that, hyaluronic acid supplementation doesn't promote their cancer more or it doesn't increase cancer. So, yeah. I mean there's no real reason to think that hyaluronic acid would, let's say, promote cancer, especially if you don't even have cancer. So because the mice who already had cancer, they didn't see increase in cancer from hyaluronic acid. So it's a lot of this like mechanistic evidence that okay, hyaluronic acid is found to be expressed by cancer cells, but you know, cancer cells, they express a lot of things and certain pathways are involved in cancer not because they promote the cancer but because cancer uses the body to survive. So it just hijacks certain resources or certain pathways to its own benefit. So like, you know, different examples would be autophagy. In certain ex- in certain cases, autophagy expression promotes cancer, in other cases it reduces and prevents against it, so, yeah, you would have to actually have more like, you know, experimental studies on animals to kind of, prove that hyaluronic acid supplementation would promote cancer, but, like I said, the studies on mice who already have cancer haven't shown that. Next question, creatine versus cardio. I personally weigh around two kilograms more with creatine and it makes cardio and training for v o t max more difficult. Would you still recommend it all year round? So yes, there have been meta analysis showing that creatine supplementation reduces VO2max slightly and it makes sense because if you're heavier, even though it might be lean tissue, it's gonna be harder for you to, you know, produce more or like have a higher V2 max. So, your cardio will be worse if you're heavier, even if it's muscle. So that's why, you know, none of the marathon runners, they don't have a ton of muscle. They want to minimize their weight so that they would run faster and they would have a greater endurance. So with that being said, you know, creatine has its own benefits for muscle growth, for the brain, etc. So what I like to think about is, okay, you know, there are certain periods of the year where I'm focusing more on muscle growth and on some periods of the year I'm focusing more on VO2 max, etc. So on the periods that I'm focusing more on VO2 max, then, I'm just gonna stop taking creatine and I'll take the creatine only when I'm in the strength training phase because that's what creatine is most effective for. Creatine is not gonna be very useful for VO2max and it actually has negative effects on VO2max so you don't wanna take it when you're deliberately trying to increase your two max. Next question. Other than fiber, what is the most potent supplement for lowering cholesterol? So yes, fiber supplementation and fiber intake is something that will lower cholesterol levels almost like in a dose specific manner that the higher the fiber intake then the lower the cholesterol will be, of course, to a certain limit. But, are there any supplements that do that? There are a few of them that come to mind. First one is Berberine. Berberine has clinical trials showing that it has, like lipid lowering effects. It, of course, lowers blood sugar as well. But the blood sugar lowering effects aren't that great compared to something like metformin. But, when it comes to lipids, then berberine does work quite well. The second supplement that comes to mind is garlic. Whether that be aged garlic extract, something like that, or allicin, etc. Garlic also appears to lower cholesterol and lipids. Garlic also lowers blood pressure and blood sugar levels, but lipids or cholesterol is where it's at with garlic more. Next question. What's the best way to lose visceral fat? I've been losing weight and gaining muscle for a year but the Tanita weight machine says my visceral fat never falls below 12. I'm not familiar with this specific tanita machine and I don't know like how do they measure your visceral fat. The best way to measure your visceral fat is either with a MRI or the DEXA scan. And a lot of these scales, you know, I'm not really confident in just like regular scales where you step on and it tells you a body fat percentage. I think it's a bit, not as accurate obviously as a DEXA scan or MRI. But, let's say you have been losing weight and you've been gaining muscle but your visceral fat is still the same. So what I if you watched my video, you know, that I made a few weeks ago where I talked about the specific things I did to reduce my visceral fat, then the highlights, you know, besides just regular weight loss and not eating sugar and not eating processed foods, then, the biggest things that I think, mattered for me were things like green tea intake, reduction in nathionine, an increase in glycine and doing more cardiovascular exercise. So I didn't change almost like anything else. These were the three biggest things that, I changed. So first, green tea. There's evidence that combining green tea with exercise results in greater fat and visual fat loss than just exercise alone. So I specifically can target visceral fat with that and I drank two to three cups of green tea per day at that time. Secondly, methionine, excess methionine is known to increase visceral fat as well and, to low glycine levels. So, low glycine, high methionine, it can also raise homocysteine but it can also increase visceral fat. So, what I did, I drastically reduced my methionine intake. So that would be eggs, meat, muscle meat specifically and dairy. I did consume dairy, so but the biggest thing I decreased was like muscle meat probably. I still consumed some eggs. So yeah. Reduction in muscle meat and increase in glycine. So So I consume more collagenous proteins and are supplemented with, you know, ten to fifteen grams of glycine every day. So low glycine levels increases visceral fat. So and, I think this could be one of the biggest, like, missing links in most people because, you know, most people are eating muscle meat and they're not eating any collagenous meats and they're probably not taking glycine or they're not taking large enough doses of glycine. So try to take like ten grams, reduce maybe the muscle meat consumption and, that will bring the methionine down and increase the collagenous proteins. So, yeah, these bone broth tendons and ligaments etc. Next question. Which of the four horsemen of death do you worry about most as you get older? Cancer, heart disease, dementia or metabolic diseases? So the four main killers, they would be, yeah, like heart disease, cancer, metabolic diseases like diabetes and, neurodegenerative conditions like Alzheimer's. What am I most afraid of? Probably like cancer because, you know, I've shared it on my channel before that my grandfather died to colorectal cancer when he was 36. So that's six years older than me right now. So, you know, of course I'm much healthier than he was. I don't smoke, I don't drink alcohol. But, still like, you know, there's some genetic risk there. Like I don't have a ton of longevity genes in my family or like not a lot of people live long in my family history. Actually no one has lived over 80 in my family tree so far, at least not to my knowledge. So I think cancer is probably one of the biggest ones and cancer is also the hardest to solve. Like we don't really have a definite cause for cancer. There's, you know, different theories but none of them have been like and there's different types of cancer. Like there's dozens of different types of cancer. So you would have to, we definitely don't know how to prevent all of them or what is the cause of all of them, you know, besides just stay healthy, eat a relatively good diet, stay physically active, prevent nutrient deficiencies, those kind of things and avoid environmental exposures. I'm afraid that cancer will eventually become the leading cause of death in the world definitely by the end of this century, because there's so many of these environmental toxins, heavy metals, pollutants, microplastics, etcetera that, you know, we're all exposed to more and more. Whereas heart disease has already peaked. The the death from heart disease has been decreasing already for the last few decades and we have a pretty good understanding of heart disease. We know how to prevent it. We know how to kind of prevent it from progressing further with, certain medications and lifestyle changes. And the same with diabetes, like diabetes is also relatively easy, especially type two diabetes, you know. Type one diabetes is hard, but, type two diabetes, which is mostly caused by lifestyle, that is also, like, easy to prevent and easy to, treat. So, cancer is for sure the most mysterious of these horsemen and the most, potentially harmful as well because if you get it then it's gonna be much harder to cure compared to diabetes or even, heart disease for that matter. And lastly neuro degeneration. So, Yeah. With neurodegeneration, yeah, we don't have a cure for it either and, it's also somewhat of a mystery, although it's less mysterious than cancer. So, from severity then cancer is the most lethal or most mysterious than might be neurodegeneration than heart disease and then metabolic diseases. So that would be my, like, my ranking. What do I do to prevent it? So, like I said, we don't have, okay, a specific understanding of this is exactly what is causing cancer. So and even then if you look at one thing, there might be some other environmental factor that secretly increases the risk. So with cancer, you just need to do the best you can with your lifestyle. You know, maintain a normal weight, exercise regularly, sleep enough, eat a good diet, try to avoid ultra processed foods, especially like this, high calorie, high sugar, high fat, kind of ultra processed foods and, try to minimize environmental toxins. So air pollution, heavy metals, and those kind of things. Of course, if you're in a big city you can do a lot for air pollution but, you know, there's certain things you can still do. Like, I think sauna is pretty useful for, helping to eliminate some of these, let's say environmental toxins like heavy metals, and, even microplastics or these xenostrogens you can sweat out. But, yeah. You need to do your best as best you can with these things. And, you know, hopefully in a few decades we will have more effective treatments for Alzheimer's and cancer as well, which I'm hopeful that we will have. You know, in ten, twenty, thirty years we will probably have, some more effective treatments for these conditions. Next question. How useful is stretching after a workout or the next day? So stretching Yeah. I'm not a big fan of like regular static stretching which, involves, you know, before a workout you do like this chest stretch or you touch your toes or you do the stretch your knees or something like that. But but, there is interesting, evidence or research that, these weighted stretching actually can promote muscle hypertrophy. So if you do, you know, for you know, this kind of pullover exercise where you do the dumbbell pullover over your head. That's like a weighted stretch. Your body is kind of in a stretched position. It's underweight. So this tension causes, mechanical tension and metabolic stress that can promote muscle hypertrophy. So if you're really trying to maximize muscle hypertrophy there are a few exercises that you can add that have a weighted stretch component. Like I said, the pullover is one of them, the lat pulldown can be one of them as well, especially if you do it in a slightly this arced position where you're like pulling down like here to your knees. This is a good stretch for the lats. I remember a few years ago when I was more focused on muscle hypertrophy than what I did was I did some sort of a heavy lat pull down exercise. So like five reps of some lat pull down exercise or a weighted pull up. And then what I would do immediately after that is you know find a pole, put my hands like this and then kind of try to stretch the lats somehow. Like I don't know how to show it but you know you're trying to stretch the lats and you can feel it for sure after a heavy set you will feel it and you can feel the stretch. Now you don't wanna overdo it, get a like cramp or something like that. That could be also a realistic thing. But yeah, you will feel the stretch and this stretch apparently has like minor effects on muscle hypertrophy. It's not gonna be, you know, obviously super significant but, this weighted stretching does work to a certain extent. And, stretching on rest days mostly can help with muscle soreness and, yes, even this static stretching after a heavy workout, you can also promote like minor hypertrophy because of the same idea. So you have a heavy workout, the next day you feel sore, you wanna alleviate the soreness, you can do whatever the chest stretch or the stretch your glutes or hamstrings etc. You will, you know, reduce the muscle soreness but you can also have some minor benefits on muscle hypertrophy, with that. So, this is what I would do, like add some weight and stretch component after a heavy set is where I find it most effective. Next question, protein restriction increase lifespan like calorie restriction. So this is one of the oldest questions in longevity science. Is protein restriction going to extend lifespan or is it harmful or is calorie restriction is it intermittent fasting, etc. Well, it does appear that calorie restriction is the most reproducible non genetic method to extend lifespan in animals. So, there's, you know, for decades they have been different studies showing that, and it has also produced the most profound extension in life lifespan. So it's been like 65% extension in, mice, or mouse, lifespan. When it comes to protein restriction, then it's there is also some studies that find that by the with protein restriction it's somewhat more complicated. Calorie restriction appears to be more responsible for the life effect action effects in, from protein restriction. So So if you compare hit to hit, then calorie restriction appears to be superior to protein restriction. And with protein restriction, it looks like the main thing responsible for the life extension is the reduction in methionine. And, methionine, whether or not it's bad for longevity also depends a lot on the glycine status. So there's been a few studies that, look at that, that show that methionine isn't going to shorten lifespan if, the rats are given glycine or supplemented glycine. So the kind of methionine glycine balance that I mentioned earlier, it can affect homocysteine levels, it can affect different aspects of the metabolism. So, yeah. If you're worried about protein shortening lifespan based on animal studies then you would want to just increase your gysine intake to balance the methionine. But when you look at the actual human studies, longitudinal studies, then, protein restriction is actually associated with higher mortality, especially in the elderly elderly people because elderly people who reduce their protein intake or have a low protein diet, they tend to be at a higher risk of frailty and sarcopenia and, you know, dying to, fractures. So there is a trade off that you don't want to make especially when you're older. When you're young, we don't have any data that, okay, if you've been eating a high protein diet since you were 20, how how is it going to affect your maximum lifespan or your risk of cancer when you're 65? We don't have like any data about that, any like real data. A low protein diet when you're older than 65 certainly will is associated with a higher risk of, death because of the malnutrition and frailty aspect. So, I don't think that it's worthwhile to restrict protein and of course we're talking about how much you you you would restrict it. So, the optimal amount of protein for muscle growth is 0.8 grams per pound or 1.6 grams per kilogram. And if you consume more than that, then you don't see additional benefits for muscle growth, based on randomized control trials. So, I would say that there's no need to eat more than that anyway. So but if you stick to the 0.8 per pound then, that maximizes muscle hypertrophy. Whether or not it's bad for longevity over the long term, we don't know. I find it hard to believe that it would be granted that you're not becoming overweight and you're not, wrecking your kidneys or something. So you need to mark you need to look at your biomarkers as well. Okay? How is your kidney health, etcetera. So, kidney disease typically, like, becomes wor or kidney function typically worsens with age, but, and there's no, like, worry that in otherwise healthy people, a high protein diet would increase the risk of kidney disease. It only does so in people with already compromised, kidneys. But again, you know, do you wanna take the risk and how much protein do you need to build muscle? So, depends on your goals. So, like, how much protein do you want to how much muscle do you want to build and how much protein do you need for that? Next question. How would you do cardio and build strength if you were limited by joint pain? So joint pain is, yeah, like a tricky situation. You definitely don't want to exercise through the pain or anything like that. If you have any joint issues or like nagging injuries, then you definitely shouldn't like, irritate that joint. So if you have elbow pain, then, kind of you need to take a time off from exercising that specific joint or at least that in that way. So there are ways to work around it. So for example, I've had in the past some, elbow pain. I fixed it and during that time, I still did this like slow repetition, lightweight, and high amounts of reps for that elbow. So I did like this regular, resistance bands curls for like 50 reps etcetera with this light weight and that kind of promotes blood flow to the area and helps with healing and recovery. But if I were to do heavy pull ups, you know, it would reset the progress and be more harmful. So you need to take time off, from irritating the joint. But slight light movements can be beneficial. So like this physiotherapy can be beneficial. But, you can also do like different exercises for that. So many people might find that okay, if I do curls like this then it irritates my elbow, but if I turn it around I do the opposite way then it doesn't. So there are ways to work around different injuries as well. But you would always want to kind of proactively try to, rehab the joint that might have some pain. When it comes to cardio then okay, you joint that might have some pain. When it comes to cardio then okay, you know, you might have knee pain, you can do cycling, you can do swimming, so with cardio it's pretty easy. You don't need to do running, you don't need to do any like burpees or something like that. You can do, whatever cardio that you like. And you can work around that. With, certain strength exercises, you know, you have back pain, you can't do deadlifts, then you shouldn't do deadlifts at that moment. You can find some alternative exercise. You can do some, like the, I guess it's called cable rows for example and, even like barbell rows or something like that. You can always work around different kinds of exercises. So you, there's no, there's no need to do specifically deadlifts or specifically bench press or specifically overhead press. There are many variations in these exercises. You can use machines, you can use dumbbells, you can use barbells, you can use resistance bands, you can use a bodyweight. Like, yeah, there's, you know, hundreds of exercises that you can choose, to do around that. But, actively doing the rehab, actively doing some of these, let's say, lighter reps and directing blood flow to the region can be also beneficial to like, you know, help to treat, that injury. If it's like a very long term injury then of course consulting with some professional, can be a faster way to, find the root cause of the injury. Sometimes these injuries come from poor form, you're doing the exercise wrong, or with too heavy weights which then just leads to the injury. But, yeah. There it is. Next question. How much NAC per day? Woman sixty plus for longevity. So NAC is one of those supplements that, has several clinical trials over the last few years combined with glycine that it shows, benefits in, you know, you could say anti aging or longevity. But what it does is mostly it like affects mitochondrial function, inflammation, grip strength, walking speed, and body composition, those kind of things. And the doses typically used in those studies are over two point five grams of NAC and glycine both and the age group was 75 years of age. So if you're 60 and above, then you could already benefit from a slightly larger dose of NAC. So two point five grams is like the minimal dose that they find to be effective. You might you could maybe benefit from slightly less if you're in your sixty's compared to when you're 75. It's hard to tell. But, you know, again, measuring your biomarkers is something that also matters. Like, if you see that your inflammation markers, for example, which is the only like real thing you can measure here, from the blood, that it goes down after taking NAC, then it appears to work. You can also, yeah, measure it with your grip strength, your walking speed, etcetera. Based on the clinical trials those things would improve. If it doesn't then you might need like a larger dose because they even use doses of up to seven point two grams, Which, yeah, is a pretty large amount of nac and glycine. But, I think it's worthwhile to try it out at least. Next question. Any advice on promoting stimulating appetite? One easy way to stimulate appetite is to just eat hyper palatable meals. So, you know, of course ultra processed foods are hyper palatable. They're engineered to be hyper palatable. I'm not saying that it's the best way to consume calories or stimulate appetite. It's just it kinda highlights the idea there are certain food combinations that are very hyperpalatable. So, these processed foods typically have a specific ratio of salt, sugar and fat that is like hyperpalatable. So they're kind of savory, their, you know, crunchiness is appetizing, there's certain colors that are more appetizing, there's certain textures that are more appetizing. And, you know, it can also be individual. Some people might find crunchier food more appetizing, some other people find more, like, gelatinous foods and more appetizing, so whatever it is. But the key here is usually like higher fat or higher carbohydrate content because protein is super satiating and the fiber is also very satiating. So if you're very full with your meals and you don't have any appetite then, you know, chances are that, you might be consuming, adequate amounts of protein and fiber already. And, just increasing the carbohydrate or fat content can be one way to increase, the appetite. But, the interesting thing here is that there's also what's called, like, palate fatigue. So if you eat just the same type of food, eventually you will be satiated by that. So if you eat, let's say one specific type of food, even if it's let's say chips, potato chips, You eat, eventually you'll become, like, satiated. From there, you develop this palate fatigue. Like, oh, I don't wanna eat any more of these chips because I've had too much already. But if you change it up, you eat chip chip chips, then you eat ice cream, then it kinda resets your, appetite or your satiety. Like, oh I can still eat ice cream because it's a new flavor, you haven't experienced palate fatigue with this type of food, you eat ice cream, then you might even go back to the chips, Like it kind of reset your appetite and that's why a lot of different types of foods can, result in, over consumption. So, but if you eat just the single type of food, you know, you eat just steak that is very sage eating, you develop palate fatigue much faster. But if you eat just steak then you have ice cream then you can keep eating ice cream. You know there's a reason there's a saying that there's always room for dessert. Which is literally true because if you eat a main course dinner like steak and potatoes and vegetables, you eat it, oh you're full, then someone brings out the ice cream or some dessert, then it kinda resets, you're able to eat it. So that's just how, the human mind or, yeah, our appetite has developed, and, palate fatigue is one way you can overcome or increase appetite. You just switch it up, you know, you can switch it up with health foods as well. You have steak and potatoes, then you have some additional foods that are different type. You know, some soup or something like that, some fruits that can stimulate appetite. So yeah, just switching it up is one of the easiest ways to increase appetite and avoid this palate fatigue. And the last question is, what's a good vr2max for women? That depends a lot on their age. So the older you get the lower your vr2max typically is. Vr2max peaks when you're 18 years old in the general population. Of course you can have a higher VO2 max in your thirties when compared to when you were 18. Which is the case for me. My VO2 max is significantly higher right now when I'm 30 compared to when I was 18 and in high school. Women typically have slightly lower VO2 max, something like 10 to 15% lower than men. And, when you look at the, the longitudinal studies then people who have VO2 max of fifty milliliters per kilogram per minute have a significantly lower risk of all cause mortality compared to people, you know, even compared to people who have forty milliliters per kilogram per minute. Not to mention people who have 20 milliliters per kilogram, per minute. So, as women, if you're, you know, twenties or thirties, then it's easy and it's possible to achieve a VO2 max of 50, relatively easy. Even in your forties, you could, do it if you're more athletic. What is a good VO2 max? It depends a lot on your age. If you're 80 years old then a VO2max of 30 is excellent. But a VO2max of 30 when you're 20 is quite bad. So, there's a huge age age factor here. So I would say that okay, in your twenties and thirties an excellent VO2 max is somewhere in your fifties, a good VO2 max is is like 45 plus 45 to 48, 49. If you are over 40 years of age then a good VO to max is low fifty's like 51, 52 and excellent is like 55 still, you can do it. But yeah in your sixty's and seventies and eighties a good VO2max is somewhere around forty, forty one, 42. If it's, you know, 20 then, that's very close to the frailty threshold or the disability line. If if your Realtor Max is below 17.5 milliliters per kilogram per minute, then you're not gonna be able to take care of yourself physically because you just like the fitness. You're not able to carry groceries, you're not able to even put on clothes and, do, like, house chores. So yeah, our goal as we get older is to avoid the disability line for as long as possible. You know, if you're 100 years old then chances are you will be below the disability line unless you are super fit and unless you're doing a lot of, health activities into your 100 years of age. But yeah. How high should it be depends a lot on your age. The younger you are the higher it should be, generally. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap, on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.