What's really interesting is that you're finding, 70 year old grandmas and, you know, granddads, basically, who have been able to, spend seven minutes under the water. Nasal breathing versus mouth breathing, higher IQ with nasal breathing versus mouth breathing, and things of that nature. So it's quite a quite a important thing for any parents out there to kind of ensure their child has every possibility to breathe through the nose. You know? Lee, welcome back to the show. Hey, Sim. How are you, mate? I'm, you know, I'm doing really good, and I'm happy to see you again. So, you've What? You've been writing a book recently, and it's coming out quite shortly, which is, I think, quite exciting time for you, like, writing your first book, if I'm not mistaken. And, yeah, we'll be talking mostly about that topic and other things. And maybe, like, we can start, first of all, with some background because we, we go, like, pretty long time back. Like, we met, I guess, like, eight no. No. Six years ago or something like that. And, yeah, we've been we've been, yeah, doing a lot of things together as well in this online space. So, yeah, I'm happy to speak with you again. Yeah, mate. It's really yeah. It's it's it has been a while, hasn't it? I remember some of those cold we did a couple of retreats together where we had, like, some water that was about this this high, and we're, like, getting in there and stuff. So it was a lot of Yeah. And, I guess it's always you know, I I always, like, find your story pretty interesting of, you being in Australia living in Finland. And, yeah, maybe we can start with, you know, how did you get how did you, end up in Finland and, especially doing, like, cold exposure and breath work? Yeah. It's a it's a it is a quite a long journey, but I can narrow it down, of course, like, you know, like many many foreigners meeting the foreign woman coming here like that. That's how I actually, like, got to Finland. If I'm being honest with you, I never actually I I probably was one of those people that thought there was, like, polar bears in Finland, you know, to be honest. I didn't know what I was getting myself into. And then, of course, I had the first winter here. You know, I've had very, very little experience even with the snow. And I tried to I tried to kind of, like, live like a bear, really, like, like, kind of, like, simulate hibernation for the whole winter, and it it just felt horrible. It felt absolutely horrible to do that. And, at the same time, my my colleagues had, like, really, really, urged me or even forced me to go and experience the cold water. Of course, sauna, it's it's sort of like sauna is a Finnish Finnish word, of course, in the English dictionary. It's the only Finnish word. Sauna thing was, like, something I became familiar with. Being naked in the sauna with other other people was, like, something to come to terms with, but the cold was really something I didn't I couldn't anticipate. You know? And these guys really it was like a baptism of I was gonna say fire, but in in fact, it would be like ice. So, yeah, my they kind of kept forcing me there year after year, and, eventually, I just sort of went and did my own thing. I learned about it. I made all the mistakes. I felt like I was gonna, honestly, I felt sometimes I really overdone it, a bit panicked sometimes. But in actual fact, I went to one party, and they wanted to force me in the cold again. And I kinda proved to them that I that I can do it now. You know? So, everything's self taught. All the mistakes have been made, and now I'm happy to be able to share my knowledge and my my, kind of, like, my experiences with people so that they can help, it can help them. You know? Because cold and, by by default breathing as well, breath work is kind of, like, really, really two big health trends at the moment, I I would say. Yeah. Yeah. I agree. And it's for sure, like, a lot of people can be quite, you know, exciting or, like, more, like, the exotic thing, like, the cold exposure for sure. Like, you know, most people don't do winter swimming or ice ice baths on a regular basis, and it can be quite quite, like, a, like, a, I guess, yeah, exotic, thing. But, yeah. It actually surprised me how many Finnish people sort of, like, don't do that too. You know? Like, it really surprised me. Sometimes it's just the like, everyone has done it, but nobody not everyone has this consistent practice of of, cold exposure. So, yeah, it is an exotic thing for an Australian to sort of, like, reintroduce the cold to to the Finn selling the ice to the Eskimos in a way. Yeah. And, I mean, your expertise in the cold exposure far exceeds most Finnish people as well. So, yeah, like, you actually ended up, learning from Wim Hof about, cold exposure. And, now you're also doing, like, these under ice swimming. So, like, you're actually swimming under under the ice, if I'm not mistaken. Yes. Yeah. Well, you know, typical that's that's me and my personality, there. You know? Like, I always I I like to kind of, like, test myself and, put the training to the test too, put myself in unique situations where I would learn about myself. And, of course, like, yeah, the in a way, like, ice diving is very ice diving or move moving under the water on one breath is essentially freediving, which also relates very closely to breathing and not breathing. So it was kind of like an easy it was an easy, you know, it was an easy way. It, like, it just really stimulated me. You know? The cold cold exposure and the feeling of being completely, submerged underwater, but then also knowing that you can control control what's going on in your body. So I think, a lot of people, when they do an ice bath, you you you see it quite often that people are kind of in there. They have their hands together because they don't wanna put their hands in and stuff, and they kind of, in a way, like, disassociate from the experience or they they put their mind somewhere else. Whereas you don't get that same opportunity when you're under the ice. You know? You have to be in complete command of your body, and you have to be, like, really present. You can't kind of disappear anywhere else. Otherwise, obviously, something something might happen. So, yeah, it's very it's a it's quite a contrasting thing to go right, like, right under. Right. I think a lot of people, you know, might have a clue or, like, a a little bit understanding about that cold exposure has some health benefits if you just, you know, do some, cold shower or sit in an ice bath for a little bit. But what are there any, like, actual health benefits of doing it with this, under the ice swimming component as well? So you're, like, combining the breath hold for, I guess, how long is it? Like, ten seconds or something, and, the cold exposure at the same time? Because it's, you know, obviously quite, like, extreme, and potentially dangerous as well. So are there, like, any is there anything worth it other than, like, an adrenaline rush or something like that? You know, like, I don't I I wouldn't know about any studies that are showing this because it's is like you said, it is kind of, like, a bit remote kinda thing to do in a sense. Like, not many people are really doing it like that. But, actually, like, you get a lot of mental benefits for sure. I mean, you know, like, we have, like, really cool, track record of, like, people going under, and it's it's it's like what like, I'm always saying, you see somebody go under somebody else, and ten, fifteen seconds later, it's almost like they're a different person in a way because they they submerge or they resurface, and they kind of, like, have this self belief. And they've for many people, it's like, you know, sometimes a marathon is at least is for somebody. You know? They want they wanna practice, to run a run a marathon, and that that takes weeks and weeks and months and months of training. And, also, like, you know, it's a really, really long race. And over the course of that whole event, you might you might feel like you've changed or it might be a tick in the box somewhere. But we kind of, like, minimize that in a way in terms of the length, but then, you know, it's yeah. I think the the it's mainly a mental, barrier or sort of like a bucket list thing that, people get. But like I said, it's it's truly unique thing because of the what I mentioned before, because you're you have to be present inside your body. There's no there's no kind of, like, getting away from that or whatever. You know? It feels really different. And, of course, we know that for sure you're gonna trigger, the mammalian diver response in a really strong way, which is like this ancient, response in the body where we actually you can feel it in your body when everything slows down. Your body senses sort of like a stress or a kind of a threat in a sense. Slows the way slows the heart rate down and the way that the body uses oxygen and energy. So it's kind of like it it sounds scary, and it sounds like it could be this really, like, amped up, adrenaline thing adrenaline fuel thing. But, actually, when you're under there, it's really cold, really calm and serene. So it's not until after you get out then the adrenaline keeps in your people are really excited and whatever. Right. Yeah. For sure. What is the mammalian, dive reflex that you mentioned? Yeah. It's it's it's said to be like, an ancient, re reflex from dating back to sort of evolutionary evolutionary theory in a way where we're water dwelling creatures, and then, of course, we have, evolved to form limbs and move out of the water. And, of course, like, we still have these remnants. And in many cases, there's there's a lot of, conjecture about the the reallocation of different, nerves in the body and and what they actually do today versus what they used to do. And because we've been under the water diving, when we have, for example, this trigeminal nerve that's across the forehead here, when that, hits hits the water or makes contact with cold in any sense, whether it's air or especially water, what it does is, send the signal that, you need to, use less, energy, slows the heart rate down, slows all the bottle bodily processes down, and gives you basically more time in the water. And it's interesting because a lot of people that have experienced sort of the face dunking, you know, when they have the ice bath or the little bowl of ice. Like, I think, celebrities, were swearing by this, like, Victoria Beckham and all this. They were they were kind of going crazy about it at some point because of the you know, it's said to produce more collagen in in the skin, and it's, you know, keeps the skin tighter, basically, aesthetic reasons. It it became really, really popular thing to do, for this, and many, many people that were doing that were also mentioning that they have this kind of calm, relaxed feeling, afterwards as well. Also, very invigorating feeling. But, that's basically because of the trigeminal nerve, cranial nerve that runs across the forehead signaling to slow down and relax in the body. I wanna take a quick break to tell you about the most evidence based supplement stack out there. Let's be honest, most supplements don't have any evidence that they would provide any significant health benefits as shown in human clinical trials. That's unfortunate because a lot of people will end up buying some new hyped up longevity supplement thinking that it's going to make them live longer, whereas in reality, they're just making expensive urine. Fortunately, there are a few supplements that do work, and they have the evidence to prove that from dozens of clinical trials. I've partnered up with donotage.org to put together the longevity leap bundle that includes one of the most proven supplements. The bundle has a starter pack and advanced pack that includes things like creatine monohydrate, berberine, collagen peptides, glynac, omega threes, vitamin d three, k two, and magnesium, and trimethylglycine. Do not age was also gracious enough to add a free bottle of SulforaBoost to every order, which is a sulforaphin supplement that promotes glutathione production. So if you want to get the starter pack that lasts for sixty days or the advanced bundle that lasts for three hundred and sixty six days, then head over to donotage.org/longevity-leap-bundle or check out the link in the description and use the code LEAP, l e a p, for an exclusive 15% discount. This is the largest discount code for do not age online, and you won't get this from anywhere else. And you'll also get the free sulfur boost, which is amazing. Head over to donotage.org/longevity-leap-bundle and use the code LEAP for a 15% discount. Alright. Back to the show. Breath holds and things like that, they can also have some cardiovascular benefits. So are there, like what are some, like, physiological effects? Like, does it have any heart rate variability benefits? Or Yeah. Of course. It yeah. I mean, like well, first and foremost, it's really interesting because, you know, this there's this tribe of people that have been studied quite extensively off the coast of The Philippines. Right? The Bajalalal, group, they're like these nomadic sea sea dwelling, tribe of people. And, often, they live in these houses with big stilts or then they're just on boats. But about 80% of all the food that they eat is actually coming from foraging under the on the sea floor. You know? Mhmm. Of course, spearfishing and all of that. So, what's really interesting is that, you you're finding, 70 year old grandmas and, you know, granddads, basically, who have been able to, spend seven minutes under the water, and they can also dive really, really deep as well. And so when they have been, like, trying to figure out, like, what what are the differences, you know, between this group of people that have been, you know, spending a lot of time under the water, diving, free diving under the water, no oxygen, no additional, equipment or anything like that, just just free diving. The spleen size is actually bigger in them, versus, like, fill it you know, off the main Mainland Philippines. So they had done this study where they had compared the spleen spleen size, and, actually, it's 50% bigger in in this group of people. And then you kind of, like, ask, okay. So what does the spleen do? The spleen is actually it's about the size of an avocado. It's found, just above the stomach here and on the on the right hand side, I believe. So it's actually like a blood reservoir, and it actually carries some of the best, highest quality blood, meaning it has a lot of oxygen in it, high level, red blood cells, and it's coming, actually straight from the bone marrow as well. And so what has been happening is that with, with extended breath holds, you can actually see, in in now we're not just talking about this group of people, but it's been studied in other groups of people as well, freedivers and whatnot, that you get these splenic contractions. And the spleen will basically shrink in size, so it will kind of contract. It'll squirt. You know, it has somewhere between 250 to, in some cases, 500 mils of of hematocrit, which is, like, highly oxygenated blood, and it will squeeze that out and then because it's like another stress or sort of a threat situation. It wants to give you your body wants to give you more time under the water, so it will squeeze or contract once, twice, maybe even three times in some instances where it gives you more of this oxygen, and gives you more time under the water. So, yeah, it's interesting. And that's an evolutionary thing too. So it's like in in the generations, from their from their ancestry, it's actually becoming a stronger and stronger, trait in this group of people. Mhmm. Wow. So and we know that freedivers are also practicing, practicing with these kind of, techniques as well with the breath holding and these kind of, static apnea where you see people kind of floating in the water, and they're they're trying to relax their body completely and trying to get to seven or eight minutes or maybe even longer in some cases. Wow. Yeah. Like, seven minutes is pretty long to hold your breath underwater. Like, what's the average person? Let's say, like, you know, a person in Helsinki or London, what's their, like, breath hold usually? Well, you see, in in the water so, like, when you when you go and get a a freediving certification to get to that this level two, which is like most most freediving, resorts or courses or whatever accepting people with this, like, certification too, it literally means that you would hold your breath for two minutes. And, I've I've every course that I've been part of or every time I've participated, I've everyone has passed, two minutes. And, I think it's more of a mental thing because the body actually has so many interesting pathways and possibilities to make, you know, to to keep you safe. Right? Like, to have like, there's a lot of residual oxygen inside the the body as well. So it's really a mental thing, like calming the mind and calming, you know, calming the thought processes. And, of course, the brain requires oxygen and energy as well. So to quiet the mind and stop it thinking all these thoughts, that's also a really, really, good thing to do so you can kind of get more time under the water. But, yeah, about two minutes, is a pretty standard thing. And and, actually, in many cases, women are really, really high performance in, apnea, breath holding times as well. In fact, many of the top freedivers here in Finland are actually female as well. And you probably have seen maybe around this Johanna Nordblad. She has, made, a Guinness Book of Records for, I think, a 105 meters under the ice on on one breath, like, you know, swimming across. And, you probably may have heard of a a guy called, Stig Severinsen, who's a a Danish freediver, and he has held his breath. I I've trained with him, and he's held his breath for about twenty two minutes under the water, but that was with, he had, inhaled pure oxygen. So it gives you a bit of an advantage, but still, you must have, like, some skills and ability to be able to even go to twenty two minutes anyway, even if it was assisted with pure oxygen. So these are kind of extreme extreme, circumstances, of course, and, like but the common thing that I found and when I've been asking these kind of high performers the questions, like, like, what what tips can you give, It like, mainly, there was a lot of repetition in terms of, like, you know, just practicing practicing your breath holding of corpus, but, also, they're both practicing yoga. In that means that they would be opening up the the physiology, like, making sure that the the diaphragm they have a good mastery of the diaphragm. They have, very flexible, intercostal muscles, which are the the muscles in between the rib ribs, and keep keeping the flexion in the in the ribs. But then also, they're always mentioning some specific, mindfulness, like, real time mindfulness activities that they're doing because they just really need to quiet the mind. And in fact, Stig has a certain he calls it like a video or a movie, that he watches, like, almost all the time because he can kind of time that to be fifteen minutes, twenty minutes. So Mhmm. Yeah. He kind of goes really into this kind of storyline or this lucid dreaming state in a way. Wow. Right. Are there, like, any yeah. Like you mentioned with a bit of it already, but is is there, like, let's say so so a person who is able to hold, you know, seven minutes their breath versus someone who is able to hold it, like, only one minute, you know, you would you would imagine that the person who holds it seven minutes is also slightly fitter and with better cardiovascular function or better lung function or whatever it is. But, I guess maybe there aren't any studies on comparing these people, or or are there? There's not so many studies on that. I mean, there are studies that compare sort of trained freedivers and their breath hold times and also, for example, lots of studies that show the the spleen size, versus nontrained, non freedivers. And, you know, obviously, the training mechanism is greater. In the freedivers, actually, they get a greater, sort of like contraction of the spleen, and it recovers really quickly as well. And what I mean by recovers, I mean it goes back to its full size much quicker. It's already starting to do this within an hour, you know, and it raises the question, you know, like, can we use breath holding, like, you know, a series of breath holds before competing in an event in a way to get the really, high quality blood already flowing inside the body, before competing, you know, as a as a sort of like a performance enhancing thing. And then, of course, we know we know that that's already been happening in certain, sports. You know? It's always, like, a well known thing that, the Tour de France and, Lance Armstrong, when when they have you know, when he got, you know, caught for, having, you know, basically, EPO in the body, which is the hormone that, basically signals to the body to produce, you know, basically, to get the the the oxygen like, the highly high level of oxygen blood. I hate this word oxygen and jaded oxygen and jaded or whatever you say. It's I always trip over that word. But, yeah, getting a lot of, healthy blood moving around the body. He was saying that, like, you know, 18 of the top 20, riders in the Tour de France, are injecting, their own blood, which has has already got higher levels of EPO. You know, so it's blood doping. It's their own blood, but it's also you know, they want that to to repair, recover, and get ready for the next stage so they can perform at a higher level. So in my in my in my mind, in my view, breath holding would be an abs absolutely a great thing to do before your competition, you know, any of these athletes at the Olympics, for example. Mhmm. Is that like the Bohr effect that causes that door? Well, it's it's part of it. It's part of it. You know, it's like the Bohr effect, what you're referring to. That's the that's literally sort of like the principle that, you know, c o two is actually the trigger to release oxygen. So our bodies, a lot of people get a little bit confused that, when they're breathing, they feel like, okay. I just took a breath in. Now the oxygen's in there, you know, somehow. When in actual fact, we need c o two, to rise gently. Don't need extreme, c o two levels, by the way, all the time. But even just a gentle pause after the inhale is enough time to allow the c o two level to rise. The chemoreceptors will kind of notice their rise in temperature slightly, also the rising levels of CO two, and then re release, actually, the oxygen from the the protein in the blood, the hemoglobin in the blood. So, you know, those breath holdings the breath holding times, are very much, you know, like, when when you're holding your breath, the c o two levels are, like, going off the charts. You know? And, that's actually when a lot of the blood is actually being released inside the body. For for anyone listening or watching this one, you know, the Wim Hof method, if you have been practising these breathing techniques, which involve kind of, like, rapid, almost like a hyperventilator hyperventilation slash superventilation over breathing practice followed by the pause in between that's having the same dynamic. Right? So you're, kind of, in a way, breathing, like, is like literally giving away the c o two, which which in turn, by the time you get to the sort of pauses or these breath hold moments, it actually gives you longer time because you've been dumping off the c o two, and that means that you'll have a longer time where the c o two needs to kind of gently build up. Eventually, it'll start building up to a point where the body realizes this, notices this, and then starts dumping the oxygen inside of, from the hemoglobin in the blood. And that's when you feel really, really, the tingles, and you feel really good. You know? And a lot of people don't know what it's like to be getting that much oxygen, going into the tissue because we're we're not breathing correctly, in society because of all the stress and anxiety and all those sort of things. Right. Yeah. So so how does the let's yeah. A lot of people might have heard about Wim Hof, the hyperventilation. So what's yeah. Like, what what is the difference between if you're, like, hyperventilating and, holding the breath? Like, how does it affect the body differently? Yeah. So the difference between hyperventilating and holding the breath is when you're breathing in, of course, you like, you have to think about the atmosphere. Right? The atmosphere itself, it's only about 21% of the atmosphere that we're walking around and breathing and all this is actually oxygen. Then when you breathe in, only, on average, only about 5% of that oxygen makes its way or finds its way into the tissues, into the cells. So when you look at this principle of the Bohr effect and and, in a way, the breath holding in a sense and having these these periods of time in between the inhale and the exhale, essentially, what that does is kind of we we know that we can influence that or sort of, like, manipulate that in a way or hack that, biohack that in a sense, where we just have the pause. We let the c o two level rise, and then we kind of, like, in a way, you know, induce the oxygen being released into into the bloodstream. So the real difference is that, like, hyperventilating, which is something a very, very sympathetic way of breathing in a sense is very active. Usually, when it's using the mouth, it's dumping off a whole bunch of c o two. It's it's kind of like it's it's something that we can use in an acute burst, like the Wim Hof method breathing or, like, freediving training, apnea training. So we can use it, like, as a as a tool in a sense. But if we're walking around every day hyperventilating, we can obviously see that that's not gonna be good for us because we will get be getting less and less oxygen, when we actually need it. You know? And, of course, that that that has a a link to hypertension, anxiety, stress, and all those sort of things as well. Right. And if is it possible to use hyperventilation for some sort of performance enhancing effect, or when would you, like, use it? Yeah. Mainly mainly, like what I mentioned, mainly, it's very good at, like, dumping, the c o two away. I mean, that's the that's the most, healthiest way to to utilize, like, in a way, like, the hyperventilation if you're kind of, like, like, consciously using that or utilizing that in your breath work. You know, it's really interesting because, like, there's there's, like, a growing there's sort of, like, this growing, awareness, let's say, about, you know, sort of, like, this what people call or refer to, simulated altitude training. Right? So what that essentially means is, like, recreating the situation inside of the blood where, you have, like, these lower levels of oxygen. Right? So even this is, like, not a new thing in a sense because, like, there was even this famous Olympian, like, people who are probably watching the Olympics at this point as well as there's this, Emil Zadepek, and he was a Czech athlete. And he I think he was, like, I think at the Helsinki Games in '52, he won, like, three gold medals. And, he was known to be really, like, an innovator of running. Like, he had a lot of different unique training, methods. But then, also, you know, like, he really had he he was the one one of the first ones who would run and do breath holds whilst Steve was running because he kind of understood that you when you have these higher levels of CO two, you're kind of getting that oxygen, like like like dumping into your your bloodstream. Right? Mhmm. And, also, I mean, there's other things that he did too. Like, he ate dandelions, like, before the race. Like, he had, you know, these dandelions. And, also, he, would eat, like, birch leaves because he felt like, okay. If a deer can run really fast, then I will eat birch leaves like a deer. You know? So he was, like, kind of a a bit sort of like, mad scientist, but, lots of people are really referring to him, nowadays because of this high altitude, you know, the simulated high altitude training. And, we know that people, for example, have, you know, you know, oxygen saturation of sort of, like, 90, like, 94% and under starts to be it starts to become more, you know, like a breathing dysfunctional breathing pattern. So if you're ever measuring your own you know, a lot of people have these different tracking, like, you know, they're measuring a lot of their their things. Like, a lot of the good watches nowadays, Polar watches and so on, you can measure this. But if you start moving too far below 94% blood oxygen saturation, then you start to become like, you know, it becomes an issue for you. And he was training at, like, in in 85 and under. You know? Right. Blood oxygen saturation, which is like being at, like, 10,000 feet, or 10,000 meters altitude. You know? That's a huge advantage for, like, a lot of these Olympic athletes that train in Morocco and Kenya and these these high altitude, locations. Because they train there, they come back down, and they they the body adapts always. So they always have this advantage, and a lot of athletes in America also training in Colorado and these kind of Yeah. They're located. Yeah. Like, I remember, you know, Estonian skiers a lot. They used to also go, like, to the Swiss Alps to train for skiing and, you know, Estonia isn't very mountainous. This is pretty flat. And, yeah, it does appear that, you know, all the pro pro athletes tend to use some form of, like, altitude training, to get some sort of performance enhancing boost. So is it more, like, similar to heat adaptation? So, like, if you are training in a hot environment as well, then your body's, like, becoming more heat adapted, and it can also just exercise for longer in a cooler environment. Because of that, you're able you're able to regulate your body temperature, better, so you postpone the overcool overheating of the body. So is it, like, something sim something similar that you're, like, improving the efficiency of your, I guess, blood oxygen saturation in this kind of a hypoxic environment, and then in a normal normoxic like, a normal oxygen environment, you're you just it, like, feels better or is easier because of that. Yeah. Exactly. And, you know, like, basically, that this whole concept of c o two tolerance, that's where this comes in. Right? So it's like, basically training the mechanism in the body where, a person can, withstand high levels of c o two in the body. Right? Like, we we know for a fact, like, the you know, when you really looked at, like, to the basics of breathing, I mean, like, we breathe because we need oxygen, because it goes through a chemical process. Like, we we can't eat food, and then our bodies just utilize that, right, as energy, of course. So it must go through the chemical process with oxygen in order to create the molecule, you know, the ATP, adenosine triphosphate, of course, which our bodies can use. But the body has that backup system, and this is where we're talking about this lactic acid. So anybody who's been training, in different different, you know, whatever it is, like, even if you're just doing running, like, training, your legs get really heavy, because, eventually, if you're running and participating in exercise for an extended period of time, it becomes harder and harder to get the the oxygen really where it needs to go inside the body. So, you know, we that that process is gonna happen in, basically, any body, but you can train it. Right? You can you can train the body to kind of withstand the higher levels of CO two and kind of, like, offset or delay the offset of the lactic acid buildup, which is kind of the which is a form of energy, but it's just a really, really laggy, slower way of energy, form of energy that makes its way to become available eventually. And it's also very, very resource intensive to make lactic acid in the body as well versus oxygen and ATP. Interesting. So what would be, like, a protocol for training that so, like, if you're not going to go to altitude to train, like, yeah, what would you what would be, like, a training protocol look like? Or would you, like, just be more do you have any specific like, during the exercise itself, you would use any specific breathing type, or is there, like, a specific, like, okay. Workout time, I'm gonna do this for five minutes, ten minutes, this this kind of exercise for breathing. So how would you, like what's that? How do you do it? Yeah. I think actually, I think I remember that you have you have been kind of doing this, like, sort of, like, in a way, like, the entry level version of this. You've been doing kind of, like, by yourself, for a long time, if I remember, because we haven't had a conversation a long time ago about it. But, like, just doing these apnea walks, you know, like, most people feel like, you know, when you start talking about these things and, you know, you know, there's no way around it. I mean, if you start holding your breath for three, four, five minutes trying to trying to sort of, like, induce these these you know, recruit all these systems to give you this this awesome oxygen, like, high oxygen blood and all the rest of it, I mean, it it feels, like, very uncomfortable. Right? And so asking someone to go straight from a from, like, a novice or never have done this before to go into that setting, it's very, very difficult. But there's a easy way that anyone can basically go in and try it and to experience that. And that's literally just to kind of, do these apnea walks where you would literally just take one breath in and exhale to neutral. You don't like you don't do it on empty lungs. You just take a breath in. You take your breath to neutral. And then you would, like, walk 10 steps or maybe 20 steps or maybe 30. You don't you don't get to, like, 27 and then kind of walk faster. You just do it in a regular walking, rate. You would measure that. You would breathe in and out, recovery breathing using your nose. And then when you feel that you're kind of rested and recovered, you can do it again. And the good news is you can basically do that anytime, anywhere. I posted a video not too long ago where I did that up a bunch of stairs. I don't know. Maybe 80 stairs. One breath in, exhale, and then all the way up. And that was no joke because, you you know, like, you when you're when you're going up the stairs, there's more muscles involved. But this is an easy way to train. So that's kind of like the entry level. But then if you wanna get those like I like I kind of mentioned before, if somebody wants to get, like, into this, like, really good state inside their body before they do their athletic training or even just some cardio cardiovascular training in the gym, on the treadmill, rowing, whatever, one really cool thing to do is literally just, like, you warm up a little bit, but then you would go and practice your max breath holds. You would do, like, five five rounds of that. So, obviously, you would probably get a a better and better breath hold time, but you would you would just literally take one deep breath in to about 85, 90%. You don't wanna be completely 100% full because it feels very tight and very uncomfortable, and you can have a bit of pressure in the throat and other areas, chest, and so on. But you would just hold your breath for as long as you can. Time that if you want to or you don't have to. You can just do it as best as you can. Then you would recover, recovery breathing for about a minute or so after. It can also be a bit longer if you prefer. Then you would you would repeat this either three to five times. And you should, you should probably, get this, reaction from the spleen on some level. You'll have really healthy blood in your in your system before you even train. That's easy protocol to do. You don't have to, like, go crazy where you're, like, feel like you're bursting or your face is going really red or anything like that. It's it's one that you would practice laying down in the gym, because, obviously, there's some some possibilities of, like, you know, if you go really, really deep into a breath hold, you could feel a little bit dizzy because of the you know, because you're you're not breathing for a while, so you can do it safely whilst you're laying down. It's a it's a great one. It's a really good one. Yeah. It's, like, very similar to exercise or, like, cardio in general. So you just need to do some of it in some form. It's good. And just doing more will, inevitably increase the results. So if you do more cardio, your your like, VioToolmax improves. And if you do more breath holds and you hold it for longer, then, yeah, it's gonna improve as well. Yeah. I mean, like, in in my book, I kind of I call it, like, the, it's it's funny concept, but it sounds like microdosing death in a sense. Right? Because it's like it kinda feels like, okay, everything in your body is saying, okay, I'm not breathing. This feels a bit weird. This feels a bit scary. But in a way, it's kind of like a very, calming, relaxing feeling as well. So it's a, you know, it's about it's like anything. The the ego or the mind wants to sort of, like, understand all outcomes and have control of everything. And it's a really, really good practice of just, like, kind of a bit letting go and just trusting the body and really connecting with the diaphragm because the diaphragm starts moving around and everything. And, just knowing that you have you you always have a little bit more than what you think you do inside. Mhmm. Yeah. And, what about then, like, everyday breathing? So, obviously, breathing is essential for life, and, a lot of people might have a wrong understanding as well of, you know, what is actually the correct way to breathe or, like, a healthy way to breathe. So maybe we can, talk about that. Yeah. Of course. And, you know, like, it's it's it's not a mystery at this point. You know, we're talking about nasal breathing, first and foremost, because of all of the, you know, the hygienic reasons. Of course, we have the you know, this this these evolved bodies of ours, they don't waste space. You know? So, like, when we have, like, a very, very complex network of, you know, passages and systems through here, like the the the night the sinus and the paranasal sinus, it's there for a reason. You know? And then we we think about how much space we have in the cheeks, the soft palate, the throat, and then all the lungs. I mean, this is the respiratory system. And to be able to, like, breathe through the nose, it's, like, the most natural way, because we know that breathing through the nose recruits the diaphragm to pull down, create a negative pressure, allow the oxygen to come in. We understand that the like I said earlier, the intercostal muscles are quite a key part of this because as they can flex and as they can open up, allows a bit more flexion, allows a little bit easier breath and maybe a fuller breath of air in as well. So it's important to have, like, yoga practices or any of these kind of stretching where we have, like, really, really flexible, intercostal muscles and remembering that they they wrap right around the rib cage as well. So there's a lot of biomechanical things we can do, but they are aided by nasal breathing. And we also know that it's a very, you know, it's an anti like, nitric oxide is the biggest thing, like, that we know, more and more about recently. It's a special molecule that's created by only breathing through the nose. We cannot produce it when we're breathing through the mouth. And the way it's produced is kind of I I I kind of say it's, like, similar to, like, a turbo in a car in a sense. You know? Because a turbo in a car, creates, like it spins around. The air actually spins around so quickly that it creates this kind of, this nit you know, like, this, like, boost in a sense. And in a way, we're getting the same thing when we're breathing through the nose. It enters the paranasal sinus so quickly that it's spinning around and it creates this nitric oxide molecule. And that's actually really interesting because it's a vasodilator, so which means that all of the the blood vessels in the nasal area and, of course, the the bronchi and the bronchioli, which are the branchy things in the lungs, they will open up and be able you know, that makes it easy to breathe, obviously. But then it's also antifungal, anti pathogen, antibacterial. So if we keep them if we keep the mouth shut and just breathing through the nose, it's biomechanically better for us. It's more efficient. It's easier. It gives us more energy than it takes to breathe, but then it also has these hygienic, factors involved as well. And just just to throw it in there as well, I mean, like, if you if you if the average person goes to a medical profession and asks, they they they claim that they have some breathing issue, ninety whatever percent of the medications that they're prescribed will have some sort of, content in there that are aimed at, dilating the veins or having this vasodilation inside of them. So a lot of asthma medicines and things of that are actually trying to perform the same task as we would otherwise do when we're breathing through the nose. And, of course, there's I always carry these things around with me too. I have, like, eucalyptus oil, tea tree oil, things of this nature that open up the blood vessels and make it easier to breathe as well. But nasal breathing, that's the way to do it. Yeah. Yeah. It's like I think a lot of people have seen these pictures online of the mouse breather versus nasal breather at children. So, yeah, that's, you know, one of the most shocking examples of, you know, what is healthier and what which one we should actually do all the time or most of the time. Yeah. It it I mean, there's really a lot of studies, and and a lot of those are coming to light now. The more that we're understanding breathing and and the effects of that is in our earlier ages, I mean, we are showing that the I mean, you have an amazing, like, very, very defined jawline, for sure nasal breather. But this is affected at childhood, you know? So if, you know, the reason being is that if, someone has their mouth, like, let's just do it. Let's just do the the quick practice. I mean, if you take three breaths using your mouth, two and three. The tongue you you if you notice where the tongue is sitting, it's down it's down in the bottom of the mouth. You know? Whereas if you take three breaths through the nose, two and three. You notice that the tongue wants to sit up up in the roof of the mouth. Right? So that's where we have the the harder and softer palate. In those developmental years of a child, of course, the tongue sits up and the cranial facial structure starts to and the airway, especially, starts to grow around the tongue if that child's breathing through the nose. If the tongue's down, then it still it still grows, but it grows lower and it's not so much more defined because the airway doesn't need doesn't have any prop there to keep it open. And, of course, that has a knock on effect with the, again, the cranial facial structure and especially the cheeks and the jaw. If it's if it's smaller and it's more compressed in, then, again, there's not room for the the teeth to grow, and then they have, like, dental dental issues as well. But then also these, studies that show, like, you know, nasal breathing versus mouth breathing, higher IQ with nasal breathing versus mouth breathing, and things of that nature. So it's quite a quite a important thing, for any parents out there to kind of ensure that their their child has every possibility to breathe through the nose. You know? And a lot of those things can be, just small mindfulness practices and repetition to kind of encourage them to sort of, like, close the mouth when they're, you know, doing certain things and whatever. But, also, of course, there's there's the props. You know? I I keep these things around. The nasal dilators are around there so people can kind of, like you know, they they work by just placing those inside and propping open the the nostrils because a lot of people, they they really struggle. I mean, we have a lot of trauma things that happen to us physically. Right? So the the shape of the nostrils, the shape of the nose can be kind of like a restricting factor, psychologically or actually physically. And, sometimes those little props, the nasal dilators and what whatsoever, they actually help give people the ability or the confidence in some cases to just basically breathe through the nose once again. Mhmm. Yeah. And you made those nasal dilators. Right? Yeah. Found a way to make make them they're they're kind of fun thing. Like, they're actually getting pretty popular these days because they they're they're so easy. They're just a little thing that can even show, like, real quickly like this. You pop them up there. If you they're they're always the easiest way to show is, like, the nasal wall collapses, and then when we put it in, it has just a little prop where now it's, like, really easy to breathe in. So there's a lot of things coming out, like, you know, there's these kind of magnetic things that go over, but they still require some small magnetic device in inside the nose. So it's kind of like it it it opens up the airways, but they always require some sort of subscription because you need to buy, like, a month supply of the little things that help it do that and the strips that go across. Subscription again. You're supposed to work you can only use one of those every day. So in a way, these are good because you can just use them all the time, wash them off as you need to. And in fact, in the Olympics, I have seen, athletes using those. Because, of course, when you breathe through your nose, you retain a lot more moisture and, water inside the body up to about 40% more, retention of, fluids in the body. Wow. That's nice. Yeah. And you you can use them, like, when you're sleeping. You know, if you're using a mouth tape, then, combining that with, this this device as well is like you're, yeah, doing both things at once in a good way. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, these things are more like a training, like, aid in a sense. Right? Like, because a lot of people, for example, there's there's people that still I I love the I love these guys. They're good they're good people. They're in the biohacking scene and what whatnot, but they're forever, like, saying, hey. I'm still typing them out. And it's like, three, four years later, I'm like, hang on. You're still taping? Like, the the idea Are you still wearing diapers? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We're, like, trying to adapt to that. Right? So, like, you know, the the the concept of taping the mouth is actually really just to kind of, like, promote the idea or the concept of the lips being closed so that you, you know, you have a better opportunity to breathe through the nose, right, especially when you're sleeping. It's not about sealing the mouth closed. I always feel like I have to say that because, people, they they want the best for their children. They they try and take the kids' mouth shut and things like that as well, which is, like, you know, that's not correct. But it's literally just about like, a vertical tape like this where you can kind of, like, just, get the mouth closed like them. Mhmm. And then the beauty of nasal breathing is the more that you do it, the more it becomes possible and the more it becomes the default mode of breathing. So it's kind of like this very, very easily trainable, you know, process in the body. It goes the other way too. If we stop doing it, then we kind of go into that we go down that path as well, and we become mouth breathers. So the idea of being able to be in bed for six, seven, eight, hopefully, eight, nine hours in some cases for some people, that long of time and just be able to be practicing nasal breathing, it's, like, one of the only things I know that you can do where you don't have to actively be participating in it. Right? So the taping becomes kind of, like, a good mechanism there. But after some weeks, you kind of, like, have to wean yourself off the tape. Otherwise, you might you might end up becoming, like, reliant on those. You know? And there's we like, these things are just there to to give more power and more recognition inside the body, so you can take control and take responsibility of those very, very fundamental things. You know? Breathing being one of those. Right. What about exercise? So, like, what what would be, like, a good way to ex breathe when you're exercising? Yeah. Also, nasal breathing. Right? So, again, that that's why these that's why the nasal dilators are so so critical because a lot of people, once they become stressed or they be they get into this active kind of stimulated, in a way, sympathetic state, the mouth hangs open. And then, of course, when we when the mouth hangs open, we know that the upper body becomes more involved in the breathing, the upper chest. There are big muscles here, and especially someone like you, Sim, like you've been training a lot. You know, big muscles in the upper body, they require blood and oxygen. Right? So if you're breathing like this and you you all of these muscles here require the blood and oxygen, and it kind of takes it away from like, if you're a performance athlete running, for example, it's taking that away from the where it needs to go in the legs and these larger running muscles and whatever else whatever else you're using, and it's kind of like going to those. It's kind of called blood stealing in a sense. So that's why we wanna practice the nasal breathing because we know that when you breathe through the nose, it's gonna pull the diaphragm down, let it do its work, you know, the breathing muscle that is the diaphragm. You know? As I I made a joke about this not so long ago. Well, not joke, but it's kind of like I touched on this. A lot of guys, especially, we we are more than happy to go to the gym and, like, pump the bicep. Like, you see some people do, like like, literally hundreds of rep on this. I mean, it's a kind of useful muscle in some ways, but it's more an aesthetic thing. Right? But where are the people that are training the diaphragm? Like, where's the mastery of the diaphragm, this breathing apparatus or this breathing muscle, which is gonna breathe for some people, it's about 25,000 times a day. Where's the mastery of this knowing how much value it can give us and how much, extra energy it can it can give us? It gives us a little boost. So, yeah, this is this is where we wanna be. Nasal breathing whilst whilst running, whilst performing. And as I said, if you wanna stack the things, you do the breath holding before you do the do the performance, whatever whatever event or whatever exercise you're gonna do. You can do some breath holds before. You can use a dilator when you're running if you wanna keep the airflow going. And then, ultimately, it's gonna be much more biomechanically sound way of breathing, but then also super efficient. And, basically, it's gonna help your performance because the blood then the oxygen is gonna go exactly where it needs to. Right. So so what is your book about? So you, I imagine you'd cover all of these topics in the book as well about, breathing. Yeah. I I I touch on a lot of these things. Like, it's a there's a lot of storytelling in the book, but it's it's kind of like, funnily enough, it's named respiritual awakening. So in a way, it's a kind of a wordplay of sorts because, like, you know, in Latin, spirare means spirit, which also means to breathe. And, you know, when you translate that through into English, for example, many different languages also, have the same in Finnish, for example. Is to breathe, and then is spirit. Mhmm. And when you look at the words, respire, spire is actually, like, kind of like the circular, angle motion in a way, like a spiral. The spine, in a way, the energy moves up the spine like this. Spire is like the top of a, you know, it's like the top of a a point, for example, like a arrow tip will spiral as well. It always means energy. Spiral means energy. So re means, again, reenergy, re spirit, rebreathe. They all kind of, like, converge in this wordplay in a sense. So, yeah, I talk a lot about these kind of, different, like, all kinds of different stories and, tales about breathing. It's I I I'll be I'll be upfront. It's not like a science science book because there's some great books out there that really cover those things, but I'm just kind of, like, weaving, the things and all all of these stories and sort of, like, the knowledge and the know how into very, very practical things where people can really, take it on board themselves. But then, ultimately, everything like, whether we breathe in a certain way, for for example, a lot of people wanna guide people to this meditative state, which is fine and it's great. We we need more of that. But then what happens then? You know? Like, in a way, sort of the essence or the fuel of life itself is kind of like finding the inspiration, which in Latin, it literally means to breathe in. Mhmm. So helping people really find the inspiration in their life, and I think that's what we're all kind of seeking, in many different ways. And I feel like I've found a way where we can actually breathe in a certain way where we can access the the inspiration almost anytime. So that's, like, some some special technique, or is it very similar to what we talked about? It's like recreating. I mean, like, if you if you think about in life where you've seen somebody, do something amazing. Like, again, the Olympics are arguably, for some people, a very, great source of this kind of inspiration. Right? Like, you see people do amazing things. You see people rise to the occasion, and this is sort of a very, very reflective thing. When I see you, writing writing book after book, I'm, like, looking at Tim, and I'm like, damn. That guy's inspiring. And I'm like, how does he actually write all and, you know, how's he getting all this content? So I'm kind of there looking at you, for example, and I'm getting inspired by you. And then maybe you're seeing other people that look to you and say, hey. Seems great. And you there's this interaction where you're kind of reexperiencing your own inspiration through the people watching you. So it's a very reversible thing. Like, the Burma hiking sent Summit is a great example of that when you see such amazing people on the stage, and you see them leaving their inspiration. And so, in a way, when you when you think back to any moment where you've actually been inspired, where you've actually been inspired, it really is this reactive, this excite highly excitable, highly reactive moment where you literally, like, you, like, really breathe in. And that's in a way, it's called inspire, inspiration, because you're, like, breathing in like like this. This is what it means in language. And so it's, like, really, sequencing that same sort of form of breath in a certain way like like this and and sort of, like, meditating towards this inspiration. And then, of course, like, the idea is to get people to kind of, work with that journal and, like, trying to get the inspiration out of here, out of the mind, out of here into into the action. You know? So it's kind of a there's a lot of philosophy in this book, obviously, as well, to kind of, like, to accompany the storytelling. Nice. And where can people get it, and when when is it available? Yeah. On September 15, it's available. It's gonna be on Amazon. Of course, my website, you can find the links from my website, my leeleeyuan,uh,.com. And, yeah, audiobook will be available as well. That will include the exercises, so the inspiration and, the aspiration and all everything in between. Those exercises will be there so that people can kind of, like, access access them whenever they need that inspiration or whenever they need to sort of aspire towards the top or breathe upon as it means, in in Latin. It means breathe to the top of something. Of course, expire is the last breath too. So, hopefully, we get to experience a lot of those inspirations, aspirations, and everything else in between before the last breath too. Yeah. That's awesome. Well, yeah, it's been great talking with you. And, yeah, you know, this is your first book. Let's hope let's hope there's many more to come. Yeah. It's a it's been a process. That's for sure. It's kind of interesting thing because it feels like a snapshot of or some sort of, in a way, like, who you are at that point of life in in this particular book. You know? And then, yeah, it's inter it's it's been fun. It helps me helps me learn much more much more as well. Yeah. Absolutely. Alright. Well, I'll see you around. Thanks, mate. See you. Alright. That's it for this episode. Make sure you check out my new book, The Longevity Leap on Amazon. I'd also appreciate if you share this episode with a friend or family member. Other than that, my name is Seem. Stay tuned for the next episode. Stay empowered.