You know, it's funny. When I was 30, I thought I was really, really old. I thought my life was over. I was going through a decline. And, it wasn't until I think I was 45 when I first found which completely changed my my body. Welcome to the Symant podcast. I'm your host, Sim Nand, and our guest today is Dave Pascaux. Dave is the 61 year old guy who beat Brian Johnson at the Rejuvenation Olympics and became an overnight sensation online. I recently made a video outlining Dave's routine, but he also agreed to come to my podcast to to talk about his story. Dave, welcome to the show. Hey, Sameh. It's great to be here. Really nice to meet you. Yeah. And, you accepted my invitation to the podcast after I made a video about, your routine, and many people were also excited to, you know, have you on the podcast because, yeah, a lot of people are interested in what you're doing for your longevity and just, yeah, getting great results with it. So I guess we can start with how did Dave Pascow become this, famous person, famous man who ages slower than Brian Johnson or has a slower speed speed ranging than Brian Johnson, and I kind of also become, yeah, like a small celebrity in, the longevity space. I was gonna say it takes one to know one because I think you're beating all of us right now. Right? Yeah. Well, I'm not actually, I'm not the number one anymore. I've seen actually quite a lot of people who, have, like, 0.56 and even, like, below that. So so, yeah, there's a lot of these, I guess, you know, not public people who have also, like, very good results. I'm just amazed to be getting any attention whatsoever just for living my normal life. It's kinda weird. Yeah. But how how did it, happen? So, like, you uploaded you took the test, I would imagine, and then you kind of was surprised about the results. Yeah. I didn't even know anything about the competition when I originally found TruDiagnostic. I really was just using them to validate my progress to see that, you know, what I'm doing, am I on the right path, basically. And so, yeah, it just happened to have my third epigenetic age test and pace of aging test when I found out that there was a competition. And I was looking at my results and I'm thinking, wait a minute, this, this can't be right. Am I truly beating this guy? This this can't be. So I submitted my results thinking, well, you know, they're gonna come back and tell me you're misinterpreting these results. You're definitely not beating Brian Johnson. Or I was beating Brian, and then I'd be really curious to see if they were gonna post my results or not. But to their credit, they did. So I was very impressed. So, like, you did three tests, and the third one was, like, you, figured out that there was actually, like, a amazing result. Or what what was, like, your three tests then? Like, what what score did you get? Shit. I was just looking at this the other day, so I should know this. I think my first one was about, like, maybe 0.78. Mhmm. I think my next one was well, it depends because there was somehow, they they tested me twice, like, the same sample. Okay. And it came once it came back 0.77, and another time it came back 0.8. But then my third was 0.66. I wanna take a quick break to announce you that you can now preorder my new book, The Longevity Leap. The Longevity Leap is an evidence based guide to slowing down biological aging and adding healthy years to your life. The book contains 24 chapters ranging from the biology of aging to nutrition, fitness, and supplements. I also cover over 50 of the most clinically relevant biomarkers that you need to think about when it comes to longevity. Everything you need to know about longevity is in this book. As a bonus for the preorder, you'll also get an additional bonus chapter as a PDF about skin longevity and reversing skin aging, and you'll also get another bonus chapter about my personal routines for longevity. If you want to preorder the book for a discount, then check out the link in the description or head over to the longevityleap.com. Yeah. How did you get into just trying to take care of your health in the first place? Like, what's the backstory? Well, you know, I was always kind of a weird kid. I, I always had a lot of crazy questions. At least I was told they were crazy. And I could never get any good answers from anybody in my family for these questions. So, I started looking to the people around me, the adults around me, and I wanted to know what made people successful, whether it was financially, relationship wise, or, you know, even health. And I started noticing that the people that were very successful at finances or relationships or health always did the same things. And the people that were terribly unsuccessful generally followed the same patterns too. So from that early age, I just wanted to do what the successful people did because I just thought that made more sense. If you can choose your life path, why not? Why not? You know? Success leaves clues as Tony Robbins likes to, to say, quoting Jim Rohn. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I agree. Like, you know, there's there's been, like, you know, billions of people before us, and, we like to think we're somehow special or and there's, of course, there's, of course, been this, you know, transformation in society and technology over the past, you know, a hundred years even. But, I guess, I guess, still some of the framework and the principles are still the same when it comes to, yeah, like health and fitness and finance and relationships. Sleep, nutrition, you know, exercise, the basics. You know, the basics are still the best. I think they're the biggest movers. Right. So you were you were never, like, any with particular medical condition or sick or obese or anything like that? Well, I I did have a bit of a scare back in 2012. I was just turning 50. And, it's it's nothing serious. So, I mean, I when I say scare, it was a scare to me. I don't think any of any other people would have blinked an eye at it. But, I was training for my first marathon. I was doing P90X and I was taking care of both of my parents who were battling cancer. And I heard about a test for telomeres. And I thought, that sounds interesting. I wonder what do what my telomeres would be like? You know, I thought it was Joe cool, Mr. Athletic. And I figured, oh yeah, my telomeres are going to come back and say, yeah, I'm about 20, 23 years old. No, I was shocked when my results came back, they said I had the telomeres of a 68 year old at age 50. And that that puzzled the heck out of me. I knew right then and there that obviously I was missing something really big. I just didn't know what it was. And that forced me to do a deep dive then at that point, you know, looking into everything I could about, you know, cellular aging, cellular biology. Yeah. I mean, longevity was not something that was on my radar prior to that. But knowing that I was aging faster than I thought I should be or the test said I should be was a huge shock. Mhmm. I think that was the biggest driver for me. Mhmm. Yeah. Well, that was, like, twelve years ago then. Yeah. Okay. Well, it is interesting. Yeah. I took, along with the test, they offered a consultation with a staff physician. So naturally, I called because I wanted to hear what they had to say. And I was really surprised that they started off the the call asking me questions about my lifestyle. At that point in time, I don't know if it was widely known that lifestyle really had a big effect. You know, most people thought it was genetics that drove everything and that you, you know, they were your destiny. You didn't really have any kind of say in the matter. At least for me at that point in my life, I was not aware that lifestyle had anything to do with anything. I mean, I guess I did. I should say that. I mean, as a kid, like I said, I I did the things that all the successful people did. So to that degree, I did know lifestyle had a lot to do with it, but the questions they asked me and in my answers surprised both them and me. As soon as I started explaining that, you know, my job was incredibly stressful, I'm taking care of both of my parents, you know, doing the P90X, I'm doing marathon training. They're like, woah, woah, woah, stop, stop right there. You are killing yourself with stress. I said, we've seen, we've seen long or short telomeres with endurance athletes. We've seen it with caretakers of elderly parents. We've seen it with people with really stressful jobs, but you've got the trifecta. I mean, you've got pretty much everything going on. Mhmm. And so they suggested that I get back into I I start doing things like yoga, meditation. And and that kinda surprised me because I used to do those things, and somehow life got in the way, and I totally forgot about them. They took a back seat. Mhmm. So I had to focus on those a little bit more, take a little more, rest time, recovery time with the p 90 x and the marathon training so that I wasn't just beating myself to death. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Like, too much, even of the good stuff can, eventually, be harmful. And, yeah, with telomeres, it's interesting. Like, I I think I guess, like, the current understanding of telomeres is also that what matters more is, like, the the speed at which they shorten. So shorter shortened telomeres are, like, a risk factor for some of these chronic diseases or they're more like a sign that, yes, you might be under some, like, increased burden or stress. But, like, I guess the real relative values themselves are more, like, subjective and it's hard to, yeah, like, you know, with a single test, it's more matters about, okay, like, how fast are they declining? So you might, you know, there might be genetically that you might have just longer telomeres or shorter telomeres. So what what yeah. Like, ideally, it would be to see, okay, how fast are they, you know, shortening within the span of, you know, a few years? So, like, have you done, like, any subsequent tests with the telomeres, or how has it, like, changed? I have. I've done I know True diagnostic gives a measure. The company that I was using, which was called Telo years, is is defunct now, so they're no longer no luck around. Lifelink is another company that I've been using, and I really wanted to get a good measure lately. But due to some lab issues, they I got somebody else's results. So I'm Okay. Still trying to work through that with them. A little frustrated by that. Yeah. Because I'm not 70 years old. So that was like, this is not my result. Yeah. Yeah. So but from the results that I have gotten, I have seen my telomeres have lengthened. And I think the last measure was, probably about a 54 year old, even though right now I'm gonna be 62 here in August. Oh, wow. Yeah. That's that's yeah. Makes more sense. And, yeah, it kinda goes to show the power of, lifestyle or that it also goes to show that you know if you have done shorter time short term damage to your body then you can still like recover from it and at least based on this marker and your other markers as well like you can improve some of your other metabolic parameters. You can improve your fitness status again. You can improve your body composition. So, yeah, like, a lot of you know, there's some some things that people the scientists think that are irreversible, but most of the things are still, like, reversible in terms of, like, functional outcomes and, like, at least you can reverse some of the risk factors for a lot of these other chronic diseases that, you know, end up killing most people. Like, the problem in the modern world is that most people die before they reach their genetic potential for, for, you know, how long they could live. So you're like, they might get a heart attack in their seventies or something. Even though they might have genetic genetic potential to live to age of a 110, they just get cut short because of this poor lifestyle that gives them a heart attack in their seventies. So, yeah, like, we all have are obviously some genetic limits, but the lifestyle is still gonna be like a huge bottleneck in, like, determining, you know, how how far you're gonna end up going. You know, it's funny. When I was 30, I thought I was really, really old. I thought my life was over. I mean, seriously, I just thought it was I was going through a decline. And, it wasn't until I think I was 45 when I first found P90X, which completely changed my my body. My body appearance gave me some great confidence. But I was also changing up my lifestyle, you know, prior to that. And at age 50, I, I was so much more healthy, fit, energetic, vibrant. My my abilities were so much greater than they were at 30 Mhmm. That I I started getting excited about getting older. In fact, now almost 62, I think I'm even better than I was at 50. So I'm I'm super excited about getting older. And I'm like, yeah. Come on. Bring it on. What do you got for me? Let's see. Yeah. Yeah. It's all, like, you're, like, actually improving with age, and you're wiser at the same time. So we know who knows with the what, you know, the the next decades. There's some, you know, medical procedures and technologies that actually, yeah, like, still extend this youthfulness for even longer, and you can still enjoy this kind of independence, physical and cognitive independence for, you know, into your nineties and hundreds. Yeah. And you know what they say? They say, like, you know, half of what we think we know turns out to be wrong. We just don't know what half. Mhmm. So, I mean, who's to say the things that I'm doing today that I assume are correct, may not be found out later to not be the right things like they were twenty years ago or ten years ago. Right. Like, are eggs healthy or not? You know? All the crazy things that, you know, bad. Fats bad for you. You know, all those things that we used to believe, I I followed because that was the belief of the day. I wonder how much of what I'm doing now we're gonna find out is is not right. Yeah. I also know this there's, like, everything goes in circles, you know, because, like, low carb diets weren't they're not, like, a new thing. You know, Atkins was the first kind of famous, low carb dietitian. So, you know, when was that? Like, in the eighties or something. I don't know. I wasn't even born yet. But but, you know, there was already in the eighties low low carb. Then there was like in the early twenty tens was paleo kind of, movement, then the paleo died off around 2016, then keto became until 2020 or something, then keto died off slightly or it became much less popular. Now there's a carnivore diet that is more popular. So, like, everything kind of goes in trends. There's nothing, like, at least in the diet world, there's not a lot of new things being invented or, you know, I think with with the diet and, like, exercise at least, it still comes down to that, you know, eat a relatively balanced diet. You don't have to have any, like, crazy diets. You know, yes, sugar is bad, but, you know, you don't need to be, like, super insane about it either. So it kinda comes down to, like, the balance. And, with exercise, there are, like, yeah, with exercise, it becomes more, like, mature over time, although seeing that it's not just cardio or just weights. You know, in the seventies and eighties, it was just cardio. Then in the early two thousands, it was mostly weights. And early twenty tens, it was also mostly weights. And now it's become like, okay. You need to do both actually, which is just like over time you become the the kind of field has become more mature with the the exercise components at least. With the diet, I I feel it's still pretty, like, dogmatic and tribalistic. And hopefully, like, in the next few years, the diet diet sphere also becomes, like, more coherent or, yeah, like, mature with, the kind of ideas. And now you gotta throw HIIT work into the mix too. So Right. Yeah. Yeah. So exercise is kinda yeah. You need to do everything almost. But let's but let's talk about yeah. Like, I made a video about it pretty thoroughly about your diet and supplements and workout routines, but, you know, let's hear from you yourself. So, like, what are some of the, like, fundamentals that, you do? Like, many people are interested in, like, your diet and supplements and exercise. Well, I gotta tell you, and I wanted to thank you too for your video because, you know, when I first saw it, I thought, oh, no. This is gonna this is gonna be a takedown. So I was bracing myself, like, oh, gosh. You know, how how badly am I gonna get destroyed here? But your your video was like was really, respectful and, very thorough. And I actually learned some good things from it. I made some changes to my supplementation, thanks to your suggestions, your recommendations. So thank you for that. I really appreciate it. Sorry. What was the question? If Dylan Yeah. Well, let's take, like, you know, you mentioned exercise and p 90 x. So, yeah, like, I think many people might know it, what what, what it is, like, how does it look like, and, yeah, what exercise you do besides that. Yep. Well, P90X was something from, gosh, yeah, I would have discovered it in 2008. I think it was probably it probably came out maybe around 2006. It's a combination of weight bearing exercises, like every other day with cardio in between and in the in between days. So the cardio things may be, you might be doing kempo karate one day, might be doing plyometrics the next. You might be doing, extreme yoga another day. So, like, some pretty interesting stuff. You're constantly switching up, body parts and basically working every muscle that you have. And I know a lot of people stop or quit two weeks into P90X because it is so extreme and you end up super sore. But I always tell people, if you can stick with it through that two weeks, you'll get through the soreness and then you're you're home free. Again, because you're hitting every muscle, and most muscles, you don't even realize you have until you start exercising them in a program like that. Yeah. So it's like some sort of a HIIT, workout protocol. Yeah. It pretty much covers everything. Right. Some of the days you'll have just and back. Other days you'll have, back and biceps, shoulders tries, and, ab work every other day. Right? Yeah. I was I was very impressed by it. Prior to that, I used to be the guy in the gym that would walk around with a clipboard going from machine to machine recording the the weight and the number of reps that I did so that I could validate that I was improving from week to week. You know? But I never really saw any change in my body composition from that until p 90 x. Okay. Well, that's super interesting. So, like, you you more like in the past, you did more of this traditional fitness or bodybuilding approach? Yeah. Okay. Wow. Yeah. Have have you noticed, like, with with the with the decades, have you noticed, like, does your body respond differently, or have you, like, had to adjust some of the workouts with age now in your sixties, for example? Yeah. I noticed, gosh, it was right around the time I hit 55. It was starting to take me longer than an hour to do an hour p 90 x workout. And I just assumed, okay, you know, this is it. You're you're getting older, you know, your energy starting to drop off. This is just the way it is, which I was not not very happy with that answer, but I was starting to accept that when I heard on a podcast, about, NAD supplementation and a product called, TrueDIAGEN or n r nicotinamide riboside. And I thought, well, it's worth a shot. I mean, I pretty much try everything. I I'm a constant experimenter. So I ordered it and I tried it. And, again, I'm a skeptic on everything too. Like, when I first started p ninety x, I I thought it was just marketing hype, so I didn't really expect anything to happen, and it did. So the same with TRU NIAGEN. When I started taking the NR supplement, I was expecting nothing. And I didn't notice anything, just in my day to day going about the house doing, doing work. But it was probably two days after I started it. I did my next p 90 x workout and I couldn't believe I got through the hour workout in the hour and I had more energy left over. So I did a whole another hour workout right after that. And I'm like, this stuff is amazing. So I didn't realize that at at my age, I guess my NAD was really dropping off and supplementing that made a huge difference. Mhmm. Wow. Yeah. Whereas I think when I was 30, I did try an NAD plus supplement. I found it in GNC and thought I'd just give it a shot. It did absolutely nothing for me. But that makes sense because in my thirties, I probably had my NAD was just fine. So in your thirties, so that was that was, like, in the nineties or mid nineties. Was it, like heard of it. Nobody was even talking about it. I just happened to find it as a supplement and thought, I'll try this. Oh, really? But it was probed. Was it was it was it NMN or NR or or or was it actual NAD itself? Or NADH. It was like as. Okay. Yeah. Well, it might I think it might might not be as, like, bioavailable than than NR or NMN. But, yeah, it's interesting that you're, like, not the first person that I've heard who say that they started taking NR or NMN, and then they got, like, some sort of a second wind with their, like, endurance and, just they were able to exercise for hours, etcetera. So, yeah, it's I think it's certainly very like individual in in some sense. Like, I I don't notice a lot of when I take it, like, I might take it sometimes if I'm getting, like, short sleep then I do notice that maybe it helps with like the alertness or helps with the sleep recovery, but yeah like a lot of times I don't notice it that much which probably makes sense like my energy levels should be like you know I'm 30 pretty much right now as well and, you know, if you didn't notice it in your thirties, so it makes sense why I don't notice it right now either. Have you ever taken an NAD test like Ginfinities or Do Not Ages tests? Yeah. I did a few years ago. It was like it was like in the range somewhere in the middle. So, yeah, it wasn't, like, deficient in in any way. Yeah. Yeah. It's interesting. Yeah. I figured at your age, you probably wouldn't need it. You're probably in optimal range already. Yeah, well probably that would make sense like, I don't have any like so like if you have like some sort of yeah, like with age is probably one of the things that can increase the demand and there's also like other things like you know I guess like poor metabolic health and jet lag and sleep deprivation those things that will also deplete it and you know I do you know occasionally if I'm like traveling across the ocean to US or India or whatever then I do notice that the the NAD, it does help a little bit because because it's also linked to the circadian rhythms as a, like, a metabolite. So it helps to, like, realign the circadian rhythms a bit better. Yeah. I was away in Italy for thirty days, and I completely changed my entire lifestyle, eating, sleeping, my diet especially, because I'm usually very low carb. I don't normally do sugar, and I don't normally caffeine. But there I was high carb, high sugar, high caffeine. And, I did a I do a blood test every month, and I did one the day I came home. And I, you know, I expected that my markers were going to be out of whack, but I was very surprised that my hormones were crazy out of whack. And it was probably more from the jet lag, you know, the plane travel and the lack of sleep, but my testosterone was almost nonexistent. Oh, wow. It's a huge shock. Yeah. Retested a couple weeks later and saw that it was, you know, coming coming back again, but Yeah. That was huge eye opener. Yeah. Well, the Italians paid on, yeah, pretty interesting that, you know, they do a lot of the the opposite of what, you know, healthy people would expect to do, like, at least, like, in US or other, Western European countries. Like, you know, they stay up late. They drink wine. They eat pasta. They don't exercise like that. Dinner until nine, 09:30. Yeah. And they still have, like, you know well, Spain and Italy are, like, number five and number six or something in the life expectancy in the world. So, you know, maybe it's the sunlight, maybe it's the olive oil, maybe it's the fish or something else. All the above. Well, their food quality is amazing. I mean, they cook everything from scratch. I took two cooking classes while I was there, and I couldn't believe how easy it was to make your own pasta. Then just good clean ingredients, not, you know, all the preservatives and the food coloring and, you know, things like Yeah. We put in our food here in The States. It's it's kinda disgusting, actually. But Yeah. There in Italy, everything was made fresh just before you ate it. So it was terrific. Yeah. And and in Italy, like, you can eat a pizza and, you know, it's it's a healthy food there because it's made of sourdough, sourdough sourdough as the dough. And, you know, you have fresh tomatoes and some, you know, other clean ingredients and stuff like that. But, yeah, when I first went to US in 2018, I landed in LA and immediately, like, the first people, even the security guards were like thirty two BMI. And I was like, well, this is a completely different place than, you know, coming from Europe where everyone was, like, you know, relatively skinny compared to US. So it's, yeah, pretty pretty drastic kind of environment difference in the environment, as well. Yeah. I like to say I fell in love almost every day in Italy. Right. But what about, your diet then as well? So, like, what do you eat at home? What's your, like, regular diet like? So one of the things that I changed, you know, between my, third or second and third epigenetic age test and the pace of aging test was my diet because I was in the process of working on remodeling my house at the time. So I was not eating, food that I make like I do now. I was, you know, ordering a couple of pizzas and I would have a few slices for lunch or a few slices for dinner in between working on things. Now though, I I pretty much make everything that I eat. I grow a lot of my own food now too. But, yeah. So I know I've got everything listed on my website. In case people are interested, they can they can look for it there. But I will do, I would do eat meat. I do, grass fed meat from ButcherBox, free range chicken, Alaskan wild caught salmon. But most of the the meat that I eat, and even if it's, you know, sardines or mackerel or clams, oysters, it's it's very small quantities. Like, I'm I'm basically doing, I guess, what you'd call a condiment of my meat. The majority of my my meal is is more vegetables. I'll do fruit, but, yeah, large really large salads. So mostly plants with some meat. Right. Yeah. You had some, nice salad recipe. I saw that you had, like, because, like, almost a dozen different types of herbs and greens in there. I would I would more in there too if I could find them at a local grocery store, but Right. We're limited what we could get here. So Do you do you, like, batch it, or or do you, like, just every time you do the same I do. Like, recipe? I do. I'll I'll have, like, a food prep day, usually Sunday, where I'll make an enormous salad that will last me the week. The same with, like, I'll I'll make mushrooms. I'll I'll cook some rice. I'll do some, acorn squash. Yeah. I'll I'll usually batch those things up, so I've got those that I can pull out and eat quickly. Because I'm I'm basically lazy. I like to do things as efficiently as possible. But then, you know, when I'm busy throughout the week, I don't wanna spend a lot of time, you know, cooking and preparing things. So it's really nice just to be able to pull stuff out. Yeah. For sure. Yeah. I understand the appeal to that. Like, I I only eat, like, mostly once a day, so it's easy for me to do it, like, on the go with that. But, yeah, at least for the for the busier people and average people I definitely I would think it's a smart idea to at least have like larger you know meals ready made and then you just eat them up and you can eat it. It makes it much better like you're able you're you'll be able to stick to it much more easily to the Dutch. And it's the same with my chia nut berry bowl. I like to make a large quantity of that, and I can freeze half of it and pull that out later. Yeah. And what what about, like, I guess, like, your calorie intake or something like that? So, like, Brian Johnson, he had this lower calorie diet. You mentioned on your website that you're not doing any calorie restriction deliberately. So, yeah, like, have you ever counted your calories or any, like, guesstimates about that? No. No. I just I eat as much as I like. In fact, my friends make fun of me when I go out to restaurants. I usually order two meals. Mhmm. Yeah. Like when I go to like Ford's garage, which is like one of my favorite restaurants locally, I will get this huge berries and gorgonzola salad with shrimp. And that's a meal in itself. I mean, it's, it's, it's enormous. And I will devour that first. And then after that, I'll order a mushroom Swiss burger with avocado and an egg sunny side up. And I'll devour that too. Yeah. Yeah. That's what I usually do as well. If I go out to the restaurant with my wife, then I usually order, like, one main course and then, like, a few sides because, you know, if I'm coming there without having eaten much the day before or the entire day, then, you know, there's a restaurant restaurant portions already are pretty, like, small as well or smaller than you would normally eat at home. So you kinda need to fill it up a bit more. A lot of the time I get busy, so I skip lunch. So I basically just have breakfast and a huge dinner, which is why I like to eat around three or 4PM. That way I've, you know, completely digested everything by the time I go to bed. And I've noticed big differences in my sleep scores when I do that. Mhmm. So you stop, like, a few hours before bed too? Yeah. Have you have you done any other, like, fasting or anything like that? I have. I I do like to pick maybe one or two days a month where I'll just go on a complete fast for the day just to mix things up. And I used to do, if you're familiar with ProLon, the five day fast mimicking diet, I used to do that quite a bit. I had to stop because I'm I'm too lean now. I don't have enough fat to burn. So when I do that, I lose muscle, which sucks. But I didn't do a five day fast immediately after returning from Italy. Cause I, I had some, you know, some nice belly fat going there from all the carbs and I wanted that going quickly. So, yeah, that did the trick. Right. So you're, like, I guess, you're adjusting your food intake based on, like, your leanness and, like, yeah, how you're feeling at the moment. Yeah. Well, somewhat. I mean, I I still eat like a pig. I I I stuff myself with salads, and it's so I feel full, but it's probably not a huge amount of calories. Right. So I don't know. Maybe I actually do live caloric restricted, and I just don't know it. I just it's not anything that I do intentionally. Let's put it that way. Yeah. Yeah. But you yeah. Yeah. It's hard to know. Yeah. Like, you know, because the there's a huge distortion between how many calories we think we're eating and how many calories we're actually eating. So yeah like even like the professional I guess like dietitians and you know professional weight loss people even they don't know exactly how many calories something is unless they actually weigh it so yeah there's always like some you know ten, twenty, thirty percent difference between the like expected intake and the actual intake but you know I don't think it matters like that much. Yeah like what matters more is you know the you know the actual what's in the mirror and what's in the in the blood in the blood work. Right. I agree. So you, I think you if I remember correctly you had on the website, your testosterone results as well, which were like very good, like super high. And, Yeah. Can you talk about that? Yeah. You know, I'm surprised and maybe a little disappointed by how quickly people go to testosterone replacement therapy. Mhmm. Because I think there's a lot of things that we can do about that prior to just jumping straight to, you know, replacing t. For instance, you know, I noticed that my DEHA and my pregnenolone, when I do my blood test was low. So I started supplementing with both of those. And of course, those are those are upstream regulators of testosterone. They, you know, they convert downstream to testosterone and estrogen. And so I noticed a big jump in my testosterone levels just by supplementing those upstream precursors. I think there's so many people that could benefit by trying that rather than just jumping straight to the testosterone replacement. Right. And then I also noticed that when I was doing my training for my marathon training or even half marathon training, just getting out and running increased my testosterone. Wow. Just there's so many simple things that we can try before just jumping to replacement. Yeah. Sleeping and vitamin d and sunlight. Yeah. Exactly. All of the above. Yeah. Yeah. And d h levels also go down with age in both men and women as well. So it does contribute to the low testosterone in in the process as well. But, yeah, like a lot of people, at least in the in the video comments that I made, they said that you're you you must be taking some, like, TRT or some peptides and those kind of things. Nope. And I I will do things like, Tongkat Ali and Right. What else am I taking? Boron, maybe, if I'm looking at it. Boron. I was doing Boron more for the, not the request, but the suggestion of my cardiologist, known as America's Healthy Heart Doc, Doctor. Joel Kahn. There were good studies on heart health with Boron, so that's why I was supplementing it. But, yeah, there's so many things that help and contribute. It all it all works together. But I was being the, like, stinging nettle and the Tongkat Ali mainly to address, DHT to try to keep that lower because I like to keep my hair. Right. Yeah. Vanity. You know? I always get you. Maybe let's talk about the the supplements then. And, in the video, you were taking, like, over a 100 supplements, for at least on the website. So now thanks to you. But So, yeah, like, we can talk about so what are you taking right now then? Like, what's the latest updates? Oh my gosh. You want me to go through a 180 something? Well, not not all but, I mean, what what are what are, like, some of the some of the highlights? Obviously, you don't need to mention all of the all of the ones like this like, some antioxidants. You don't need to mention those, but Okay. Or the, like, the highlights. Alpha ketoglutarate is one. I'm doing TAM eight one eight and TA sixty five specifically for to address my shorter telomeres. I do several supplements just to address my eye health because, doing my full genome, I found that I have three genetic markers for the same macular degeneration that my dad suffered from. So I'm doing things like, you know, a zeaxanthin, lutein, astaxanthin. And of course, eating a lot of, you know, carotenoid rich foods, you know, lots of reds and yellows and oranges, orange colors, things like that. Trying to think what else might be notable in my supplements because I truly do take a lot. Was some some of these, like, the telomerase, or telomer supplements that you you had in the video at least. Yeah. That would be the TAM eight one eight and the t e sixty five. Yeah. Oh, and then, I think, GATU Kola, I think, is another one that's supposed to increase telomerase. I just learned about that one recently. So I'm, adding that as a powder into my, my drinks when I drink mix my drinks in the morning. Nice. Gotcha. And what what do you think are, like, one of the things that you notice that work the most? So, yeah, like, one of the I guess, one of my main things I pointed out in my my video was that, you know, your heart it's hard to know which ones work and that's the same like I think I pointed out to Brian Johnson as well that he you know he takes so many supplements it's like virtually impossible for him to have split split tested all of them and to know okay what does it actually do and and stuff. So you know he might rely on like some clinical evidence from studies that it does that but you know it's it's not like that he's also like representative of the subjects in those clinical studies. So, like, a lot of the supplements might be done on people who have some sort of metabolic disorder or some, you know, metabolic disease. So, yeah, it's hard to know if it actually works for him. And so, like, what do you think? Having noticed some of the supplements, like, actually working? Or Well, so I have a I have an odd theory about all of this. When you take a look at somebody like Julie Gibson Clark, who is on the Rejuvenation Olympics leaderboard, she's doing amazing and she's not taking a whole bunch of supplements. I mean, I think her pace of aging is slower than mine and Brian's. Well, maybe not Brian's now that he's done the follistatin gene therapy, but just slightly under his. I think he's 0.64 now, and I think she was 0.65. So, I mean, that's pretty darn close for somebody that doesn't do a bunch of supplements, hasn't had gene therapy, and really just focuses on the basics. I think the basics are really the key to slower pace of aging and a good epigenetic age, you know, getting the right sleep, getting great exercise, sweating a lot, and clean nutrition, making your own food, not eating processed foods or things coming out of a box or a bag. So when you look at now I've heard this from the folks at True Diagnostic and some of their podcasts, and at least this is this was my understanding that those numbers, that test, is specifically designed to give you, an accurate age completely independent of disease status. And so what that means is, you know, originally, when they started these aging clocks, they wanted to be able to, say, you know, age the DNA of a cadaver to be able to determine how old it was. And you couldn't have things confounding that age, like heart disease or high, you know, high blood pressure, diabetes, liver, kidney disease. You know, so it was specifically designed not to take those things into consideration. Mhmm. So you can have a very slow pace of aging and a good epigenetic age but still have a major disease, which to me was sort of eye opening. Right. And that's why I focus on the sleep, the diet, and the exercise for the cellular level of control or benefit that they do give. But then I look at supplements to take care of the organ systems, the higher level functioning within the body to address things like heart health, eye health, liver health, things like if if that makes sense. Yeah. Yeah. It does. Like and, I kinda like it or I I might agree with it to a certain extent. Of course, like, the fundamentals are also good for the organs and the eyes and the heart Sure. Etcetera. But, yeah, like, the supplements aren't going to move the needle on a, like, a on, like, I guess, like, on this epigenetic level or, on, like, yeah, like, the deeper level. They're more like they might, you know, adjust your biomarkers to a certain extent, and they can adjust some of the risk factors for some of these chronic diseases. Yeah. But they're not going to, like, yeah, fundamentally affect your epigenetics the same way, like, exercise or your diet or, like, sleep are going to do. So, yeah, in that in that sense, yeah, like, it makes sense that you're just using them as for for, like, yeah, like, this is some minor. And, yeah, like, you even then, like, you know, we don't have supplements that are that powerful and that they're going to, yeah, like, give you maybe, like, you know, one to two percent, maybe five percent at most in terms of the the results. And the the vast majority comes from exercise and, you know, you know I wish we had those pills or these drugs for longevity you know every everyone would take them but yeah like right now what what matters the most appears to be just the exercise, the diet, sleep, circadian rhythms, and managing stress and that is going to just reduce your risk of these chronic diseases and epigenetically slow down the the your biological aging as well. And and then, you know, at least that's what the that's what Brian thinks as well that, you know, in twenty twenty years or something like that, we'll we will have these drugs that dramatically extend your lifespan. So So you just need to stay alive until that point, until those drugs come into into, like, availability. I guess it's possible. I know my parents the pill because, you know, they they didn't exercise. They didn't eat right. They smoked. They drank. A pill would have been so much easier rather than having to change your day with day to day activities. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Like, most people will want to take the pill rather than exercise. But, yeah, like, there's nothing that is as powerful as as exercise. Yeah, right not right now. And I'm also, like, a bit less, I guess, optimistic about it that we will have this massive rejuvenation technologies because, you know, it's it's, it's hard to imagine how it would look like, given the fact that right now we don't have anything that is nearly as nearly as good as exercise in terms of the therapeutics and stuff. So, yeah, like, we're kinda looking at a we don't even know where to look kind of almost, in some sense. Yeah. I don't think there's ever gonna be a pill to replace exercise because, I mean, you think about it, exercise is, you know, the only thing that removes cellular waste or lymph is, you know, muscle movement, massage, exercise, sweating. I don't think you're ever gonna find a pill that's gonna be able to to do that. Yeah. I think that's always gonna be important. Right. So, you also mentioned that you're, like, retired on the website. So, what has what has your, like, yellow what how how has your, like, routines changed in some sense given you're not working anymore? So do you have more time to take care of your health, or do you have more time for relaxation? Or what's yeah. What's what are you doing, like, then nowadays? Surprisingly, it didn't work the way I expected it would. Uh-huh. I thought that I was gonna have all kinds of extra time to do things. But I think that while I was working, I was far more regimented on things because I had to be. You know, you have, like, eight hours of the day that were allotted to work and then you to do anything else, you really had to schedule and and be very diligent about getting those things done. Now with my time being more freeform, some of that discipline has fallen off, I hate to say, but a lot of that had to do with, this new direction my life has taken because of the rejuvenation Olympics. You know, interviews, podcasts, creating a website, and all of that just took my time and attention in a completely different direction. So, I'm hoping as things kind of calm down and settle down, I'll be able to focus again more on things like, I mean, I had my entire genome sequenced, so I've got this mountain of data there that I really want to dive deep into and examine, but that's going to take a lot of, a lot of spare time, which I haven't had lately. Plus, I've been doing a lot of travel. Again, Italy, I went to, Dave Asprey's biohacking conference, in Dallas a few weeks ago. I went to, Las Vegas for exosome treatment, like, in my shoulder. That was, what, last weekend, two weekends ago. So, yeah, I've had, I've had more time to do a lot of extra things, but not necessarily to focus as much as I would like back on my routines and the supplementation and, and the core of what I was doing before. Yeah. Yeah. Like, one thing that I I think you will not lose is probably, like, your sense of purpose or some sort of mission or goals. Because, you know, we are like like you said, you're like diving deep into your own health and longevity now after retirement. So you have this kind of new thing you're working on, which is your your own personal health. And I think, you know, that's what that was that that's, like, the best thing ever to have, like, your entire, like, attention be able to do dedicate on on on just that and enjoy that process at the same time. Because, you know, when you look at the studies and if people, you know, lose their sense of purpose, and, they'll, you know, lose some sort of meaning, then that's also where their, like, risk of dying also increases a lot. So, yeah, just having this sense of purpose or thing or project, whatever it is to work on kind of keeps humans motivated and kind of inspired, to live as well. Yeah. I totally agree. You know, a few years ago, I actually got a concussion on a roller coaster. Mhmm. Part of my youthfulness was always to go to a roller park on my birthday. And each year, I would come home from riding the coasters with a kind of a headache. And the headache would last me a few hours. And I kept thinking, well, this probably isn't so good for my brain, having all this jostling around at high speeds and quick stops and starts. And yeah. Well, so two years ago, the very last ride at the roller coaster, the roller coaster stopped fast. And I felt like my brain went smashing into the front of my skull and the entire vision went down to this tiny little dot and came zooming back. And my friends were having to pull me off the roller coaster because I just wasn't, wasn't quite with it. I found out I had got a concussion. And so I found since the concussion that my balance has not been as good as it used to be. So now I'm trying to focus on a lot of things to improve my balance. Like I have a slack line in my backyard now, have a Bosu ball in my den that I play with. I think these things are important for longevity anyway, just to have a really good sense of balance because, you know, who knows when you're 90 some years old and you're naturally going to be a little more frail. If you take a fall, it's going to be a serious thing. Yeah. Definitely don't want that to happen to me. So I like to focus a lot on balance and stretching to stay supple. If you fall on your stiff, you're gonna strain something, you know, pull a muscle or break a bone probably more likely than you would if you were flexible enough where you fall and you can just roll and tumble with it. Mhmm. Yeah. For sure. That's a very underrated yeah. Like, just, you know, with age, you might stiffen up and you'll your posture goes worse and, you're more rigid. So, yeah, it's important to, like, stretch and be flexible and mobile, not just strong and fast and, that kind of thing. Yeah. That's one of the things I just hear lacking in the talk about longevity. People just don't give stretching enough credit. Yeah. So you you stretched every day, right? Yeah. It's usually one of the first things I do when I wake up, even while I'm still in bed. Know, I have my p PEMF mat going, and then I'm stretching my legs up over my head, trying to stretch my lower back out and, and my thighs and my quads. And, so I'm gonna Is that, like, the inversion table behind you? Or Oh, yeah. Yeah. That's another nice thing about having habits. Some of the critiques I've gotten about my routines are, Oh, that's a lot. How do you do all that stuff? Well, if you make it so that you have to trip over things on your way to the bathroom, it's very easy to remember to do them. So just off camera, I've got my, little trampoline that's there. So, you know, after I get out of bed and I stretch, I'll do some bouncing on the trampoline, and, you know, that generally gets the, the bowels moving. So, I know some people do coffee for that, but the trampoline seems to work wonders for me. Do the inversion table for five minutes while I'm looking at my phone upside down or listening to a podcast. Mhmm. You know? Things like the the habit stacking makes routines just automatic. I don't even have to think about them. It's just part of my everyday. Yeah. And, you know, what you don't use, you lose. So, like, if your house was, you know, obstacle course, then you would maintain this functionality for a lot longer as well because you're just kind of forced to do it. And, yeah, if, you know, the average house is that you don't it's kind of flat surface everywhere. You have chairs everywhere, you have doors, and you know, all these things are there's no challenges in the environment, then, you like, your body will regress in terms of the, I guess, the capacity with movements. So like, yeah, of course, very few people will turn their house into an actual obstacle course. Some people will probably do it. But, you know, we still like our comfort, but, you know, the comfort is fine. It's more about, you know, you then just have to be deliberate about adding those challenges to your life, whether that be doing hit cardio. So, like, we don't have to run over after our prey animals anymore. So you would you have to do the hit cardio on the treadmill or in the woods or whatever wherever. And the same with strength, like, you know, we don't need to lift carcasses and we don't need to lift firewood and boulders and stuff like that to survive. So we just need to do it with barbells and, or resist resistant fans or whatever it is. So, yeah, we just need to add this artificial strain stress or strenuous activity to our life, because, yeah, unless we do it or if you don't do it, then the body will just, regress and, yeah, deteriorate. And we don't have to club a mate over the head and throw them over our shoulder anymore. It's just Yeah. A lost heart. Yeah. One thing I was I wanted to ask was, like, what what do you think about in the future will you do regarding, like, any of these new rejuvenation technologies or peptides or whatever things? Like, have you thought about doing some of those things in the future? Or, yeah, what are your, like, feelings about that? Yeah. It's a matter of affordability. You know, so I've seen in the biohacking community, a lot of people are doing the follistatin gene therapy. Right. It's not really something I can afford. I did look into the full body stem cell makeover because I know Dave Asprey and Ben Greenfield did that, I think multiple times each. When they first did it, I think it was back 2018, 2019. I looked into it at the same clinic they went to, and the price was around $30,000, which was no small sum for me. It's not something I could just, you know, whip out and do. That was a little too much. But I looked into it again recently because I just assumed that, you know, with the prevalence of stem cell therapy, that that price would have come down drastically. But instead, it did just the opposite. It's it's around $65,000 to $85,000 now for the same therapy. Yeah. So they just keep pricing it out of my reach. I I don't know if I'll ever actually be able to afford that. Yeah. That's kinda interesting. Yeah. Like, you know, because the argument is that over time, they're gonna be cheaper or more affordable. But, yeah, I guess, the it might increase because that technologies or the treatments themselves become more advanced or more effective. So they're bound to become more costly because they become more effective or whatever the reason is. So, yeah, I guess it's still right now is for sure, like, yeah, only, like, the wealthiest people will generally be able to afford all the all the things, like all the all the stem cells and gene therapies and stuff like that. But yeah. Who knows? Maybe plasmapheresis. You know, plasmapheresis cost $10 to have that done in a clinic. Yeah. And that's not even getting young blood. That's just swapping out your plasma for albumin. So I do it on the cheap. I'll go to plasma donation places and donate my plasma for free. So it's kind of the same thing. It just takes longer, and it's not as convenient, but they pay me, which I think is wonderful. Mhmm. Yeah. And then I take the money that I get from that, and I pay that into doing hyperbaric treatments. So one pays for the other. Yeah. Yeah. Like, I guess, that's the blood. It must be it's pretty underrated as well, I think, blood donations or plasma donations. Just, you know, you get paid, and it actually has quite interesting benefits. What have you noticed anything, in your blood work or in how you feel or anything like that after doing it consistently? I wish I could say that I have. I was not doing those things prior to getting on the rejuvenation Olympics leaderboard, but I did do another true diagnostic test after doing those, and I didn't see any any needle move at all from doing those. But I look at it like, changing the oil in your car. I mean, you can go forever without changing the oil in your car. And it seems like your car is working just fine until it doesn't. Right. Yeah. Because it bogs down under all the gunk that gets built up and all the waste. So I look at, you know, offloading your plasma the same way because there's so many, junk proteins that build up that, you know, if you get rid of them, you're gonna function a whole lot better. System's gonna Yeah. Yeah. And and and it's another example of, you know, ancestry or in the past, you would have gotten scratched somehow, like, you know, fighting an animal or or climbing a cliff or falling down or whatever. And or in war, like, it's pretty common to get injured, so you're regularly losing the blood at least for for you know, women use it lose it as well regularly during menstruation, but, you know, men nowadays, unless you have a physical, some sort of labor, then or if you are, you know, combat, some in a combat job, then, you're not gonna lose the blood either on a regular basis. So, yeah, you need to artificially kind of promote that circulation somehow. Yeah. And whole blood donations are a really good way to do that. But Yeah. You know, you can only get rid of two pints of blood, you know, at a time, and there's much much smaller amount of plasma in that. Whereas if you're donating plasma, you get your red blood cells back again. So you can even donate twice a week if you want. Right. Nice. So what are your plans right now? So you're retired, you're, super, I guess, motivated and interested in the longevity game. So what are your, like, future plans? What's your game plan? Yeah. I mean, I really just wanna enjoy life more. Little fly flying in here. Spending more time with friends. I've been doing a lot more concerts, hoping to do more travel, doing more conferences. I know RadFest is coming up here. I missed the Health Optimization Summit in London. That would have been really fun. But I understand that they're coming here, I think in Austin in April. So, attending more conferences, just socializing more, volunteering more time, having fun. For sure. Yeah. That's, you know, it's fun to do longevity stuff, but, yeah, you should not lose the sight of actually enjoying the life as well. Yeah. But I do watch it the we we I I think, you know, we both enjoy doing these things, the exercising and checking our genome and stuff like that. We're like, we kinda enjoy it. So it's half half or it's like, you know, double the fun almost. Exactly. I mean, now I can just go out for a run whenever I feel like it. You know? Whereas before, I had to do it during certain hours so that I was still available for conference calls at work, things like that. Now I can go in the sauna whenever I want. I can watch Netflix or I can meditate, and, the time is mine now. And I love that. Do you have any plans to, like, share more of your journey with, you know, I I think you will have, like, a lot of new people who will follow you online and track your stuff. Oh, absolutely. Yeah. I've been, I I probably shouldn't say this because I'll get a flood of DMs, but people that have DMed me so far, I usually write back to. So I've kept pretty busy just conversing with various people that have had questions. In fact, their questions have fueled a lot of the, q and a that I have. I've got a a page on my website with a lot of the q and a that I get from people. And when I get the same question more than once, it goes on to the page. So Mhmm. Nice. People wanna know. Gotcha. Yeah. I think a lot of people will because, yeah, like, you know, doing this in your sixties and, you know, getting great results, that's, yeah, inspiring for a lot of people. And, you know, when you look at some of these people in there or who are like this, a 100 year old sprinter or stuff like that, then, yeah, it's it makes makes peep the average person also more like, hey. This is, you know, pretty common for, someone in their, you know, a 100 years of age to be super fit and, you know, run 60 meter sprints and stuff like that. So, So, yeah, it's just, you know, more motivational for a lot of people to see then. So they just want to kind of follow along, to the the journey. And I think that kind of stuff could be the norm. I just don't think that people realize that they're still capable. You know, we get told that as we age, we need to slow down. We need to, you know, take things easy, kind of worry about hurting yourself, you know, and people take that real seriously. They sit more often than than not. And then, like you mentioned before, if you don't use it, you lose it. So the more that we sit and aren't out doing things, the more that we find we can't get up and do things. It's a self fulfilling prophecy. So as long as you stay active and keep moving, you'll be able to stay active and keep moving. Yeah. For sure. Well, it's been great talking with you. And before I ask, my last question, where can people find you and your work? Awesome. My website is davepasco.net, and I'm found on Instagram under dave.pasco. Cool. And, my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or a habit that you wish you adopted sooner? Wow. I'm gonna change that a little bit if that's okay because it is something I did adopt sooner, but I wish more people would do. And that's if, for the young folks, if you guys are looking to live long, like, a hundred and twenty years or beyond, you need to be able to fund that, and you're not gonna wanna work forever. So if you have the ability to invest in a financial plan, like, I don't know, like different countries have different plans, but here in The States, we have four zero one ks's and IRAs investing in that while you're still young, compounding interest is your friend. You know, you'll be able to be a millionaire by the time you retire easily. And then you'll be able to afford all those really good longevity hacks, all the new cool stuff that comes out. But if you don't start putting money away while you're young, you're not gonna have it down the road. So invest. That's that's my big advice to young folks. Mhmm. Yeah. And what you said in the beginning that, you know, you you follow what other successful people have done in the past. So just follow the the footsteps. Yeah. Success leaves clues. Yeah. Well, it was amazing to talk with you, and, yeah, definitely, I hope a lot of people and I'm sure a lot of people will, know, check out your stuff in the future as well. Cool. Thank you for this. This was fun. Alright. That's it for this episode. If you liked it, then make sure you subscribe and follow us on social media. You can also preorder my new book, The Longevity Leap, at thelongevityleap.com.