The right choice can be different for different people. There is a lot of individual variability. There's no experimental design that guarantees with a 100% certainty cause and effect. All of it is an inferential process. You always wanna look at reproducibility. That nails it. End of story. Welcome to the Seamnan podcast. Our guest today is doctor Gil Carvallo. Gil has a PhD in biology from the California Institute of Technology. Gil has a popular YouTube channel called Nutrition Made Simple where he shares the latest studies on nutrition and health. In this episode, we discuss how to make sense of the conflicting landscape of online nutrition discussions. Gil, welcome to the show. Thanks for having me. Yeah. You have a very, nice YouTube channel where you, you know, what I've come to the conclusion or my impression of it is that you're not on you or you you really, like, try to make people come to the conclusion themselves or, like, make the decision themselves rather than telling them, okay. This is what you need to eat. These are the, like, foods that you that will be, you know, like, good for you or bad for you or, like, you're just educating. This is what the science says, and, this is what, you know, these are the kind of pros and cons of whatever kind of diet or whatever other health related information, you follow. Thanks, man. Appreciate it. Yeah. I I honestly believe that the right choice can be different for different people. It's not cookie cutter. There is a lot of individual variability. And so I think the only thing that makes sense is to provide people with the highest quality information that we have. And then based on that, they you know, just give them access to the information, basically. That's all. Mhmm. From there, they can do with that whatever they want or ignore it or use it or you know, that's that's not my turf anymore. But Mhmm. I think it's that access that is missing most of the time, and people are given super oversimplified soundbites that aren't really informative, aren't really empowering because you can't make a decision if you just get a soundbite. Mhmm. So Yeah. And it's that's, like, especially true on, like, Instagram, for example, where you're, like, scrolling through a reel. You might get the first reel that says, like, you know, apples are the best foods for you, and the next you scroll up, the next reel is gonna say apples are killing you. So it's, like, you know, very hard for, you know, the average person to really, you know, understand, okay, which one is it then? Or Right. Right. Right. Yeah. So, yeah, maybe we can start with a bit about your background of, you know, how why did you start making this kind of content? What is your background in this? And yeah. Yeah. So I went to medical school, and then after that, I decided to get a bit more training in research, in research science. And I went to graduate school, and I got a PhD in biology and did some work in physiological effects of different diets. We were interested in aging and factors that affect rate of aging. And so nutrition and caloric restriction and all these things are staples of that field. So we ended up doing a lot of dietary manipulations and looking at the effect on physiology and genetics and aging and all these things. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. Yeah. And then and then after that, I mean, I've always had an interest in nutrition. I think it's one of the pillars of of a healthy lifestyle. And when I decided to do something in terms of communication for the general public, I wasn't sure if I was gonna do a podcast or or write a book or do I end up landing on the YouTube thing. I like the I like having both the the voice channel and the the visual channel. I think I it fits my my personality better. I like to talk face to face more than just writing or more than just voice. And the, yeah, the gen the the the nutrition thing, I think, was a a good overlap between things that I had an interest in and some background in and also where where I thought I could add value. People have an interest in nutrition. There was a lot of a lot of doubt, a lot of frustration, and I thought there was a lot of scientific information available that wasn't being provided to people. I wanna take a short break to let you know that I'm excited to announce my long waited longevity program. If you want to slow down aging and add healthy years to your life, then email me the word health to info@cmlan.com, and I'll send you the details. I mean, my my professional experience is overwhelmingly in research science. But everything I do, I always I always bear in mind that I it's it's about the application at the end of the day to people's health. And that's one thing that, I mean, I've done research in other fields, things like physiology and neurobiology. And, and one thing that I always wanted it was always on the back of my mind was, okay, well, what's the application to people's lives? And it it was never entirely satisfying to me if if even if it was an interesting scientific question, but if the application was too far in the future or not no direct application to to medicine or to people's well-being, that was something that was missing for me. So I think this is a good exactly as you said, I think it's a good mix where, yes, there is the scientific side, the research side, but also it only matters if it's applicable to improving someone's health. Yeah. So we can, like, start off with a talking about why is there so much, let's say, conflicting opinions about, you know, nutrition for starters. Like, I I haven't noticed you know, obviously, in social media, there's always conflicting opinions about all topics like politics, physics, and all other aspects of, like, science and, life in general also have conflicting opinions. But it feels like in nutrition, at least, there's a lot more, let's say, different camps, like, you know, dozens of different kinds of, almost like ideologies, in terms of, what what is a healthy diet or what is, you know, bad for you. So why do why do you think that this kind of phenomenon exists in 2024 right now in social media? I think part of it is because there is individual variability. Some people have intolerance to certain foods that other people do really well on. And so that right there, you can have a a divide. Right? You're gonna have people that are doing great, feeling great on a certain diet or a certain food. Other people that have a devastating immediate acute reaction to that food and are, you know, are understandably not gonna welcome a message that says this food should be in your diet every day. They they it doesn't work for them. So they want at least an explanation of what's going on so they can address that. So right there, you have an obvious source of heterogeneity. Then you have the fact that the research itself, there's nuance. Things are not completely black and white. It's not. This this idea that we begin on social media. Food x is poison. Food y is a superfood that everybody should be eating all day long. This is like a an over oversimplification, almost a cartoonish view of nutrition. Foods must be good or bad, and which bucket do you put them in? It's it's not that simple. It doesn't work that way. There is nuance. There is there are aspects like contrast of exposure. How much of the food are you eating? Right? For how long? You can eat almost anything in a in the short term without without it having a massive effect on your health. But when you extend this over longer periods of time, that's when you see the biggest impacts on health. And so that's not easy, necessarily to observe at an individual level. You that's where a lot of times these large studies following people for long periods of time are useful because you wanna know what happens in the long run. And then you have personal preferences. Nutrition and food is something very emotional to a lot of people. It's something literally, it's a visceral thing. Right? It's it's something that you put in your viscera. So there's a lot of personal preference. There's a lot of tradition. There's a lot of culture. Food is intimately tied to all of this. And so it's very difficult, for for to for people to separate what is a scientific finding from all of these personal aspects. And so I think that's normal. And in any of these topics, like you said, in politics and religion, all these things have very emotional aspects. So these discussions are not purely abstract or cerebral. They there's an element of emotion in, involved there. So, yeah, I'm not surprised that there is a lot of a lot of different views and very and people are very excited about it and very, you know, that these discussions sometimes get heated. I actually think that's a good sign. I think our enemy is indifference. It's not when people are fighting each other. Okay. That might not be very productive, but at least it's a sign that they care. They care about health. They care about nutrition. They understand that nutrition is important. I think our problem is that a lot of people don't care. They're not on social media consuming nutrition information. They're eating whatever is cheap and easy and and tasty. And I think the the the epidemics that we have of health issues and the the notoriously, unhealthy western population in large part is because of this indifference or or the conditions that people have in their lives don't allow them the the time and the, you know, the luxury of worrying about what they're gonna eat. Yeah. And I agree that, you know, there's many different diets that can be healthy and, you know, different people reacting to different or in a different way to different diets. So, yeah, like, it's almost like they're arguing about the wrong things, like, you know, whether or not apples are good for you or bad for you, it doesn't really matter, at least, like, in terms of, you know, because they still agree on some of the main principles like that, you know, apples are still healthier than Cheetos or or French fries, for example. And, you know, they're just ending up maybe getting too into the weed of, you know, protecting their diet camp or trying to, you know, come out with some, like, a novel information that would, like, you know, be shocking as well to, gain more attention on social media and that kind of thing. That's a that's a factor, you know, for from the point of view of influencers or however we wanna call them, healthfluencers or gurus, whatever you wanna call people. And I, you know, I don't say that with a with a negative connotation because people sometimes will call me that those terms, and I don't I don't mind. If anything, I think it's a privilege. I think it's a responsibility. I don't think it's an insult. But, yeah, there's an element of if you just say something that sounds contrarian, that sounds iconoclastic, if you say something that people have never heard or even better that goes against everything they've ever heard, they've always heard, this gets clicks. This gets attention. This gets even if it's outrage, outrage sells. And so I think it's a it's a on a kind of a business model. Say the thing that goes against what people have heard, you get attention, and a percentage of people will follow you and will do whatever you're saying, especially if you have some credentials. This is something that's very common on social media. And then and then yeah. That there's there's things that we can get into more detail in detail, like, these different types of evidence that are genuinely confusing at first. There's many types of scientific experiments and many types of scientific evidence. They're not all created equal. And so it is confusing when someone says for example, I got a lot of message from people messages from people saying, well, this is really frustrating. I'm so tired. I go on Instagram or TikTok. Every doctor says something different, and they all have studies. I hear this all the time. So I don't know how to make sense of this. And the reality I understand this is frustrating for, general for the general public to to see the scenario. The reality is that it that it in science, studies aren't all weren't all, created equal. That there's there's different tiers of studies and different way different weights to studies. It's not all, like, a mixed bag. Yeah. So that's something we can get it working. Maybe you can go into it, like, you know, how do the people know then, okay, this is a good study versus this is a bad study and, yeah, what are the, like, the different tiers? Because, you know, there you can, like, when you're doing, like, some sort of a sales study or a mouse study, it doesn't necessarily translate into humans, for for example as well. Yeah. So to not to to to gotta give a summarized view, let's say, for example, that we're trying to figure out the health effect of something. There's no research on it. Right? So we're starting from ground zero. Could be a food or it could be a a type of exercise. It doesn't matter. Let's say it's a food. It's some, almonds or something like that. If we the first thing we can do is we can ask around. I can ask my neighbors. I can ask my cousin, and they might tell me, yeah. I eat almonds and, you know, I I feel pretty good, and I think I lost weight around that time. And, there's this thing that was bothering me in my in my back and went away. Okay. This type of anecdotal account is interesting. It's not useless. It's not garbage. Sometimes people exaggerate too, and it's everything is either perfect or garbage. It's not it's not like that. It's useful. It's interesting. But we don't jump to cause and effect from this because there's too many loose parts. Right? First of all, there's nothing's documented. We can't confirm any of this. It's all up in the air. The person might have done a thousand other things at the same time, and those might have caused some of the effects and not the almonds. There's no control group to compare it to. There's something called placebo effect that's very well characterized. It's a p when people have an expectation that something is healthy, they tend to feel better when they do it, and then they psychologically attribute the benefits that they feel to that food or practice. It can also work in the opposite direction. There's a placebo effect also. Bottom line, too many variables. We can't really very low level of confidence. So let's say we could go one level up like you were saying, lab experiments. Right? You give the food to a mouse in a cage, and you watch what happens to the mouse's health. Interesting actually, important experiments. You can get a lot information from this. It's just a big jump to humans. It doesn't tell us what the health effect is in a human. Okay. Let's go to humans. You can look at indigenous populations somewhere in an island. Right? You can ask, okay. I found this in this population somewhere in the Pacific Islands, and they eat a lot of almonds. They eat three or four times more almonds than the average westerner, and they seem to be pretty lean, and they have low rates of diabetes or whatever. Okay. This is better than anecdotes because now we can document this. We can observe it. We can study it. Still a lot of moving parts. Still too many variables. The we're comparing these guys to the average westerner. Genetics is completely different. Pollution levels, activity levels, junk food intake. I mean, literally a thousand variables. So we can't infer cause and effect. We don't know what the causal effect of eating almonds is from this type of data. It's interesting. It's hypothesis generating. Next level up, cohort studies. Okay. We look at a population in the same area, so it could be in an area of Estonia or in an area of Germany, anywhere. A population there, people who eat more and less almonds, compare them to each other. Now we can document these outcomes. We can have doctors following them over years, so it's prospective. It's not cross sectional. We can have an adjustment a statistical adjustment model where we try to minimize all the other variables. So we're trying to isolate the almonds the almond intake, the the the variable we're interested in. So it's a stronger dataset. It's it's closer to cause and effect. Can we do even better? Yeah. Randomized trial. Right? Split people randomly, give elements to half of them, follow follow over time, what happens to their health? That everything else being equal, that's stronger than anything else pretty pretty much because the randomization, at least in principle, does a better job of averaging out the variables other than the variable of interest, which is the elements. Right? So that's a very quick bird's eye view of what we call hierarchy of evidence, which is this ladder, and by you you know, you can you can tell that the difference between anecdotes or studies in a in a rat and an analysis looking at 10 randomized trials is night and day. I mean, yeah, both are both are studies technically, but scientifically, it's night and day. Yeah. Like a I guess a good example would be, like, pretty much everyone has heard about someone who has had, like, an uncle or a grandfather who smoked and they lived to a 100 years old and never got cancer. But if you look at the epidemiology, then, you know, people who smoke, they have much higher rates of cancer and heart disease, and they're ten years shorter life expectancy. And I believe, like, in randomized trials, if they do it like that, then they would also find, you know, those kind of same results. So just, you know, the an anecdote is, yeah, like, a very there's many things that contribute to the observation that the audio anecdotes in the end. Yeah. And do we we just released a video looking at the the the so called French paradox where in France, they eat more saturated fat than in some other countries, but their rate of heart disease is a bit lower. So it's this paradox. But we we actually were looking into this. In France, they smoke a lot, very high smoking rate, and yet they have this low heart disease rate. So, again, when we look at these eco we call it ecological associations. Right? Just looking at populations of here's the population of Japan. Here's the population of Spain. Oh, Japanese people live longer, and they also eat more tofu. Oh, it must be the tofu. How do you know? There's a thousand other differences. Right? The genetics is different. The health care system, they're in culture. Everything's different. So ecological associations are really, really loose, and, yeah, they're hypothesis generating. We use them to have ideas to then test things in sturdier contexts. Yeah. And Japanese also, how much smaller portion sizes compared to America, for example. So yeah. Could be anything. Yeah. There's many other things. So how do yeah. Like, how do the in the studies, how do they pinpoint that this is the reason for that, not what they but because, you know, humans living in the free world, there's, you know, thousands of other things that could affect the outcomes of the of the study. So, like, in this epidemiology studies, that's very, you know, known and many people criticize epidemiology for the this, fact that it's very noisy or there's not a lot of, you know, things you can find causal association with. So it's still causal inference. Right? You we don't you don't really look at an epidemiological study and say, cause and and effect is proven from this study. It doesn't really work that way. But so one thing that's very important are these adjustment models where you're gonna try to, you're gonna try to take out of the equation all the other variables. So if you're looking at, say, almond intake and you find that these different groups, let's say, the tertile the tertiles or the quartiles of almond intake. So, basically, you're you're splitting the population into people in order of almond intake, the lowest intermediate and then the highest. If you find that there's also a difference in terms of smoking, for example, or exercise or something like that, an obvious confounder, you're gonna try to do it in you're always gonna have a statistical model trying to correct for that and seeing if the effect of the almonds survives. And oftentimes, what you find is the effect of of the variable goes away after you do this correction. If it doesn't go away, now you have a higher level of confidence. There's other ways you can do this. You can do this with baseline stratification, for example. So you actually divide the population. Let's say, for example, tobacco. Right? You're worried that tobacco might be an explanation. You can take your population and split it and look just at nonsmokers and just as smokers as a function of almond intake, and you can see if the effect is dependent on the presence of smoking or not. That's another way to do it. And, basically, you're gonna take all of this, and then, ideally, you're gonna look at randomized trials also and you're gonna essentially look at preponderance of evidence or totality of evidence. You're gonna see if all of these lines of evidence are pointing in the same direction or not. If they are, you have a higher level of confidence that probably this thing is having this effect. If there's a lot of contradictions, then your level of confidence is gonna be lower. Do you have, like, an example where, like, the adjustment of the model yielded, like, a completely different outcome than was, like, initially seen, like, an actual actual study or even you you can hypothesize the study. Yeah. Yeah. It's pretty common to see, for example, if you look at certain foods and then correct for BMI, and these for example, effective certain foods on, diabetes. Right? Or or type two diabetes on incidence of type two diabetes, and then you correct for BMI, it's not uncommon to see the effect of on diabetes become nonsignificant. Now that's actually a bit controversial because you could argue that the the the effect of the food on BMI is what causes the effect on diabetes. So this is called something being in the causal pathway. And so an argument could be made that correcting for BMI is actually an over adjustment that we're adjusting for something that is actually fine. If the food makes you fat and if being fat raises risk of diabetes, then that's a a reasonable way that you get there. So that's kind of one example. But yeah. I mean, you could you could for example, you could adjust for socioeconomic status. Let's say that you're looking at the effect of living in a certain area, right, and risk of death. And you find that living in a certain area of the city, you tend to die more or than than in another part of the city. So now you might think, okay. So it's living in that part of the city that makes you die, but, actually, you find out that people who live there have a higher socioeconomic status. They are richer, and so they have access to better health care. And so when you when you correct for that, you might see that the effect on death becomes nonsignificant. That tells you that it's not moving to that area of town that's gonna lower your risk of death. It's all the access that most people in that area have to other privileges that is probably lowering their risk of death. Does that make sense? I don't know if that was confusing. Yeah. Yeah. It does. Okay. And but, you know, how perfect is it in terms of, like, you obviously can't do it a 100%, or you can't a 100% eliminate all the effects of the variables. So, for example, if you do baseline stratification, it's pretty good. If you split between smokers and nonsmoke or between men and women, for example, or between, you know, people with obesity, people with overweight, and people with normal BMI. That's pretty good. And if if you see that the baseline stratification does not eliminate the effect, you've certainly taken another step in that direction. In general, you're right. Adjustment models don't eliminate confounders a 100%. So this is everything is incremental steps. Even a randomized trial isn't perfect. You can run a randomized trial and get a statistically significant result, and it might not be the the thing that you think is causing it. I'll give you an example. Let's say that you have two groups. You're studying the effect of exercise on weight loss, for example. Right? So you split a group of people into two groups randomly, and you tell half of them to go exercise, and you have a submit exercise program. And the other guys, you don't tell them anything. And by the end of whatever period of time, the guys that you told to exercise have lost weight. So at face value, we go, alright. This is a randomized trial. We we randomly split them. Must be the exercise that caused them to lose weight. Not in all rigor. Really, what you saw was a statistical association between being in the exercise group, being randomized onto this to the exercise group and losing weight. We're inferring that is because they were assigned the weight loss program, but it could be something else. For example, maybe these guys got assigned their exercise program, but they didn't stick to it. They didn't exercise that much. And the other guys weren't told to do anything, so they were doing their normal exercise. And maybe there was no statistically significant difference in terms of energy output between the two groups. But they lost weight because since they were told to exercise, they felt that they felt more pressure, and they ate a little cleaner. Right? One possibility among a thousand possibilities. Or maybe there was something about the treatment. These guys got more attention from the research team, and so they ended up doing some other thing, being more careful and losing weight for that reason. Maybe they were being measured more often, so the pressure was there. Right? The bottom line is is there's no experimental design that guarantees with a 100% certainty that you find, cause and effect. All of it is an inferential process of incremental steps. The stronger a study is, the higher the confidence you get. You always wanna look at reproducibility at all. So you're it's never one study nails it. End of story. Yeah. It's all because if you have if instead of one study with exercise, you have 30 randomized trials with exercise, all showing your reduct or at least in general showing a reduction in in body weight, yeah, they're done differently, and there's different types of controls. Right? And you control for the diets and some, but not all, your confidence goes up even more that the it's the exercise doing this. Mhmm. Right? So you do the the experiment in different ways, complementary ways. You're looking at preponderance of evidence, and you're looking at balance of evidence really to to determine what's the likelihood of this or that. But it's always an educated guess. Mhmm. Yeah. It's like, you know, the more different lines of evidence point in the same direction, the more confident you can be in it because, you know, there's different types of evidence and repeated in dozens of studies. And, you know, it it must you know, of course, with, these diet things, it's gonna be, like, the 100% accuracy you could be only if you have, like, this lifelong metabolic war study where you control all the calorie intake and you have twins and you, like, literally, for the rest of their life, control all their activities and control their physical activity and those things. And then you might know, like, a 100% certainty. But, you know, obviously, this is impossible to do in humans, and that's why we have to kind of, you know, like you said, it's trying to get as close to it as possible. Yeah. For all of these things that we take for granted, that's the case. For tobacco, for junk food, for the benefits of exercise, for trans fats, or, you know, all of this all the poisons that we accept as poisonous and all the things that we accept as health promoting, this is the case. It's never a 100% certainty, but it is the case that as the evidence accumulates over and over and over over decades, different research teams in different places in the world looking at different populations, asking the same question but in complementary techniques, and you keep getting the same answer. It gets to a point where, yeah, theoretically, in terms of scientific rigor, we can't say this has been proven, and we can't say the certainty is a 100%. But for practical purposes, are you gonna smoke or not? I choose not to smoke very serenely. I mean, that's the evidence there's so much evidence pointing to a balance of harm that for practical purposes, I think that's a wise choice. Junk food, same thing. Right? All of these basic fundamentals of nutrition, exercise. Yeah. So it's it's about making these decisions. I mean, if you think about it in our in our daily lives, which decision are you a 100% sure of? Virtually nothing. You choose jobs. You choose career paths. You choose who you marry. You choose, you know, what who you're friends with. You choose every one of these decisions is made with some information in hand, but nothing is a 100. Mhmm. You know? Sometimes we choose a job. It doesn't work out. We marry. It doesn't work out. Friends, it doesn't work out. I mean, all these things are educated choices. Yeah. So Yeah. It's about And even then, you know, with all if you do have a 100% certainty about something, then even then people have the free will or, let's say, the the ability to choose, you know, whatever thing. They might want to eat some junk food. They might want to smoke every once in a while. They might want to, you know, stay up late or whatever, you know, because as long as they're aware of it as long as they're aware of the risks, then it's fine. Like, I'm I'm not against, like, a sugar tax or something because I think people, if they are educated enough, then they would know that, you know, if the sugar is bad and if they care about their health, then they would read the labels and choose the foods that have less sugar or lower amounts of sugar. But I would never, like, you know, say that you should never be able to, like, have foods that contain sugar because I think I believe in, like, you know, free market capitalism and have to I think it's much worse to, like, you know, control all the things than than for people to, make poor, let's say because then, you know, everyone pretty much knows that excess sugar is bad, but there are some people still choose to, consume it. Yep. I mean, I agree with that in general. Making giving people the tools to make an informed choice, and lots of people smoke and understand the the implications. And I don't think that's a that the choice is wrong. It could be right for them. If they're choosing their pleasure in smoking is so significant that it trumps the the future risk, it could be the right choice for them. It could be that that balance is favorable for them. It's not the right choice for me, but, you know, it's we're not all the same. So Yeah. I I I think that makes a lot of sense. Yeah. Unfortunately, with smoking, there's also the addiction part. And with junk food, I I think with junk food, especially, it's, yeah, pretty addictive and a lot of people, you know, still still consume it and not not be able to control, their food intake. But maybe we can now switch into, like, what are the things then that we with pretty high certainty of evidence, obviously, not the perfect amount of evidence, but, like, high certainty of evidence that it's bad in the nutrition realm, similar similar to that that that we know that, like, you know, smoking is bad. Yeah. I mean, so the fundamentals of nutrition, and you're you're asking about the things that we are, wary of. We know with a pretty high degree of certainty that an excess of ultra processed foods is not a good idea. And the the average currently for for the average Americans is getting almost 60 of their calories from ultra processed foods. That's not working out. So that's we know that with a pretty high degree of certainty. We know that an excess of sodium in the food is not great. There is individual variability. There are people that can that are more sensitive than others, but populationally, we know that's one issue. That's that overlaps largely with the ultra processed foods because most of the sodium comes from these junk foods and packaged foods. It's less of a problem with whole foods or diets, foods that we make at home. Sorry. Yeah. Yeah. But so for in this example, like, how would you in the studies, how would you come to the conclusion that it's the salt or it's not that it's not the processed food, that is causing the harm and not not the salt? Oh, no. I I mean, the most of the salt in the western diet is coming from ultra processed foods. Right. Gotcha. The majority is coming from there. You're asking me how what kind of studies have pointed to concerns of excess sodium? Yeah. So, like, in the salt example, like, is it the processed food that is causing the harm, or is it the salt itself? Like, if you eat Oh, I see. Salt from a whole foods source and otherwise you're, you know, exercising blah blah blah, all the other healthy things, Is it the salt per se, or is it the processed food that is correlated with higher salt intake? Yep. I see what you're asking. Yeah. So even when you do trials, for example, just looking at salt and salt substitutes, and you just swap that, you're not looking at a lot of junk food, you still see an effect on blood pressure. And even in some trials, you still see an effect on on what we call outcomes, so risk of strokes or heart attacks. And then you understand also the mechanisms. That's part that's part of the totality. Right? So you look at actual providing just sodium, purified sodium or sodium chloride, and you look at the effect on blood pressure and other other readouts, regardless of whether it's a it's junk food or not, you see an effect there as well. Now the the the effect on, on blood pressure is not just sodium. That's just one factor. Potassium plays a role. So it's the balance between sodium and potassium, and then certain certain foods also have a, blood pressure lowering effect. So it's not all sodium that's not yeah. I don't wanna give that impression, but, excess sodium is one factor and becomes the more sodium you have, the harder it becomes to balance it out with potassium. Right. But it all comes down to the the total dietary pattern. Gotcha. Thanks. Yeah. Other things, the type of fats matters. The so the quality of nutrients. Right? In nutrition, especially on on in on the Internet and these these forums, a lot of attention is put on the the the amount of nutrients. How much how much fat and how much carb? Is it high carb? Is it low carb? Is it high fat? Is it low fat? That's okay. It's it's more of a personal preference, really. The more critical factor for health is the the quality of the nutrients. Is it what would be carbohydrate or or a low quality carbohydrate? And that's mostly at the level of refinement. Are we talking about, you know, ice cream or well, ice cream actually isn't is has a lot of carb has a lot of fat as well. But if you're lucky, for example, a candy or soda, those tend to be high in carbohydrate, but it's the wrong type of carbohydrate or these these very refined cereals, for example, is another example. And then with the fat, the same thing. The the type the quality of the fat matters. And so trans fats have a lot of evidence, pointing to being problematic when they're in they're taken in a certain certain amount. Saturated fat, if it's taken at a high amount, particularly from some sources, there's nuance as well in terms of the saturated fatty acid. But a high amount of saturated, saturated fat in general tends to raise cardiovascular risk relative to other alternatives, like unsaturated fats in general tend to be better. Again, it matters where you get them. If you get your unsaturated fats from junk food, you're not doing a very good a very good job. But, if you're getting them from, you know, nuts and seeds and fatty fish and vegetable oils and things like that, in general, the outcomes look better. Yeah. Drinks is is is another thing. Unfortunately, in the West, a lot of a lot of consumption of sugar sweetened beverages, and that's obviously an issue. So replacing that with mostly water, but coffee some coffee, some teas is great too. Yep. We've we've touched on most of the fundamental there there's other things that we can talk about, but that's that covers most of it, really. Yeah. Yeah. Like, it's the what you kind of compare it to is what matters quite a lot, especially when, you know, talking about fats or the carbohydrates. So, you know, let's say saturated fat is still healthier than, trans fats or some, let's say, other processed foods that, if you're you're eating McDonald's and fries and then you replace it with, you know, whatever pretty much. I I don't think there's anything that would make your health worse unless you're literally, like, you know, drinking sticks of mar or eating sticks of margarine or something like that. That would make your health worse, than, you know, replacing anything with, McDonald's kind of with this very high ultra processed food diet. So, you know, even if you whatever kind of diet, you're paleo, keto, vegan, vegetarian, if it fits your macros, if you, you know, go from the standard American diet to whatever diet, then your health generally will, improve, I would imagine. Yeah. I think that's true. I mean, there's even some demonstrations that are very, kind of striking. There's these these experiments with the the the rice the the white rice diet. I don't know if you've heard of that, the Walter Kempner's white rice diet. There's another one that's the Twinkie diet. There's a professor that came up with this, and they're basically just they're trying to make make a point. Right? So he may basically, this is a university professor. I think it was a nutrition professor that went on a diet that was mainly these junk foods, Twinkies and donuts and things like that. That's that's primarily what he was eating, but he limited the amount. So he was still hypocaloric. So he ended up losing weight, and a lot of these markers improved. Triglycerides, inflammatory markers, all these things moved in the right direction even though he's eating this diet that nobody would recommend long term. So it makes some interesting points there that, yeah. I mean, the the we can get some benefits short term on almost anything, particularly if you play if you play ball, if you play the game right, and if you control calories or something like that. If you find a new way to restrict your calories. Same story with the Walter Kempner's rice diet. So he took people that were very obese and had diabetes and had crazy high blood pressure. You put them on a diet that was mostly white rice, table sugar, and some fruit juice. Not surprisingly, they lost a ton of weight. Their diabetes in most people tended to improve. The blood pressure came down, came crashing down because it's a diet that's very monotonous, a diet that is a radical elimination diet, and you're not gonna get 4,000 calories a day from white rice. So it's gonna cap your caloric intake, and a lot of things are gonna move in the right direction. But it doesn't mean that those are health promoting diets for the long run or that we're gonna recommend them Mhmm. In the population at large. So Yeah. Maintaining healthy body weight is crucial, but I I would say there's other concerns as well long long term. Mhmm. Yeah. I think in the Twinkie that he actually took a protein shake as well every day to, like, get some protein to maintain his muscle tissue. Right. Yeah. Like, in the long term, he would, yeah, pretty much go very catabolic and malnourished. Yeah. Yeah. In regards to, like, you mentioned the so saturated fat that, you you said would be better to limit. So, what how much, first of all, and what has, yeah, like, what has, led to the conclusion of, of that? So the the the the reference range is under 10% of calories from the saturated fat. That comes from some meta analysis that indicate that above that, you tend to get you the risk starts to climb up. But this is average of population. Right? The the the reality is that an individual level, you're gonna see a lot of variation. Some people can handle more than others. So and I I actually think that the excessive focus on nutrients I realize I brought up saturated fats, so it's it's on me. But, at the end of the day, I think it's more actionable and more more helpful for people to think in terms of dietary patterns. So if you if you just think in terms of what a a healthy dietary pattern looks like and, you know, if you think of, the the traditional the typical Mediterranean diet as sort of just a reference, it doesn't mean that everybody needs to eat that. But as as a as a visual, you know, it's not gonna be a bunch of Kentucky fried chicken and a bunch of lollipops. Right? That's not gonna be the picture of that traditional Mediterranean diet. So you're you're shooting for a diet that has mostly whole foods, that has, some fish and seafood, that has substantial fruits and vegetables, unprocessed plant foods, that has some lean meats, that has some dairy, particularly fermented dairy, tends to be tends to show better outcomes. That's kind of the the general picture that you're looking for. And if you're if you're looking at a diet with that composition, most of these tend to fall into place. You're probably not gonna be getting crazy amounts of salt. You're probably not gonna be getting crazy amounts of saturated fat. You might still need some tweaking depending on the individual because some people are more require more micromanaging than others, more attention than others. But in general, you're gonna hit 80 or 90% of the the fundamentals right there. Mhmm. Gotcha. Yeah. I agree that many people are just very sensitive about these topics that you know, because everything is on a almost like a bell curve, like, too much of something anything is bad and too little of anything is also bad. Like, too much oxygen is bad, too little oxygen is bad, too much water is bad, too little water is bad. You know? And, you know, like, it makes sense that the same applies to all the micronutrients as well. Like, too much protein is called gravestarization. Too little protein is called, you know, malnourishment or malnutrition. And, you know, too much saturated fat is gonna be bad and too little saturated fat. Many people, you know, argue about that if it too little saturated fat would be bad, but, you know, generally, like, there's always, like, a sweet spot for everything, like calorie intake, exercise, and it's just, like, it's just very people are, I guess, too delved too deep into their ideology of whatever diet that they're following, that they're very, like, defensive about, you know, that that any any indication or any indication that their diet would be somehow bad is taken all taken very, like, very, like, you know, defensively. Yeah. I'll give you another example. I was just looking at a a study on eggs. Eggs are a big controversial topic. Right? People do I I've gotten this question since the very beginning, and I still get it. Are eggs good or bad? Can you just give me the answers? Are eggs good or good or bad? And, usually, this is what you find on the Internet. Some camps will tell you eggs are eggs are poison. If you are eating any eggs, you're killing yourself. Other camps will tell, no. Eggs are superfood are perfect. You should everybody should be eating 10 eggs a day, and if you're not, you're losing leaving gains on the table. I mean, obviously, these are exaggerations, but there is legitimate variability there at an individual level. And so people depending on on your genetics, some people absorb more cholesterol from their food and some absorb less. The intestinal transporters of cholesterol actually vary a lot from person to person. And so this study that I was looking at is looking at the effect of egg intake on cardiovascular disease, but it's splitting people by genetics. And what they find is that people who have a certain genetic composition that have a higher risk for cardiovascular disease, they are much more sensitive to the egg intake. And then the ones that are that have low to intermediate genetic risk, they have a modest, if any if any, effect of egg intake. As you go from low intake to high intake, you barely see a an increase in risk. So it's a beautiful demonstration that the difficulties you have when you talk about in general in generalities, you have to give people recommendations. You have to go tell them something. But the reality is this is gonna vary from an individual to individual. And some people can have an egg every day or more even and be fine, whereas others need to be stricter or would benefit from being stricter, at least at the cardiovascular level. All depends on our makeup. Yeah. I guess, you know, the diet or the foods are just an means to an end to having good health. And in terms of, like, the clinical outcomes, then a lot of it is determined by, like, your blood work. So people react differently to different foods with, you know, cholesterol or triglycerides or blood sugar or whatever. But there's very a lot of variability between people in terms of how they respond to foods. Like, you know, I'm I'm, like, very physically active. I'm very lean. I can eat, like, you know, 300 grams of carbs a day and be with, like, very normal low blood sugar levels and without any issues whereas someone who has diabetes probably is gonna do a lot worse, with something, that kind of a carbohydrate intake. And, you know, at the end of the day, what matters most is what your, like, blood work and whether or not you get some sort of a disease or not, I think. Yeah. And with cardiovascular disease, we have the luxury of having blood parameters that have been characterized ad nauseam, and we have so much evidence on them. With other things like cancer, for example, it's harder. Like, how do you know if you're if you can get away with smoking or not? We know that a lot of people can get away with smoking, smoke a lot their entire lives, don't get lung cancer. That that's a thing. But how do you know beforehand? Yeah. You can look at family history. That's certainly valid. You know, if your family members had lung cancer or not, that tells you something. But it's hard to know who is at risk. With cardiovascular disease, we have better indicators. So if your lipids are great and your glucose levels are great, your blood pressure's great, chances are you are doing pretty well and you have low much lower risk than if somebody you know, their metrics are all over the place or crazy high. That person needs to be more cautious, obviously. So this is absolutely vital information that, yeah, would be would be crazy to not pay attention to. Yeah. And another thing regarding the biomarkers and the diet is that you can, like, I guess, you can modify your risk with your lifestyle as well. Like, if you, let's say, exercise more, then you can probably eat more carbohydrates because you're burning them more for, energy. And if you have, like, some other healthy lifestyle habits that make up for some other dietary choices, like, if you, yeah, like, literally, like, run 10 k every day or, like, a marathon every day, then you can probably eat KFC and still lose weight. Then, you know, what who knows what's gonna happen in the long run, but at least in the short term, you can maintain very good health if you just, you know, quote, unquote, out exercise a bad diet. So you can there's a lot of other lifestyle and supplemental and other, like, factors that you can modify. So you don't necessarily or you you there's never, like, a perfect diet. Like, you have to follow a diet together with the other lifestyle factors and then, you know, follow your blood work as well to see how it affects your actual outcomes. Yeah. It's definitely gonna be a conjunction of genetics and environment. Absolutely. You gotta you gotta play it's like in in cards. Right? You gotta play the hand you're dealt. Mhmm. If you're if you're dealt an amazing hand, even if you're a bad player, you have good chances. But if you're if you're if you're handled a really bad hand, you have to be more careful. You have to develop some skills. Right. So we talked about saturated fat. I guess the next thing we can talk about is, like, protein in general. So, like, what is the because protein is also, like, pretty controversial, like, for longevity, especially, like, many longevity experts say that you need to be on a low protein diet. Others say that high protein is actually good for preventing, sarcopenia and muscle loss. So, what do you think about that? Yeah. I honestly, the evidence on protein being bad for longevity, I I'd I'm not persuaded. I have never seen strong evidence of that. Basically, this is based on, mouse studies, and then there are some observational studies in humans that show a direct correlation between protein intake and some some outcomes like mortality. But it tends to be often, it's the type of protein or the source of the protein matters. So there's a lot of these studies showing that protein animal protein has this has this correlation with the increased mortality. But then you look at plant protein, you don't see the same. Sometimes you would see a protective effect. So I'm not persuaded that protein per se is the problem. Maybe it's what comes with it. Maybe it's the the saturated fats and all these other factors, and maybe it's the it's a displacement effect of diets lower in fiber. It's even possible that there's other other factors. I haven't looked at those that in enough detail to be able to say that confidently, but it's possible that in general, people who eat these diets that are higher in animal products and lower in fiber tend to have unhealthier lifestyles. So this is gonna hinge on those adjustment models that we talked about. How how good are those? How good of a job do they do in trying to minimize the effect of these other factors? And, also, do you have data from other pillars of science that point in the same direction? Right? Do you have any trials that suggest a harm of excess protein? Do you have a mechanism for it? All of these things are gonna increase your confidence. So I haven't seen, any evidence that convinces me that protein itself is is shortens life. I mean, I'm open to it. And if it's out there, if it's compelling, but I haven't seen it. The sarcopenia thing is certainly true. It's it's a concern about when you start getting to an old age, especially if you don't exercise. That has a lot to do with it. It has to do with lack of exercise. It has to do with morbidity as well. People start getting sick, different diseases, infectious diseases, cancer, you know, chronic diseases like that that affect everything, affect your ability to exercise, affect your appetite, affect your nutrient absorption. So, yeah, you're gonna start losing muscle for all of those reasons. So, yeah, I think I think it's it is a more of a concern after a certain age adequate protein intake and, and exercise. Resistance training, I think, is very important, for everyone, but but especially actually, just we just made a video about that. The American Heart Association just came out with the guideline emphasizing resistance training for an older population above 60, because it's a population that tends to not do it and that loses muscle mass rapidly. And so you have these problems of sarcopenia and and the the falls and the balance and the the mobility, all these things are affected. So yeah. I I think adequate protein intake is absolutely essential. I think sometimes it's people get people obsess over it too. It's like we can you eat 200 grams of protein a day. We eat 300 grams of protein a day. I haven't seen evidence of that. And maybe if you're a bodybuilder and you need to maximize every gram of muscle, maybe. But for the vast majority of people, I think the best evidence I've seen points to maybe 1.2 grams of protein per kilo of body weight. One one point two to 1.6 is a good reference range. The these studies point to 1.6. Around 1.6, give or take, see you seem to maximize your hypertrophy. Some people argue that it should be a little bit a little bit more than that. Okay. But that's the ballpark, for that's for maximizing hypertrophy. Right? That's if you're if you're going to the gym, you're lifting weights, you're trying to grow your muscle, and you're getting the the enough protein for it. Yeah. Otherwise, majority of people who don't exercise, they should. But if they don't, 1.2 is good. Even for an older population, it's a good range. Some people are are fine with even less. The the the RDA is point eight. That's a bit more controversial. I think some people worry that it might not be enough for some individuals. And, certainly, if you're trying to build muscle and you're at point eight, you're probably not maximizing hypertrophy. So depends on your goal. Yeah. Yeah. That depends a lot on the goal. And, yeah, with protein, it's like there is a sweet spot or or there is, like, a maximum threshold that they find at least in the studies. Yeah. So there's, like, no point in eating, you know, 300 grams of protein unless you are very big or, like like, unless you weigh, like, almost three hundred pounds yourself. So then it might make sense to maintain your large size. But if you're, like, a hundred and twenty pound female, then you don't need to eat, like, 300 grams of protein is kind of redundant at that point then. You know, you might be better off by getting, like, more bioavailable sources of energy from carbohydrates or fats rather than converting the protein extra protein into glucose. There's another benefit of protein too, in terms of satiety. It is one factor that helps with satiety. So, yes, it has it's, it has a role for people who are trying to lose weight or to or who who struggle maintaining healthy body weight, who tend to overeat. It's one factor playing with the protein, that can help can help achieve satiety and then not overeat. For diabetes management also, there is a role of protein in inducing pancreatic function. Also, during weight loss, there's a there's a it's important also to maintain adequate protein intake because you don't you wanna lose mostly fat mass. You don't wanna lose your muscle. So that's another thing that matters. So yeah. But I I think I think it's I think it's important. I think it should be should be talked about. I think, I think most most of the people that don't think about protein are the ones that need these messages. And the ones who are already obsessed over about protein, probably you don't need to hear these details. I think that's the irony. Yeah. Yeah. There's a pretty wide range you can get away with protein. Like, you might not maybe, like, make the 100% of all the potential of your gains in terms of muscle mass, but you might get there, like, you know, 60 or 70% there in terms of if you fall into, like, slightly higher protein intake above the RDA, like, you know, the RDA is probably enough to maintain, the muscle tissue and prevent frailty at least in younger people. But if you're older, then you might, yeah, need a bit more to, compensate for the aging aspect. Yeah. I think that's that's probably that's probably a a good approximation. And carbohydrates then, that's also, like, obviously, very controversial, like, low carb, high carb, or not necessarily even high carb, but let's say, you know, low carb versus eating even less moderate amounts of carbs. Like, somehow it feels like the low carb has switched from not only being against high carb, but being against any amount of carb that is above, you know, 30 grams of carbs per day. Mhmm. Yeah. I think it it depends also which outcome you're talking about. I mean, if you're talking about weight loss, I think we have so much evidence that populationally, it doesn't really matter how much carb or how much fat is in the diet. You you see weight loss if you cut calories in in randomized trial, and we have so many randomized trials looking at this. You see weight loss with high carb diets, with low carb diets, with high fat diets, with low fat diets, as long as you can maintain people on a on a on a diet that is overtly moderate. Now at an individual level, it doesn't matter because how do you get to moderate calories? Some people do really well on a low fat diet and love a very low fat diet and find it very easy to to not overeat on those diets that are very low fat and very high carb. Other people hate that and do very well on a on a very low carb diet. And most people struggle with both extremes. They can't stick with either one. I mean, we see this in trials over and over again. So I don't I wouldn't dream of telling someone who's doing very well on either one. People who are doing great on a ketogenic diet and everything's under control, I don't see a problem. I don't see a reason to tell them to stop. Same for peep for someone on a very low fat diet. Assuming that, they're also minding their future health, that it's not just body weight. But I don't think there's anything inherently, concerning about a very low fat or a very low carb diet. Now should we tell everybody to go on those diets? I don't think the diets the the evidence supports that because most people can't do it, can't stick with it. They do it for a couple months, and then they fall off the wagon. We see this over and over again. So I think we have to present the options, and we have to give people the information. Look. This is these are the factors that matter. These are the different roads you can take to get there. Pick one that works for you. I think that's that's what works. Yeah. Yeah. Like, many different type that type of dots and different outcomes or, like, different focuses on what they're trying to achieve. You know, like, optimal weight loss diet may not be the most optimal longevity diet or vice versa. So, but there are, like, still, like, some hierarchies of, let's say, things that matter. Like, you know, obviously, in the top, there are, like, you know, avoid diabetes and avoid obesity. Those are the probably the biggest, let's say, factors that shorten your lifespan and have other negative effects on your health. So everything else, like the the macro macronutrient ratios and everything else, tend to be, like, after that. Like, the first goal is obviously to, like, for, like, long long term health is still to, like, avoid obesity and avoid the same metabolic syndrome and, diabetes. Yeah. Those are big big factors. You definitely wanna dodge that. And at the end of the day, with any dietary pattern, you can mess it up. You know, it's it's possible to do any name diet wrong. The problem with very low fat diets tends to be the intake of refined carbohydrate. We see this in trials, but people tend to fall to to eat more refined carbohydrates. So that's a a caveat. It's possible to do low fat diets without doing that. I have viewers who do it successfully and healthily. For the low carb diets, also some caveats. Some people go more on junky low carb diets. Others go on low carb diets, and their cholesterol goes up a lot. All of those things can be adjusted while you're still on a low carb diet. So I I believe it's possible to have the best of both worlds and choose a diet that you like personally and still adjust these key factors. And certainly on a on a on, let's say, on a on a common diet that is intermediate fat, intermediate carb, the same things apply. The same caveats apply. Going easy on the ultra processed foods and the refined grains and the refined carbohydrates, That's something that we I mean, that's an obvious one of the big issues that we have with the the the standard western diet. And then, yeah, making sure that most of your foods come from whole foods. That's that's most of your calories come from whole whole foods. That's that's a good general rule of thumb. And, yeah, the basically, the the the pillars that we've touched on. Right. What I think are some of you know, we mentioned that foods that we kind of generally agree that are bad. What do you think are the foods generally agreed upon that are good? You know, obviously, there's still a lot of people who don't agree with whatever or, you know, there's always disagreements. But what is, like, what is generally, like, healthy food besides from the fact of, you know, not being ultra processed of, you know, being a whole food, generally? Yeah. Fruits and vegetables, they're widespread agreement. Those are healthy health promoting categories of foods. Fermented fermented dairy, it also has good outcomes. Fatty fish, couple times a week. Sources of unsaturated fats, like olive oil, like canola oil, things like that are widely agreed upon as being healthy. Additives, lean meats in general. Yeah. Water, tea, coffee. Now for all of those, we can find for every single one of those, seafood also with the fish, for every single one of those, we can find a group of people that don't do well on them. Right? We can find people who have intolerance to seafood, allergy to seafood, obviously. We can find people who have intolerance to some vegetables. People who have gastrointestinal conditions who have a difficulty digesting them. So that's where individual care goes into, you know, comes in, and and trying to address those conditions and and tailoring the diets to individual needs. But in general, those are the foods that have the best health outcomes for most people. Mhmm. Nuts and seeds, whole grains, legumes, all of those have great health health outcomes. Yeah. Still like whole foods that, you can find in a minimally processed form. Yep. Yep. Yeah. I gotcha. And what about, like, whole grains and refined grains? I think we covered it a little bit, but, you know, there's like they're like similar foods, but they're obviously processed in a different way, and it drastically changes the health effects. Yeah. Health outcomes are drastically different for whole for whole grains and, refined grains. Almost nobody in the West is eating whole grains in any substantial amount. If you look at the statistics, ninety five percent of Americans under eat whole grains regard relative to the recommendations and ninety something percent overeat refined grains. So it's exactly in the opposite direction of what is recommended and what's shown in the scientific evidence. One question that people ask sometimes is if you have okay. Whole grains are the the health outcomes look great for the for for a healthy person. But what if you have type two diabetes, for example, if you're a few pre diabetic? There's actually trials on all kinds of different diets putting diabetes in remission or improving diabetes parameters from low carb diets to high carb diets and everything in between. The main factor there seems to be some some weight loss, some moderation of of the excess fat, in the body, the excess fat fat mass carried. And so there's different roads to get there. Some people prefer low carb diets. I don't see a problem. That's a valid option, I think. I think it's, some some health organizations already alluded to low carb diets as an option. I think, it's it's fair to increase that emphasis on in guidelines because I think it is a valid valid way to do it and helps helps at least a a percentage of people. I don't think it's true that you need to go on a low carb diet, and if you don't, you're killing yourself. I think that's exaggeration too. You can you can achieve a healthy dietary pattern with with some legumes and fruit and whole grains. We don't need to be scared of those foods. But, yeah, if if you have that type two diabetes and if you if you eat a bowl of oatmeal and your glucose skyrockets and you're dizzy and you're you're you're, you know, you're you have this peak of hypoglycemia and then a hypoglycemic, period, and you decide to go to to dial back on those, I don't think that's crazy either. That's a valid approach. And then when you when you get your diabetes under control and you you regain your metabolic health, you have the choice again to eat whatever diet you want to to introduce the whole grains or not if that's your preference. But, yeah, I I think the these kind of very artificially polarized views that there's only one diet that's allowed. And and if you if you're doing anything else, you're, you know, you're you're you're murdering you're you're murdering people and you're Yeah. I don't I don't really see the the rationale. Yeah. It's just people identify these either, like, one study or some mechanism or something like that that would, you know, say that this food is bad or is not optimal for some for that whatever reason, but, you know, you have to look at the totality of evidence and the actual, like, outcomes in the real world of, you know, let's say, for example, if rice is bad, then why is Japanese people healthy or or generally healthier than, Americans? Right. Yeah. I think I think it's understandable the confusion because diabetes is a disease where you your carbohydrate processing machinery isn't working properly. That's that's true. That doesn't mean that eating carbohydrate causes diabetes. That's a massive logical leap. In fact, we have evidence that if that's not the case, that eating carbohydrate per se does not does not raise risk of diabetes. And some depending on the context, it might even decrease it depending on the details. So, yeah, as long as we know what we're talking about. Gotcha. Well, yeah, I think it's a good point to wrap things up, like eat whole foods, not too much, and and, yeah, like, make sure you follow other healthy lifestyle habits and practices. Yeah. Yeah. I would agree with that. I would sign on the dotted line. Well, it was great, talking with you. Before I ask my last question, where can people find you and your work? Oh, yeah. Our main our main platform is YouTube. So the channel is called Nutrition Made Simple. And then, we our videos tend to be, shorter recently and go over one topic and kinda try to condensate things. And then, you can find me on Twitter as well on nutrition. The handle is at nutrition made as three. Yeah. People are welcome to link up to link up on Twitter. Right now, those are my my main platforms. There's a YouTube pay a Facebook page as well. If you search nutrition made simple on Facebook, you should be able to find me. And, hopefully, this year, I'm trying to start a Instagram and maybe TikTok. We'll see if I have the attention span to do it. Mhmm. Nice. And my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or a habit that you, wish you adopted sooner? Probably being kinder on myself at a young age, not being so hard on myself. Understanding that our we tend to overestimate how much we can get accomplished in one year, and we tend to underestimate how much we can get done in ten years. So understanding that this there's a this learning process for anything. And if you just stick at stick to something, you will see improvements, but it tends to take longer than we expect expect and and desire. That's a good research. Well, it was a great talking with you, and, yeah, let's stay in touch. Thanks, man. Pleasure. Take care, and definitely, we'll we'll talk. But do you want to achieve and maintain biological youth? If yes, then I'm looking for more people who want to add healthy years to their life. If you're interested, then email me the word health to info@siemlund.com, and I'll send you the details.