In my previous video, I talked about the new supplements that I'm taking and I shared my updated list. Well, one of the questions was also that what are the supplements that I stopped taking and what are the red flag supplements. So in this video and in this q and a, I'm gonna cover this topic and many other questions. Alright. The first question, you share the new supplements you're taking. What are the supplements you stop taking? So the first supplement that I wanna talk about is spermidine. This supplement has become quite popular over the past few years, and it's essentially a pollamine that is thought to have benefits for autophagy regulation and other aspects of aging and longevity. Now first of all, there's no human trials on spermidine supplementation that it's going to have any, like, longevity benefits. And that the only hint or the only reason why people think that spermidine supplements might have longevity benefits has to do with the studies on dietary spermidine intake. So the spermidine that you get from, foods, that has been found to be associated with reduced mortality, reduced hypertension, reduced risk of other diseases quite often in previous studies, but there's no studies indicating that the supplemental spirumidin would have those same effects. And in fact one of the recent at least two of these clinical trials on spermidine have found that number one the first study found that it didn't even raise blood spermine levels or spermidine levels so it probably hasn't has little to know like bioavailability or and in the second study also found that the spermidine supplements, they, didn't improve cognition in elderly people who suffer from, like, some, let's say, decrease in cognitive function. So, at least right now, it kinda goes to show for me at least that there's no point in taking spironium supplements. There's little to no evidence that they work. A lot of the review articles on spironium being a longevity supplement are written by people who have, let's say, stocks in spermidine supplements or these companies. So I personally I I don't wanna waste money on this spermidine supplement and I did stop taking it, you know, over the last year and a half or something like that. I did take it initially just to try it out and experiment it, and some people say that it helps with, like, hair growth or something that my wife also tried, spermidine. She said it did help with hair growth and nails, for example, but, anything else I haven't haven't noticed. And, the clinical trials at least on spermidine right now show that it does it doesn't have any effects. So much rather than taking spermidine supplements, it's better to focus on the dietary spermidine, the spermidine that you get from foods like wheat germ, cheeses, some beef even has vegetables, mushrooms, natto, those foods have the most amount of spermidines. So the highest spermidine food is like wheat germ, wheat bran. So you can just buy, powder of, wheat germ and it's actually tastes quite nice. You can add it to salads or some mix into smoothies or just take it with a spoon. You're gonna get much more spermidine or more like bioavailable form of spermidine, I guess. And also, like, that is aligned with the current studies that the dietary spermidine intake is linked to reduced mortality. So I'm just fine by eating spermidine foods myself. The second supplement I want to talk about that I stopped taking is calcium alpha ketoglutarate. This is another more trendy supplement or a supplement that is becoming trendy and I do think that there are mechanistic reasons why calcium alpha ketoglutarate might have some health benefits and it has to do with the Krebs cycle so energy production and things like that. The citric acid cycle. There's also one human study that found that supplementing with calcium, affagated butyrate reduced biological age scores in humans. So this is one of the, like, the biggest reasons why people think that it's gonna have longevity benefits so it reduced the DNA methylation based, biological age, in humans and that's only just one study unfortunately and it's obviously not enough for for me to keep taking calcium alpha ketoglutarate. I did take it. It's just very expensive. So right now based on this one study, it's not worth it for me at least to take it in, like a regular basis. Like in a few years or something, we might have new studies that, either replicate those effects or, you know, shed new light onto the topic. So then I might change my mind. Maybe it is worthwhile taking just right now. You know, there's a lot of supplements that initially are seen or thought to have a lot of benefits, but after a few trials they, like, become disappointing, supplements. So like spironidin, for example, I think it's a bit disappointing results as of now and, you know, who knows what's gonna happen with calcium alpha ketoglutarate as well. Right now, I'm not taking it because it's pretty expensive. Next supplement on the list is Torkesterone. So this is another hype supplement, I guess, over the past few years. So, Torkesterone is a ichthyosterone like a plant or like an insect steroid hormone that supposedly helps with muscle growth and muscle hypertrophy. I've tried it. I haven't noticed, like, muscle growth, but I did notice that I was slightly stronger when I was taking, turkesterone. Maybe it's placebo, but, I was already while I was taking the turkesterone, I was already aware of the studies that find that turkesterone has no, like, beneficial or it doesn't have any anything greater effects for muscle growth and muscle strength than placebo, at least in the human, trials that we do have. So it's, you know, my mind was already prepared that, hey. It shouldn't work, but I still noticed, like, a small increase in my strength, just the strength the pure strength, component of my exercise routine. But I didn't notice anything else. So again, it's a bit more expensive and it's a very, like, theoretical or hypothetical supplement as of now, so I'm not taking it because of that reason. Maybe if I really wanna max out my strength gains in the short term then I might take it again, but again maybe it's placebo so, I'm not gonna take it right now. And the last supplement that I'll cover is alpha GPC. So this is a cholinergic supplement. I do think that it's worthwhile to make sure that you get adequate choline but in my opinion it's better to get the choline from dietary sources and again the Alpha GPC is, it does have nootropic effects. I did notice that it helps my brain to work, but, I'm not in any need of using nootropics. I've never used any, like, actual smart drugs or any other serious nootropic agents in my life. I've never needed to do it, so I'm already pretty productive and mentally clear all the time without needing to take any nootropics. But, yeah, Alpha GPC, the choline the aspect of choline is also important for, like, just neurodegeneration and preventing fatty liver. But right now, I'm getting enough dietary choline pretty regularly from, like, eggs is my main eggs are my main source of choline, but I'm also eating less fat overall. So my requirement for choline is significantly lower as well. So if you eat a high fat diet, then you need a lot more choline to pretty much help with the, fatty fatty oxidation and to prevent the fat accumulation in the liver. So I don't need, like, large amounts of choline in my opinion. Like, the more fat you consume, apparently, then, the more choline you also need. And my liver fat values were fine. My visceral fat is relatively low. And the amount of choline I'm getting from diet should like cover all the like the requirements for choline. These are the supplements that I'll stop taking but I'll also outline some of the red flag supplements that I think are actually potentially dangerous or harmful to your health. So the first one that I'll mention is gonna be resveratrol. So this one supplement is another one of the most original longevity supplements thought to have longevity benefits, but I think it's pretty clear that right now at least there's no indication that it's going to extend lifespan even in animal studies like the National Institute of Aging study on resveratrol didn't find life extension from resveratrol use and the only like the only I guess reliable or the proven method where resveratrol I don't want to say extends life, but enables the continuation of life is when you have these mice who are fed like a super obeseogenic diet, like 60% coconut diet and in that scenario the aziraterals does make them live longer, but those mice already live shorter than the average healthy mice. So it's just that the obese mice might have some, they might gain some protective effects, from resveratrol if they're obese and if they're consuming, like, obesity and that. And in humans, you find that in human studies, resveratrol does improve blood sugar and lipids but those people are also, you know, obese and with metabolic syndrome and other aspects of poor metabolic health. So in otherwise healthy people there's no evidence that it's going to extend lifespan or or have any other health benefits really unless you have like elevated lipids or elevated blood sugar and it can actually do like more harm because resveratrol does reduce ER to max. It can blunt some of the hypertrophy response from exercise and, it has also been found to reduce testosterone levels in men. So I think it's a more net negative and, unless you are someone who has metabolic syndrome or obese or something like that, then I don't think you have a lot of lot to gain from rosero twelve. The next supplements that I wanna cover are iron and calcium. So both of these supplements in supplemental doses or larger doses are implicated in myocardial infarction, heart disease, and atherosclerosis. So taking calcium supplements raises blood calcium levels too high and causes hypercalcemia which then can, or it is associated pretty consistently with strokes and heart disease as well. Unless you have like super low calcium levels or if you don't consume any other form of dietary calcium, then, you probably are better off not using, calcium as a supplement. So maybe there are a few cases of, yeah, women who postmenopausal women, if if they have low calcium levels or if they consume low calcium diets, then in those cases it might be, like you know worthwhile to consider. But again you need to like measure your blood calcium levels, you need to make sure that you're getting adequate dietary calcium and that kind of thing. So otherwise normal people I think it's actually more dangerous to use calcium as a supplement because of the studies associating with with heart disease. And iron, like excess iron to higher iron levels are also problematic. Excess iron can cause oxidative stress and and can lead to atherosclerosis. The, like, associations with iron are less consistent as it is with calcium, but again, like, if you're a man especially then using iron as a supplement is a pretty bad idea in my opinion because your iron levels are generally higher as a man than it is in women and, it's harder to excrete iron. Like, the only reliable method to excrete iron is through, like, menstruation or a blood donation, or other some form of other bleeding if you cut yourself in like a sword fight for example or a katana fight. So, you know, as a man it's much healthier to prevent that you're not consuming too much iron than it is for women. Like women generally, you know, premenopausal women, they're already getting rid of the iron every month if they're menstruating regularly, and they are at a higher risk of iron deficiency. But supplementing iron for them could also be something that they need to first pay attention to. Like, okay. What's your iron levels? Are you anemic? And are you getting any other symptoms? So I wouldn't take these supplements just for the sake of it. Talk a lot about the longevity benefits of the sauna on this channel. Using the sauna over four times a week compared to two to three times is linked with a sixty three percent lower risk of heart disease mortality, forty six percent lower risk of hypertension, and forty percent reduced all cause mortality. It's also linked to a sixty five percent lower risk of dementia and Alzheimer's. Those are quite incredible numbers. In my opinion, using the sauna is the second most powerful thing after exercise for your longevity. The sauna actually mimics a lot of the benefits of exercise by giving you a mild cardiovascular workout, increasing body temperature, as well as making you excrete out microplastics, xenitrogens, heavy metals, and the so called forever chemicals. I'm from Estonia, so there's a lot of saunas everywhere. However, they're not that common in The US or UK. Fortunately, infrared sauna blankets are about 10 times cheaper than a regular sauna, and they give the same benefits in terms of sweating and the heat. I'm using the Bond Charge infrared sauna blanket almost every day. It heats up in less than five minutes to 70 degrees Celsius, which is the temperature used in studies and it fits under my bed. The Bond Charge blankets are also low in e m f, so you're not exposed to any radiation. You can get a 15% discount by heading to boncharge.com/seamnund and by using the code seam. Alright. Back to the video. Alright. Next question. At which body fat percentage would you stop a muscle gaining phase and start cutting? So this is an interesting question for for the sake of muscle growth then while keeping in mind the idea of longevity and health then I think it's not a smart idea to get fat when you're trying to gain muscle because first of all if you gain too much body fat then yeah you're just gaining body fat and the amount of muscle you still gain is a minimum compared to like building muscle slower over time. So there's no real reason in my opinion to do this dirty bulking and to gain a lot of mass just for the sake of it. It's much better to, yeah, focus on a slow, moderate calorie surplus and keep consistent with the resistance training to increase muscle through that means. So what's the best what if a percentage to, like, maybe look at? Well, I think, in my, like, I would never want to go above 15% body fat as a man and for women, like, 25%. So the, that's the kind of sweet spot. Like if you start to lose the abs, if you see that you're getting a bit too fluffy, like you can pinch your belly and stuff like that, then that's already a sign. Okay. Maybe you're getting a bit too too chubby and it's better to kinda kind of lose some of that fat and then maybe regain some weight after that. But, you know, this much rather do instead of doing like this dirty bulking, it's better to do like mini cuts, cuts, mini bulks. I'm a bigger fan of that. I've never done, like, actual dirty bulking or any prolonged periods of bulking. I've always done mini cuts, mini bulks, so to say, like, maybe two to three weeks of cutting, two to three weeks of bulking. And that's how I've maintained a lean physique for the last ten years while having gained, quite a lot of muscle in the process as well and always maintained, the kind of, abs, visible abs and still made progress in the gym and still made gains in muscle growth. So there's no point in getting really fat because the the fatter you become then the harder it's going to lose it and also you're just not really building that much muscle in the process. So muscle growth is very slow compared to fat gain. So it's much easier to gain fat than to build muscle. So, with that in mind, you would just want to slow down this process, slow down the total gain of fat, and then enable your body to catch up with the muscle growth, so to say. And when it comes to longevity then it also is more important for men to be leaner than it is for women. Like you can find it pretty much across the board in most studies that that if you wanna for a man at least, if you want to live longer and, you know, reach centenarian food for example, then you need to be pretty fit and healthy. Like, you need to be actually significantly healthier and fitter than the average man or average person to become a centenarian and all the centenarians, the men who are centenarians, they're in pretty good health because to reach centenarian hood as a man you need to be very healthy and being a lower body fat also is a part of that. And when you look at the studies comparing or assessing the relationship with between mortality and body fat percentage, then with men it's pretty much as low as the body fat percentage goes, the lower the risk. So anything below fifteen percent is linked to a lower risk of mortality. That's why I pointed out the fifteen percent for me at least. Whereas with women, the relationship is less linear. So for women, you can even have a body fat percentage of thirty, twenty five, 20 up until like 35%, that's where you don't see any in between those ranges you don't see any increased risk as a woman. So women, they can be not that healthy and they're not that fit and still make it to centenarian hood and still live pretty long, which is kind of interesting because yeah. Because most of the centenarians like the ratio is like eight to one or something, nine to one in some countries. So like eight centenarian women to one centenarian man. So as a woman, it's it's much less important to be lean and much less important to be fit and healthy to live long. But as a man, then you really need to be dialed in with your health and nutrition and exercise to live long. At least that's what is found pretty much, in many studies. And even among Olympic athletes, so 01/2021 study found that Olympic athletes live on average five years longer than the average person. But, they found that the regular women who weren't athletes still lived slightly longer than Olympic men. So even if you're a Olympic man, Olympic athlete as a man, your life expectancy is still lower than an average woman who doesn't do any exercise or who isn't an Olympic athlete. Of course, Olympic women, Olympic athletic women are with a higher life expectancy than regular women but regular women are still with a higher life expectancy than Olympic athlete men which just goes to show how how strange it is kind of, and you know it might be might have to do with some of the sex hormones, might have to do with something else. Maybe risky behavior can mediate some of the effects, but, yeah, it's just kind of funny to see. Next question, is whey isolate or concentrate better? So you might have seen on whey protein powders, there's, like, whey isolate, whey concentrate. What's the different difference? So whey protein is, pretty much extracted from milk so they dry it up and they scoop the whey protein and that's usually like 80% protein and 20% carbs or fats and they make the concentrate powder out of that. So the regular whey concentrate is about 80% protein and it has a higher fat and carbohydrate content whereas the whey isolate is that they extract it even more so they remove even more of the fat and carbs. So you'll end up with about, like, 90 protein, 10% carbs and fats. So the difference is that whey isolate is just higher in protein, usually lower in calories and lower in fats and carbs. But the difference is only, like, 20 calories per scoop, something like that. So it's not a massive difference, but, there is a slight, you know, adjustment there. Which one is better? You know, I guess it depends on your budget than depends on your macros. So if you're with a lower budget, then the concentrate is fine. It's very good still and whey protein is, you know, just the best protein powder in the world in terms of bioavailability and effects on muscle hypertrophy generally. And, whey isolate is just more maybe for, like, more professional athletes or professional bodybuilders who are really trying to count all their calories and macros and make sure that they don't get, you know, too much fat or carbs. So it's I guess it's for if you're with a higher protein intake and a lower fat than carb intake, then it's easier to hit the macros with the whey isolate. Next question, glycine in the pre workout drink. So, glycine, usually I like to take it before bed so I'll take three grams before bed. That's amazing for sleep. I'll take three grams in my coffee or tea and that's another way to make it kind of taste better and, also helps with blood sugar response, for example, after meals. But the glycine before workouts is also actually a smart idea because glycine lowers body temperature and one of the limiting factors to your physical performance during exercise is overheating. So maybe you might not notice it but, the, the bonking and your decrease in performance occurs when your muscles overheat and your body temperature rises too high and there's different methods to counteract that like you can you can cool down your hands, you can wear these ice gloves, or you can put your hands in a cold water or splash water on your head. That's why if you use, like, a cold towel, like, ice towel over your forehead, that's gonna cool down your body temperature and then enables you to exercise for longer. But glycine also lowers your body temperature. So, that's why, for example, if you consume some sort of pre workout drink then adding glycine is actually a pretty good idea. And, of course, just regular sodium has also been shown to, do that. So sodium lowers your body temperature, and, there's a lot of studies that higher salt solutions before exercise, especially like longer endurance exercise, increases performance, quite a lot, and it's much more than any other, like, pre workout supplement. But that's for sodium. So if you add glycine to your sodium mix, then, that's gonna have, like, additional benefits. It's gonna lower the body temperature as well, and it actually improves sodium absorption. So, that's a cool workout hack that you can use. Next question, are the longevity benefits to donating blood? So this is an interesting question because I just talked about if men have high iron levels then one of the best ways to lower that is through blood donation. So I do think that blood donation is probably healthy like a few times a year, for unless you're anemic or something like that then for the regular man at least, non menstruating woman maybe per perhaps as well, then, for them it is, I think, a net positive to, dump some iron. Of course, you need to, like, measure iron as well to make sure that you're not becoming anemic in the process. But, blood donation also has some other interesting effects. So, recently there's been a lot of talk about these microplastics. Theoretically, yes, you can remove microplastics from your blood with blood donation and but there's also these, forever chemicals, PFAS, that have also been found in studies. So like firefighters who are exposed to these different kinds of chemicals and toxins because of their work, so they get blood donations and they can dump some of these forever chemicals with blood donation. Now if you go for, like, public blood donation, then obviously if you donate blood then you're donating your microplastics to someone else. So I don't know if that's a, like, a very ethical way to do it, but I guess you could also just ask I mean, there are probably ways to dump the blood or donate blood without actually donating it and, just, you know, throwing down the sink, if that makes sense. But, again, if someone is in life threatening situation, if you have a rare blood type so I have a rare blood type, zero negative. So, you know, many people need it. And it's much better to obviously get some of the the blood than to, not for someone who has some sort of life threatening situation. Next question, is women's waist getting wider from lifting? So I guess the question is like if you lift weights as a woman and you see is it possible that your waist circumference is gonna rise? So first of all, it's for health purposes for men and women it's healthier to have the waist narrower than the hips. So if your waist is bigger than your hips, then that's a sign generally of visceral adiposity or just being too overweight. So that is a risk factor for heart disease and it's linked to higher all cause mortality as well. So pretty much getting your waist lower than your hip and getting it the waist to hip ratio as low as possible is generally associated with better health and women do generally store more fat around the hips than the waist unless they are accumulating visceral fat. So, if you're lifting weights and your body fat percentage stays the same so you're still lean, you can, you know, you can see abs and stuff like that and then your waist slightly increases a few inches then it could be because, yeah, you're building core muscles. So if you're doing squats or deadlifts or just a lot of core exercises then theoretically your core will, you know, widen slightly but it can't be it can't be like multiple inches or it can't be several centimeters. You know, depends a lot on the person and their response to the training and their diet, etcetera. But even like the biggest, like, power lifters and just strength athletes who are doing a lot of core exercises, then even then they don't see their waist exploding unless they are gaining also body fat like power lifters or strongmen do. But like bodybuilders, even though they're lifting heavy weights their waist is still pretty narrow unless they're taking growth hormone which then creates the bubble bubble gut but, you know, you get my point that if your body fat is low and your waist slightly increases then it's just maybe a little bit of muscle in there in the core muscles but if it's if it if the waist increases and your body fat also increases and the waist is bigger than your hip circumference then that could be a sign of either visceral fat or just being slightly, you know, overweight that, you're maybe consuming too many calories. So there is a natural response by your waist becoming slightly, let's say more muscular muscular, but it shouldn't be too much. Like, I've lifted weights for over ten years. I have a pretty thick core. Like, my core muscles are pretty good and my bone density and my spine density is also, like, super high because of doing squats and deadlifts. So I have obviously built a lot of thickness in in my waist or my core muscles, but my waist is super slim, kind of. My waist is actually almost as as small as a like a woman's, but but but that's because of my lower body fat percentage. So when my body fat percentage is so low that my waist is naturally or not naturally, but my waist is just, much smaller and my waist to hip ratio is also in the lowest risk category. My waist waist circumference is below the lowest risk category, so it's even lower than what is associated with the lowest risk, but that's because of my low body fat percentage. And I still have muscle in my waist and like a lot of core muscles so to say. Next question, can we eat boiled egg as a pre workout? So that's an interesting question. Well theoretically yes. So eggs are generally pretty easy to digest and fast to absorb as well by available forms of protein. Boiled egg. So let's say one boiled egg has about 80 calories, eight grams of protein, four grams of fat approximately, something like that. Now how many eggs would you want to eat? So at minimum, I think it depends on also, like, if you're doing training fasted or not. So if you've eaten anywhere, you know, four hours before the workout, then I don't think you need to eat anything. In that case, if you've eaten protein four hours before before the workout then in my opinion it's better to consume some, like, simple carbohydrates or fruit or something like that. That's gonna have a bigger performance enhancing effect than a boiled egg in that scenario because you've already eaten protein maybe a few hours before the workout. If you're planning to work out fast and you haven't eaten anything, you need okay. I'm gonna need a quick snack. Then, yeah, like, maybe two to three eggs is a good idea for fast digestion and quick, like, bioavailability and then maybe adding a little bit of fruit there as well. That would be like a pretty easy and effective pre workout snack but it wouldn't I wouldn't see any point in eating protein before the workout if you have already eaten like a few hours before that. In that scenario I would do like more something fruit or berries or some some other like carbohydrates. Next question, beef liver supplements for raising ferritin levels. Anything better for women? Again, another iron question, beef liver does contain iron in quite large amounts and it does contain copper as well which is more important for combating anemia and improving hemoglobin status. So copper improves iron absorption and it also helps with hemoglobin production. So I think, yes, like a liver supplement is probably better for iron and safer as well than an actual iron supplement. So I don't think there's anything wrong with that and if you have low iron levels then yes I would start with probably, you know, eating liver perhaps and if that's not possible then that'd be liver supplements as well. And the final question is what would you do for gum disease? So I am actually covering periodontal diseases, at least partly, in my new book, The Longevity Leap, and the reason I did it was because there's a lot of, let's say, connection between gum diseases, so inflammation in the mouth and Alzheimer's and neurodegeneration and and actually like gum inflammation, inflammation in mouth pore and pathogenic bacteria in the mouth are linked to Alzheimer's and they cause neuroinflammation because your teeth are an extension of your brain, they're part of your nervous system. So if the teeth are inflamed, they cause inflammation that spreads through the nervous system to the brain as well and, the poor gut or poor oral microbiome is also linked to heart disease and atherosclerosis. So there is a very, like, interesting connection between these things. So how do you, like, improve that or how what would you do? Well, first of all, it's important to just make sure that you're not doing the things that worsen your oral health and increase the pathogenic bacteria. Things like smoking, alcohol, this snooze, the kind of a mouth tobacco, those things are also are pretty problematic in that scenario causing inflammation in the mouth and the different kinds of sugary beverages, added sugars in general, like dietary added sugars and, just inflammation in general. Like, if you have diabetes, other medical problems, visceral fat, obesity, they all all linked to poor oral health and insulin, you know, neurodegeneration and heart disease. What would I do then? Well, after I've eliminated or tried to exclude all of those factors, then the second important thing is to just take care of your oral health. But, you know, if you have poor oral health as of now, let's say you have gum gum inflammation, then of course you need to clean your mouth regularly and, you know, at that point, flossing is more important. You know, I do I think I do think that flossing is also worthwhile to do pretty much every day and either using the tooth floss or the or there's also these water picks that I've actually started to use that it's more convenient and faster way to floss. So you're just just shooting water with this tube into you into these areas of the mouth or the teeth where the gums and the teeth meet and there that's a like a breeding ground for the bad bacteria. So you can't really reach that with your regular toothbrush and it's harder to reach there with your floss as well. Although you can floss between the teeth, but the Waterpik is pretty effective way to, like, just flush water there and, kind of, help to eliminate some of those, you know, food particles and, some bad bacteria from those areas. It's also interesting to find that there are these different kind of essential oil mouthwashes and, like peppermint oil, rosemary oil, clove oil, and even green tea has been found to improve the oral microbiomes to help, like, fight these bad bacteria and periodontal pathogen and bacteria in the mouth. So, I would use some sort of mouthwash and essential oils, oil pulling potentially as well. With regular mouthwash, the problem is that the regular mouthwash actually is also associated with slightly higher risk of diabetes and neurodegeneration because of eliminating the good bacteria as well. So regular mouthwash might, you know, wipe out bad bacteria but it also wipes out the good bacteria and it wipes out the nitric oxide producing bacteria in the mouth. So nitric oxide it's this molecule that improves vasodilation, improves blood flow and it also lowers the blood pressure. Now dietary nitrate is also linked to better health outcomes, better oral health, so things like different kinds of leafy greens, beetroot, spinach, arugula, and those kind of things, they're better for their microbiome as well. Other factors linked to a lower prevalence of gum disease include higher fiber intake, higher omega three intake, higher polyphenol intake, low sugar intake and dietary carotenoids. Alright. That's it for this q and a. Check out my full supplement list in the description to know all the supplements that I take and which ones I don't take. Thanks for watching this video. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.