Vitamin k two is a very popular supplement that many people use for fighting plaque buildup in the arteries. Is there any evidence for this and what's the correct dose? In this video, I'm going to answer these questions and I'll also share the foods you should be eating to get vitamin k two. As a bonus, I'll also talk about vitamin k one. So make sure click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. Vitamin k two also called menaquinone is an essential vitamin needed for blood coagulation and bone density. Vitamin k two has anticoagulation, anti inflammatory, and anti atherosclerotic properties. High dietary k one and k two intake is associated with reduced coronary calcification and all cause mortality. You get k two from primarily fermented foods and cheeses, and in smaller amounts from liver. You get k one from leafy green vegetables and other plant foods. So there is evidence that eating k one and k two foods is good for your longevity. What about supplements? There are over 15 different types of vitamin k two. M k four and m k seven are the most common types. Out of m k four and m k seven, m k seven is the one that's more bioavailable and with a longer half life. When m k four has a half life of only a few hours, then m k seven has forty eight hours which makes it effective at smaller dosages and at less frequent intake. Let's talk about the benefits of supplementation starting with m k seven. There is evidence that vitamin k two m k seven supplements can slow down and even reduce coronary artery calcification. In a 2022 randomized controlled trial, they found that seven hundred and twenty micrograms a day of vitamin k two m k seven plus twenty five micrograms of vitamin d for two years resulted in regression of coronary artery calcification by 51 Agatston units and by 92 Agatston units in those with a coronary calcium score of over 400. A 2023 meta analysis of 14 randomized controlled trials concluded that vitamin k supplements could slow down coronary artery calcification. The studies used about a hundred to two thousand micrograms of vitamin k two m k seven. So several clinical trials have shown that vitamin k two supplementation, especially m k seven, could slow down the progression of coronary artery calcification. The effects aren't massive, but any decrease in calcium buildup does reduce the risk of future cardiac events. And the effects are much bigger in people with a higher calcium score. Based on the 2023 meta analysis, a dose of a hundred to two thousand micrograms a day is effective. But that's quite a wide range. So which one is it? A 2015 trial on healthy postmenopausal women found that a hundred and eighty micrograms a day improved arterial stiffness, but they didn't measure calcium. In the 2022 clinical trial, they used a dose of seven hundred and twenty micrograms a day, which I would suggest is the better dose. So it appears that a higher dose of a few hundred micrograms a day is more effective than a hundred micrograms a day. Regarding bone density, a 2015 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that MK four supplementation at a dose of one point five milligrams a day improved bone mineral density in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis, but not in postmenopausal women without osteoporosis. In another 2021 clinical trial on postmenopausal women, three years of supplementing with three hundred and seventy five micrograms of k two m k seven with calcium and vitamin d didn't improve bone density or turnover either. However, a 2022 meta analysis of clinical trials on postmenopausal women found that vitamin k two supplementation could modestly increase bone density. So the evidence that vitamin k two supplementation would improve bone density is somewhat limited, and it's found to be effective primarily in postmenopausal women who have osteoporosis. Although vitamin k two supplements do work in some aspects, the intake of dietary k two is associated with longevity and reduced risk of heart disease quite consistently. So how do you get your vitamin k two from foods? Here's a table of the highest vitamin k two foods. Number one is natto, which is a fermented soybean dish. It contains over a thousand micrograms of vitamin k two m k seven in a hundred grams. Number two is goose liver pate, three hundred sixty nine micrograms of m k four, hard cheeses, seventy six micrograms, camembert cheese, sixty eight micrograms, eel, sixty three micrograms, soft cheeses, fifty six point five micrograms, 4% milk, thirty eight micrograms, egg yolk, thirty two micrograms, curd cheeses, twenty four point eight micrograms, cheddar cheeses, twenty three point five micrograms, butter, fifteen micrograms, chicken liver, twelve point six micrograms, and ground beef eight point one micrograms. Regarding m k four and m k seven, then fermented foods are the highest source of m k seven and other m k's like m k nine, whereas foods like egg yolks, liver, and beef contain mostly m k four. That's why natto is the highest food source of m k seven and k two in the world. Natto is a fermented soybean dish. Dietary natto intake has been seen to contribute to reductions in cardiovascular disease mortality. A 2020 study on over 92,000 Japanese adults aged 45 to 74 followed up for fourteen point eight years found that a higher intake of fermented soy products such as miso and natto was linked to a lower risk of all cause mortality, whereas the same wasn't found with regular soy products. Both natto and miso are fermented dishes. You can get a thousand micrograms of vitamin k two m k seven from just a hundred grams of natto. That's a very large and effective dose. And theoretically, you wouldn't need to supplement with vitamin k two if you're eating such large amounts of natto. Let's talk about vitamin k one now because it's also quite interesting in regards to calcification. A recent 2022 randomized controlled trial on people with diabetes found that ten milligrams of vitamin k one per day decreased the likelihood of developing new lesions in the coronary arteries, aorta, and both aortic and coronary arteries. Another 2022 clinical trial on hemodialysis patients found that people taking five milligrams of vitamin k one for eighteen months had a sixty eight percent lower progression of thoracic aortic calcification. Regarding inflammation, then this 2018 double blind placebo controlled trial found that ten milligrams of vitamin k one for eight weeks in patients of rheumatoid arthritis didn't lower inflammation or disease severity. Dietary vitamin k one intake, however, is linked to a lower risk of all cause mortality, heart disease, hip fractures, and diabetes. A 2019 review concluded that k one supplementation does reduce the risk of fractures, but the studies are considered low quality. So getting your k one from dietary sources appears to be quite beneficial. And the evidence for k one supplements are somewhat smaller aside from the benefits on coronary artery calcification. You get k one from leafy greens like spinach, kale, mustard greens, Swiss chard, etcetera. You also get it from nacho, broccoli, and in smaller amounts from liver and cheeses. Here's a table of the highest k one foods, collard greens, seven hundred and six micrograms per hundred grams, turnip, 586, broccoli, a hundred and forty six micrograms, spinach, ninety six micrograms, natto, thirty two micrograms, kiwi, thirty four to fifty micrograms, avocado, fifteen to twenty seven micrograms, cheese has two to six micrograms, beef liver, two point three micrograms, and minced meat, one microgram. I also wanna talk about the dosage of vitamin k from dietary sources. In a 2021 study on Danish people, an intake of two hundred and eighty micrograms a day of vitamin k one and sixty to eighty micrograms a day of vitamin k two was associated with a maximal reduction in the risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. The recommended daily allowance or RDA for vitamin k, on the other hand, is only ninety micrograms a day for females and a hundred and twenty micrograms a day for males. There isn't a separate RDA for vitamin k one and k two. They have the same RDA. So the guidelines don't differentiate between k one and k two, but there is a huge difference between these vitamins. What's more, the RDA is greatly on the shooting because the optimal intake for vitamin k one is two hundred and eighty micrograms a day and over a hundred micrograms for k two. So you want to consume more than the RDA when it comes to vitamin k one and k two. Overall, I think it's a good idea to increase your dietary intake of vitamin k one and k two. It appears to reduce the risk of coronary artery calcification and all cause mortality. If you want to learn more about the different supplements and dietary practices linked to longevity, then check out my new book, The Longevity Leap. Link in the description. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. My name is C. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.