I don't add that many new supplements to my routine nowadays. I'm focusing only on the top 10 or so of the key supplements that I think have the evidence and will improve my personal goals. However, there are a few supplements that I've added over the past few weeks into my routine which I'm gonna share with you in this video. And I wish I did it sooner actually to gain those benefits. Number one is astaxanthin. Astaxanthin is a carotenoid that gives salmon its pink red color. It's a very powerful antioxidant that has 6,000 times higher antioxidant potential than vitamin c and 100 to 500 times higher than vitamin e. I've obviously known about astaxanthin for many years, but recently I stumbled upon several meta analysis of human randomized controlled trials that showed how Astaxanthin has quite a lot of health benefits. There are many clinical trials on humans showing Astaxanthin has anti inflammatory, cardioprotective and neuroprotective qualities. A 2022 meta analysis of clinical trials showed Astaxanthin lowers total cholesterol, systolic blood pressure marginally and significantly lowers LDL cholesterol in people at high risk of metabolic syndrome. Another twenty twenty one METS analysis of randomized controlled trials saw that astaxanthin supplementation lowered diastolic blood pressure in people with high blood pressure. One particularly interesting effect of astaxanthin is its protective effects against oxidized fats. A 2022 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that astaxanthin significantly lowered malondialdehyde, which is a marker of lipid peroxidation that reflects oxidative stress. These effects were particularly significant in people with type two diabetes. Type two diabetics also saw a reduction in other inflammatory markers such as interleukin six. These are all benefits in people with poor metabolic health. I don't have poor metabolic health by any means and I do think that the benefits of Astaxanthin against oxidized fats is amazing. The thing that got me really interested in Astaxanthin were its skin anti aging benefits. Astaxanthin can protect your skin against excessive UV radiation from the sun. A 2021 systematic review and meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that oral astaxanthin supplementation was able to improve skin moisturization and elasticity. Another 2021 review of clinical trials saw that astaxanthin improved photoaged skin. Skin health is more than just vanity. It's also a reflection of your speed of biological aging and overall health. And last but not least, Astaxanthin also has life extension data from animal models. A recent 2023, the National Institute on Aging Interventions testing program saw that asexanthin extended the lifespan of male mice by twelve percent. Now the twelve percent doesn't sound like a lot, but the ITP studies are generally very well done. And there aren't many over the counter supplements that have even any data about life extension. Another 2019 study on roundworms saw that astaxanthin extended lifespan by twenty percent by affecting mitochondrial function. So astaxanthin has a very broad spectrum effect on systemic aging by affecting your brain function, heart function, your skin health and many other things. Oh and did I forget to mention that Astaxanthin is also a senolytic which means that it eliminates senescent zombie cells that accumulate during aging. This is the reason why I added Astaxanthin to my supplement routine. It's got a lot of human clinical trials and animal studies showing its benefits. Unfortunately, like with fish oil, astaxanthin can be often contaminated with pollutants from the sea. Usually, astaxanthin is harvested from krill which is quite a clean source of omega threes and Azaxanthin. However, Northco just came out with their brand new ultimate omega formula harvested from phytoplankton which makes it much lower in pollutants and more environmentally sustainable. Northco's omega formula contains a clinically relevant dose of Azaxanthin as well as DHA and EPA, the main omega three fatty acids. This is the astaxanthin I'm taking because it's high quality and lab tested. Head over to livehealthy.com/ collections slash nord code with two o's and use the code seem10 for a 10% discount. Number two is b vitamins. So I've never taken b twelve or b complex in my life because I never thought that I need to and, I am an omnivore so I eat foods that contain b vitamins. However, a few weeks ago, I got a comprehensive blood panel and showed my homocysteine levels were slightly higher than what's optimal. All my other markers for cardiovascular disease like cholesterol, ApoB inflammation and LPA were optimal. But my homocysteine was 12 micromoles per liter which isn't bad but it's not the lowest risk either. High homocysteine levels are a risk factor for heart disease and ideally it should be below 10 micromoles. A 2017 meta analysis of prospective studies found that homocysteine levels are associated with higher all cause mortality risk in a linear fashion with every five micromole increase in homocysteine increasing the risk by thirty three point six percent. So ideally your homocysteine should be closer to five rather than 12. There are some possible genetic reasons why someone's homocysteine levels could be elevated. It has to do with methylation and even exercise can increase your homocysteine levels because I do exercise a lot and I might have some poor methylation genes. But I do eat plenty of b vitamins from my dietary sources. And the blood work also showed that my b vitamins were generally normal. As a way to try and get my homocysteine levels lower, I added a b complex to my routine. I'm already taking a lot of the other supplements that help to lower homocysteine such as glycine and trimethylglycine, but I've never taken a b supplement in my life before so I decided to test it. I also found research that omnivores who eat meat are still at a higher risk of b twelve deficiency. A 2018 Adventist health study saw that vegan participants had the highest b12 levels. They had two hundred and ninety two picograms per milliliter compared to the omnivore's two hundred and fifty six picograms per milliliter. The biggest predictor of serum b12 levels was b12 supplementation independent of dietary b12 source. So the reason the vegans had the highest B12 levels was that they're more likely to supplement with B12 because they know that they're not getting it from their food. Whereas omnivores, they think that they're getting B12 from their meat and they don't supplement it so their B12 levels were lower. The The reason meat doesn't even contain that much B12 anymore is because of antibiotics that kill the B12 producing bacteria in farm animals. A 2013 meta analysis saw that doubling dietary B12 intake only increased B12 levels by eleven percent. Thirteen percent in the elderly and eight percent in adults. So eating more b twelve doesn't appear to raise your b twelve levels that much. Number three are omega threes. I have previously mentioned that I started taking omega threes but it's still a relatively new phenomenon for me because I haven't been taking any omega threes for the last, you know, eight to ten years. The reason I started taking omega threes is because of, again, the research that I saw. Supplementing with omega threes has been shown to reduce inflammation, reduce the risk of heart disease, Alzheimer's and diabetes in dozens of clinical trials over the last few decades. I have made some videos about omega threes before but here are the highlights of the biggest studies. A 2024 meta analysis of clinical trials found that omega three supplementation improves heart function, reduces inflammation and decreases the risk of heart disease events in patients of heart failure. A 2020 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials concluded that omega threes might improve insulin sensitivity and lipid metabolism in type two diabetics. Again, I don't have any of those problems but there's also a lot of research about the protective effects of omega threes against heart disease and neurodegeneration and even old cause mortality. A 2021 analysis discovered that people with the highest blood levels of EPA and DHEA, which are the main omega three fats, had a fifteen to eighteen percent lower risk of total mortality and they were nine to twenty one percent less likely to die from heart disease compared to the individuals with the lowest levels. The amount of EPA and DHA in red blood cells is called the omega three index And if your omega three index is low, then that is considered a risk factor for heart disease, neurodegeneration, and all cause mortality. The optimal omega three index associated with the lowest risk is somewhere between eight to twelve percent and an omega three index below four percent is linked to higher risk. People with the highest omega three index over six point eight percent compared to those with the lowest less than four point two percent haven't seem to have a thirty three percent lower risk of all cause mortality and thirty nine percent lower risk of incident cardiovascular disease. I recently tested my omega three index and got a result of nine percent, which is in the lowest risk category. My omega six to three ratio was also 2.7 to one, which is also in the lowest risk category. However, my goal is to get an omega three index of at least eleven percent and ideally twelve percent. And the only reliable method of getting there is omega three supplementation. Like I said, I haven't been taking any omega threes for the last eight to ten years so the problem is that it takes quite a long time to increase your omega three index because your red blood cells, they have a turnover rate of six months. This means that it takes months to raise your omega three index. So it's better to, like, start immediately. A 2022 study also found that the risk of Alzheimer's disease among the highest red blood cell DHA quantile over six point one percent was forty nine percent lower compared to the lowest quantile, less than three point eight percent in fully adjusted models. My results were six point three percent for DHA which is the highest group but I wish it was a bit higher. So I'm taking the omega threes from Nordcode to increase my omega three index and it's a low contamination and low oxidized source. Number four is hyaluronic acid. Hyaluronic acid, also called hyaluronan, it is a gooey substance found in the skin, joints, organs and connective tissue. It maintains hydration of the tissue by making them hold onto water. Hyaluronic acid in the skin starts decreasing after the age of 25 and a 75 year old person has one fourth of the hyaluronic acid as someone who's 19 years old. Like with collagen, it's something you don't want to play catch up with because it's much better to be ahead of the curve. Oral supplementation of hyaluronic acid in human clinical trials has found that it significantly reduces wrinkles and dryness compared to placebo. In a 2021 randomized controlled trial, they found that a hundred and twenty milligrams per day of hyaluronic acid for twelve weeks improved skin condition and decreased wrinkles in 40 healthy Asian people between the ages of 35 and 64. Another 2017 clinical trial saw similar results, but a higher molecular weight hyaluronic acid showed greater effects. Again, skin aging and wrinkles are much more important than just the aesthetics. It's also a reflection of biological aging. Overall, these are the supplements that I've added to my routine over the past few weeks and months. Like I said, I wouldn't take them unless they had the clinical evidence. I'm not saying that you need to take them but they do have evidence that they work. If you want to know the top longevity supplements to take then check out my recent video about it. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure to click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. Thanks for watching. My name is Seem. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.