Everyone knows you could speed up aging from, like, smoking, for example, but no one really positioned it as, well, you could actually slow it down. What if we were to address all of the hallmarks of aging simultaneously? Welcome to the Sim Lund podcast. My name is Sim Lund, and today, our guest is Chris Mirabel. Chris is an entrepreneur and the founder and CEO of Novos Labs. He's also interested in longevity and slowing down his speed of aging. Chris, welcome to the show. Thank you. It's great to be here. Yeah. I'm, glad to have you, and, you are one of those people who are also doing this kind of a Brian Johnson like experiment with their health and longevity by trying to optimize all these different biomarkers and their biological age, to, like, to be on a lower level than their chronological age. So I'm, like, happy to have you on the podcast, and we're gonna discuss different things of your results and, your routines as well of how to people how how do they can implement these kind of similar routines related to, you know, diet, exercise, and supplements and also improve their longevity in the process. But how did you, like, get into this, field, and what got you interested in trying to, you know, improve your biological age? Yeah. Great question. So I I've been doing this for a while, actually. My initial interest in health started when I was 12 years old, and I started reading Men's Health magazine here in The US. And, but then when I was 16, I was diagnosed with a brain tumor. And, when you nearly lose your life, you start thinking about different different things, and you you look at health in a different way than a typical teenager does. So, whereas prior to that experience, I was looking at health from the superficial side of just wanting to be in in great shape and be attractive and play sports well. After that experience, it turned into a deeper appreciation for biology and the avoidance or absence of disease and trying to live as healthy as I can for as long as I can because I never wanted to be laying in a hospital bed again wondering if I would wake up the next morning or not. So that experience had a really profound impact on my perspectives, life perspectives in general, but specifically how I I looked at health. And so I was interested in longevity from that point forward, though I didn't think of it in the terms of longevity ever since the the scientific and biological approach to lifespan has has started more than ten years ago. That has has informed my thinking a lot. But at the time, it was really just how can I avoid getting another brain tumor or, cancer, heart disease, and so on for that matter? And so, I've I've been a entrepreneur for my adult life, but in my personal life, I've been kind of obsessive about all of this, about health and optimizing it and spent a lot of time just going straight to the primary sources, leveraging PubMed, for example. I I would have ideas in my mind, and then I would look for the studies on PubMed and try to come up with my own perspectives on things. And about ten years ago, as part of that, I came across the paper, the Hallmarks of Aging, which is now a famous paper. It's a seminal paper that, it was a meta analysis that looked at many other historical studies, hundreds of them across animals and humans, and it identified the, at the time, nine hallmarks of aging or the nine biological mechanisms that take place when we get older across animals and and humans. And that was a eye opening paper for me because it first of all, it gave me a lens through which I could look at my own aging and disease risk from. Right? I could rather than just, quote, unquote, trying to be healthy, and following what, like, the medical establishment will tell you makes you health healthy, I could actually get to a more fundamental level of health, that is the biological side of these mechanisms of aging. So the question then turned into, what could I do to optimize these biological hallmarks of aging and slow down their digression? And then, the second thing that it it it woke me up to was this idea that aging is actually something that's malleable. That concept had never crossed my mind prior to seeing this paper ten years ago. And, that that was so empowering because then I realized that, you know, everyone knows you could speed up aging from, like, smoking, for example, but no one really positioned it as, well, you could actually slow it down. And not everything you do for your health is going to slow it down, but certain things, if done properly, can slow it down. So that completely transformed my thinking. And, eventually, a few years ago and and we can talk about this, but back in about 2017, 2018, I had an idea for what is now Novos, which is a very novel, unique approach to aging. Yeah. It's, the hallmarks of aging are, yeah, pretty famous right now, and they've actually, like, updated the list from the original nine hallmarks of aging to now. There is, like, 13, if I'm not mistaken, or 12, and they probably will add a few more in a few years. So it's, yeah, pretty interesting to see, like, yeah, these are the things that go wrong with aging during aging. And, it also gives you, like, certain targets to aim for in terms of, like, therapies and and routines to, like, you know, improve upon. Exactly. Yes. There there are as you mentioned, there are three new hallmarks. So it was at the ten year anniversary of that initial paper. The same authors based on additional scientific research that has evolved over the past decade added three more, to those initial nine. So, that includes inflammaging, which is this chronic inflammatory state that it it increases. Just as we get older, we have more and more inflammation building in our bodies. Another is disabled autophagy. So this is the process in which our our bodies, our immune systems largely are, identifying old, not well functioning cells and, basically, eating them up or recycling their parts. Excuse me. And the third is, microbiome dysbiosis. So we're learning about all of these gut organ axes. I believe there are nine of them. Our gut impacts our our brain, our skin, and our heart and other organs. And, and this is actually shown or or been found to change, dramatically. That is our microbiome, composition, as we age. Yeah. What are the other ones, the first nine? Good good question. So let's see if I can if I can remember them. I might look at, some notes just as a cheat sheet to to recall, but, we can go through each of them. I can give just a very quick overview of what each one of them is. So the first is microbiome, sorry, mitochondrial dysfunction. So mitochondria, the power plants of ourselves, as we get older, we have fewer of them, and those that we do have are not functioning as well. So our cells are not getting as much energy as they would normally be getting to be able to function properly. And, obviously, energy is is what enables the cells to carry out their functions. The second is cellular senescence. So this has grown in popularity in the last couple of years. This is the idea of cells. Oftentimes, you'll hear hear them being referred to as zombie cells. So this is when a cell, is is kind of shut down by the body, and sometimes this is because the cell might be cancerous, for example. It's not the only reason, but that is oftentimes, one of the reasons why a cell will turn senescent. And you would think that this is good, and in many ways, that is good. You don't want a proliferating cancer cell, for example. But the problem is that these senescent cells can then start secreting inflammatory molecules that then cause nearby cells to also become damaged and eventually can potentially turn senescence as well. And this process increases exponentially as we age. It's actually one of the reasons why our skin wrinkles. So, cellular senescence is something that a lot of, researchers are focusing on to try to, destroy these senescent cells with substances called senolytics, which if you take the derivative of the word, lysit lytic is like lysis, like sliding slicing in half the senescent cell and destroying it. Next is loss of proteostasis. So this is the process proteostasis is it's the process in which the body is, folding pro, proteins and making sure that they are actually being utilized properly. As we get older, these proteins can start to accumulate inside of and outside of the cells, and this prevents the cells from being able to function properly. It's almost like garbage accumulating inside and outside of your home, and it's going to make it harder for you to get in and out of your home and and use it as you otherwise would. And so to that point, the next one is altered intracellular communication. And so, our cells, they are a vast network. They are very advanced, network, and they are all communicating with each other by secreting molecules that will hit other cells, and then those cells will react to those molecules. And so if you have something like loss of proteostasis, just as an example, if it's blocking the receptor sites on these cells, it's going to make it harder for these cells to be able to communicate with each other. And as you can imagine, if cells aren't communicating with each other well, they're not performing the function that they otherwise would. And by extension, the tissue and the organs are not going to be well equipped or or fully, fulfilling their function, given a a particular circumstance or stressor. Next is genomic instability. So this is one that everyone knows of. It's the idea of DNA damage. It's why we wear sunblock, for example, to avoid, the damaging effects of ultraviolet rays. And for a long time, it was believed that this is the reason why we get older and, like, full stop, that this is why we get older. For decades, this was largely believed, but it's since been found that this is just one component of many, a dozen at least of the reasons why we get older. But it is nonetheless important. So DNA can become damaged from various stressors whether that be radiation like ultraviolet radiation or foods that we eat, lifestyle habits, and so on. And these mutations to the DNA can lead to things like cancer, or, require excess cellular division, which to that point, the next hallmark is telomere shortening. And telomeres are the protective end caps of our chromosomes, which our chromosomes contain our DNA. And, each time we we do a cellular division, that telomere is going to get shorter and shorter and shorter. And it's okay when when they're relatively long, but eventually, you hit something called the telomeric brink, which is when it's kind of like, the tipping point where your telomeres have become so short that they're not really protecting the DNA as well anymore. And then that's when we see significant increases in different types of diseases. For example, gastrointestinal cancer, increases when your telomeres are are too short. And so as you can imagine, if you have a lot of damage to your cells and DNA, you need to replace those cells more so your telomeres are going to shorten more frequently or more rapidly, and this is going to contribute to the aging process. The next one is epigenetic alteration. So on the subject of DNA, DNA is kind of like the hard written, code for each one of us. But, then from there, the question is which genes are activated and deactivated. And it it varies per cell and per organ, but it also varies as we age. And as we age, certain genes turn on that shouldn't. For example, they they might be pro inflammatory genes, and certain genes turn off that shouldn't. These might be anti inflammatory genes or protective genes that might repair DNA and so on. And, the as we get older, these alterations then lead to our bodies not really, upkeeping themselves as well as they ordinarily would. And that's why there's this whole field, called cellular reprogramming that's a lot of, well known researchers in the longevity field are focused on trying to reprogram the cells, to express a younger epigenome. If if your audience has ever heard of the term Yamanaka factors, this is where they play in. After that is deregulated nutrient sensing. So nutrients being, fats or lipids and, carbohydrates, sugars, and to some degree, amino acids and, proteins. These nutrients, our body needs to be able to detect them and then know what to do with them. And as we get older, the body is not as capable of doing that. So that's why we see things like blood glucose levels increasing, insulin levels increasing, triglycerides and LDL cholesterol levels increasing. So, this these are all potentially damaging. As those levels get higher and higher, there's a higher occurrence of diseases, especially cardiovascular disease. And then finally, the the final one of the original nine was stem cell exhaustion. So stem cells are the cells that, give birth to all of our new cells. Right? They're they are kind of like the photocopy machine that is then generating all of the copies that we need to be able to survive. And as we get older, our our stem cells, they become dysfunctional or they die off. And so as a result, our tissues are less replenished, and they aren't maintained as well as they otherwise would be. Nope. I think you're on mute. Sorry. Yeah. That's a long list of, the hallmarks of aging. And, you know, you can imagine that all of these are so interconnected with each other as well, and they affect each other's function, like, autophagy affects mitochondrial function and cells in a sense and inflammation. And, likewise, inflammation affects genomic stability and telomere shortening. So, yeah, they're very, it's a very complex process, obviously. And even even now we know the hallmarks of aging kind of though they're used as the hallmarks of aging, then, you know, we still don't have, quote, unquote, a cure for aging or we don't have a solution yet. We're just, you know, learning individually of how do we manipulate these hallmarks and how do we improve, yeah, like, the outcomes, of people. Yeah. So all of these interact with each other. That's a great point that you raised. So when one is damaged, the other ones in one way or another are also going to then have a a negative repercussion from that, some more directly than others. But, ultimately, there's kind of a reverberating effect across these. So that's likely part of the reason at least why as we get older, we see aging becomes exponential. So the health of someone and even their physical appearance going from 20 to 25 years old is not quite as dramatic as going from 75 to 80 or 80 to 85. As we get older, we see the decline in health, accelerating. And if you look at charts of morbidity, for example, and mortality, it is literally exponential. So, it's largely because of their interactions. And this was an insight that I had back when I was first, thinking of the idea for Novos back in 2017, 2018, which was, what if we were to address all of the hallmarks of aging simultaneously rather than just one or two at a time? Back then, I was attending biotech conferences, and I was hearing scientists presents with their concepts or with their their companies and the interventions that they were in the r and d phase. And it became immediately apparent that, first of all, most of what they were working on was very far out into the future. It was not anything that I would be able to personally use or, share with my my friends and family and loved ones anytime soon. But the second thing was that they were focusing on only one or two of the mechanisms at a time. And this is largely because of, first of all, just the scientific method of of, being reductionistic, trying to simplify things as much as possible so that they can fully understand it, and then only adding complexity after something seems to be fully understood or adequately understood. The second reason is that the FDA and, by extension, EFSA in Europe, they want you to focus on specific medical indications. And so, the approach for that is oftentimes, start with something relatively simple. Not to mention, when it comes to prescription drugs, for example, it is typically a single molecule that is modified. Maybe they were inspired by nature. It's modified, and then it's patented. But it's nothing nothing complex. My idea was, to create something that was completely natural. All of the ingredients are found in nature. And as a result, the ingredients are considered generally recognized as safe or grass status. So the FDA would not stop us from being able to produce this. It would be considered an over the counter safe per general use supplement. And then based on that, I would be able to mix and combine different ingredients that would then be able to have a synergistic effect at least conceptually. We have since proven that. But back then, it was just a theory to, be able to address all of these hallmarks simultaneously. And I talked to scientists, well known ones, and asked them these questions, whether they believe that this would be a ideal approach and efficacious approach to aging. And it was unanimous agreement. People from Harvard, MIT, Salk Institute, you name it. They were all in agreement that this would probably have the biggest impact on aging by addressing all of the hallmarks at once. Yeah. And, with Novos, you created, this Novos Core supplement, the first product that you had, which was Yes. There's a drink powder. And, what are the ingredients? And, like, have you done any, like, clinical trials on this, or what's the other, like, proof of concept kind of Sure. So so yeah. So this is Novoscore. It's hard to see with the background filter, but, this is Novoscore. It's, these daily sachets. So you tear one open. You pour it into water or into a smoothie. We have orange flavored with no sugar, and then we also have an unflavored version if you put it into a drink, like a smoothie or something. It's the first formula to address the 12 hallmarks of aging. We file for patents on the formula. The ingredients, I can read them off quickly, and then I can tell you about some of the the research and, results that we found from that research. So, glycine, malate, specifically coming from magnesium malate, calcium alpha ketoglutarate, glucosamine sulfate, rhodiola, rosea root extract, l theanine, hyaluronic acid. Specifically, believe it or not, hyaluronic acid, which is great for skin health from the inside out, the reason we included it, although that's a nice to have, was for the acetylglucosamine molecule that is present within hyaluronic acid and has, lifespan, extending effects. Ficetin, organic ginger root extract, pterostilbene, and a microdose of lithium, which if you're if you'd like to go into lithium, a lot of people, they their eyebrows raise when they hear lithium, but there's great reasons for including lithium. So, as well as vitamin c. I think I I left that out. So, the the, results that we found so far from our formulation, the very first study that we ran was an in vitro study, at, a lab in, New York that had done $7,000,000 worth of studies prior to ours, the same type of study that they ran for us. And they warned us before we commissioned them for the study that they had never really seen any significant benefits from any ingredients, whether prescription or or over the counter natural substances. And we said, let's run the study anyway. And, the study, it induced radiation to human cells, and there was, of course, the control with no Novos, and then there were different dosages of Novos across, different different tests. And we found that we were able to reduce DNA damage by as much as seventy seven percent. This is in the form of oxidative damage. The result was so significant that they the scientists called their CEO to make him aware of the results before they even called us. And I actually, less than a year ago, saw that CEO at a biotech event and asked him firsthand, and he said, yes. Like, 100%, this was the best results. I mean, we were shocked to see these types of results. So to that point I made earlier about us seeing synergies, this is the first proof point that there is something synergistic happening with our combined ingredients that you wouldn't have seen with these individual ingredients. The second study we ran was looking at cellular senescence. This was done at an academic lab, Newcastle University in The United Kingdom. And, for this, we compared our results to the prescription drug rapamycin. This is the gold standard for longevity drugs. And, when looking at cellular senescence, we were able to reduce the size of the senescent cells in in human cells, by the same order of magnitude as rapamycin. We were within percentages of each other. And, this was very significant. There was more than a 50% reduction in the size of the senescent cells. So that was amazing for us to see because every researcher compares results to rapamycin. And, the fact that we had essentially the same results was was, really encouraging for us. Another study that we ran looked at, again, DNA damage, but this time by administering chemotherapeutic, to, human keratinocytes. And so these are skin cells, and the chemotherapeutics are incredibly harsh. I mean, they essentially destroy all cells. You know, the hope is that they kill the cancer cells before they kill the person that it's being administered to. That's how intense chemotherapeutics are. And they go beyond oxidative damage to the DNA. They actually cause single and double strand breaks to the DNA. So the analogy I give is oxidative damage is like having a car that starts to rust, whereas a double strand brake is like slicing the car down its axle. Like, you're completely demolishing, mute mutilating that DNA. And we were able to reduce that by a very significant margin. I can't give exact numbers because we're working on a paper that will be published soon for that or the researchers at the at the, university are. That was done at University of Bologna, by the way. But, that was a very encouraging result. Another result that we have, more recently is this process called oxytocin spheroidosis. So this is a process that is associated with Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and and forms of cancer. And, at the Salk Institute, they ran the study and they compared us to a r and d prescription drug. So this is a drug that has not been approved by the FDA yet, but it is intended specifically for Alzheimer's and dementia. And it is targeting this specific, mechanism being oxytocin, ferreptosis. And we were able to reduce the amounts of oxytocin, ferroptosis by, halfway between our single most effective ingredient at doing that, which is fisetin, and that prescription drug. So, again, it goes to show the synergistic nature of our formula, which is that fisetin, which can have an effect on oxytocin, pharoptosis. Novos got 50% closer to this prescription drug that's in r and d for that same process of oxytocin, pharoptosis. We also showed in that same study that we are able to reduce inflammation, in these human cells as well. And then finally, when it comes to humans, we did a case study where we administered, biological age test to people prior to them consuming our Novos Core and Novos Boost formulas. Novos Boost is just an add on to Novos Core. It's one single ingredient. It's NMN. And, after six months, they were tested again. Now we didn't administer the test. It was a third party lab, so we had you know, we were not in touch with any of the lab blood lab results or anything. That was done independently. Only thing that we did was ship them the Novos products, and we asked them to not change their lifestyles. So don't integrate more exercise or, watch your diet and make sure you continue to eat essentially the same way that you have been. Try to keep everything constant. And we found that seventy three percent of the participants slowed down their biological pace of aging by a statistically significant margin. I I believe it averaged one and a half months per year of slower, biological aging according to the Dunedin pace clock. Second thing is that zero percent of people accelerated their aging. You would expect excuse me. You would expect some people would have accelerated their aging because of lifestyle stressors that come up. You know, maybe they're very stressed at work or they haven't been sleeping as well or they drank some alcohol. But, none none of the participants accelerated their aging. And the p value of this, the probability that this was a coincidence is less than one in one thousand. So typically, a p value that you need for statistical significance is point zero five. For us, it was point zero zero one. So, this is enough for us to now be, running some clinical trials to try to further validate this. The last thing I'll I'll leave off on is that we have also done a mouse study. I can't share those results yet because it's not complete, but, we're very optimistic, and we're we're excited to be able to share those results in in the months ahead. Yeah. That's super interesting. And, I always like if, you know, you have actual studies on the whatever supplement that is being recommended so that, you actually see that although, you know, there are cell studies, this is always, like, the first stages of these, this kind of research. You first do it in cells then animals and eventually in humans. But, yeah, it always takes time, but it's, you know, good to see some, research being done on these, molecules. But you mentioned the people getting the slower speed of aging. If I'm not mistaken, then, one of the at one of the people at the top of the rejuvenation leaderboard, Julie Carr Clark, I think she is also taking, Novos core. Right? Yeah. So the rejuvenation Olympics leadership board, which had thousands of submissions, Novos as a company, we've got, I believe, four people in the top 10 list. There's two leadership boards, and so one is the best biological age, and then the other is the relative change. For best biological age, we've got three out of the top 10. And for relative change, we have two of the top 10. That's more than any other company if if I recall correctly. And not to mention that we're an over the counter affordable easy option for people to access, whereas the other companies that are competing are typically medical clinics that are very expensive and, are are under the supervision of medical doctors and so on. So, we're all about making things really simple and accessible and achievable. So it's it's that much, more, dare I say, impressive that we were able to achieve this with everyday people, achieving these results. So, yes, Julie Gibson Clark, she's been covered by the press a fair amount if you do a search for her. She Ben Greenfield recently did a podcast interview with her. It was about an hour long, and she talks about Novos. And she, you know, she as she says herself, she's not compensated. We don't do anything with her. She's not an influencer, nothing like that. She just believes in our product so much. She just wants to get the word out about us. And she's ranked number two, globally for her slow pace of aging. We have another woman, Amy Hardison. She's in her sixties. She is ranked number five, I believe. A guy, Rick Chia Chiavarelli, he's ranked number seven. These people are living relatively normal lifestyles. They're not going even as far as I go with my health, and they're achieving these amazing results. Yeah. And, the I guess, like, they are doing exercise and eating a good diet and sleeping enough and those kind of things. So it's, you know, in that case, you know, you it's very hard to know, like, how big of an effect does certain things play? Like, you know, I I'm also, like, you know, more vigorous exerciser than the average person, and I'm more like, you know, as a consistent and disciplined with those things. And then it's kind of thinking, okay, we don't know exactly how much exercise is good. And, you know, it's hard to pinpoint exactly the optimal dose with these things. And, you need to kind of just experiment yourself and see how does your body react and, how does your, like, other lifestyle factors also, like, affect that that, those results. Yeah. Yeah. So so two points to raise. One is that, yes. They are each of them, it they are, living relatively healthy lifestyles. Right? So they are getting good sleep. They are physically active. The guy, Rick, for example, I believe, plays pickleball. And, you know, Amy, does, cardio, I think, five or six days out of the week, on, like, an elliptical machine. So they're physically active. They do have, you know, adequate sleep. They are eating healthy. They have a lot of vegetables in their diet. But their results, they have they all improved from the before they were taking Novos to after they were taking Novos, and their lifestyles did not change significantly. So that's one thing that's important to emphasize. And then to your point about, like, how much is too much, I think a lot of people, they think more is always more, but sometimes it's not. And, this is something I myself need to follow because I'm like you. I push myself very hard. I just turned 40 this past, weekend, and my goal has been to outperform my 20 year old self in many different capacities, everything from, my mile time to run one mile. I've gotten myself down to five minutes and thirty four seconds. So I'm within just a few seconds of my best time when I was in my twenties. I'm deadlifting not as much as my all time max, but considering how fast I'm running. I'm deadlifting, relatively speaking, more than I ever did while I was running fast. Same thing with pull ups and so on. So I'm I'm challenging myself in all these ways, but at the same time, you can overdo it. There is a study that I I came across, and I can't recall who the authors were. It was it was something I I saw relatively quickly, but we did publish it on our website in an article where we talk about the effects of exercise on epigenetic aging. And there is an an analysis done of people in terms of, I believe, their step count. And there is a certain sweet spot for step count for the lowest epigenetic age. And then when people went beyond that, there was a slight increase in the epigenetic age. So you're you're still doing better than most people, like the vast majority of people if you overdo it, but you're not doing quite as well as those who have the balance. Yeah. That's true. Like, I remember when I did my own doing an in paced tests, then, the first time I did a test, like, I was doing the least exercise and eating the most calories, and I got the best result, which is kind of funny. Like, I the first test I did was 0.62, which is, like, very good, but Amazing that. At that time I wasn't doing like almost any cardio and I was mostly using weights only and I was like four kilos heavier than I am right now and the last test so I like then I did the first test I got inspired by this okay I'm gonna try to really maximize my like aging speed with this and went more like let's say regular with cardio I just started doing more cardio and I lost about like three to four kilograms as well of mostly like body fat and maybe a little bit of muscle as well But, the, yeah, point is, like, I did all this effort, but my speed of aging based on the test at least went to, like, 0.65. And, then the last test was 0.69 as well. But I did have, like, some infections around the time which do skew the results, as well with, like, COVID and that kind of thing. But, yeah, it's kind of funny that you want to do more good to your health and to end at least based on this test, you might be doing too much. But at the same time, like, my v of two max got higher, my blood work got better. So, you know, it's hard to say which markers are like superior. Are the traditional biomarkers and traditional blood work, which we have like a lot of data, are those better than these kind of new and novel epigenetic markers, which don't have that much data but are still kind of interesting to think about. Yeah. Yeah. And and I wouldn't underestimate the impact that something like COVID could have on your epigenetic results too because that causes so much inflammation in in our bodies, not to mention activating the immune system. But as an extension of the immune activation, our bodies become inflamed, and that can definitely have a pronounced impact. Less so on the Dunedin Pace clock than others, but especially some of the earlier clocks like the Horvath clock and some of the the clocks that provide a biological age output as opposed to a pace of aging output. Those oftentimes can can be significantly impacted by COVID and, and and infections in general. And it it typically seems to be, like, three to four months that you need to wait before you test again for that to get back down to normal levels again and and and, be a fair test. Gotcha. Yeah. I think I got the COVID somewhere in July, and I did a test in August. The second test and the third test, I think I did, yeah, in the October or something like that. So, yeah, maybe I haven't tested it again because it's, you know, it's a pretty expensive test, then it's something like, I don't want to do, you know, six times a year. I'm not gonna do with the test six times a year. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that that's within three months. Right? Each each one of those tests that you did after being, infected with COVID. So I would consider, you know, the possibility of of doing another one, but I agree with you. I I have access to these tests. I I could expense them and do them every week. Not that I would do that, but I could. I personally do once every six months or so. I think that that's plenty. And for most people, once a year is probably enough because you wanna also consider the confounding factor of seasonality. Right? Like, our lifestyles are considerably different in winter and December than they are in July and the summer. In terms of physical activity, UV exposure, our social lives, the foods we eat, how much alcohol we consume, how much time we spend laying in bed or on a couch versus up and active. So those can really have an impact on on the pace of aging. So if you wanna have a more sound test to see how your lifestyle and supplements and so on are impacting it, I would consider if if budget is an issue, just do it once a year. And that's kinda talking against my business. Right? Like, I I would love to say do it every month, but, no, I think once a year is a no. Right. And, what are some other, like, markers you kind of track for your longevity? Like, are there any, like, valuable biomarkers or blood tests that you think are, like, a good assessment of aging and longevity? Sure. So besides the epigenetic, clocks. Yeah. So, well, I'll start with what we have in the Novus age clock, but then there is a lot more, to it than that. So the Novus age clock in includes the Dunedin pace clock, which is the most accurate and precise of the biological h clocks out there. There are many other clocks out there on the market that are not transparent about what the algorithm is, and and many of them actually even use saliva, which is inferior to blood. But a lot of these tests are actually first generation tests. They're trained on chronological age, which, you know, that might make sense for some sort of, detective work. If if there's a homicide and you try to figure out who the killer was, you wanna know how old they are chronologically, it's a clue. So for forensic science, it makes sense. But for us, what's the point of a test that's going to guesstimate or estimate how old we are chronologically when we have our birth certificate and our license for that. Right? We want something that's going to tell us how old we are biologically, which is essentially morbidity risk, mortality risk, and the quality of life metrics. So how likely is it that we can stand up without having to use assistance or how strong our grip strength is or what our gait speed is and so on. So the Dunedin pace clock is trained on all of this and more. And so we want these later generation tests, the third generation ones. That's why we chose to license the Do You Need and PACE clock. Even though we could have made one of our own and been more profitable, it wouldn't have been honest to our consumers or customers. We wanted to provide the best, and that's why we we licensed Do You Need and PACE. The second is biological age output, which we acknowledge is not as accurate as that first test. So we encourage our customers to really focus on that do need and pace clock. But people are still curious. They wanna know that biological age, so we give it to them. But we caution people not to, rely on that so much. And then the third is telomere length. So we talked about telomeres being one of the hallmarks or mechanisms of aging. And, the the key for that is you don't want it to get too short. So when we present the results to you, we present them as a, percentile by your chronological age. And as long as your percentile is something reasonable, forty, fifty, or higher, that's great. But if it's in a low percentile, that's something you should keep an eye on because that means that, it's getting significantly shorter by your age, and it might, at some point, become an issue. So you should look into ways to try to slow slow down, the shortening of your telomeres. So going beyond our test, other metrics that I look at, you mentioned b o two max. That's a fantastic one. I do training to intentionally increase my b o two max. Let's see. There's also, different types of, metabolomic clocks out there. So there's one that I use called e o e o y o, or Yolo. I don't know how exactly they pronounce it. I think it's Yolo. It's I o l l o. Like, you only live once. Right? So, Yolo, measures, like, more than 600 different biomarkers, and then they provide a biological age output. For that, it it computed mine as being 29% slower aging. By comparison, Dunedin Paste calculates me as being 31 slower aging, so that would be the point six nine as as you referenced you got for one of your results. But then there are, also many other other tests that I've I've run. I I have access to scientists that are able to run the different algorithms for r and d purposes. In addition, just taking the same methylation data and then running it multiple times. And across all of those tests, it averages out to 39% slower aging. So that would be, like, a point six one across, you know, that's the Hannem test and Horvath test and the PhenoAge test and and so on. So there's all of these different algorithms, but I would keep it simple and and stick with the, do need and pace. Beyond those, obviously, you know, this is a very controversial topic is, cholesterol and LDL, and you've got a lot of people saying that LDL is not nearly as damaging as it as it is made out to be. I'm personally conservative about that. I think that there's no proof that it isn't damaging, especially especially APO b levels. So, I track that, and I just naturally have, like, based on my genetics, familial hypercholesterolemia. Not super high, but, above 200 typically. So that's something that I I keep an eye out on. And now that I'm, in my forties, it's something that I would consider, potentially a statin for, of course, being mindful of side effects and keeping a close eye on that. What else? Other things I've looked at, pulse wave velocity. There are devices like the Withings Scale, for example, where you can measure, the velocity of your pulse waves, and you want that to be as as slow as possible. So somewhat counterintuitive, everyone thinks faster is better. But, actually, when it comes to your blood vessels, you want the velocity to be slow. Because if it's fast, that means that the blood vessels are stiff. So the wave travels faster. And if they're flexible, it's going to move more slowly. So that's something that increases as we age. Diet and exercise can impact that. Even supplements, for example, omega threes and and, vitamin d can counterintuitively potentially increase your pulse wave velocity, not necessarily permanently in a negative way, but, acutely, in the short term while taking the supplements, it might give you a a a higher output. So that scale, for your American viewers, if you're going to purchase it, you have to make sure you buy the European version because the FDA restricts The US version and doesn't provide the pulse wave velocity as an output. Another is visceral fat. That's worth taking a look at. If you're super fit, then you probably have very little. But for people who are more sedentary, visceral fat is is something that you want to keep an eye out on and make sure that you can reduce that as much as possible. Novos, we we offer something called FaceAge, which is facial, AI, software technology where you can take a selfie. And then based on a dataset of millions of people, we're able to tell you how young your face is perceived to be. And it's quite accurate within a couple of years for most people. But it will also then give you skin health metrics as well, like wrinkles, pore size, skin inflammation, and so on. And, this is something that you can kinda just keep a track keep track of seeing, like, how your face is is aging over time. To that point, something very interesting going back to the do you need in PACE study, the researchers, actually took this the 10 slowest aging people, the 10 average aging people, and the 10 fastest aging people. And they use computer software to merge each of their faces, both male and female. And when you look at them side by side, so it's it's three males, three females, the 10 slowest aging people I I did, like, a speech at a medical conference called a four m, last weekend, and I presented this to people. In the audience, I asked them, how old would you guess the 10 slowest aging people were? And they all guessed 35. They were actually 45 years old. And then the 10 fastest aging people who are also 45 years old, how old would you guess they were? And they guess 55. So there's a twenty year gap in perceived age of people who are the fastest aging people according to Dunedin Pace and the slowest aging people. So that goes to show that what we physically look like can actually be captured by perception of aging. And this FaceAge test, that we offer completely for free, you can find it at novoslabs.com/faceage is also something that's that's pretty cool for people to get a baseline on and then track as as they're proceeding with their longevity journey. Yeah. That's, super interesting with the face part, and I think there are studies on on centenarian offspring as well. So the people who have apparently good genetics in their family, and, they do the same kind of computer image of all the people who are in the centenarian offspring group, and their face looks also, like, slightly younger on average than the regular control people control group. So, yeah, like, centenarians obviously just or most of the centenarians live, long because of their genetics. And if you're a centenarian offspring, then you have, like, a massive reduction in the risk of heart disease and other chronic diseases. And, apparently, you also, like, age slower in terms of your facial aging if you have centenarian parents. Yeah. And I'm sure if you ran the Dunedin clock on them, they would also have slower paces of aging relative to the average person too. Yeah. So, yeah, like, I mean, the the obviously, there's dozens of different biomarkers that can now also add to the list. Like, you know, you can measure inflammation directly with CRP and and blood sugar levels and hemoglobin A1C and everything else, so we're not gonna go into details with all those markers. But, so what do you you do then to achieve good results with your speed of aging and biological ages? And what do you do for your, like, overall longevity? What's your routine? My routine? Let's see. There's a lot to it. Let's see if I can simplify this. So, we'll start with diet. So for food, for the most part, most days of the week, I'm probably eucaloric, so I'm eating as many calories as I'm burning, or I'm slightly hypocaloric. There might be one day a week in the weekends where I might eat a little bit more, have some fun. I'm not as strict with my diet. And so net net, I'm probably more or less eucalyoric for for the week or very slightly hypocaloric. I, do a sixteen eight, time restricted feeding window. So, from, basically, twelve or eleven eight 11AM or 12PM until about seven or 8PM is when I will have my last meal. During that feeding window, on weekdays, I'm having typically relatively low carb meals for most of the day until the evening. That's kinda backwards. Ideally, I'm having the higher carbs in the morning and lower carbs in the evening just based on metabolism and our body's ability to deal with blood glucose. But I find that I just focus that much more, well when I'm having low carbs during the day, with my work. And so it's it's more of a a choice or a sacrifice that I make, by having the carbs later at night. But I find that if I don't have enough carbs at night, my sleep suffers. And I track it with, you know, Oura ring or sometimes with the Apple Watch. And it, subjectively, I just feel much worse if I if I go too long having too few carbs. It's probably something to do with serotonin production and then that being converted to melatonin and me just not sleeping through the night as soundly and not feeling as refreshed in the morning. So I need to get those carbs, especially because I exercise a lot, which I'll I'll talk about in a minute. And my meals are are composed of a lot of vegetables, brussels sprouts, spinach, broccoli, cauliflower, mushrooms, and so on. I have some legumes, like, lots of lentils and and some other beans as well. I have a moderate amount of white meat chicken poultry. I'll have, a moderate amount of whole eggs, including the yolk. I'll have, a higher amount of fish. I have some like, salmon almost every every evening. And if not salmon, then some other type of fish is typically my dinner. I don't have, much, if any, red meat in my diet. If I do, it might be in the form of organ meat like liver. I'll I'll have some liver maybe once every two, three, four weeks, in my diet just because they're they're replete with nutrients, lots of nutrients in in organ meat. And what else? I post workout, I'll have a smoothie. That smoothie will, be based on a, a plant based protein. It's, I believe, pea protein and hemp protein and a couple of others mixed in. But then it also has a lot of different fibers from the plants and and so on. It's the Garden of Life brands that, I I'm currently using. And then I throw in some some other things into that smoothie, including, you know, carrots and celery and some frozen kale, some mushroom powder, like a blend of, I think six or seven different mushrooms in in the scoop, some creatine monohydrate as well. Those are the main things that I have in that smoothie. And that's, like, high level overview. That's pretty much what I do for my diet. On my blog, slowmyage.com, I do have a blog post specifically talking about diet. And I also mentioned in there, some results from the NHANES study that found that most people, well, practically everyone, even if they're eating healthy diets, if not having a deficiency in a critical nutrient, they at least have an inadequacy in this in a critical nutrient. It's typically something like vitamin d or vitamin k, maybe choline, maybe magnesium. So as healthy as I eat and as healthy as many people in your audience eat, you're probably still running some sort of inadequacy. And so that's why I'll also then supplement with just a basic multivitamin, but, very high quality one. So I use the Pure Encapsulations, o n e, formula. But, Life Extension brand makes it two per day caps capsule, which is very affordable. I think it's only about 10 or $12 a month. That's another option for for people to consider. So with supplementation, in addition to the multi, of course, I have Novos Core. This is 12 ingredients in one. I have Novos Vital, which is our newest product. So, this is specifically for organ health in their daily chews. So they aren't quite gummies, but similar texture. They have a sweet tropical flavor to them, but less than one gram of sugar. And the ingredients for this are trehalose, inulin, raw apple cider vinegar containing acetic acid, of course, rutin, nattokinase, lutein, and zeaxanthin. So this is essentially seven supplements in one. So, and then I'll have Novos Boost, which is just NMN. So between those three products, I'm getting 20 supplements in very convenient form factors that make it super easy. I'm not, you know, just downing a lot of pills. In terms of other pills I do take, vitamin d plus k, fish oil, omega three fish oils. And, that's all that's coming to mind at the moment. I might be missing a couple, but, that's the that's the majority of it. And then at night, sometimes, if if I've had, like, a very stressful day and when I say stressful, I'm I'm mainly referring to, like, physical stress. Like, maybe I worked out too hard and my body is just too amped up. I I might have valerian extract that works very well for me to put me to sleep and a time release three hundred microgram, melatonin. That's pretty much my stack. Exercise. I, exercise typically six days out of the week. The one day that I don't is I I'm still active. I'm walking a lot, but I'm not, you know, pushing myself hard. I weight lift three of those days. I used to weight lift more throughout my life, but now I've kinda balanced it since I moved to Florida. This it's the weather's great, so I wanna get outside more, and I find myself doing more cardio than weight lifting. But one of those days will be chest triceps, another will be back biceps, another, will be, lower body predominantly deadlifts, and some, shoulder exercises as well. And then, on those days, I will also, do, like, a light run zone two cardio for the most part for about twenty five minutes. And then the days that I'm not weightlifting is when I'll push myself harder on the cardio. So on Saturdays, I'm doing a lot of intervals. I I mentioned earlier, I'm trying to outdo my best mile time. So I'll start with a a two mile light jog warm up, then I'll run as fast as I can for that mile. And I'm shaving off a couple of seconds each week. And, and then after that, I'll do a bunch of intervals. So whether that be a quarter mile or a half mile or, as far as I can go for two minutes flat or as far as I can go for one minute flat, and then I'll have walking in interspersed in between each of those, and I'll typically do between six and eight of those sets. And then other days, I'll be doing, you know, maybe more extended cardio. Like, today, I I I, rode a bicycle for, forty five minutes, and that was my heart rate was about a 140 beats per minute for that ride. So that's exercise. Sleep, I'm very, strict with. So I have, for example, the Philips Hue light bulbs in my home across my entire home. So, when evening is coming, I'll change the light from this this, you know, blue temperature light to a yellow, eventually, the orange. And then about a half hour before bedtime, they'll they'll switch to red. And that makes it super easy for me to fall asleep when I put my head on the pillow. I'm I'm out within five to ten minutes. I wear earplugs when I sleep. I wear a sleep mask. I I have a girlfriend who, you know, might turn the light on and get up before me, or I have a dog that might make some noise, so this helps me to not be as as disturbed. For your audience, oftentimes, they they might think that they're sleeping through the night, but the thing is that our our minds are still hypervigilant while we're sleeping. For evolutionary reasons, we wanna be aware if there's a predator. So you might be waking up without even realizing it. Right? These micro arousals that can take place anytime there's a a noise or a flash of light or something. So I try to minimize the chances that any of that happens throughout the night, and my my quality of sleep is is is quite good as a result of that. Am I missing anything? No. I think, yeah, I mean, these are the In terms of most interesting topics people are interested in, like the supplements and exercise routines. Of course, there's many, like, other things like stress management and those things, but, it's not, like, as exciting for a lot of people. But what do you think, you know, I mean, there's, like, a lot of people are doing very similar things in regards to, like, they exercise regularly, they have a good diet, and they take some supplements. What do you think is, like, the biggest, determining factor for your health and, like, results? What what what would be, like, okay. This is the actual secret sauce that people, like, tend to neglect or underestimate. Yeah. Well, so I'll I'll first acknowledge that I'm biased. I do really believe that Novos is having a significant impact on on my results, and I'll give just a quick case in point example. My father, he, had an epigenetic test done prior to us launching Novosage. It was a a third party epigenetic test, and he, his result came back as one year younger than his biological age. Sorry, his chronological age. And then after taking our formula for six months, his result came back as minus ten years from his chronological age. We've also seen the results in our case study. We see the results from people like Julie, Amy, Rick, a woman named Lil Eske, who I didn't mention earlier. My my results, on the other hand, I never had the before Novos test. I didn't try epigenetic testing before. I had r and d versions of Novos. Before we launched for the public, I was taking my product for more than a year. And so I don't have that before test, unfortunately. But seeing the results from other people, also seeing the results from my father who is genetically related to me, being so significant, I do think that, it's at least a significant portion of my results are coming from it. Now with that said, if I was living an unhealthy lifestyle, like, smoking a pack a day and laying on the couch and not eating healthy, eating junk food, I would not be in this place. I mean, if I look at my genes, which I have, I have a number of obesogenic genes. I have family history of obesity, family history of cardiovascular disease, family history of cancer. My mother passed away from pancreatic cancer while I was starting Novos. So, I don't think I would be in a good place. Not to mention I have my brain tumor, which I mentioned earlier. So I don't think I would be in a good place if I wasn't living a healthy lifestyle in and of itself. So that's the foundation. I think everyone should get a handle over their sleep, eat a lot more vegetables than they currently are, minimize the processed foods, and just be active. You don't have to run and lift like I do. But at least spend ninety minutes a day, ideally, just moving, like walking, dancing, doing whatever it is for you. You can wear an Oculus headset and break a sweat playing ping pong for all I care. Right? But, like, be active. Do something for ninety minutes a day. I think if you have that foundation, I think that that's going to get you. It's like Perrito's principle 80% of the way. And then different hacks like, our my formula. I would say also maybe consider, the b vitamins, which you can find in the multivitamins I was mentioning. But, like, getting adequate b vitamins and methyl donors from foods like egg yolks, which contain choline and methyl donors or trimethylglycine, or supplementing with choline. These things can also help to optimize your methylation. And these tests, these epigenetic tests are based on methylation. So I think that that would also probably play a significant role in my results too. Do you think you're, like, peaking right now? You're forty years old. Are you, like, peaking with your health and fitness and, biological age results, or do you think you still have, more rooms for gains? I I think I have more room for gains. I I have not felt I mean, throughout my life, I I haven't felt as healthy as I feel now. Right? And and there's no sign of that eclipsing. So if if I look back over the like, my thirties, I wasn't running as fast as I am now. So that entire decade of my thirties, I wasn't running this fast. Including the second half of my twenties, I wasn't running this fast. I was running a lot, but I wasn't running at this speed partly because I wasn't pushing myself, admittedly, to to run at this pace. This is a new goal. Like, when I turned 30, my goal was to do more pull ups than I ever did in my life, and I wanted to outdo the Guinness record for more pull ups in sixty seconds. And I I personally hit more than 50 pull ups. I think it was 54 pull ups in sixty seconds. That was my goal at 30. And now my goal at 40 is to outdo my running time for the mile. But, being able to achieve these numbers that I was achieving in my early twenties while also balancing things like power lift with deadlift and pull up reps as I'm doing right now about 36, 37 pull ups in the set. Not my personal best, but when you consider everything holistically, I'm feeling as good as I ever have. So I don't think I'm I'm on the decline. I think that I'm I'm kinda steady state. Am I going to argue I'll be healthier than my entire life going forward, but to be able to maintain this for a long time, I think I can. Yeah. It's, like, a very important mindset, point as well that, you know, with age, these numbers go down, like, your strength and and your biomarkers get worse, etcetera. But if you hold yourself to that standard, so to say like, oh, I'm 40 now, so it's okay for me to have this lower, let's say, lower status of health, then you're kind of falling victim to this, you know, mindset of that, you know, it's okay to be in your age group kind of when ideally you wanna be, you're like, you know, a few few years younger than your chronological age to effectively slow down the speed of aging and, ideally, be like, you know, ten to up to twenty years younger with these markers. So to have, like, you know, a Vio to max that is ten to twenty years younger than a chronological chronological age and have, the muscle strength that is, you know, decades younger than your chronological age and the other biomarkers as well to maintain, like, more youthful markers for as long as possible. Yeah. So I I'm inspired by every so often I'll see on social media, I guess the algorithm knows me well, videos of people in their seventies, eighties, nineties doing things that you don't even see people in their thirties doing. Like, for example, last night, I saw a video of a of a woman, I believe she's German, who's 98 years old doing, gymnastics. And she's doing better gymnastics than, the typical I mean, the well, than practically anyone since most people don't do gymnastics. But, performing better than probably 40 year old gymnasts, are. And at 98 years old, it just goes to show that if you put the effort in and you are disciplined and persistent and you don't fall off track significantly, you can maintain this for a long time. Another video I watched was at, at the Penn Relays at University of Pennsylvania, seeing people in their seventies running faster times than if I if I were to take a random assortment of a 100 people aged, you know, in their thirties, I bet you this guy would have beat practically every single one of them, again, because he's disciplined and persistent. So it goes to show that, like, these these stats that you see for people as they get older, these are are are general stats. They aren't individuals. You have these individual outliers. And that's what I'm curious of is how much of an outlier can I be? I'm not going to say that because the average 50 year old is not as capable as they were when they're 20, that I couldn't be 50 and be just as capable as I was when I was 25 years old. Mhmm. Yeah. I think the 98 year old gymnasts I think you might have seen my post on, Instagram where I made a reel about her, and the video Oh, okay. The the video got, like, 10,000,000 views, so it went kind of very viral. And even that's maybe you might have seen that particular video from my my stories. It probably was. Thank you for that video. It inspired me last night. Yeah. And exactly I mean, that's the reason it went viral. It got 10,000,000 views because, the kind of amazing story of a 98 year old. I I think in the video, she was 91, but I mean, still 91 year old woman doing, punches, doing handstand on the on the parallel bars. And Yep. That's what I saw. Kinds of vanishes tricks. So yeah. Yeah. I was I was I was showing my girlfriend and and her father who's who's visiting from out of town and saying, like, that's a planche. And practically, nobody is ever able in their entire life to do a planche, and she's in her nineties doing a planche. That is unbelievably impressive. Yeah. Most, like, yeah, 20 year olds are gonna do that as well. Yeah. And, yeah, I mean, there's many stories of that, like this, 100 year old sprinter who is, like, cut the world record for all the seniors, and he ran, like, 60 meters or something, in eighteen seconds or something like that. So it's pretty pretty, like, amazing to see old people maintaining, like, such high levels of fitness into their, you know, late years. Yeah. And then and then my question is how much better will we be able to do? Right? Because we are although there's this this split between the average person who is unfortunately very unhealthy, and then those like us who are more healthy than people were, you know, at our age 50 years ago. So then the question becomes, what could we if we maintain this, what could we potentially do when we're 90 or a 100? Especially because we learn that much more about aging. New interventions are invented or discovered. So in theory, we can potentially do quite a bit better by the time we hit those ages, or at least that's the hope. Yeah. Yeah. The longevity philosophy philosophy. The velocity is also something, yeah, many people hope is gonna happen, but, yeah, we'll see. Yep. Well, it's been great to talk with you, and, I think people learned quite valuable information. So where can people learn more about you? Where can they find, Novus, and where can they learn more about your work? Sure. So learn about me, the things that I my interventions, my biological results. I share, my blog. It's slowmyage.com, and I'm also on x and Instagram. And I I believe recently, we set up a a TikTok account, though I'm not on that as much, as slow my age. And then Novos, of course, is novoslabs.com. We're on all of the social networks. And, we didn't have a chance to talk about this, but we are also in the process of rolling out a free mobile app. This app is going to provide a free biological age clock output that is based on a survey, and it leverages AI. It was produced at University of Washington. We collaborated with their researchers to get it into our app. It's more accurate than the first generation blood test. So the Horovath clock, for example, this is more accurate than that based on a survey. 100% free on our app. It's called Novos Life. In addition to that, we also then provide free lifestyle guidance based on how you respond to questions. We'll then provide you with personalized guidance for how to improve your, your biological age and, essentially, your longevity lifestyle. And then there's also an AI trained bot within the app to be able to answer any specific questions you might have. That bot will typically have the the answer for you trained by Novos and our researchers. Gotcha. We'll put the links in the show notes. And my last question is, what's this one piece of advice or habit that you wish you adopted sooner? Well, I I think, although I I learned this ten years ago, I wish I learned it even, earlier is, as I mentioned before, the fact that aging is malleable. It is something that we can have a real impact on, and that I think that's the most empowering thing. When we, as a company, advertise our products on social networks, we oftentimes hear from people that aging is something that's, like, written into our genetics or God will decide how long they live and so on. And I just can't help but feel like that's disempowering. It's it's feeling like it's not up to you and the decisions you make to determine how healthy and long you live. And the more people that we can educate and inform and make them aware that the decisions they make can and will slow down their aging, which will then provide so many more benefits in terms of enjoying life and making the most out of life and spending more time with your loved ones and them with you. That's ultimately what this is all about. And, I think that that's one of the most important lessons that I've learned in the in the past decade. Yeah. It's like, you know, it means that the effort you put in can actually, you know, determine your results or can give you greater, you know, returns in the future. If you just take care of your health now, then, you know, you're gonna be that 100 year old sprinter and, doing planches when you're 90 years old. Exactly. Reduce the suffering in the world. That's how I look at it. Yeah. Well, it's been great talking with you, and, yeah, thanks for coming to the podcast. Of course. Great to talk with you too. Thank you.