Astaxanthin has become one of the staples in my own supplement stack, and it's gotten a lot of attention from longevity researchers. That's mostly because last year in 2023, the National Institute of Aging Interventions Testing program saw that astaxanthin extended the lifespan of male mice by twelve percent. I'm at a point where I'm not taking any random supplements unless they have actual evidence that they would work. And animal studies alone aren't enough for me. So in this video, I'm going to go through the research of why I'm taking astaxanthin and what's the optimal dose. First, what is astaxanthin? Astaxanthin is a carotenoid or specifically a ketocarotenoid that gives salmon their pink color. It's a metabolite of other common carotenoids like zeaxanthin and cantaxanthin. Carotenoids are different colored pigments such as yellow, orange, or red that you can find in pumpkins, carrots, lobster, shrimp, flamingos, corn, and tomatoes. Let's begin with the 2023 interventions testing program study. They saw that aaxanthin male mice lifespan by twelve percent. The interventions testing program is considered to be the highest standard for life extension research in animals at the moment. That's why a lot of people got interested in alexanthan. Another 2019 study on roundworms saw that aaxanthin extended lifespan by 20% by affecting mitochondrial function. Now we can't draw any conclusions about the longevity effects of aaxanthin on humans from these studies. What we can do is look at the clinical trials done on aaxanthin and see if it has any benefits on various aspects of health and longevity such as cardiovascular disease risk, skin aging and metabolic health. Fortunately, there have been many randomized controlled trials in humans using aaxanthin and it seemed to have anti inflammatory, cardio protective and neuroprotective qualities. Let's take a look at these studies. One of the most promising effects of asteaxanthin is its anti inflammatory effects. Azteaxanthin's ORAC score, which measures antioxidant potential, is an astonishing 2,800,000, which is up to 6,000 times greater than vitamin c, 800 times greater than co q ten 550 times greater than vitamin e. Astaxanthin scavenges free radicals and activates an antioxidant pathway called nRF two which supports glutathione, the body's master antioxidant. This maintains lower inflammation levels throughout the body and maintains the integrity of the blood brain barrier, which protects the brain against neuroinflammation. Are there any clinical trials looking at the effects of aethaxanthin on inflammation? This 2022 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that astaxanthin supplementation was able to significantly reduce markers of inflammation such as IL six and Melon d'Aldehyde. The effects were particularly significant in type two diabetes patients. The effects on CRP and tumor necrosis factor alpha, which are other inflammatory proteins were not significant in this study. However, another 2020 meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that astaxanthin supplementation resulted in a reduction in CRP and an increase in HDL cholesterol if taken at a dose of over twelve milligrams a day for over twelve weeks. They found no effects on fasting blood sugar, total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, triglycerides or blood pressure. One of the main ways astaxanthin's anti inflammatory effects manifest is through the protection of skin against UV radiation. Astaxanthin's high antioxidant value makes it effective for protecting against UV radiation and photoaging. A 2021 systematic review and meta analysis of randomized controlled trials found that oral astaxanthin supplementation two to twelve milligrams a day for four to sixteen weeks was able to improve skin moisturization and elasticity, but not reduce wrinkle depth. Another 2021 review of clinical trials saw that a dose of three to six milligrams a day of astaxanthin had benefits for photoaged skin. In middle aged volunteers, taking four milligrams of astaxanthin per day for four weeks was seen to reverse age related morphological changes of the facial skin, especially in obese individuals. So a dose of up to twelve milligrams a day might be protective for skin aging. Although, there doesn't appear to be any direct effects on wrinkles. An additional mechanism of astaxanthin for skin anti aging has to do with senescent cells. Azaxanthin has senolytic properties which means it can eliminate these pro inflammatory senescent cells that accumulate during aging. One of the potential mechanisms for that is the induction of autophagy. What about metabolic health? Azaxanthin also has beneficial effects on lipid metabolism and blood pressure. There's a 2022 meta analysis of 14 epidemiological studies that show that Azaxanthin supplementation lowered total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, triglycerides, triglycerides, blood pressure, and blood glucose. And it also increased HDL cholesterol. Those are the favorable cardiometabolic effects you would want. Now these were epidemiological studies. And as of now, this review hasn't been peer reviewed. However, we have a few meta analysis of randomized controlled trials showing that aaxanthin has similar benefits. A 2022 meta analysis and review of clinical trials concluded that aaxanthin significantly lowers LDL cholesterol and marginally reduces total cholesterol and systolic blood pressure. Another 2021 meta analysis of clinical trials found that asexanthin supplementation significantly lowered diastolic blood pressure, but had no significant effect on systolic blood pressure. The effects were also greater in those who are less healthy and in the Asian population. So there is some evidence that asexanthin supplementation could lower LDL cholesterol levels. The effects on total cholesterol and blood pressure appear to be nonsignificant or only evident in people who have elevated cholesterol or elevated blood pressure. What's the dose of aaxanthin for these effects? The effective dose appears to be somewhere between two to twelve milligrams a day for several weeks when we also take into account the skin benefits. Can you get this amount of Azaxanthin from just food? Azaxanthin is most known to be found in salmon and shrimp because these animals are pink or red color. That's true. Salmon, trout and shrimp all have Azaxanthin. However, Astaxanthin is produced by micro algae, yeast, and certain bacteria when they're exposed to certain stressors like excessive sunlight, lack of nutrients, or increase in salinity of their environment. Salmon, trout, shrimp, and flamingos feed on these algae that then increase their own pigmentation. The Azaxanthin content of different foods goes in order of this. Salmonids have the lowest amount, then come plankton and krill, Arctic shrimp, yeast and algae is the highest source. Here are the approximate concentrations of aaxanthin in different salmon species. Sockeye salmon, twenty six to thirty eight milligrams per kilogram. Atlantic salmon, six to eight milligrams per kilogram. And trout, six milligrams per kilogram. To get four milligrams of aaxanthin, you'd need to consume about a 180 grams of salmon or seven hundred and twenty grams for the twelve milligram dose. Algae species have significantly higher amounts of aaxanthin up to one milligram per gram which is up to 38 times more than in salmon. The most concentrated aaxanthin is in a species of algae called Haematococcus pluvialis. It can be compromised with up to 7% aaxanthin, which would mean that to get twelve milligrams of aaxanthin from this, you would need a hundred and seventy one milligrams a day. That's a pretty small amount. So there are indeed ways to get aaxanthin from food. The problem is that to get the optimal twelve milligram dose, you would need to consume quite a large amount of food, up to 720 grams of salmon. The microalgae can be a lot easier. About a hundred and seventy milligrams would give you the twelve milligram dose. However, taking twelve milligrams as a supplement is also shown to provide benefits in clinical trials. In conclusion, I think that aaxanthin is one of the most interesting supplements out there right now. The biggest benefit for a healthy person is protecting the skin against UV damage and lowering inflammation. People with worse metabolic health could also experience benefits related to lipids and blood pressure. Check out this video about another popular longevity supplement called taurine. And if you want to get my free supplement list, then check out the link in the description. Other than that, thanks for watching this video. Make sure you click a like and subscribe for future videos about living longer and staying healthier. My name is Siim. Stay optimized. Stay empowered.